letter my valet will bring you. Adieu, Marie.”

Raoul left the house after again straining the countess to his heart
with dreadful pressure, leaving her stupefied and distressed.

“What is the matter, my dear?” said Madame d’Espard, coming to look for
her. “What has Monsieur Nathan been saying to you? He has just left
us in a most melodramatic way. Perhaps you are too reasonable or too
unreasonable with him.”

The countess got into a hackney-coach and was driven rapidly to the
newspaper office. At that hour the huge apartments which they occupied
in an old mansion in the rue Feydeau were deserted; not a soul was there
but the watchman, who was greatly surprised to see a young and pretty
woman hurrying through the rooms in evident distress. She asked him to
tell her where was Monsieur Nathan.

“At Mademoiselle Florine’s, probably,” replied the man, taking Marie for
a rival who intended to make a scene.

“Where does he work?”

“In his office, the key of which he carries in his pocket.”

“I wish to go there.”

The man took her to a dark little room looking out on a rear court-yard.
The office was at right angles. Opening the window of the room she was
in, the countess could look through into the window of the office, and
she saw Nathan sitting there in the editorial arm-chair.

“Break in the door, and be silent about all this; I’ll pay you well,”
 she said. “Don’t you see that Monsieur Nathan is dying?”

The man got an iron bar from the press-room, with which he burst in the
door. Raoul had actually smothered himself, like any poor work-girl,
with a pan of charcoal. He had written a letter to Blondet, which lay on
the table, in which he asked him to ascribe his death to apoplexy. The
countess, however, had arrived in time; she had Raoul carried to her
coach, and then, not knowing where else to care for him, she took him to
a hotel, engaged a room, and sent for a doctor. In a few hours Raoul was
out of danger; but the countess did not leave him until she had obtained
a general confession of the causes of his act. When he had poured into
her heart the dreadful elegy of his woes, she said, in order to make him
willing to live:--

“I can arrange all that.”

But, nevertheless, she returned home with a heart oppressed with the
same anxieties and ideas that had darkened Nathan’s brow the night
before.

“Well, what was the matter with your sister?” said Felix, when his wife
returned. “You look distressed.”

“It is a dreadful history about which I am bound to secrecy,” she said,
summoning all her nerve to appear calm before him.

In order to be alone and to think at her ease, she went to the Opera
in the evening, after which she resolved to go (as we have seen) and
discharge her heart into that of her sister, Madame du Tillet; relating
to her the horrible scene of the morning, and begging her advice and
assistance. Neither the one nor the other could then know that du Tillet
himself had lighted the charcoal of the vulgar brazier, the sight of
which had so justly terrified the countess.

“He has but me in all the world,” said Marie to her sister, “and I will
not fail him.”

That speech contains the secret motive of most women; they can be heroic
when they are certain of being all in all to a grand and irreproachable
being.




CHAPTER VIII. A LOVER SAVED AND LOST


Du Tillet had heard some talk even in financial circles of the more or
less possible adoration of his sister-in-law for Nathan; but he was
one of those who denied it, thinking it incompatible with Raoul’s
known relations with Florine. The actress would certainly drive off the
countess, or vice versa. But when, on coming home that evening, he found
his sister-in-law with a perturbed face, in consultation with his wife
about money, it occurred to him that Raoul had, in all probability,
confided to her his situation. The countess must therefore love him;
she had doubtless come to obtain from her sister the sum due to old
Gigonnet. Madame du Tillet, unaware, of course, of the reasons for
her husband’s apparently supernatural penetration, had shown such
stupefaction when he told her the sum wanted, that du Tillet’s
suspicions became certainties. He was sure now that he held the thread
of all Nathan’s possible manoeuvres.

No one knew that the unhappy man himself was in bed in a small hotel in
the rue du Mail, under the name of the office watchman, to whom Marie
had promised five hundred francs if he kept silence as to the events of
the preceding night and morning. Thus bribed, the man, whose name
was Francois Quillet, went back to the office and left word with the
portress that Monsieur Nathan had been taken ill in consequence of
overwork, and was resting. Du Tillet was therefore not surprised at
Raoul’s absence. It was natural for the journalist to hide under any
such pretence to avoid arrest. When the sheriff’s spies made inquiries
they learned that a lady had carried him away in a public coach early
in the morning; but it took three days to ferret out the number of the
coach, question the driver, and find the hotel where the debtor was
recovering his strength. Thus Marie’s prompt action had really gained
for Nathan a truce of four days.

Both sisters passed a cruel night. Such a catastrophe casts the lurid
gleams of its charcoal over the whole of life, showing reefs, pools,
depths, where the eye has hitherto seen only summits and grandeurs.
Struck by the horrible picture of a young man lying back in his chair
to die, with the last proofs of his paper before him, containing in type
his last thoughts, poor Madame du Tillet could think of nothing else
than how to save him and restore a life so precious to her sister. It
is the nature of our mind to see effects before we analyze their causes.
Eugenie recurred to her first idea of consulting Madame Delphine de
Nucingen, with whom she was to dine, and she resolved to make the
attempt, not doubting of success. Generous, like all persons who are not
bound in the polished steel armor of modern society, Madame du Tillet
resolved to take the whole matter upon herself.

The countess, on the other hand, happy in the thought that she had saved
Raoul’s life, spent the night in devising means to obtain the forty
thousand francs. In emergencies like these women are sublime; they find
contrivances which would astonish thieves, business men, and usurers,
if those three classes of industrials were capable of being astonished.
First, the countess sold her diamonds and decided on wearing paste; then
she resolved to ask the money from Vandenesse on her sister’s account;
but these were dishonorable means, and her soul was too noble not to
recoil at them; she merely conceived them, and cast them from her.
Ask money of Vandenesse to give to Nathan! She bounded in her bed with
horror at such baseness. Wear false diamonds to deceive her husband!
Next she thought of borrowing the money from the Rothschilds, who had
so much, or from the archbishop of Paris, whose mission it was to help
persons in distress; darting thus from thought to thought, seeking help
in all. She deplored belonging to a class opposed to the government.
Formerly, she could easily have borrowed the money on the steps of the
throne. She thought of appealing to her father, the Comte de Granville.
But that great magistrate had a horror of illegalities; his children
knew how little he sympathized with the trials of love; he was now a
misanthrope and held all affairs of the heart in horror. As for the
Comtesse de Granville, she was living a retired life on one of her
estates in Normandy, economizing and praying, ending her days between
priests and money-bags, cold as ever to her dying moment. Even supposing
that Marie had time to go to Bayeux and implore her, would her mother
give her such a sum unless she explained why she wanted it? Could she
say she had debts? Yes, perhaps her mother would be softened by the
wants of her favorite child. Well, then! in case all other means failed,
she _would_ go to Normandy. The dreadful sight of the morning, the
effects she had made to revive Nathan, the hours passed beside his
pillow, his broken confession, the agony of a great soul, a vast genius
stopped in its upward flight by a sordid vulgar obstacle,--all these
things rushed into her memory and stimulated her love. She went over
and over her emotions, and felt her love to be deeper in these days
of misery than in those of Nathan’s fame and grandeur. She felt the
nobility of his last words said to her in Lady Dudley’s boudoir. What
sacredness in that farewell! What grandeur in the immolation of a
selfish happiness which would have been her torture! The countess had
longed for emotions, and now she had them,--terrible, cruel, and yet
most precious. She lived a deeper life in pain than in pleasure. With
what delight she said to herself: “I have saved him once, and I will
save him again.” She heard him cry out when he felt her lips upon his
forehead, “Many a poor wretch does not know what love is!”

“Are you ill?” said her husband, coming into her room to take her to
breakfast.

“I am dreadfully worried about a matter that is happening at my
sister’s,” she replied, without actually telling a lie.

“Your sister has fallen into bad hands,” replied Felix. “It is a shame
for any family to have a du Tillet in it,--a man without honor of any
kind. If disaster happened to her she would get no pity from him.”

“What woman wants pity?” said the countess, with a convulsive motion. “A
man’s sternness is to us our only pardon.”

“This is not the first time that I read your noble heart,” said the
count. “A woman who thinks as you do needs no watching.”

“Watching!” she said; “another shame that recoils on you.”

Felix smiled, but Marie blushed. When women are secretly to blame they
often show ostensibly the utmost womanly pride. It is a dissimulation of
mind for which we ought to be obliged to them. The deception is full of
dignity, if not of grandeur. Marie wrote two lines to Nathan under the
name of Monsieur Quillet, to tell him that all went well, and sent them
by a street porter to the hotel du Mail. That night, at the Opera, Felix
thought it very natural that she should wish to leave her box and go to
that of her sister, and he waited till du Tillet had left his wife
to give Marie his arm and take her there. Who can tell what emotions
agitated her as she went through the corridors and entered her sister’s
box with a face that was outwardly serene and calm!

“Well?” she said, as soon as they were alone.

Eugenie’s face was an answer; it was bright with a joy which some
persons might have attributed to the satisfaction of vanity.

“He can be saved, dear; but for three months only; during which time we
must plan some other means of doing it permanently. Madame de Nucingen
wants four notes of hand, each for ten thousand francs, endorsed by any
one, no matter who, so as not to compromise you. She explained to me how
they were made, but I couldn’t understand her. Monsieur Nathan, however,
can make them for us. I thought of Schmucke, our old master. I am sure
he could be very useful in this emergency; he will endorse the notes.
You must add to the four notes a letter in which you guarantee
their payment to Madame de Nucingen, and she will give you the money
to-morrow. Do the whole thing yourself; don’t trust it to any one. I
feel sure that Schmucke will make no objection. To divert all suspicion
I told Madame de Nucingen you wanted to oblige our old music-master who
was in distress, and I asked her to keep the matter secret.”

“You have the sense of angels! I only hope Madame de Nucingen won’t tell
of it until after she gives me the money,” said the countess.

“Schmucke lives in the rue de Nevers on the quai Conti; don’t forget the
address, and go yourself.”

“Thanks!” said the countess, pressing her sister’s hand. “Ah! I’d give
ten years of life--”

“Out of your old age--”

“If I could put an end to these anxieties,” said the countess, smiling
at the interruption.

The persons who were at that moment levelling their opera-glasses at the
two sisters might well have supposed them engaged in some light-hearted
talk; but any observer who had come to the Opera more for the pleasure
of watching faces than for mere idle amusement might have guessed them
in trouble, from the anxious look which followed the momentary smiles
on their charming faces. Raoul, who did not fear the bailiffs at night,
appeared, pale and ashy, with anxious eye and gloomy brow, on the step
of the staircase where he regularly took his stand. He looked for the
Countess in her box and, finding it empty, buried his face in his hands,
leaning his elbows on the balustrade.

“Can she be here!” he thought.

“Look up, unhappy hero,” whispered Mme. du Tillet.

As for Marie, at all risks she fixed on him that steady magnetic gaze,
in which the will flashes from the eye, as rays of light from the sun.
Such a look, mesmerizers say, penetrates to the person on whom it is
directed, and certainly Raoul seemed as though struck by a magic wand.
Raising his head, his eyes met those of the sisters. With that charming
feminine readiness which is never at fault, Mme. de Vandenesse seized
a cross, sparkling on her neck, and directed his attention to it by a
swift smile, full of meaning. The brilliance of the gem radiated
even upon Raoul’s forehead, and he replied with a look of joy; he had
understood.

“Is it nothing then, Eugenie,” said the Countess, “thus to restore life
to the dead?”

“You have a chance yet with the Royal Humane Society,” replied Eugenie,
with a smile.

“How wretched and depressed he looked when he came, and how happy he
will go away!”

At this moment du Tillet, coming up to Raoul with every mark of
friendliness, pressed his hand, and said:

“Well, old fellow, how are you?”

“As well as a man is likely to be who has just got the best possible
news of the election. I shall be successful,” replied Raoul, radiant.

“Delighted,” said du Tillet. “We shall want money for the paper.”

“The money will be found,” said Raoul.

“The devil is with these women!” exclaimed du Tillet, still unconvinced
by the words of Raoul, whom he had nicknamed Charnathan.

“What are you talking about?” said Raoul.

“My sister-in-law is there with my wife, and they are hatching something
together. You seem in high favor with the Countess; she is bowing to you
right across the house.”

“Look,” said Mme. du Tillet to her sister, “they told us wrong. See how
my husband fawns on M. Nathan, and it is he who they declared was trying
to get him put in prison!”

“And men call us slanderers!” cried the Countess. “I will give him a
warning.”

She rose, took the arm of Vandenesse, who was waiting in the passage,
and returned jubilant to her box; by and by she left the Opera and
ordered her carriage for the next morning before eight o’clock.

The next morning, by half-past eight, Marie had driven to the quai
Conti, stopping at the hotel du Mail on her way. The carriage could not
enter the narrow rue de Nevers; but as Schmucke lived in a house at the
corner of the quai she was not obliged to walk up its muddy pavement,
but could jump from the step of her carriage to the broken step of the
dismal old house, mended like porter’s crockery, with iron rivets,
and bulging out over the street in a way that was quite alarming to
pedestrians. The old chapel-master lived on the fourth floor, and
enjoyed a fine view of the Seine from the pont Neuf to the heights of
Chaillot.

The good soul was so surprised when the countess’s footman announced the
visit of his former scholar that in his stupefaction he let her enter
without going down to receive her. Never did the countess suspect or
imagine such an existence as that which suddenly revealed itself to her
eyes, though she had long known Schmucke’s contempt for dress, and the
little interest he held in the affairs of this world. But who could have
believed in such complete indifference, in the utter laisser-aller
of such a life? Schmucke was a musical Diogenes, and he felt no shame
whatever in his untidiness; in fact, he was so accustomed to it that
he would probably have denied its existence. The incessant smoking of
a stout German pipe had spread upon the ceiling and over a wretched
wall-paper, scratched and defaced by the cat, a yellowish tinge.
The cat, a magnificently long-furred, fluffy animal, the envy of all
portresses, presided there like the mistress of the house, grave and
sedate, and without anxieties. On the top of an excellent Viennese piano
he sat majestically, and cast upon the countess, as she entered, that
coldly gracious look which a woman, surprised by the beauty of another
woman, might have given. He did not move, and merely waved the two
silver threads of his right whisker as he turned his golden eyes on
Schmucke.

The piano, decrepit on its legs, though made of good wood painted black
and gilded, was dirty, defaced, and scratched; and its keys, worn like
the teeth of old horses, were yellowed with the fuliginous colors of the
pipe. On the desk, a little heap of ashes showed that the night before
Schmucke had bestrode the old instrument to some musical Walhalla. The
floor, covered with dried mud, torn papers, tobacco-dust, fragments
indescribable, was like that of a boy’s school-room, unswept for a week,
on which a mound of things accumulate, half rags, half filth.

A more practised eye than that of the countess would have seen
certain other revelations of Schmucke’s mode of life,--chestnut-peels,
apple-parings, egg-shells dyed red in broken dishes smeared with
sauer-kraut. This German detritus formed a carpet of dusty filth which
crackled under foot, joining company near the hearth with a mass of
cinders and ashes descending majestically from the fireplace, where lay
a block of coal, before which two slender twigs made a show of burning.
On the chimney-piece was a mirror in a painted frame, adorned with
figures dancing a saraband; on one side hung the glorious pipe, on the
other was a Chinese jar in which the musician kept his tobacco. Two
arm-chairs bought at auction, a thin and rickety cot, a worm-eaten
bureau without a top, a maimed table on which lay the remains of a
frugal breakfast, made up a set of household belongings as plain as
those of an Indian wigwam. A shaving-glass, suspended to the fastening
of a curtainless window, and surmounted by a rag striped by many wipings
of a razor, indicated the only sacrifices paid by Schmucke to the Graces
and society. The cat, being the feebler and protected partner, had
rather the best of the establishment; he enjoyed the comforts of an old
sofa-cushion, near which could be seen a white china cup and plate. But
what no pen can describe was the state into which Schmucke, the cat, and
the pipe, that existing trinity, had reduced these articles. The pipe
had burned the table. The cat and Schmucke’s head had greased the green
Utrecht velvet of the two arm-chairs and reduced it to a slimy texture.
If it had not been for the cat’s magnificent tail, which played a useful
part in the household, the uncovered places on the bureau and the piano
would never have been dusted. In one corner of the room were a pile of
shoes which need an epic to describe them. The top of the bureau and
that of the piano were encumbered by music-books with ragged backs and
whitened corners, through which the pasteboard showed its many layers.
Along the walls the names and addresses of pupils written on scraps
of paper were stuck on by wafers,--the number of wafers without paper
indicating the number of pupils no longer taught. On the wall-papers
were many calculations written with chalk. The bureau was decorated with
beer-mugs used the night before, their newness appearing very brilliant
in the midst of this rubbish of dirt and age. Hygiene was represented by
a jug of water with a towel laid upon it, and a bit of common soap. Two
ancient hats hung to their respective nails, near which also hung the
self-same blue box-coat with three capes, in which the countess
had always seen Schmucke when he came to give his lessons. On the
window-sill were three pots of flowers, German flowers, no doubt, and
near them a stout holly-wood stick.

Though Marie’s sight and smell were disagreeably affected, Schmucke’s
smile and glance disguised these abject miseries by rays of celestial
light which actually illuminated their smoky tones and vivified the
chaos. The soul of this dear man, which saw and revealed so many things
divine, shone like the sun. His laugh, so frank, so guileless at
seeing one of his Saint-Cecilias, shed sparkles of youth and gaiety and
innocence about him. The treasures he poured from the inner to the outer
were like a mantle with which he covered his squalid life. The most
supercilious parvenu would have felt it ignoble to care for the frame in
which this glorious old apostle of the musical religion lived and moved
and had his being.

“Hey! by what good luck do I see you here, dear Madame la comtesse?”
 he said. “Must I sing the canticle of Simeon at my age?” (This idea
so tickled him that he laughed immoderately.) “Truly I’m ‘en bonne
fortune.’” (And again he laughed like a merry child.) “But, ah!” he
said, changing to melancholy, “you come for the music, and not for a
poor old man like me. Yes, I know that; but come for what you will, I am
yours, you know, body and soul and all I have!”

This was said in his unspeakable German accent, a rendition of which we
spare the reader.

He took the countess’s hand, kissed it and left a tear there, for the
worthy soul was always on the morrow of her benefit. Then he seized a
bit of chalk, jumped on a chair in front of the piano, and wrote upon
the wall in big letters, with the rapidity of a young man, “February
17th, 1835.” This pretty, artless action, done in such a passion of
gratitude, touched the countess to tears.

“My sister will come too,” she said.

“The other, too! When? when? God grant it be before I die!”

“She will come to thank you for a great service I am now here to ask of
you.”

“Quick! quick! tell me what it is,” cried Schmucke. “What must I do? go
to the devil?”

“Nothing more than write the words ‘Accepted for ten thousand francs,’
and sign your name on each of these papers,” she said, taking from her
muff four notes prepared for her by Nathan.

“Hey! that’s soon done,” replied the German, with the docility of a
lamb; “only I’m sure I don’t know where my pens and ink are--Get away
from there, Meinherr Mirr!” he cried to the cat, which looked composedly
at him. “That’s my cat,” he said, showing him to the countess. “That’s
the poor animal that lives with poor Schmucke. Hasn’t he fine fur?”

“Yes,” said the countess.

“Will you have him?” he cried.

“How can you think of such a thing?” she answered. “Why, he’s your
friend!”

The cat, who hid the inkstand behind him, divined that Schmucke wanted
it, and jumped to the bed.

“He’s as mischievous as a monkey,” said Schmucke. “I call him Mirr in
honor of our great Hoffman of Berlin, whom I knew well.”

The good man signed the papers with the innocence of a child who does
what his mother orders without question, so sure is he that all is
right. He was thinking much more of presenting the cat to the countess
than of the papers by which his liberty might be, according to the laws
relating to foreigners, forever sacrificed.

“You assure me that these little papers with the stamps on them--”

“Don’t be in the least uneasy,” said the countess.

“I am not uneasy,” he said, hastily. “I only meant to ask if these
little papers will give pleasure to Madame du Tillet.”

“Oh, yes,” she said, “you are doing her a service, as if you were her
father.”

“I am happy, indeed, to be of any good to her--Come and listen to my
music!” and leaving the papers on the table, he jumped to his piano.

The hands of this angel ran along the yellowing keys, his glance was
rising to heaven, regardless of the roof; already the air of some
blessed climate permeated the room and the soul of the old musician; but
the countess did not allow the artless interpreter of things celestial
to make the strings and the worn wood speak, like Raffaelle’s Saint
Cecilia, to the listening angels. She quickly slipped the notes into her
muff and recalled her radiant master from the ethereal spheres to which
he soared, by laying her hand upon his shoulder.

“My good Schmucke--” she said.

“Going already?” he cried. “Ah! why did you come?”

He did not murmur, but he sat up like a faithful dog who listens to his
mistress.

“My good Schmucke,” she repeated, “this is a matter of life and death;
minutes can save tears, perhaps blood.”

“Always the same!” he said. “Go, angel! dry the tears of others. Your
poor Schmucke thinks more of your visit than of your gifts.”

“But we must see each other often,” she said. “You must come and dine
and play to me every Sunday, or we shall quarrel. Remember, I shall
expect you next Sunday.”

“Really and truly?”

“Yes, I entreat you; and my sister will want you, too, for another day.”

“Then my happiness will be complete,” he said; “for I only see you now
in the Champs Elysees as you pass in your carriage, and that is very
seldom.”

This thought dried the tears in his eyes as he gave his arm to his
beautiful pupil, who felt the old man’s heart beat violently.

“You think of us?” she said.

“Always as I eat my food,” he answered,--“as my benefactresses; but
chiefly as the first young girls worthy of love whom I ever knew.”

So respectful, faithful, and religious a solemnity was in this speech
that the countess dared say no more. That smoky chamber, full of dirt
and rubbish, was the temple of the two divinities.

“There we are loved--and truly loved,” she thought.

The emotion with which old Schmucke saw the countess get into her
carriage and leave him she fully shared, and she sent him from the tips
of her fingers one of those pretty kisses which women give each other
from afar. Receiving it, the old man stood planted on his feet for a
long time after the carriage had disappeared.

A few moments later the countess entered the court-yard of the hotel de
Nucingen. Madame de Nucingen was not yet up; but anxious not to keep a
woman of the countess’s position waiting, she hastily threw on a shawl
and wrapper.

“My visit concerns a charitable action, madame,” said the countess, “or
I would not disturb you at so early an hour.”

“But I am only too happy to be disturbed,” said the banker’s wife,
taking the notes and the countess’s guarantee. She rang for her maid.

“Therese,” she said, “tell the cashier to bring me up himself,
immediately, forty thousand francs.”

Then she locked into a table drawer the guarantee given by Madame de
Vandenesse, after sealing it up.

“You have a delightful room,” said the countess.

“Yes, but Monsieur de Nucingen is going to take it from me. He is
building a new house.”

“You will doubtless give this one to your daughter, who, I am told, is
to marry Monsieur de Rastignac.”

The cashier appeared at this moment with the money. Madame de Nucingen
took the bank-bills and gave him the notes of hand.

“That balances,” she said.

“Except the discount,” replied the cashier. “Ha, Schmucke; that’s the
musician of Anspach,” he added, examining the signatures in a suspicious
manner that made the countess tremble.

“Who is doing this business?” said Madame de Nucingen, with a haughty
glance at the cashier. “This is my affair.”

The cashier looked alternately at the two ladies, but he could discover
nothing on their impenetrable faces.

“Go, leave us--Have the kindness to wait a few moments that the people
in the bank may not connect you with this negotiation,” said Madame de
Nucingen to the countess.

“I must ask you to add to all your other kindness that of keeping this
matter secret,” said Madame de Vandenesse.

“Most assuredly, since it is for charity,” replied the baroness,
smiling. “I will send your carriage round to the garden gate, so that no
one will see you leave the house.”

“You have the thoughtful grace of a person who has suffered,” said the
countess.

“I do not know if I have grace,” said the baroness; “but I have suffered
much. I hope that your anxieties cost less than mine.”

When a man has laid a plot like that du Tillet was scheming against
Nathan, he confides it to no man. Nucingen knew something of it, but
his wife knew nothing. The baroness, however, aware that Raoul was
embarrassed, was not the dupe of the two sisters; she guessed into
whose hands that money was to go, and she was delighted to oblige
the countess; moreover, she felt a deep compassion for all such
embarrassments. Rastignac, so placed that he was able to fathom the
manoeuvres of the two bankers, came to breakfast that morning with
Madame de Nucingen.

Delphine and Rastignac had no secrets from each other; and the baroness
related to him her scene with the countess. Eugene, who had never
supposed that Delphine could be mixed up in the affair, which was only
accessory to his eyes,--one means among many others,--opened her eyes to
the truth. She had probably, he told her, destroyed du Tillet’s chances
of selection, and rendered useless the intrigues and deceptions of
the past year. In short, he put her in the secret of the whole affair,
advising her to keep absolute silence as to the mistake she had just
committed.

“Provided the cashier does not tell Nucingen,” she said.

A few moments after mid-day, while du Tillet was breakfasting, Monsieur
Gigonnet was announced.

“Let him come in,” said the banker, though his wife was at table. “Well,
my old Shylock, is our man locked up?”

“No.”

“Why not? Didn’t I give you the address, rue du Mail, hotel--”

“He has paid up,” said Gigonnet, drawing from his wallet a pile of
bank-bills. Du Tillet looked furious. “You should never frown at money,”
 said his impassible associate; “it brings ill-luck.”

“Where did you get that money, madame?” said du Tillet, suddenly turning
upon his wife with a look which made her color to the roots of her hair.

“I don’t know what your question means,” she said.

“I will fathom this mystery,” he cried, springing furiously up. “You
have upset my most cherished plans.”

“You are upsetting your breakfast,” said Gigonnet, arresting
the table-clock, which was dragged by the skirt of du Tillet’s
dressing-gown.

Madame du Tillet rose to leave the room, for her husband’s words alarmed
her. She rang the bell, and a footman entered.

“The carriage,” she said. “And call Virginie; I wish to dress.”

“Where are you going?” exclaimed du Tillet.

“Well-bred husbands do not question their wives,” she answered. “I
believe that you lay claim to be a gentleman.”

“I don’t recognize you ever since you have seen more of your impertinent
sister.”

“You ordered me to be impertinent, and I am practising on you,” she
replied.

“Your servant, madame,” said Gigonnet, taking leave, not anxious to
witness this family scene.

Du Tillet looked fixedly at his wife, who returned the look without
lowering her eyes.

“What does all this mean?” he said.

“It means that I am no longer a little girl whom you can frighten,” she
replied. “I am, and shall be, all my life, a good and loyal wife to you;
you may be my master if you choose, my tyrant, never!”

Du Tillet left the room. After this effort Marie-Eugenie broke down.

“If it were not for my sister’s danger,” she said to herself, “I should
never have dared to brave him thus; but, as the proverb says, ‘There’s
some good in every evil.’”




