CHAPTER VII. SUICIDE


In the month of May Vandenesse took his wife, as usual, to their
country-seat, where she was consoled by the passionate letters she
received from Raoul, to whom she wrote every day.

Marie’s absence might have saved Raoul from the gulf into which he was
falling, if Florine had been near him; but, unfortunately, he was alone
in the midst of friends who had become his enemies from the moment that
he showed his intention of ruling them. His staff of writers hated him
“pro tem.,” ready to hold out a hand to him and console him in case of
a fall, ready to adore him in case of success. So goes the world of
literature. No one is really liked but an inferior. Every man’s hand
is against him who is likely to rise. This wide-spread envy doubles the
chances of common minds who excite neither envy nor suspicion, who
make their way like moles, and, fools though they be, find themselves
gazetted in the “Moniteur,” for three or four places, while men of
talent are still struggling at the door to keep each other out.

The underhand enmity of these pretended friends, which Florine would
have scented with the innate faculty of a courtesan to get at truth amid
a thousand misleading circumstances, was by no means Raoul’s greatest
danger. His partners, Massol the lawyer, and du Tillet the banker, had
intended from the first to harness his ardor to the chariot of their own
importance and get rid of him as soon as he was out of condition to feed
the paper, or else to deprive him of his power, arbitrarily, whenever
it suited their purpose to take it. To them Nathan represented a certain
amount of talent to use up, a literary force of the motive power of ten
pens to employ. Massol, one of those lawyers who mistake the faculty
of endless speech for eloquence, who possess the art of boring by
diffusiveness, the torment of all meetings and assemblies where
they belittle everything, and who desire to become personages at any
cost,--Massol no longer wanted the place as Keeper of the Seals; he
had seen some five or six different men go through that office in four
years, and the robes disgusted him. In exchange, his mind was now set on
obtaining a chair on the Board of Education and a place in the Council
of State; the whole adorned with the cross of the Legion of honor. Du
Tillet and Nucingen had guaranteed the cross to him, and the office of
Master of Petitions provided he obeyed them blindly.

The better to deceive Raoul, these men allowed him to manage the paper
without control. Du Tillet used it only for his stock-gambling, about
which Nathan understood next to nothing; but he had given, through
Nucingen, an assurance to Rastignac that the paper would be tacitly
obliging to the government on the sole condition of supporting his
candidacy for Monsieur de Nucingen’s place as soon as he was nominated
peer of France. Raoul was thus being undermined by the banker and the
lawyer, who saw him with much satisfaction lording it in the newspaper,
profiting by all advantages, and harvesting the fruits of self-love,
while Nathan, enchanted, believed them to be, as on the occasion of his
equestrian wants, the best fellows in the world. He thought he managed
them! Men of imagination, to whom hope is the basis of existence, never
allow themselves to know that the most perilous moment in their affairs
is that when all seems going well according to their wishes.

This was a period of triumph by which Nathan profited. He appeared as a
personage in the world, political and financial. Du Tillet presented him
to the Nucingens. Madame de Nucingen received him cordially, less for
himself than for Madame de Vandenesse; but when she ventured a few
words about the countess he thought himself marvellously clever in using
Florine as a shield; he alluded to his relations with the actress in a
tone of generous self-conceit. How could he desert a great devotion, for
the coquetries of the faubourg Saint-Germain?

Nathan, manipulated by Nucingen and Rastignac, by du Tillet and Blondet,
gave his support ostentatiously to the “doctrinaires” of their new and
ephemeral cabinet. But in order to show himself pure of all bribery he
refused to take advantage of certain profitable enterprises which
were started by means of his paper,--he! who had no reluctance in
compromising friends or in behaving with little decency to mechanics
under certain circumstances. Such meannesses, the result of vanity
and of ambition, are found in many lives like his. The mantle must be
splendid before the eyes of the world, and we steal our friend’s or a
poor man’s cloth to patch it.

Nevertheless, two months after the departure of the countess, Raoul had
a certain Rabelaisian “quart d’heure” which caused him some anxiety in
the midst of these triumphs. Du Tillet had advanced a hundred thousand
francs, Florine’s money had gone in the costs of the first establishment
of the paper, which were enormous. It was necessary to provide for the
future. The banker agreed to let the editor have fifty thousand francs
on notes for four months. Du Tillet thus held Raoul by the halter of an
IOU. By means of this relief the funds of the paper were secured for six
months. In the eyes of some writers six months is an eternity.
Besides, by dint of advertising and by offering illusory advantages to
subscribers two thousand had been secured; an influx of travellers added
to this semi-success, which was enough, perhaps, to excuse the throwing
of more bank-bills after the rest. A little more display of talent, a
timely political trial or crisis, an apparent persecution, and Raoul
felt certain of becoming one of those modern “condottieri” whose ink is
worth more than powder and shot of the olden time.

This loan from du Tillet was already made when Florine returned with
fifty thousand francs. Instead of creating a savings fund with that sum,
Raoul, certain of success (simply because he felt it was necessary),
and already humiliated at having accepted the actress’s money, deceived
Florine as to his actual position, and persuaded her to employ the money
in refurnishing her house. The actress, who did not need persuasion,
not only spent the sum in hand, but she burdened herself with a debt of
thirty thousand francs, with which she obtained a charming little house
all to herself in the rue Pigale, whither her old society resorted.
Raoul had reserved the production of his great piece, in which was
a part especially suited to Florine, until her return. This
comedy-vaudeville was to be Raoul’s farewell to the stage. The
newspapers, with that good nature which costs nothing, prepared the way
for such an ovation to Florine that even the Theatre-Francais talked of
engaging her. The feuilletons proclaimed her the heiress of Mars.

This triumph was sufficiently dazzling to prevent Florine from carefully
studying the ground on which Nathan was advancing; she lived, for the
time being, in a round of festivities and glory. According to those
about her, he was now a great political character; he was justified in
his enterprise; he would certainly be a deputy, probably a minister in
course of time, like so many others. As for Nathan himself, he firmly
believed that in the next session of the Chamber he should find himself
in government with two other journalists, one of whom, already a
minister, was anxious to associate some of his own craft with himself,
and so consolidate his power. After a separation of six months, Nathan
met Florine again with pleasure, and returned easily to his old way of
life. All his comforts came from the actress, but he embroidered the
heavy tissue of his life with the flowers of ideal passion; his letters
to Marie were masterpieces of grace and style. Nathan made her the
light of his life; he undertook nothing without consulting his “guardian
angel.” In despair at being on the popular side, he talked of going over
to that of the aristocracy; but, in spite of his habitual agility,
even he saw the absolute impossibility of such a jump; it was easier
to become a minister. Marie’s precious replies were deposited in one
of those portfolios with patent locks made by Huret or Fichet, two
mechanics who were then waging war in advertisements and posters all
over Paris, as to which could make the safest and most impenetrable
locks.

This portfolio was left about in Florine’s new boudoir, where Nathan did
much of his work. No one is easier to deceive than a woman to whom a man
is in the habit of telling everything; she has no suspicions; she thinks
she sees and hears and knows all. Besides, since her return, Nathan had
led the most regular of lives under her very nose. Never did she
imagine that that portfolio, which she hardly glanced at as it lay there
unconcealed, contained the letters of a rival, treasures of admiring
love which the countess addressed, at Raoul’s request, to the office of
his newspaper.

Nathan’s situation was, therefore, to all appearance, extremely
brilliant. He had many friends. The two plays lately produced had
succeeded well, and their proceeds supplied his personal wants and
relieved him of all care for the future. His debt to du Tillet, “his
friend,” did not make him in the least uneasy.

“Why distrust a friend?” he said to Blondet, who from time to time
would cast a doubt on his position, led to do so by his general habit of
analyzing.

“But we don’t need to distrust our enemies,” remarked Florine.

Nathan defended du Tillet; he was the best, the most upright of men.

This existence, which was really that of a dancer on the tight rope
without his balance-pole, would have alarmed any one, even the most
indifferent, had it been seen as it really was. Du Tillet watched it
with the cool eye and the cynicism of a parvenu. Through the friendly
good humor of his intercourse with Raoul there flashed now and then a
malignant jeer. One day, after pressing his hand in Florine’s boudoir
and watching him as he got into his carriage, du Tillet remarked to
Lousteau (envier par excellence):--

“That fellow is off to the Bois in fine style to-day, but he is just as
likely, six months hence, to be in a debtor’s prison.”

“He? never!” cried Lousteau. “He has Florine.”

“How do you know that he’ll keep her? As for you, who are worth a
dozen of him, I predict that you will be our editor-in-chief within six
months.”

In October Nathan’s notes to du Tillet fell due, and the banker
graciously renewed them, but for two months only, with the discount
added and a fresh loan. Sure of victory, Raoul was not afraid of
continuing to put his hand in the bag. Madame Felix de Vandenesse was
to return in a few days, a month earlier than usual, brought back, of
course, by her unconquerable desire to see Nathan, who felt that he
could not be short of money at a time when he renewed that assiduous
life.

Correspondence, in which the pen is always bolder than speech, and
thought, wreathing itself with flowers, allows itself to be seen without
disguise, and brought the countess to the highest pitch of enthusiasm.
She believed she saw in Raoul one of the noblest spirits of the epoch,
a delicate but misjudged heart without a stain and worthy of adoration;
she saw him advancing with a brave hand to grasp the sceptre of power.
Soon that speech so beautiful in love would echo from the tribune. Marie
now lived only in this life of a world outside her own. Her taste was
lost for the tranquil joys of home, and she gave herself up to the
agitations of this whirlwind life communicated by a clever and adoring
pen. She kissed Raoul’s letters, written in the midst of the ceaseless
battles of the press, with time taken from necessary studies; she felt
their value; she was certain of being loved, and loved only, with no
rival but the fame and ambition he adored. She found enough in her
country solitude to fill her soul and employ her faculties,--happy,
indeed, to have been so chosen by such a man, who to her was an angel.

During the last days of autumn Marie and Raoul again met and renewed
their walks in the Bois, where alone they could see each other until
the salons reopened. But when the winter fairly began, Raoul appeared in
social life at his apogee. He was almost a personage. Rastignac, now
out of power with the ministry, which went to pieces on the death of de
Marsay, leaned upon Nathan, and gave him in return the warmest praise.
Madame de Vandenesse, feeling this change in public opinion, was
desirous of knowing if her husband’s judgment had altered also. She
questioned him again; perhaps with the hope of obtaining one of those
brilliant revenges which please all women, even the noblest and least
worldly,--for may we not believe that even the angels retain some
portion of their self-love as they gather in serried ranks before the
Holy of Holies?

“Nothing was wanting to Raoul Nathan but to be the dupe he now is to a
parcel of intriguing sharpers,” replied the count.

Felix, whose knowledge of the world and politics enabled him to judge
clearly, had seen Nathan’s true position. He explained to his wife that
Fieschi’s attempt had resulted in attaching to the interests threatened
by this attack on Louis-Philippe a large body of hitherto lukewarm
persons. The newspapers which were non-committal, and did not show their
colors, would lose subscribers; for journalism, like politics, was about
to be simplified by falling into regular lines. If Nathan had put his
whole fortune into that newspaper he would lose it. This judgment,
so apparently just and clear-cut, though brief and given by a man
who fathomed a matter in which he had no interest, alarmed Madame de
Vandenesse.

“Do you take an interest in him?” asked her husband.

“Only as a man whose mind interests me and whose conversation I like.”

This reply was made so naturally that the count suspected nothing.

The next day at four o’clock, Marie and Raoul had a long conversation
together, in a low voice, in Madame d’Espard’s salon. The countess
expressed fears which Raoul dissipated, only too happy to destroy
by epigrams the conjugal judgment. Nathan had a revenge to take. He
characterized the count as narrow-minded, behind the age, a man who
judged the revolution of July with the eyes of the Restoration, who
would never be willing to admit the triumph of the middle-classes--the
new force of all societies, whether temporary or lasting, but a real
force. Instead of turning his mind to the study of an opinion given
impartially and incidentally by a man well-versed in politics, Raoul
mounted his stilts and stalked about in the purple of his own glory.
Where is the woman who would not have believed his glowing talk sooner
than the cold logic of her husband? Madame de Vandenesse, completely
reassured, returned to her life of little enjoyments, clandestine
pressures of the hand, occasional quarrels,--in short, to her
nourishment of the year before, harmless in itself, but likely to drag a
woman over the border if the man she favors is resolute and impatient
of obstacles. Happily for her, Nathan was not dangerous. Besides, he
was too full of his immediate self-interests to think at this time of
profiting by his love.

But toward the end of December, when the second notes fell due, du
Tillet demanded payment. The rich banker, who said he was embarrassed,
advised Raoul to borrow the money for a short time from a usurer, from
Gigonnet, the providence of all young men who were pressed for money. In
January, he remarked, the renewal of subscriptions to the paper would be
coming in, there would be plenty of money in hand, and they could then
see what had best be done. Besides, couldn’t Nathan write a play? As a
matter of pride Raoul determined to pay off the notes at once. Du Tillet
gave Raoul a letter to Gigonnet, who counted out the money on a note of
Nathan’s at twenty days’ sight. Instead of asking himself the reason of
such unusual facility, Raoul felt vexed at his folly in not having asked
for more. That is how men who are truly remarkable for the power of
thought are apt to behave in practical business; they seem to reserve
the power of their mind for their writings, and are fearful of lessening
it by putting it to use in the daily affairs of life.

Raoul related his morning to Florine and Blondet. He gave them an
inimitable sketch of Gigonnet, his fireplace without fire, his shabby
wall-paper, his stairway, his asthmatic bell, his aged straw mattress,
his den without warmth, like his eye. He made them laugh about this
new uncle; they neither troubled themselves about du Tillet and his
pretended want of money, nor about an old usurer so ready to disburse.
What was there to worry about in that?

“He has only asked you fifteen per cent,” said Blondet; “you ought to
be grateful to him. At twenty-five per cent you don’t bow to those old
fellows. This is money-lending; usury doesn’t begin till fifty per cent;
and then you despise the usurer.”

“Despise him!” cried Florine; “if any of your friends lent you money at
that price they’d pose as your benefactors.”

“She is right; and I am glad I don’t owe anything now to du Tillet,”
 said Raoul.

Why this lack of penetration as to their personal affairs in men whose
business it is to penetrate all things? Perhaps the mind cannot be
complete at all points; perhaps artists of every kind live too much in
the present moment to study the future; perhaps they are too observant
of the ridiculous to notice snares, or they may believe that none would
dare to lay a snare for such as they. However this may be, the future
arrived in due time. Twenty days later Raoul’s notes were protested, but
Florine obtained from the Court of commerce an extension of twenty-five
days in which to meet them. Thus pressed, Raoul looked into his affairs
and asked for the accounts, and it then appeared that the receipts
of the newspaper covered only two-thirds of the expenses, while the
subscriptions were rapidly dwindling. The great man now grew anxious
and gloomy, but to Florine only, in whom he confided. She advised him to
borrow money on unwritten plays, and write them at once, giving a lien
on his work. Nathan followed this advice and obtained thereby twenty
thousand francs, which reduced his debt to forty thousand.

On the 10th of February the twenty-five days expired. Du Tillet, who did
not want Nathan as a rival before the electoral college, where he meant
to appear himself, instigated Gigonnet to sue Nathan without compromise.
A man locked up for debt could not present himself as a candidate for
election. Florine was herself in communication with the sheriff on the
subject of her personal debts, and no resource was left to her but the
“I” of Medea, for her new furniture and belongings were now attached.
The ambitious Raoul heard the cracking in all directions of his
prosperous edifice, built, alas! without foundations. His nerve failed
him; too weak already to sustain so vast an enterprise, he felt himself
incapable of attempting to build it up again; he was fated to perish in
its ashes. Love for the countess gave him still a few thrills of life;
his mask brightened for a moment, but behind it hope was dead. He did
not suspect the hand of du Tillet, and laid the blame of his misfortune
on the usurer. Rastignac, Blondet, Lousteau, Vernou, Finot, and Massol
took care not to enlighten him. Rastignac, who wanted to return to
power, made common cause with Nucingen and du Tillet. The others felt
a satisfaction in the catastrophe of an equal who had attempted to make
himself their master. None of them, however, would have said a word to
Florine; on the contrary, they praised Raoul to her.

“Nathan,” they said, “has the shoulders of an Atlas; he’ll pull himself
through; all will come right.”

“There were two new subscribers yesterday,” said Blondet, gravely.
“Raoul will certainly be elected deputy. As soon as the budget is voted
the dissolution is sure to take place.”

But Nathan, sued, could no longer obtain even usury; Florine, with all
her personal property attached, could count on nothing but inspiring a
passion in some fool who might not appear at the right moment. Nathan’s
friends were all men without money and without credit. An arrest for
debt would destroy his hopes of a political career; and besides all
this, he had bound himself to do an immense amount of dramatic work for
which he had already received payment. He could see no bottom to the
gulf of misery that lay before him, into which he was about to roll. In
presence of such threatened evil his boldness deserted him. Would the
Comtesse de Vandenesse stand by him? Would she fly with him? Women are
never led into a gulf of that kind except by an absolute love, and the
love of Raoul and Marie had not bound them together by the mysterious
and inalienable ties of happiness. But supposing that the countess did
follow him to some foreign country; she would come without fortune,
despoiled of everything, and then, alas! she would merely be one more
embarrassment to him. A mind of a second order, and a proud mind like
that of Nathan, would be likely to see, under these circumstances, and
did see, in suicide the sword to cut the Gordian knots. The idea of
failure in the face of the world and that society he had so lately
entered and meant to rule, of leaving the chariot of the countess and
becoming once more a muddied pedestrian, was more than he could bear.
Madness began to dance and whirl and shake her bells at the gates of the
fantastic palace in which the poet had been dreaming. In this extremity,
Nathan waited for some lucky accident, determined not to kill himself
until the final moment.

During the last days employed by the legal formalities required before
proceeding to arrest for debt, Raoul went about, in spite of himself,
with that coldly sullen and morose expression of face which may be
noticed in persons who are either fated to commit suicide or are
meditating it. The funereal ideas they are turning over in their minds
appear upon their foreheads in gray and cloudy tints, their smile has
something fatalistic in it, their motions are solemn. These unhappy
beings seem to want to suck the last juices of the life they mean to
leave; their eyes see things invisible, their ears are listening to a
death-knell, they pay no attention to the minor things about them. These
alarming symptoms Marie perceived one evening at Lady Dudley’s. Raoul
was sitting apart on a sofa in the boudoir, while the rest of the
company were conversing in the salon. The countess went to the door, but
he did not raise his head; he heard neither Marie’s breathing nor the
rustle of her silk dress; he was gazing at a flower in the carpet, with
fixed eyes, stupid with grief; he felt he had rather die than abdicate.
All the world can’t have the rock of Saint Helena for a pedestal.
Moreover, suicide was then the fashion in Paris. Is it not, in fact, the
last resource of all atheistical societies? Raoul, as he sat there, had
decided that the moment had come to die. Despair is in proportion to our
hopes; that of Raoul had no other issue than the grave.

“What is the matter?” cried Marie, flying to him.

“Nothing,” he answered.

There is one way of saying that word “nothing” between lovers which
signifies its exact contrary. Marie shrugged her shoulders.

“You are a child,” she said. “Some misfortune has happened to you.”

“No, not to me,” he replied. “But you will know all soon enough, Marie,”
 he added, affectionately.

“What were you thinking of when I came in?” she asked, in a tone of
authority.

“Do you want to know the truth?” She nodded. “I was thinking of you; I
was saying to myself that most men in my place would have wanted to be
loved without reserve. I am loved, am I not?”

“Yes,” she answered.

“And yet,” he said, taking her round the waist and kissing her forehead
at the risk of being seen, “I leave you pure and without remorse. I
could have dragged you into an abyss, but you remain in all your glory
on its brink without a stain. Yet one thought troubles me--”

“What is it?” she asked.

“You will despise me.” She smiled superbly. “Yes, you will never believe
that I have sacredly loved you; I shall be disgraced, I know that. Women
never imagine that from the depths of our mire we raise our eyes to
heaven and truly adore a Marie. They assail that sacred love with
miserable doubts; they cannot believe that men of intellect and poesy
can so detach their soul from earthly enjoyment as to lay it pure upon
some cherished altar. And yet, Marie, the worship of the ideal is more
fervent in men then in women; we find it in women, who do not even look
for it in us.”

“Why are you making me that article?” she said, jestingly.

“I am leaving France; and you will hear to-morrow, how and why, from a
