PART II.

THE FALSE OR THEOLOGICAL ESSENCE OF RELIGION.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE ESSENTIAL STANDPOINT OF RELIGION.


The essential standpoint of religion is the practical or
subjective. The end of religion is the welfare, the salvation, the
ultimate felicity of man; the relation of man to God is nothing else
than his relation to his own spiritual good; God is the realised
salvation of the soul, or the unlimited power of effecting the
salvation, the bliss of man. [150] The Christian religion is specially
distinguished from other religions in this,--that no other has given
equal prominence to the salvation of man. But this salvation is not
temporal earthly prosperity and well-being. On the contrary, the most
genuine Christians have declared that earthly good draws man away from
God, whereas adversity, suffering, afflictions lead him back to God,
and hence are alone suited to Christians. Why? Because in trouble
man is only practically or subjectively disposed; in trouble he has
resource only to the one thing needful; in trouble God is felt to be a
want of man. Pleasure, joy, expands man; trouble, suffering, contracts
and concentrates him; in suffering man denies the reality of the world;
the things that charm the imagination of the artist and the intellect
of the thinker lose their attraction for him, their power over him; he
is absorbed in himself, in his own soul. The soul thus self-absorbed,
self-concentrated, seeking satisfaction in itself alone, denying the
world, idealistic in relation to the world, to Nature in general,
but realistic in relation to man, caring only for its inherent need
of salvation,--this soul is God. God, as the object of religion,--and
only as such is he God,--God in the sense of a nomen proprium, not of a
vague, metaphysical entity, is essentially an object only of religion,
not of philosophy,--of feeling, not of the intellect,--of the heart's
necessity, not of the mind's freedom: in short, an object which is
the reflex not of the theoretical but of the practical tendency in man.

Religion annexes to its doctrines a curse and a blessing, damnation
and salvation. Blessed is he that believeth, cursed is he that
believeth not. Thus it appeals not to reason, but to feeling, to
the desire of happiness, to the passions of hope and fear. It does
not take the theoretic point of view; otherwise it must have been
free to enunciate its doctrines without attaching to them practical
consequences, without to a certain extent compelling belief in them;
for when the case stands thus: I am lost if I do not believe,--the
conscience is under a subtle kind of constraint; the fear of hell urges
me to believe. Even supposing my belief to be in its origin free,
fear inevitably intermingles itself; my conscience is always under
constraint; doubt, the principle of theoretic freedom, appears to me
a crime. And as in religion the highest idea, the highest existence
is God, so the highest crime is doubt in God, or the doubt that God
exists. But that which I do not trust myself to doubt, which I cannot
doubt without feeling disturbed in my soul, without incurring guilt;
that is no matter of theory, but a matter of conscience, no being of
the intellect, but of the heart.

Now as the sole standpoint of religion is the practical or subjective
standpoint, as therefore to religion the whole, the essential man is
that part of his nature which is practical, which forms resolutions,
which acts in accordance with conscious aims, whether physical or
moral, and which considers the world not in itself, but only in
relation to those aims or wants: the consequence is that everything
which lies behind the practical consciousness, but which is the
essential object of theory--theory in its most original and general
sense, namely, that of objective contemplation and experience, of
the intellect, of science [151]--is regarded by religion as lying
outside man and Nature, in a special, personal being. All good, but
especially such as takes possession of man apart from his volition,
such as does not correspond with any resolution or purpose, such as
transcends the limits of the practical consciousness, comes from God;
all wickedness, evil, but especially such as overtakes him against
his will in the midst of his best moral resolutions, or hurries him
along with terrible violence, comes from the devil. The scientific
knowledge of the essence of religion includes the knowledge of the
devil, of Satan, of demons. [152] These things cannot be omitted
without a violent mutilation of religion. Grace and its works
are the antitheses of the devil and his works. As the involuntary,
sensual impulses which flash out from the depths of the nature, and,
in general, all those phenomena of moral and physical evil which are
inexplicable to religion, appear to it as the work of the Evil Being;
so the involuntary movements of inspiration and ecstasy appear to it as
the work of the Good Being, God, of the Holy Spirit or of grace. Hence
the arbitrariness of grace--the complaint of the pious that grace at
one time visits and blesses them, at another forsakes and rejects
them. The life, the agency of grace, is the life, the agency of
emotion. Emotion is the Paraclete of Christians. The moments which
are forsaken by divine grace are the moments destitute of emotion
and inspiration.

In relation to the inner life, grace may be defined as religious
genius; in relation to the outer life as religious chance. Man is
good or wicked by no means through himself, his own power, his
will; but through that complete synthesis of hidden and evident
determinations of things which, because they rest on no evident
necessity, we ascribe to the power of "chance." Divine grace is the
power of chance beclouded with additional mystery. Here we have again
the confirmation of that which we have seen to be the essential law
of religion. Religion denies, repudiates chance, making everything
dependent on God, explaining everything by means of him; but this
denial is only apparent; it merely gives chance the name of the
divine sovereignty. For the divine will, which, on incomprehensible
grounds, for incomprehensible reasons, that is, speaking plainly,
out of groundless, absolute arbitrariness, out of divine caprice, as
it were, determines or predestines some to evil and misery, others
to good and happiness, has not a single positive characteristic to
distinguish it from the power of chance. The mystery of the election
of grace is thus the mystery of chance. I say the mystery of chance;
for in reality chance is a mystery, although slurred over and ignored
by our speculative religious philosophy, which, as in its occupation
with the illusory mysteries of the Absolute Being, i.e., of theology,
it has overlooked the true mysteries of thought and life, so also
in the mystery of divine grace or freedom of election, has forgotten
the profane mystery of chance. [153]

But to return. The devil is the negative, the evil, that springs from
the nature, but not from the will; God is the positive, the good, which
comes from the nature, but not from the conscious action of the will;
the devil is involuntary, inexplicable wickedness; God involuntary,
inexplicable goodness. The source of both is the same, the quality only
is different or opposite. For this reason, the belief in a devil was,
until the most recent times, intimately connected with the belief
in God, so that the denial of the devil was held to be virtually as
atheistic as the denial of God. Nor without reason; for when men once
begin to derive the phenomena of evil from natural causes, they at
the same time begin to derive the phenomena of good, of the divine,
from the nature of things, and come at length either to abolish the
idea of God altogether, or at least to believe in another God than
the God of religion. In this case it most commonly happens that they
make the Deity an idle inactive being, whose existence is equivalent
to non-existence, since he no longer actively interposes in life,
but is merely placed at the summit of things, at the beginning of
the world, as the First Cause. God created the world: this is all
that is here retained of God. The past tense is necessary; for since
that epoch the world pursues its course like a machine. The addition:
He still creates, he is creating at this moment, is only the result
of external reflection; the past tense adequately expresses the
religious idea in this stage; for the spirit of religion is gone
when the operation of God is reduced to a fecit or creavit. It is
otherwise when the genuine religious consciousness says: The fecit
is still to-day a facit. This, though here also it is a product of
reflection, has nevertheless a legitimate meaning, because by the
religious spirit God is really thought of as active.

Religion is abolished where the idea of the world, of so-called
second causes, intrudes itself between God and man. Here a foreign
element, the principle of intellectual culture, has insinuated itself,
peace is broken, the harmony of religion, which lies only in the
immediate connection of man with God, is destroyed. Second causes are
a capitulation of the unbelieving intellect with the still believing
heart. It is true that, according to religion also, God works on man
by means of other things and beings. But God alone is the cause, he
alone is the active and efficient being. What a fellow-creature does
is in the view of religion done not by him, but by God. The other
is only an appearance, a medium, a vehicle, not a cause. But the
"second cause" is a miserable anomaly, neither an independent nor a
dependent being: God, it is true, gives the first impulse, but then
ensues the spontaneous activity of the second cause. [154]

Religion of itself, unadulterated by foreign elements, knows nothing
of the existence of second causes; on the contrary, they are a stone
of stumbling to it; for the realm of second causes, the sensible
world, Nature, is precisely what separates man from God, although
God as a real God, i.e., an external being, is supposed himself to
become in the other world a sensible existence. [155] Hence religion
believes that one day this wall of separation will fall away. One day
there will be no Nature, no matter, no body, at least none such as
to separate man from God: then there will be only God and the pious
soul. Religion derives the idea of the existence of second causes,
that is, of things which are interposed between God and man, only
from the physical, natural, and hence the irreligious or at least
non-religious theory of the universe: a theory which it nevertheless
immediately subverts by making the operations of Nature operations
of God. But this religious idea is in contradiction with the natural
sense and understanding, which concedes a real, spontaneous activity
to natural things. And this contradiction of the physical view with
the religious theory, religion resolves by converting the undeniable
activity of things into an activity of God. Thus, on this view,
the positive idea is God; the negative, the world.

On the contrary, where second causes, having been set in motion, are,
so to speak, emancipated, the converse occurs; Nature is the positive,
God a negative idea. The world is independent in its existence, its
persistence; only as to its commencement is it dependent. God is here
only a hypothetical Being, an inference, arising from the necessity of
a limited understanding, to which the existence of a world viewed by
it as a machine is inexplicable without a self-moving principle;--he
is no longer an original, absolutely necessary Being. God exists not
for his own sake, but for the sake of the world,--merely that he may,
as a First Cause, explain the existence of the world. The narrow
rationalising man takes objection to the original self-subsistence
of the world, because he looks at it only from the subjective,
practical point of view, only in its commoner aspect, only as a piece
of mechanism, not in its majesty and glory, not as the Cosmos. He
conceives the world as having been launched into existence by an
original impetus, as, according to mathematical theory, is the case
with matter once set in motion and thenceforth going on for ever:
that is, he postulates a mechanical origin. A machine must have a
beginning; this is involved in its very idea; for it has not the
source of motion in itself.

All religious speculative cosmogony is tautology, as is apparent from
this example. In cosmogony man declares or realises the idea he has
of the world; he merely repeats what he has already said in another
form. Thus here, if the world is a machine, it is self-evident that it
did not make itself, that, on the contrary, it was created, i.e., had
a mechanical origin. Herein, it is true, the religious consciousness
agrees with the mechanical theory, that to it also the world is a mere
fabric, a product of Will. But they agree only for an instant, only
in the moment of creation; that moment past, the harmony ceases. The
holder of the mechanical theory needs God only as the creator of
the world; once made, the world turns its back on the Creator,
and rejoices in its godless self-subsistence. But religion creates
the world only to maintain it in the perpetual consciousness of its
nothingness, its dependence on God. [156] To the mechanical theorist,
the creation is the last thin thread which yet ties him to religion;
the religion to which the nothingness of the world is a present truth
(for all power and activity is to it the power and activity of God),
is with him only a surviving reminiscence of youth; hence he removes
the creation of the world, the act of religion, the non-existence
of the world (for in the beginning, before the creation, there was
no world, only God), into the far distance, into the past, while
the self-subsistence of the world, which absorbs all his senses and
endeavours, acts on him with the force of the present. The mechanical
theorist interrupts and cuts short the activity of God by the activity
of the world. With him God has indeed still an historical right,
but this is in contradiction with the right he awards to Nature;
hence he limits as much as possible the right yet remaining to God,
in order to gain wider and freer play for his natural causes, and
thereby for his understanding.

With this class of thinkers the creation holds the same position as
miracles, which also they can and actually do acquiesce in, because
miracles exist, at least according to religious opinion. But not
to say that he explains miracles naturally, that is, mechanically,
he can only digest them when he relegates them to the past; for the
present he begs to be excused from believing in them, and explains
everything to himself charmingly on natural principles. When a
belief has departed from the reason, the intelligence, when it is no
longer held spontaneously, but merely because it is a common belief,
or because on some ground or other it must be held; in short, when
a belief is inwardly a past one; then externally also the object
of the belief is referred to the past. Unbelief thus gets breathing
space, but at the same time concedes to belief at least an historical
validity. The past is here the fortunate means of compromise between
belief and unbelief: I certainly believe in miracles, but, nota bene,
in no miracles which happen now--only in those which once happened,
which, thank God! are already plus quam perfecta. So also with
the creation. The creation is an immediate act of God, a miracle,
for there was once nothing but God. In the idea of the creation man
transcends the world, he rises into abstraction from it; he conceives
it as non-existent in the moment of creation; thus he dispels from
his sight what stands between himself and God, the sensible world;
he places himself in immediate contact with God. But the mechanical
thinker shrinks from this immediate contact with God; hence he at
once makes the præsens, if indeed he soars so high, into a perfectum;
he interposes millenniums between his natural or materialistic view
and the thought of an immediate operation of God.

To the religious spirit, on the contrary, God alone is the cause
of all positive effects, God alone the ultimate and also the sole
ground wherewith it answers, or rather repels, all questions which
theory puts forward; for the affirmative of religion is virtually
a negative; its answer amounts to nothing, since it solves the
most various questions always with the same answer, making all the
operations of Nature immediate operations of God, of a designing,
personal, extra-natural or supranatural Being. God is the idea which
supplies the lack of theory. The idea of God is the explanation of
the inexplicable,--which explains nothing because it is supposed to
explain everything without distinction; he is the night of theory,
a night, however, in which everything is clear to religious feeling,
because in it the measure of darkness, the discriminating light of the
understanding, is extinct; he is the ignorance which solves all doubt
by repressing it, which knows everything because it knows nothing
definite, because all things which impress the intellect disappear
before religion, lose their individuality, in the eyes of divine
power are nothing. Darkness is the mother of religion.

The essential act of religion, that in which religion puts into
action what we have designated as its essence, is prayer. Prayer
is all-powerful. What the pious soul entreats for in prayer God
fulfils. But he prays not for spiritual gifts [157] alone, which
lie in some sort in the power of man; he prays also for things which
lie out of him, which are in the power of Nature, a power which it
is the very object of prayer to overcome; in prayer he lays hold
on a supernatural means, in order to attain ends in themselves
natural. God is to him not the causa remota but the causa proxima,
the immediate, efficient cause of all natural effects. All so-called
secondary forces and second causes are nothing to him when he prays;
if they were anything to him, the might, the fervour of prayer would
be annihilated. But in fact they have no existence for him; otherwise
he would assuredly seek to attain his end only by some intermediate
process. But he desires immediate help. He has recourse to prayer in
the certainty that he can do more, infinitely more, by prayer, than
by all the efforts of reason and all the agencies of Nature,--in
the conviction that prayer possesses superhuman and supernatural
powers. [158] But in prayer he applies immediately to God. Thus God
is to him the immediate cause, the fulfilment of prayer, the power
which realises prayer. But an immediate act of God is a miracle;
hence miracle is essential to the religious view. Religion explains
everything miraculously. That miracles do not always happen is indeed
obvious, as that man does not always pray. But the consideration that
miracles do not always happen lies outside the nature of religion, in
the empirical or physical mode of view only. Where religion begins,
there also begins miracle. Every true prayer is a miracle, an act
of the wonder-working power. External miracles themselves only make
visible internal miracles, that is, they are only a manifestation in
time and space, and therefore as a special fact, of what in and by
itself is a fundamental position of religion, namely, that God is,
in general, the supernatural, immediate cause of all things. The
miracle of fact is only an impassioned expression of religion, a
moment of inspiration. Miracles happen only in extraordinary crises,
in which there is an exaltation of the feelings: hence there are
miracles of anger. No miracle is wrought in cold blood. But it
is precisely in moments of passion that the latent nature reveals
itself. Man does not always pray with equal warmth and power. Such
prayers are therefore ineffective. Only ardent prayer reveals the
nature of prayer. Man truly prays when he regards prayer as in itself
a sacred power, a divine force. So it is with miracles. Miracles
happen--no matter whether few or many--wherever there is, as a basis
for them, a belief in the miraculous. But the belief in miracle
is no theoretic or objective mode of viewing the world and Nature;
miracle realises practical wants, and that in contradiction with the
laws which are imperative to the reason; in miracle man subjugates
Nature, as in itself a nullity, to his own ends, which he regards
as a reality; miracle is the superlative expression of spiritual or
religious utilitarianism; in miracle all things are at the service
of necessitous man. It is clear from this, that the conception of
the world which is essential to religion is that of the practical
or subjective standpoint, that God--for the miracle-working power
is identical with God--is a purely practical or subjective Being,
serving, however, as a substitute for a theoretic view, and is thus
no object of thought, of the knowing faculty, any more than miracle,
which owes its origin to the negation of thought. If I place myself
in the point of view of thought, of investigation, of theory, in
which I consider things in themselves, in their mutual relations,
the miracle-working being vanishes into nothing, miracle disappears;
i.e., the religious miracle, which is absolutely different from the
natural miracle, though they are continually interchanged, in order
to stultify reason, and, under the appearance of natural science, to
introduce religious miracle into the sphere of rationality and reality.

But for this very reason--namely, that religion is removed from the
standpoint, from the nature of theory--the true, universal essence
of Nature and humanity, which as such is hidden from religion and
is only visible to the theoretic eye, is conceived as another, a
miraculous and supernatural essence; the idea of the species becomes
the idea of God, who again is himself an individual being, but is
distinguished from human individuals in this, that he possesses their
qualities according to the measure of the species. Hence, in religion
man necessarily places his nature out of himself, regards his nature
as a separate nature; necessarily, because the nature which is the
object of theory lies outside of him, because all his conscious
existence spends itself in his practical subjectivity. God is his
alter ego, his other lost half; God is the complement of himself;
in God he is first a perfect man. God is a need to him; something is
wanting to him without his knowing what it is--God is this something
wanting, indispensable to him; God belongs to his nature. The world
is nothing to religion, [159]--the world, which is in truth the sum
of all reality, is revealed in its glory only by theory. The joys of
theory are the sweetest intellectual pleasures of life; but religion
knows nothing of the joys of the thinker, of the investigator of
Nature, of the artist. The idea of the universe is wanting to it,
the consciousness of the really infinite, the consciousness of the
species. God only is its compensation for the poverty of life, for
the want of a substantial import, which the true life of rational
contemplation presents in unending fulness. God is to religion the
substitute for the lost world,--God is to it in the stead of pure
contemplation, the life of theory.

That which we have designated as the practical or subjective view
is not pure, it is tainted with egoism, for therein I have relation
to a thing only for my own sake; neither is it self-sufficing,
for it places me in relation to an object above my own level. On
the contrary, the theoretic view is joyful, self-sufficing, happy;
for here the object calls forth love and admiration; in the light of
the free intelligence it is radiant as a diamond, transparent as a
rock-crystal. The theoretic view is æsthetic, whereas the practical
is unæsthetic. Religion therefore finds in God a compensation for
the want of an æsthetic view. To the religious spirit the world
is nothing in itself; the admiration, the contemplation of it is
idolatry; for the world is a mere piece of mechanism. [160] Hence
in religion it is God that serves as the object of pure, untainted,
i.e., theoretic or æsthetic contemplation. God is the existence to
which the religious man has an objective relation; in God the object
is contemplated by him for its own sake. God is an end in himself;
therefore in religion he has the significance which in the theoretic
view belongs to the object in general. The general being of theory
is to religion a special being. It is true that in religion man,
in his relation to God, has relation to his own wants as well in a
higher as in the lower sense: "Give us this day our daily bread;"
but God can satisfy all wants of man only because he in himself has
no wants,--because he is perfect blessedness.







