CHAPTER XXIV.

THE CONTRADICTION IN THE TRINITY.


Religion gives reality or objectivity not only to the human or divine
nature in general as a personal being; it further gives reality to
the fundamental determinations or fundamental distinctions of that
nature as persons. The Trinity is therefore originally nothing else
than the sum of the essential fundamental distinctions which man
perceives in the human nature. According as the mode of conceiving
this nature varies, so also the fundamental determinations on which
the Trinity is founded vary. But these distinctions, perceived in one
and the same human nature, are hypostasised as substances, as divine
persons. And herein, namely, that these different determinations
are in God, hypostases, subjects, is supposed to lie the distinction
between these determinations as they are in God, and as they exist
in man,--in accordance with the law already enunciated, that only
in the idea of personality does the human personality transfer and
make objective its own qualities. But the personality exists only in
the imagination; the fundamental determinations are therefore only
for the imagination hypostases, persons; for reason, for thought,
they are mere relations or determinations. The idea of the Trinity
contains in itself the contradiction of polytheism and monotheism,
of imagination and reason, of fiction and reality. Imagination gives
the Trinity, reason the Unity of the persons. According to reason, the
things distinguished are only distinctions; according to imagination,
the distinctions are things distinguished, which therefore do away
with the unity of the divine being. To the reason, the divine persons
are phantoms, to the imagination realities. The idea of the Trinity
demands that man should think the opposite of what he imagines,
and imagine the opposite of what he thinks,--that he should think
phantoms realities. [176]

There are three Persons, but they are not essentially
distinguished. Tres personæ, but una essentia. So far the conception is
a natural one. We can conceive three and even more persons, identical
in essence. Thus we men are distinguished from one another by personal
differences, but in the main, in essence, in humanity we are one. And
this identification is made not only by the speculative understanding,
but even by feeling. A given individual is a man as we are; punctum
satis; in this feeling all distinctions vanish,--whether he be
rich or poor, clever or stupid, culpable or innocent. The feeling
of compassion, sympathy, is therefore a substantial, essential,
speculative feeling. But the three or more human persons exist apart
from each other, have a separate existence, even when they verify
and confirm the unity of their nature by fervent love. They together
constitute, through love, a single moral personality, but each has
a physical existence for himself. Though they may be reciprocally
absorbed in each other, may be unable to dispense with each other,
they have yet always a formally independent existence. Independent
existence, existence apart from others, is the essential characteristic
of a person, of a substance. It is otherwise in God, and necessarily
so; for while his personality is the same as that of man, it is
held to be the same with a difference, on the ground simply of this
postulate: there must be a difference. The three Persons in God have
no existence out of each other; else there would meet us in the heaven
of Christian dogmatics, not indeed many gods, as in Olympus, but at
least three divine Persons in an individual form, three Gods. The gods
of Olympus were real persons, for they existed apart from each other,
they had the criterion of real personality in their individuality,
though they were one in essence, in divinity; they had different
personal attributes, but were each singly a god, alike in divinity,
different as existing subjects or persons; they were genuine
divine personalities. The three Persons of the Christian Godhead,
on the contrary, are only imaginary, pretended persons, assuredly
different from real persons, just because they are only phantasms,
shadows of personalities, while, notwithstanding, they are assumed to
be real persons. The essential characteristic of personal reality,
the polytheistic element, is excluded, denied as non-divine. But by
this negation their personality becomes a mere phantasm. Only in the
truth of the plural lies the truth of the Persons. The three persons
of the Christian Godhead are not tres Dii, three Gods;--at least they
are not meant to be such;--but unus Deus, one God. The three Persons
end, not, as might have been expected, in a plural, but in a singular;
they are not only Unum--the gods of Olympus are that--but Unus. Unity
has here the significance not of essence only, but also of existence;
unity is the existential form of God. Three are one: the plural is
a singular. God is a personal being consisting of three persons. [177]

The three persons are thus only phantoms in the eyes of reason, for
the conditions or modes under which alone their personality could
be realised, are done away with by the command of monotheism. The
unity gives the lie to the personality; the self-subsistence of the
persons is annihilated in the self-subsistence of the unity--they
are mere relations. The Son is not without the Father, the Father
not without the Son: the Holy Spirit, who indeed spoils the symmetry,
expresses nothing but the relation of the two to each other. But the
divine persons are distinguished from each other only by that which
constitutes their relation to each other. The essential in the Father
as a person is that he is a Father, of the Son that he is a Son. What
the Father is over and above his fatherhood, does not belong to his
personality; therein he is God, and as God identical with the Son as
God. Therefore it is said: God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost:--God is in all three alike. "There is one person of the
Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the
Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all
one;" i.e., they are distinct persons, but without distinction of
substance. The personality, therefore, arises purely in the relation
of the Fatherhood; i.e., the idea of the person is here only a
relative idea, the idea of a relation. Man as a father is dependent,
he is essentially the correlative of the son; he is not a father
without the son; by fatherhood man reduces himself to a relative,
dependent, impersonal being. It is before all things necessary not
to allow oneself to be deceived by these relations as they exist in
reality, in men. The human father is, over and above his paternity,
an independent personal being; he has at least a formal existence for
himself, an existence apart from his son; he is not merely a father,
with the exclusion of all the other predicates of a real personal
being. Fatherhood is a relation which the bad man can make quite an
external one, not touching his personal being. But in God the Father,
there is no distinction between God the Father and God the Son as
God; the abstract fatherhood alone constitutes his personality, his
distinction from the Son, whose personality likewise is founded only
on the abstract sonship.

But at the same time these relations, as has been said, are maintained
to be not mere relations, but real persons, beings, substances. Thus
the truth of the plural, the truth of polytheism is again affirmed,
[178] and the truth of monotheism is denied. To require the reality of
the persons is to require the unreality of the unity, and conversely,
to require the reality of the unity is to require the unreality of the
persons. Thus in the holy mystery of the Trinity,--that is to say,
so far as it is supposed to represent a truth distinct from human
nature,--all resolves itself into delusions, phantasms, contradictions,
and sophisms. [179]







