
                                  THE
                          ENGLISH AND FOREIGN
                         PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY.







                      THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY.

                                   BY
                           LUDWIG FEUERBACH.

               TRANSLATED FROM THE SECOND GERMAN EDITION

                                   BY
                             MARIAN EVANS,
                TRANSLATOR OF "STRAUSS'S LIFE OF JESUS."


                            Second Edition.

                                LONDON:
                KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER, & CO., Ltd.
                                 1890.







PUBLISHERS' NOTE.


The first edition of this work was published in 1854, and, although
a large one, has been long out of print. Many inquiries having been
made for it since the recent lamented death of the translator, the
publishers have determined to offer a second edition to the public,
and have been advised to give it a place in their "English and Foreign
Philosophical Library." It is an exact reprint of the first edition,
and they trust it will be received with equal favour.


London, June 1881.







PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. [1]


The clamour excited by the present work has not surprised me,
and hence it has not in the least moved me from my position. On the
contrary, I have once more, in all calmness, subjected my work to the
severest scrutiny, both historical and philosophical; I have, as far as
possible, freed it from its defects of form, and enriched it with new
developments, illustrations, and historical testimonies,--testimonies
in the highest degree striking and irrefragable. Now that I have thus
verified my analysis by historical proofs, it is to be hoped that
readers whose eyes are not sealed will be convinced and will admit,
even though reluctantly, that my work contains a faithful, correct
translation of the Christian religion out of the Oriental language of
imagery into plain speech. And it has no pretension to be anything
more than a close translation, or, to speak literally, an empirical
or historico-philosophical analysis, a solution of the enigma of the
Christian religion. The general propositions which I premise in the
Introduction are no à priori, excogitated propositions, no products
of speculation; they have arisen out of the analysis of religion;
they are only, as indeed are all the fundamental ideas of the work,
generalisations from the known manifestations of human nature, and
in particular of the religious consciousness,--facts converted into
thoughts, i.e., expressed in general terms, and thus made the property
of the understanding. The ideas of my work are only conclusions,
consequences, drawn from premisses which are not themselves mere
ideas, but objective facts either actual or historical--facts which
had not their place in my head simply in virtue of their ponderous
existence in folio. I unconditionally repudiate absolute, immaterial,
self-sufficing speculation--that speculation which draws its material
from within. I differ toto coelo from those philosophers who pluck
out their eyes that they may see better; for my thought I require the
senses, especially sight; I found my ideas on materials which can be
appropriated only through the activity of the senses. I do not generate
the object from the thought, but the thought from the object; and I
hold that alone to be an object which has an existence beyond one's own
brain. I am an idealist only in the region of practical philosophy,
that is, I do not regard the limits of the past and present as the
limits of humanity, of the future; on the contrary, I firmly believe
that many things--yes, many things--which with the short-sighted,
pusillanimous practical men of to-day, pass for flights of imagination,
for ideas never to be realised, for mere chimeras, will to-morrow,
i.e., in the next century,--centuries in individual life are days
in the life of humanity,--exist in full reality. Briefly, the "Idea"
is to me only faith in the historical future, in the triumph of truth
and virtue; it has for me only a political and moral significance;
for in the sphere of strictly theoretical philosophy, I attach myself,
in direct opposition to the Hegelian philosophy, only to realism,
to materialism in the sense above indicated. The maxim hitherto
adopted by speculative philosophy: All that is mine I carry with
me, the old omnia mea mecum porto, I cannot, alas! appropriate. I
have many things outside myself, which I cannot convey either in my
pocket or my head, but which nevertheless I look upon as belonging
to me, not indeed as a mere man--a view not now in question--but
as a philosopher. I am nothing but a natural philosopher in the
domain of mind; and the natural philosopher can do nothing without
instruments, without material means. In this character I have
written the present work, which consequently contains nothing else
than the principle of a new philosophy verified practically, i.e.,
in concreto, in application to a special object, but an object which
has a universal significance: namely, to religion, in which this
principle is exhibited, developed, and thoroughly carried out. This
philosophy is essentially distinguished from the systems hitherto
prevalent, in that it corresponds to the real, complete nature of
man; but for that very reason it is antagonistic to minds perverted
and crippled by a superhuman, i.e., anti-human, anti-natural religion
and speculation. It does not, as I have already said elsewhere, regard
the pen as the only fit organ for the revelation of truth, but the eye
and ear, the hand and foot; it does not identify the idea of the fact
with the fact itself, so as to reduce real existence to an existence
on paper, but it separates the two, and precisely by this separation
attains to the fact itself; it recognises as the true thing, not the
thing as it is an object of the abstract reason, but as it is an object
of the real, complete man, and hence as it is itself a real, complete
thing. This philosophy does not rest on an Understanding per se, on
an absolute, nameless understanding, belonging one knows not to whom,
but on the understanding of man;--though not, I grant, on that of
man enervated by speculation and dogma;--and it speaks the language
of men, not an empty, unknown tongue. Yes, both in substance and in
speech, it places philosophy in the negation of philosophy, i.e.,
it declares that alone to be the true philosophy which is converted
in succum et sanguinem, which is incarnate in Man; and hence it finds
its highest triumph in the fact that to all dull and pedantic minds,
which place the essence of philosophy in the show of philosophy,
it appears to be no philosophy at all.

This philosophy has for its principle, not the Substance
of Spinoza, not the ego of Kant and Fichte, not the Absolute
Identity of Schelling, not the Absolute Mind of Hegel, in short,
no abstract, merely conceptional being, but a real being, the true
Ens realissimum--man; its principle, therefore, is in the highest
degree positive and real. It generates thought from the opposite
of thought, from Matter, from existence, from the senses; it has
relation to its object first through the senses, i.e., passively,
before defining it in thought. Hence my work, as a specimen of
this philosophy, so far from being a production to be placed in the
category of Speculation,--although in another point of view it is the
true, the incarnate result of prior philosophical systems,--is the
direct opposite of speculation, nay, puts an end to it by explaining
it. Speculation makes religion say only what it has itself thought,
and expressed far better than religion; it assigns a meaning to
religion without any reference to the actual meaning of religion; it
does not look beyond itself. I, on the contrary, let religion itself
speak; I constitute myself only its listener and interpreter, not its
prompter. Not to invent, but to discover, "to unveil existence," has
been my sole object; to see correctly, my sole endeavour. It is not I,
but religion that worships man, although religion, or rather theology,
denies this; it is not I, an insignificant individual, but religion
itself that says: God is man, man is God; it is not I, but religion
that denies the God who is not man, but only an ens rationis,--since it
makes God become man, and then constitutes this God, not distinguished
from man, having a human form, human feelings, and human thoughts,
the object of its worship and veneration. I have only found the key to
the cipher of the Christian religion, only extricated its true meaning
from the web of contradictions and delusions called theology;--but
in doing so I have certainly committed a sacrilege. If therefore
my work is negative, irreligious, atheistic, let it be remembered
that atheism--at least in the sense of this work--is the secret of
religion itself; that religion itself, not indeed on the surface, but
fundamentally, not in intention or according to its own supposition,
but in its heart, in its essence, believes in nothing else than
the truth and divinity of human nature. Or let it be proved that the
historical as well as the rational arguments of my work are false; let
them be refuted--not, however, I entreat, by judicial denunciations,
or theological jeremiads, by the trite phrases of speculation, or
other pitiful expedients for which I have no name, but by reasons,
and such reasons as I have not already thoroughly answered.

Certainly, my work is negative, destructive; but, be it observed,
only in relation to the unhuman, not to the human elements of
religion. It is therefore divided into two parts, of which the
first is, as to its main idea, positive, the second, including the
Appendix, not wholly, but in the main, negative; in both, however,
the same positions are proved, only in a different or rather opposite
manner. The first exhibits religion in its essence, its truth, the
second exhibits it in its contradictions; the first is development,
the second polemic; thus the one is, according to the nature of the
case, calmer, the other more vehement. Development advances gently,
contest impetuously; for development is self-contented at every
stage, contest only at the last blow. Development is deliberate, but
contest resolute. Development is light, contest fire. Hence results a
difference between the two parts even as to their form. Thus in the
first part I show that the true sense of Theology is Anthropology,
that there is no distinction between the predicates of the divine and
human nature, and, consequently, no distinction between the divine and
human subject: I say consequently, for wherever, as is especially the
case in theology, the predicates are not accidents, but express the
essence of the subject, there is no distinction between subject and
predicate, the one can be put in the place of the other; on which point
I refer the reader to the Analytics of Aristotle, or even merely to
the Introduction of Porphyry. In the second part, on the other hand,
I show that the distinction which is made, or rather supposed to be
made, between the theological and anthropological predicates resolves
itself into an absurdity. Here is a striking example. In the first part
I prove that the Son of God is in religion a real son, the son of God
in the same sense in which man is the son of man, and I find therein
the truth, the essence of religion, that it conceives and affirms a
profoundly human relation as a divine relation; on the other hand,
in the second part I show that the Son of God--not indeed in religion,
but in theology, which is the reflection of religion upon itself,--is
not a son in the natural, human sense, but in an entirely different
manner, contradictory to Nature and reason, and therefore absurd, and
I find in this negation of human sense and the human understanding,
the negation of religion. Accordingly the first part is the direct,
the second the indirect proof, that theology is anthropology: hence
the second part necessarily has reference to the first; it has no
independent significance; its only aim is to show that the sense in
which religion is interpreted in the previous part of the work must be
the true one, because the contrary is absurd. In brief, in the first
part I am chiefly concerned with religion, in the second with theology:
I say chiefly, for it was impossible to exclude theology from the first
part, or religion from the second. A mere glance will show that my
investigation includes speculative theology or philosophy, and not,
as has been here and there erroneously supposed, common theology
only, a kind of trash from which I rather keep as clear as possible,
(though, for the rest, I am sufficiently well acquainted with it),
confining myself always to the most essential, strict and necessary
definition of the object, [2] and hence to that definition which
gives to an object the most general interest, and raises it above
the sphere of theology. But it is with theology that I have to do,
not with theologians; for I can only undertake to characterise what
is primary,--the original, not the copy, principles, not persons,
species, not individuals, objects of history, not objects of the
chronique scandaleuse.

If my work contained only the second part, it would be perfectly just
to accuse it of a negative tendency, to represent the proposition:
Religion is nothing, is an absurdity, as its essential purport. But I
by no means say (that were an easy task!): God is nothing, the Trinity
is nothing, the Word of God is nothing, &c. I only show that they are
not that which the illusions of theology make them,--not foreign, but
native mysteries, the mysteries of human nature; I show that religion
takes the apparent, the superficial in Nature and humanity for the
essential, and hence conceives their true essence as a separate,
special existence: that consequently, religion, in the definitions
which it gives of God, e.g., of the Word of God,--at least in those
definitions which are not negative in the sense above alluded to,--only
defines or makes objective the true nature of the human word. The
reproach that according to my book religion is an absurdity, a nullity,
a pure illusion, would be well founded only if, according to it, that
into which I resolve religion, which I prove to be its true object and
substance, namely, man,--anthropology, were an absurdity, a nullity,
a pure illusion. But so far from giving a trivial or even a subordinate
significance to anthropology,--a significance which is assigned to
it only just so long as a theology stands above it and in opposition
to it,--I, on the contrary, while reducing theology to anthropology,
exalt anthropology into theology, very much as Christianity, while
lowering God into man, made man into God; though, it is true, this
human God was by a further process made a transcendental, imaginary
God, remote from man. Hence it is obvious that I do not take the word
anthropology in the sense of the Hegelian or of any other philosophy,
but in an infinitely higher and more general sense.

Religion is the dream of the human mind. But even in dreams we do not
find ourselves in emptiness or in heaven, but on earth, in the realm
of reality; we only see real things in the entrancing splendour of
imagination and caprice, instead of in the simple daylight of reality
and necessity. Hence I do nothing more to religion--and to speculative
philosophy and theology also--than to open its eyes, or rather to turn
its gaze from the internal towards the external, i.e., I change the
object as it is in the imagination into the object as it is in reality.

But certainly for the present age, which prefers the sign to the thing
signified, the copy to the original, fancy to reality, the appearance
to the essence, this change, inasmuch as it does away with illusion,
is an absolute annihilation, or at least a reckless profanation;
for in these days illusion only is sacred, truth profane. Nay,
sacredness is held to be enhanced in proportion as truth decreases
and illusion increases, so that the highest degree of illusion comes
to be the highest degree of sacredness. Religion has disappeared, and
for it has been substituted, even among Protestants, the appearance
of religion--the Church--in order at least that "the faith" may
be imparted to the ignorant and indiscriminating multitude; that
faith being still the Christian, because the Christian churches
stand now as they did a thousand years ago, and now, as formerly,
the external signs of the faith are in vogue. That which has no
longer any existence in faith (the faith of the modern world is only
an ostensible faith, a faith which does not believe what it fancies
that it believes, and is only an undecided, pusillanimous unbelief)
is still to pass current as opinion: that which is no longer sacred
in itself and in truth is still at least to seem sacred. Hence the
simulated religious indignation of the present age, the age of shows
and illusion, concerning my analysis, especially of the Sacraments. But
let it not be demanded of an author who proposes to himself as his
goal not the favour of his contemporaries, but only the truth, the
unveiled, naked truth, that he should have or feign respect towards
an empty appearance, especially as the object which underlies this
appearance is in itself the culminating point of religion, i.e.,
the point at which the religious slides into the irreligious. Thus
much in justification, not in excuse, of my analysis of the Sacraments.

With regard to the true bearing of my analysis of the Sacraments,
especially as presented in the concluding chapter, I only remark,
that I therein illustrate by a palpable and visible example the
essential purport, the peculiar theme of my work; that I therein call
upon the senses themselves to witness to the truth of my analysis
and my ideas, and demonstrate ad oculos, ad tactum, ad gustum, what
I have taught ad captum throughout the previous pages. As, namely,
the water of Baptism, the wine and bread of the Lord's Supper, taken
in their natural power and significance, are and effect infinitely
more than in a supernaturalistic, illusory significance; so the
object of religion in general, conceived in the sense of this work,
i.e., the anthropological sense, is infinitely more productive and
real, both in theory and practice, than when accepted in the sense
of theology. For as that which is or is supposed to be imparted in
the water, bread, and wine, over and above these natural substances
themselves, is something in the imagination only, but in truth, in
reality, nothing; so also the object of religion in general, the Divine
essence, in distinction from the essence of Nature and Humanity,--that
is to say, if its attributes, as understanding, love, &c., are and
signify something else than these attributes as they belong to man
and Nature,--is only something in the imagination, but in truth
and reality nothing. Therefore--this is the moral of the fable--we
should not, as is the case in theology and speculative philosophy,
make real beings and things into arbitrary signs, vehicles, symbols,
or predicates of a distinct, transcendent, absolute, i.e., abstract
being; but we should accept and understand them in the significance
which they have in themselves, which is identical with their qualities,
with those conditions which make them what they are:--thus only do we
obtain the key to a real theory and practice. I, in fact, put in the
place of the barren baptismal water, the beneficent effect of real
water. How "watery," how trivial! Yes, indeed, very trivial. But
so Marriage, in its time, was a very trivial truth, which Luther,
on the ground of his natural good sense, maintained in opposition to
the seemingly holy illusion of celibacy. But while I thus view water
as a real thing, I at the same time intend it as a vehicle, an image,
an example, a symbol, of the "unholy" spirit of my work, just as the
water of Baptism--the object of my analysis--is at once literal and
symbolical water. It is the same with bread and wine. Malignity has
hence drawn the conclusion that bathing, eating, and drinking are the
summa summarum, the positive result of my work. I make no other reply
than this: If the whole of religion is contained in the Sacraments,
and there are consequently no other religious acts than those which
are performed in Baptism and the Lord's Supper; then I grant that the
entire purport and positive result of my work are bathing, eating,
and drinking, since this work is nothing but a faithful, rigid,
historico-philosophical analysis of religion--the revelation of
religion to itself, the awakening of religion to self-consciousness.

I say an historico-philosophical analysis, in distinction from a merely
historical analysis of Christianity. The historical critic--such
a one, for example, as Daumer or Ghillany--shows that the Lord's
Supper is a rite lineally descended from the ancient cultus of human
sacrifice; that once, instead of bread and wine, real human flesh
and blood were partaken. I, on the contrary, take as the object of my
analysis and reduction only the Christian significance of the rite,
that view of it which is sanctioned Christianity, and I proceed
on the supposition that only that significance which a dogma or
institution has in Christianity (of course in ancient Christianity,
not in modern), whether it may present itself in other religions
or not, is also the true origin of that dogma or institution in
so far as it is Christian. Again, the historical critic, as, for
example, Lützelberger, shows that the narratives of the miracles
of Christ resolve themselves into contradictions and absurdities,
that they are later fabrications, and that consequently Christ was
no miracle-worker, nor, in general, that which he is represented
to be in the Bible. I, on the other hand, do not inquire what the
real, natural Christ was or may have been in distinction from what
he has been made or has become in Supernaturalism; on the contrary,
I accept the Christ of religion, but I show that this superhuman being
is nothing else than a product and reflex of the supernatural human
mind. I do not ask whether this or that, or any miracle can happen
or not; I only show what miracle is, and I show it not à priori,
but by examples of miracles narrated in the Bible as real events;
in doing so, however, I answer or rather preclude the question as
to the possibility or reality of necessity of miracle. Thus much
concerning the distinction between me and the historical critics
who have attacked Christianity. As regards my relation to Strauss
and Bruno Bauer, in company with whom I am constantly named, I
merely point out here that the distinction between our works is
sufficiently indicated by the distinction between their objects,
which is implied even in the title-page. Bauer takes for the object
of his criticism the evangelical history, i.e., biblical Christianity,
or rather biblical theology; Strauss, the System of Christian Doctrine
and the Life of Jesus (which may also be included under the title of
Christian Doctrine), i.e., dogmatic Christianity, or rather dogmatic
theology; I, Christianity in general, i.e., the Christian religion,
and consequently only Christian philosophy or theology. Hence I take
my citations chiefly from men in whom Christianity was not merely a
theory or a dogma, not merely theology, but religion. My principal
theme is Christianity, is Religion, as it is the immediate object,
the immediate nature, of man. Erudition and philosophy are to me only
the means by which I bring to light the treasure hid in man.

I must further mention that the circulation which my work has had
amongst the public at large was neither desired nor expected by
me. It is true that I have always taken as the standard of the mode
of teaching and writing, not the abstract, particular, professional
philosopher, but universal man, that I have regarded man as the
criterion of truth, and not this or that founder of a system, and
have from the first placed the highest excellence of the philosopher
in this, that he abstains, both as a man and as an author, from the
ostentation of philosophy, i.e., that he is a philosopher only in
reality, not formally, that he is a quiet philosopher, not a loud
and still less a brawling one. Hence, in all my works, as well as
in the present one, I have made the utmost clearness, simplicity,
and definiteness a law to myself, so that they may be understood,
at least in the main, by every cultivated and thinking man. But
notwithstanding this, my work can be appreciated and fully understood
only by the scholar, that is to say, by the scholar who loves truth,
who is capable of forming a judgment, who is above the notions
and prejudices of the learned and unlearned vulgar; for although a
thoroughly independent production, it has yet its necessary logical
basis in history. I very frequently refer to this or that historical
phenomenon without expressly designating it, thinking this superfluous;
and such references can be understood by the scholar alone. Thus,
for example, in the very first chapter, where I develop the necessary
consequences of the standpoint of Feeling, I allude to Jacobi and
Schleiermacher; in the second chapter I allude chiefly to Kantism,
Scepticism, Theism, Materialism and Pantheism; in the chapter on the
"Standpoint of Religion," where I discuss the contradictions between
the religious or theological and the physical or natural-philosophical
view of Nature, I refer to philosophy in the age of orthodoxy, and
especially to the philosophy of Descartes and Leibnitz, in which
this contradiction presents itself in a peculiarly characteristic
manner. The reader, therefore, who is unacquainted with the historical
facts and ideas presupposed in my work, will fail to perceive on what
my arguments and ideas hinge; no wonder if my positions often appear
to him baseless, however firm the footing on which they stand. It
is true that the subject of my work is of universal human interest;
moreover, its fundamental ideas, though not in the form in which they
are here expressed, or in which they could be expressed under existing
circumstances, will one day become the common property of mankind:
for nothing is opposed to them in the present day but empty, powerless
illusions and prejudices in contradiction with the true nature of
man. But in considering this subject in the first instance, I was under
the necessity of treating it as a matter of science, of philosophy; and
in rectifying the aberrations of Religion, Theology, and Speculation,
I was naturally obliged to use their expressions, and even to appear
to speculate, or--which is the same thing--to turn theologian myself,
while I nevertheless only analyse speculation, i.e., reduce theology
to anthropology. My work, as I said before, contains, and applies in
the concrete, the principle of a new philosophy suited--not to the
schools, but--to man. Yes, it contains that principle, but only by
evolving it out of the very core of religion; hence, be it said in
passing, the new philosophy can no longer, like the old Catholic and
modern Protestant scholasticism, fall into the temptation to prove
its agreement with religion by its agreement with Christian dogmas;
on the contrary, being evolved from the nature of religion, it has
in itself the true essence of religion,--is, in its very quality as
a philosophy, a religion also. But a work which considers ideas in
their genesis and explains and demonstrates them in strict sequence,
is, by the very form which this purpose imposes upon it, unsuited to
popular reading.

Lastly, as a supplement to this work with regard to many
apparently unvindicated positions, I refer to my articles in the
Deutsches Jahrbuch, January and February 1842, to my critiques
and Charakteristiken des modernen After-christenthums, in previous
numbers of the same periodical, and to my earlier works, especially the
following:--P. Bayle. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Philosophie und
Menschheit, Ausbach, 1838, and Philosophie und Christenthum, Mannheim,
1839. In these works I have sketched, with a few sharp touches, the
historical solution of Christianity, and have shown that Christianity
has in fact long vanished, not only from the reason but from the life
of mankind, that it is nothing more than a fixed idea, in flagrant
contradiction with our fire and life assurance companies, our railroads
and steam-carriages, our picture and sculpture galleries, our military
and industrial schools, our theatres and scientific museums.


LUDWIG FEUERBACH.

Bruckberg, Feb. 14, 1843.







CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER                                                         PAGE

   I. § 1. The Essential Nature of Man                             1
      § 2. The Essence of Religion Considered Generally           12


Part I.

THE TRUE OR ANTHROPOLOGICAL ESSENCE OF RELIGION.

     II.   God as a Being of the Understanding                    33
    III.   God as a Moral Being or Law                            44
     IV.   The Mystery of the Incarnation; or, God as Love,
           as a Being of the Heart                                50
      V.   The Mystery of the Suffering God                       59
     VI.   The Mystery of the Trinity and the Mother of God       65
    VII.   The Mystery of the Logos and Divine Image              74
   VIII.   The Mystery of the Cosmogonical Principle in God       80
     IX.   The Mystery of Mysticism, or of Nature in God          87
      X.   The Mystery of Providence and Creation out of
           Nothing                                               101
     XI.   The Significance of the Creation in Judaism           112
    XII.   The Omnipotence of Feeling, or the Mystery of
           Prayer                                                120
   XIII.   The Mystery of Faith--The Mystery of Miracle          126
    XIV.   The Mystery of the Resurrection and of the
           Miraculous Conception                                 135
     XV.   The Mystery of the Christian Christ, or the
           Personal God                                          140
    XVI.   The Distinction between Christianity and Heathenism   150
   XVII.   The Significance of Voluntary Celibacy and
           Monachism                                             160
  XVIII.   The Christian Heaven, or Personal Immortality         170


