CHAPTER XIV.

THE MYSTERY OF THE RESURRECTION AND OF THE MIRACULOUS CONCEPTION.


The quality of being agreeable to subjective inclination belongs not
only to practical miracles, in which it is conspicuous, as they have
immediate reference to the interest or wish of the human individual;
it belongs also to theoretical, or more properly dogmatic miracles,
and hence to the Resurrection and the Miraculous Conception.

Man, at least in a state of ordinary well-being, has the wish
not to die. This wish is originally identical with the instinct of
self-preservation. Whatever lives seeks to maintain itself, to continue
alive, and consequently not to die. Subsequently, when reflection and
feeling are developed under the urgency of life, especially of social
and political life, this primary negative wish becomes the positive
wish for a life, and that a better life, after death. But this wish
involves the further wish for the certainty of its fulfilment. Reason
can afford no such certainty. It has therefore been said that all
proofs of immortality are insufficient, and even that unassisted reason
is not capable of apprehending it, still less of proving it. And with
justice; for reason furnishes only general proofs; it cannot give
the certainty of any personal immortality, and it is precisely this
certainty which is desired. Such a certainty requires an immediate
personal assurance, a practical demonstration. This can only be given
to me by the fact of a dead person, whose death has been previously
certified, rising again from the grave; and he must be no indifferent
person, but, on the contrary, the type and representative of all
others, so that his resurrection also may be the type, the guarantee
of theirs. The resurrection of Christ is therefore the satisfied
desire of man for an immediate certainty of his personal existence
after death,--personal immortality as a sensible, indubitable fact.

Immortality was with the heathen philosophers a question in which
the personal interest was only a collateral point. They concerned
themselves chiefly with the nature of the soul, of mind, of the vital
principle. The immortality of the vital principle by no means involves
the idea, not to mention the certainty, of personal immortality. Hence
the vagueness, discrepancy, and dubiousness with which the ancients
express themselves on this subject. The Christians, on the contrary,
in the undoubting certainty that their personal, self-flattering wishes
will be fulfilled, i.e., in the certainty of the divine nature of their
emotions, the truth and unassailableness of their subjective feelings,
converted that which to the ancients was a theoretic problem into an
immediate fact,--converted a theoretic, and in itself open question,
into a matter of conscience, the denial of which was equivalent to
the high treason of atheism. He who denies the resurrection denies the
resurrection of Christ, but he who denies the resurrection of Christ
denies Christ himself, and he who denies Christ denies God. Thus did
"spiritual" Christianity unspiritualise what was spiritual! To the
Christians the immortality of the reason, of the soul, was far too
abstract and negative; they had at heart only a personal immortality,
such as would gratify their feelings, and the guarantee of this lies
in a bodily resurrection alone. The resurrection of the body is the
highest triumph of Christianity over the sublime but certainly abstract
spirituality and objectivity of the ancients. For this reason the
idea of the resurrection could never be assimilated by the pagan mind.

As the Resurrection, which terminates the sacred history (to the
Christian not a mere history, but the truth itself), is a realised
wish, so also is that which commences it, namely, the Miraculous
Conception, though this has relation not so much to an immediately
personal interest as to a particular subjective feeling.

The more man alienates himself from Nature, the more subjective,
i.e., supranatural or antinatural, is his view of things, the
greater the horror he has of Nature, or at least of those natural
objects and processes which displease his imagination, which affect
him disagreeably. [107] The free, objective man doubtless finds
things repugnant and distasteful in Nature, but he regards them as
natural, inevitable results, and under this conviction he subdues
his feeling as a merely subjective and untrue one. On the contrary,
the subjective man, who lives only in the feelings and imagination,
regards these things with a quite peculiar aversion. He has the eye of
that unhappy foundling, who even in looking at the loveliest flower
could pay attention only to the little "black beetle" which crawled
over it, and who by this perversity of perception had his enjoyment
in the sight of flowers always embittered. Moreover, the subjective
man makes his feelings the measure, the standard of what ought to
be. That which does not please him, which offends his transcendental,
supranatural, or antinatural feelings, ought not to be. Even if that
which pleases him cannot exist without being associated with that which
displeases him, the subjective man is not guided by the wearisome
laws of logic and physics, but by the self-will of the imagination;
hence he drops what is disagreeable in a fact, and holds fast alone
what is agreeable. Thus the idea of the pure, holy Virgin pleases
him; still he is also pleased with the idea of the Mother, but only
of the Mother who already carries the infant on her arms.

Virginity in itself is to him the highest moral idea, the cornu copiæ
of his supranaturalistic feelings and ideas, his personified sense
of honour and of shame before common nature. [108] Nevertheless,
there stirs in his bosom a natural feeling also, the compassionate
feeling which makes the Mother beloved. What then is to be done in
this difficulty of the heart, in this conflict between a natural and
a supranatural feeling? The supranaturalist must unite the two, must
comprise in one and the same subject two predicates which exclude each
other. [109] Oh, what a plenitude of agreeable, sweet, supersensual,
sensual emotions lies in this combination!

Here we have the key to the contradiction in Catholicism, that at
the same time marriage is holy and celibacy is holy. This simply
realises, as a practical contradiction, the dogmatic contradiction of
the Virgin Mother. But this wondrous union of virginity and maternity,
contradicting Nature and reason, but in the highest degree accordant
with the feelings and imagination, is no product of Catholicism; it
lies already in the twofold part which marriage plays in the Bible,
especially in the view of the Apostle Paul. The supernatural conception
of Christ is a fundamental doctrine of Christianity, a doctrine which
expresses its inmost dogmatic essence, and which rests on the same
foundation as all other miracles and articles of faith. As death,
which the philosopher, the man of science, the free objective thinker
in general, accepts as a natural necessity, and as indeed all the
limits of nature, which are impediments to feeling, but to reason
are rational laws, were repugnant to the Christians, and were set
aside by them through the supposed agency of miraculous power; so,
necessarily, they had an equal repugnance to the natural process of
generation, and superseded it by miracle. The Miraculous Conception is
not less welcome than the Resurrection to all believers; for it was
the first step towards the purification of mankind, polluted by sin
and Nature. Only because the God-man was not infected with original
sin, could he, the pure one, purify mankind in the eyes of God, to
whom the natural process of generation was an object of aversion,
because he himself is nothing else but supranatural feeling.

Even the arid Protestant orthodoxy, so arbitrary in its criticism,
regarded the conception of the God-producing Virgin as a great,
adorable, amazing, holy mystery of faith, transcending reason. [110]
But with the Protestants, who confined the speciality of the Christian
to the domain of faith, and with whom, in life, it was allowable
to be a man, even this mystery had only a dogmatic, and no longer
a practical significance; they did not allow it to interfere with
their desire of marriage. With the Catholics, and with all the old,
uncompromising, uncritical Christians, that which was a mystery of
faith was a mystery of life, of morality. [111] Catholic morality is
Christian, mystical; Protestant morality was, in its very beginning,
rationalistic. Protestant morality is and was a carnal mingling of
the Christian with the man, the natural, political, civil, social
man, or whatever else he may be called in distinction from the
Christian; Catholic morality cherished in its heart the mystery of
the unspotted virginity. Catholic morality was the Mater dolorosa;
Protestant morality a comely, fruitful matron. Protestantism is
from beginning to end the contradiction between faith and love; for
which very reason it has been the source, or at least the condition,
of freedom. Just because the mystery of the Virgo Deipara had with
the Protestants a place only in theory, or rather in dogma, and no
longer in practice, they declared that it was impossible to express
oneself with sufficient care and reserve concerning it, and that it
ought not to be made an object of speculation. That which is denied in
practice has no true basis and durability in man, is a mere spectre
of the mind; and hence it is withdrawn from the investigation of the
understanding. Ghosts do not brook daylight.

Even the later doctrine (which, however, had been already enunciated
in a letter to St. Bernard, who rejects it), that Mary herself was
conceived without taint of original sin, is by no means a "strange
school-bred doctrine," as it is called by a modern historian. That
which gives birth to a miracle, which brings forth God, must itself
be of miraculous divine origin or nature. How could Mary have had
the honour of being overshadowed by the Holy Ghost if she had not
been from the first pure? Could the Holy Ghost take up his abode in
a body polluted by original sin? If the principle of Christianity,
the miraculous birth of the Saviour, does not appear strange to you,
why think strange the naïve, well-meaning inferences of Catholicism?







