CHAPTER XVIII.

THE CHRISTIAN HEAVEN, OR PERSONAL IMMORTALITY.


The unwedded and ascetic life is the direct way to the heavenly,
immortal life, for heaven is nothing else than life liberated from
the conditions of the species, supernatural, sexless, absolutely
subjective life. The belief in personal immortality has at its
foundation the belief that difference of sex is only an external
adjunct of individuality, that in himself the individual is a sexless,
independently complete, absolute being. But he who belongs to no sex
belongs to no species; sex is the cord which connects the individuality
with the species, and he who belongs to no species, belongs only to
himself, is an altogether independent, divine, absolute being. Hence
only when the species vanishes from the consciousness is the heavenly
life a certainty. He who lives in the consciousness of the species,
and consequently of its reality, lives also in the consciousness of
the reality of sex. He does not regard it as a mechanically inserted,
adventitious stone of stumbling, but as an inherent quality, a chemical
constituent of his being. He indeed recognises himself as a man in
the broader sense, but he is at the same time conscious of being
rigorously determined by the sexual distinction, which penetrates not
only bones and marrow, but also his inmost self, the essential mode
of his thought, will, and sensation. He therefore who lives in the
consciousness of the species, who limits and determines his feelings
and imagination by the contemplation of real life, of real man, can
conceive no life in which the life of the species, and therewith the
distinction of sex, is abolished; he regards the sexless individual,
the heavenly spirit, as an agreeable figment of the imagination.

But just as little as the real man can abstract himself from the
distinction of sex, so little can he abstract himself from his moral or
spiritual constitution, which indeed is profoundly connected with his
natural constitution. Precisely because he lives in the contemplation
of the whole, he also lives in the consciousness that he is himself
no more than a part, and that he is what he is only by virtue of the
conditions which constitute him a member of the whole, or a relative
whole. Every one, therefore, justifiably regards his occupation, his
profession, his art or science, as the highest; for the mind of man
is nothing but the essential mode of his activity. He who is skilful
in his profession, in his art, he who fills his post well, and is
entirely devoted to his calling, thinks that calling the highest and
best. How can he deny in thought what he emphatically declares in act
by the joyful devotion of all his powers? If I despise a thing, how can
I dedicate to it my time and faculties? If I am compelled to do so in
spite of my aversion, my activity is an unhappy one, for I am at war
with myself. Work is worship. But how can I worship or serve an object,
how can I subject myself to it, if it does not hold a high place in
my mind? In brief, the occupations of men determine their judgment,
their mode of thought, their sentiments. And the higher the occupation,
the more completely does a man identify himself with it. In general,
whatever a man makes the essential aim of his life, he proclaims to
be his soul; for it is the principle of motion in him. But through
his aim, through the activity in which he realises this aim, man
is not only something for himself, but also something for others,
for the general life, the species. He therefore who lives in the
consciousness of the species as a reality, regards his existence
for others, his relation to society, his utility to the public, as
that existence which is one with the existence of his own essence--as
his immortal existence. He lives with his whole soul, with his whole
heart, for humanity. How can he hold in reserve a special existence
for himself, how can he separate himself from mankind? How shall he
deny in death what he has enforced in life? And in life his faith is
this: Nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo.

The heavenly life, or what we do not here distinguish from it--personal
immortality, is a characteristic doctrine of Christianity. It is
certainly in part to be found among the heathen philosophers; but
with them it had only the significance of a subjective conception,
because it was not connected with their fundamental view of things. How
contradictory, for example, are the expressions of the Stoics on this
subject! It was among the Christians that personal immortality first
found that principle, whence it follows as a necessary and obvious
consequence. The contemplation of the world, of Nature, of the race,
was always coming athwart the ancients; they distinguished between the
principle of life and the living subject, between the soul, the mind,
and self: whereas the Christian abolished the distinction between soul
and person, species and individual, and therefore placed immediately
in self what belongs only to the totality of the species. But the
immediate unity of the species and individuality is the highest
principle, the God of Christianity,--in it the individual has the
significance of the absolute being,--and the necessary, immanent
consequence of this principle is personal immortality.

Or rather: the belief in personal immortality is perfectly identical
with the belief in a personal God;--i.e., that which expresses the
belief in the heavenly, immortal life of the person, expresses God
also, as he is an object to Christians, namely, as absolute, unlimited
personality. Unlimited personality is God; but heavenly personality, or
the perpetuation of human personality in heaven, is nothing else than
personality released from all earthly encumbrances and limitations;
the only distinction is, that God is heaven spiritualised, while heaven
is God materialised, or reduced to the forms of the senses: that what
in God is posited only in abstracto is in heaven more an object of
the imagination. God is the implicit heaven; heaven is the explicit
God. In the present, God is the kingdom of heaven; in the future,
heaven is God. God is the pledge, the as yet abstract presence and
existence of heaven; the anticipation, the epitome of heaven. Our own
future existence, which, while we are in this world, in this body, is a
separate, objective existence,--is God: God is the idea of the species,
which will be first realised, individualised in the other world. God
is the heavenly, pure, free essence, which exists there as heavenly
pure beings, the bliss which there unfolds itself in a plenitude of
blissful individuals. Thus God is nothing else than the idea or the
essence of the absolute, blessed, heavenly life, here comprised in
an ideal personality. This is clearly enough expressed in the belief
that the blessed life is unity with God. Here we are distinguished and
separated from God, there the partition falls; here we are men, there
gods; here the Godhead is a monopoly, there it is a common possession;
here it is an abstract unity, there a concrete multiplicity. [140]

The only difficulty in the recognition of this is created by
the imagination, which, on the one hand by the conception of the
personality of God, on the other by the conception of the many
personalities which it places in a realm ordinarily depicted in the
hues of the senses, hides the real unity of the idea. But in truth
there is no distinction between the absolute life which is conceived
as God and the absolute life which is conceived as heaven, save that
in heaven we have stretched into length and breadth what in God is
concentrated in one point. The belief in the immortality of man is the
belief in the divinity of man, and the belief in God is the belief
in pure personality, released from all limits, and consequently eo
ipso immortal. The distinctions made between the immortal soul and
God are either sophistical or imaginative; as when, for example, the
bliss of the inhabitants of heaven is again circumscribed by limits,
and distributed into degrees, in order to establish a distinction
between God and the dwellers in heaven.

The identity of the divine and heavenly personality is apparent even
in the popular proofs of immortality. If there is not another and a
better life, God is not just and good. The justice and goodness of God
are thus made dependent on the perpetuity of individuals; but without
justice and goodness God is not God;--the Godhead, the existence of
God, is therefore made dependent on the existence of individuals. If
I am not immortal, I believe in no God; he who denies immortality
denies God. But that is impossible to me: as surely as there is a God,
so surely is there an immortality. God is the certainty of my future
felicity. The interest I have in knowing that God is, is one with the
interest I have in knowing that I am, that I am immortal. God is my
hidden, my assured existence; he is the subjectivity of subjects,
the personality of persons. How then should that not belong to
persons which belongs to personality? In God I make my future into a
present, or rather a verb into a substantive; how should I separate
the one from the other? God is the existence corresponding to my
wishes and feelings: he is the just one, the good, who fulfils my
wishes. Nature, this world, is an existence which contradicts my
wishes, my feelings. Here it is not as it ought to be; this world
passes away; but God is existence as it ought to be. God fulfils my
wishes;--this is only a popular personification of the position: God is
the fulfiller, i.e., the reality, the fulfilment of my wishes. [141]
But heaven is the existence adequate to my wishes, my longing; [142]
thus there is no distinction between God and heaven. God is the power
by which man realises his eternal happiness; God is the absolute
personality in which all individual persons have the certainty of
their blessedness and immortality; God is to subjectivity the highest,
last certainty of its absolute truth and essentiality.

The doctrine of immortality is the final doctrine of religion; its
testament, in which it declares its last wishes. Here therefore it
speaks out undisguisedly what it has hitherto suppressed. If elsewhere
the religious soul concerns itself with the existence of another
being, here it openly considers only its own existence; if elsewhere
in religion man makes his existence dependent on the existence of God,
he here makes the reality of God dependent on his own reality; and
thus what elsewhere is a primitive, immediate truth to him, is here
a derivative, secondary truth: if I am not immortal, God is not God;
if there is no immortality, there is no God;--a conclusion already
drawn by the Apostle Paul. If we do not rise again, then Christ is
not risen, and all is vain. Let us eat and drink. It is certainly
possible to do away with what is apparently or really objectionable
in the popular argumentation, by avoiding the inferential form; but
this can only be done by making immortality an analytic instead of a
synthetic truth, so as to show that the very idea of God as absolute
personality or subjectivity is per se the idea of immortality. God
is the guarantee of my future existence, because he is already the
certainty and reality of my present existence, my salvation, my
trust, my shield from the forces of the external world; hence I need
not expressly deduce immortality, or prove it as a separate truth,
for if I have God, I have immortality also. Thus it was with the
more profound Christian mystics; to them the idea of immortality was
involved in the idea of God; God was their immortal life,--God himself
their subjective blessedness: he was for them, for their consciousness,
what he is in himself, that is, in the essence of religion.

Thus it is shown that God is heaven; that the two are identical. It
would have been easier to prove the converse, namely, that heaven is
the true God of men. As man conceives his heaven, so he conceives his
God; the content of his idea of heaven is the content of his idea of
God, only that what in God is a mere sketch, a concept, is in heaven
depicted and developed in the colours and forms of the senses. Heaven
is therefore the key to the deepest mysteries of religion. As heaven
is objectively the displayed nature of God, so subjectively it is the
most candid declaration of the inmost thoughts and dispositions of
religion. For this reason, religions are as various as are the kingdoms
of heaven, and there are as many different kingdoms of heaven as there
are characteristic differences among men. The Christians themselves
have very heterogeneous conceptions of heaven. [143]

The more judicious among them, however, think and say nothing definite
about heaven or the future world in general, on the ground that it is
inconceivable, that it can only be thought of by us according to the
standard of this world, a standard not applicable to the other. All
conceptions of heaven here below are, they allege, mere images,
whereby man represents to himself that future, the nature of which
is unknown to him, but the existence of which is certain. It is just
so with God. The existence of God, it is said, is certain; but what
he is, or how he exists, is inscrutable. But he who speaks thus has
already driven the future world out of his head; he still holds it
fast, either because he does not think at all about such matters, or
because it is still a want of his heart; but, preoccupied with real
things, he thrusts it as far as possible out of his sight; he denies
with his head what he affirms with his heart; for it is to deny the
future life, to deprive it of the qualities by which alone it is a real
and effective object for man. Quality is not distinct from existence;
quality is nothing but real existence. Existence without quality is a
chimera, a spectre. Existence is first made known to me by quality;
not existence first, and after that quality. The doctrines that God
is not to be known or defined, and that the nature of the future life
is inscrutable, are therefore not originally religious doctrines;
on the contrary, they are the products of irreligion while still in
bondage to religion, or rather hiding itself behind religion; and
they are so for this reason, that originally the existence of God is
posited only with a definite conception of God, the existence of a
future life only with a definite conception of that life. Thus to the
Christian, only his own paradise, the paradise which has Christian
qualities, is a certainty, not the paradise of the Mahometan or the
Elysium of the Greeks. The primary certainty is everywhere quality;
existence follows of course when once quality is certain. In the New
Testament we find no proofs or general propositions such as: there
is a God, there is a heavenly life; we find only qualities of the
heavenly life adduced;--"in heaven they marry not." Naturally;--it
may be answered,--because the existence of God and of heaven is
presupposed. But here reflection introduces a distinction of which
the religious sentiment knows nothing. Doubtless the existence is
presupposed, but only because the quality is itself existence, because
the inviolate religious feeling lives only in the quality, just as to
the natural man the real existence, the thing in itself, lies only in
the quality which he perceives. Thus in the passage above cited from
the New Testament, the virgin or rather sexless life is presupposed
as the true life, which, however, necessarily becomes a future one,
because the actual life contradicts the ideal of the true life. But
the certainty of this future life lies only in the certainty of its
qualities, as those of the true, highest life, adequate to the ideal.

Where the future life is really believed in, where it is a certain
life, there, precisely because it is certain, it is also definite. If
I know not now what and how I shall be; if there is an essential,
absolute difference between my future and my present; neither shall I
then know what and how I was before, the unity of consciousness is at
an end, personal identity is abolished, another being will appear in my
place; and thus my future existence is not in fact distinguished from
non-existence. If, on the other hand, there is no essential difference,
the future is to me an object that may be defined and known. And so
it is in reality. I am the abiding subject under changing conditions;
I am the substance which connects the present and the future into a
unity. How then can the future be obscure to me? On the contrary,
the life of this world is the dark, incomprehensible life, which
only becomes clear through the future life; here I am in disguise;
there the mask will fall; there I shall be as I am in truth. Hence the
position that there indeed is another, a heavenly life, but that what
and how it is must here remain inscrutable, is only an invention of
religious scepticism, which, being entirely alien to the religious
sentiment, proceeds upon a total misconception of religion. That
which irreligious-religious reflection converts into a known image
of an unknown yet certain thing, is originally, in the primitive,
true sense of religion, not an image, but the thing itself. Unbelief,
in the garb of belief, doubts the existence of the thing, but it is too
shallow or cowardly directly to call it in question; it only expresses
doubt of the image or conception, i.e., declares the image to be only
an image. But the untruth and hollowness of this scepticism has been
already made evident historically. Where it is once doubted that the
images of immortality are real, that it is possible to exist as faith
conceives, for example, without a material, real body, and without
difference of sex; there the future existence in general is soon a
matter of doubt. With the image falls the thing, simply because the
image is the thing itself.

The belief in heaven, or in a future life in general, rests on a mental
judgment. It expresses praise and blame; it selects a wreath from the
flora of this world, and this critical florilegium is heaven. That
which man thinks beautiful, good, agreeable, is for him what alone
ought to be; that which he thinks bad, odious, disagreeable, is
what ought not to be; and hence, since it nevertheless exists, it is
condemned to destruction, it is regarded as a negation. Where life is
not in contradiction with a feeling, an imagination, an idea, and where
this feeling, this idea, is not held authoritative and absolute, the
belief in another and a heavenly life does not arise. The future life
is nothing else than life in unison with the feeling, with the idea,
which the present life contradicts. The whole import of the future
life is the abolition of this discordance, and the realisation of a
state which corresponds to the feelings, in which man is in unison
with himself. An unknown, unimagined future is a ridiculous chimera:
the other world is nothing more than the reality of a known idea,
the satisfaction of a conscious desire, the fulfilment of a wish;
[144] it is only the removal of limits which here oppose themselves
to the realisation of the idea. Where would be the consolation, where
the significance of a future life, if it were midnight darkness to
me? No! from yonder world there streams upon me with the splendour
of virgin gold what here shines only with the dimness of unrefined
ore. The future world has no other significance, no other basis of
its existence, than the separation of the metal from the admixture
of foreign elements, the separation of the good from the bad,
of the pleasant from the unpleasant, of the praiseworthy from the
blamable. The future world is the bridal in which man concludes
his union with his beloved. Long has he loved his bride, long has
he yearned after her; but external relations, hard reality, have
stood in the way of his union to her. When the wedding takes place,
his beloved one does not become a different being; else how could he
so ardently long for her? She only becomes his own; from an object
of yearning and affectionate desire she becomes an object of actual
possession. It is true that here below, the other world is only an
image, a conception; still it is not the image of a remote, unknown
thing, but a portrait of that which man loves and prefers before all
else. What man loves is his soul. The heathens enclosed the ashes of
the beloved dead in an urn; with the Christian the heavenly future
is the mausoleum in which he enshrines his soul.

In order to comprehend a particular faith, or religion in general,
it is necessary to consider religion in its rudimentary stages,
in its lowest, rudest condition. Religion must not only be traced
in an ascending line, but surveyed in the entire course of its
existence. It is requisite to regard the various earlier religions as
present in the absolute religion, and not as left behind it in the
past, in order correctly to appreciate and comprehend the absolute
religion as well as the others. The most frightful "aberrations,"
the wildest excesses of the religious consciousness, often afford the
profoundest insight into the mysteries of the absolute religion. Ideas,
seemingly the rudest, are often only the most childlike, innocent, and
true. This observation applies to the conceptions of a future life. The
"savage," whose consciousness does not extend beyond his own country,
whose entire being is a growth of its soil, takes his country with him
into the other world, either leaving Nature as it is, or improving it,
and so overcoming in the idea of the other life the difficulties he
experiences in this. [145] In this limitation of uncultivated tribes
there is a striking trait. With them the future expresses nothing
else than home-sickness. Death separates man from his kindred, from
his people, from his country. But the man who has not extended his
consciousness, cannot endure this separation; he must come back again
to his native land. The negroes in the West Indies killed themselves
that they might come to life again in their fatherland. And, according
to Ossian's conception, "the spirits of those who die in a strange
land float back towards their birthplace." [146] This limitation is
the direct opposite of imaginative spiritualism, which makes man a
vagabond, who, indifferent even to the earth, roams from star to star;
and certainly there lies a real truth at its foundation. Man is what
he is through Nature, however much may belong to his spontaneity;
for even his spontaneity has its foundation in Nature, of which his
particular character is only an expression. Be thankful to Nature! Man
cannot be separated from it. The German, whose God is spontaneity,
owes his character to Nature just as much as the Oriental. To find
fault with Indian art, with Indian religion and philosophy, is to find
fault with Indian Nature. You complain of the reviewer who tears a
passage in your works from the context that he may hand it over to
ridicule. Why are you yourself guilty of that which you blame in
others? Why do you tear the Indian religion from its connection,
in which it is just as reasonable as your absolute religion?

Faith in a future world, in a life after death, is therefore with
"savage" tribes essentially nothing more than direct faith in the
present life--immediate unbroken faith in this life. For them,
their actual life, even with its local limitations, has all, has
absolute value; they cannot abstract from it, they cannot conceive its
being broken off; i.e., they believe directly in the infinitude, the
perpetuity of this life. Only when the belief in immortality becomes a
critical belief, when a distinction is made between what is to be left
behind here, and what is in reserve there, between what here passes
away, and what there is to abide, does the belief in life after death
form itself into the belief in another life; but this criticism, this
distinction, is applied to the present life also. Thus the Christians
distinguish between the natural and the Christian life, the sensual or
worldly and the spiritual or holy life. The heavenly life is no other
than that which is, already here below, distinguished from the merely
natural life, though still tainted with it. That which the Christian
excludes from himself now--for example, the sexual life--is excluded
from the future: the only distinction is, that he is there free from
that which he here wishes to be free from, and seeks to rid himself
of by the will, by devotion, and by bodily mortification. Hence this
life is, for the Christian, a life of torment and pain, because he
is here still beset by a hostile power, and has to struggle with the
lusts of the flesh and the assaults of the devil.

The faith of cultured nations is therefore distinguished from
that of the uncultured in the same way that culture in general is
distinguished from inculture: namely, that the faith of culture is
a discriminating, critical, abstract faith. A distinction implies a
judgment; but where there is a judgment there arises the distinction
between positive and negative. The faith of savage tribes is a
faith without a judgment. Culture, on the contrary, judges: to the
cultured man only cultured life is the true life; to the Christian
only the Christian life. The rude child of Nature steps into the other
life just as he is, without ceremony: the other world is his natural
nakedness. The cultivated man, on the contrary, objects to the idea of
such an unbridled life after death, because even here he objects to
the unrestricted life of Nature. Faith in a future life is therefore
only faith in the true life of the present; the essential elements of
this life are also the essential elements of the other: accordingly,
faith in a future life is not faith in another unknown life; but in
the truth and infinitude, and consequently in the perpetuity, of that
life which already here below is regarded as the authentic life.



As God is nothing else than the nature of man purified from that
which to the human individual appears, whether in feeling or thought,
a limitation, an evil; so the future life is nothing else than the
present life freed from that which appears a limitation or an evil. The
more definitely and profoundly the individual is conscious of the limit
as a limit, of the evil as an evil, the more definite and profound is
his conviction of the future life, where these limits disappear. The
future life is the feeling, the conception of freedom from those
limits which here circumscribe the feeling of self, the existence of
the individual. The only difference between the course of religion and
that of the natural or rational man is, that the end which the latter
arrives at by a straight line, the former only attains by describing
a curved line--a circle. The natural man remains at home because he
finds it agreeable, because he is perfectly satisfied; religion which
commences with a discontent, a disunion, forsakes its home and travels
far, but only to feel the more vividly in the distance the happiness
of home. In religion man separates himself from himself, but only to
return always to the same point from which he set out. Man negatives
himself, but only to posit himself again, and that in a glorified form:
he negatives this life, but only, in the end, to posit it again in
the future life. [147] The future life is this life once lost, but
found again, and radiant with all the more brightness for the joy of
recovery. The religious man renounces the joys of this world, but only
that he may win in return the joys of heaven; or rather he renounces
them because he is already in the ideal possession of heavenly joys;
and the joys of heaven are the same as those of earth, only that they
are freed from the limits and contrarieties of this life. Religion
thus arrives, though by a circuit, at the very goal, the goal of joy,
towards which the natural man hastens in a direct line. To live in
images or symbols is the essence of religion. Religion sacrifices
the thing itself to the image. The future life is the present in the
mirror of the imagination: the enrapturing image is in the sense of
religion the true type of earthly life,--real life only a glimmer of
that ideal, imaginary life. The future life is the present embellished,
contemplated through the imagination, purified from all gross matter;
or, positively expressed, it is the beauteous present intensified.

Embellishment, emendation, presupposes blame, dissatisfaction. But
the dissatisfaction is only superficial. I do not deny the thing to
be of value; just as it is, however, it does not please me; I deny
only the modification, not the substance, otherwise I should urge
annihilation. A house which absolutely displeases me I cause to be
pulled down, not to be embellished. To the believer in a future
life joy is agreeable--who can fail to be conscious that joy is
something positive?--but it is disagreeable to him that here joy
is followed by opposite sensations, that it is transitory. Hence he
places joy in the future life also, but as eternal, uninterrupted,
divine joy (and the future life is therefore called the world of joy),
such as he here conceives it in God; for God is nothing but eternal,
uninterrupted joy, posited as a subject. Individuality or personality
is agreeable to him, but only as unencumbered by objective forces;
hence, he includes individuality also, but pure, absolutely subjective
individuality. Light pleases him; but not gravitation, because this
appears a limitation of the individual; not night, because in it man
is subjected to Nature: in the other world, there is light, but no
weight, no night,--pure, unobstructed light. [148]

As man in his utmost remoteness from himself, in God, always returns
upon himself, always revolves round himself; so in his utmost
remoteness from the world, he always at last comes back to it. The
more extra- and supra-human God appears at the commencement, the more
human does he show himself to be in the subsequent course of things,
or at the close: and just so, the more supernatural the heavenly life
looks in the beginning or at a distance, the more clearly does it,
in the end or when viewed closely, exhibit its identity with the
natural life,--an identity which at last extends even to the flesh,
even to the body. In the first instance the mind is occupied with the
separation of the soul from the body, as in the conception of God
the mind is first occupied with the separation of the essence from
the individual;--the individual dies a spiritual death, the dead
body which remains behind is the human individual; the soul which
has departed from it is God. But the separation of the soul from
the body, of the essence from the individual, of God from man, must
be abolished again. Every separation of beings essentially allied
is painful. The soul yearns after its lost half, after its body;
as God, the departed soul yearns after the real man. As, therefore,
God becomes a man again, so the soul returns to its body, and the
perfect identity of this world and the other is now restored. It
is true that this new body is a bright, glorified, miraculous body,
but--and this is the main point--it is another and yet the same body,
[149] as God is another being than man, and yet the same. Here we
come again to the idea of miracle, which unites contradictories. The
supernatural body is a body constructed by the imagination, for which
very reason it is adequate to the feelings of man: an unburdensome,
purely subjective body. Faith in the future life is nothing else than
faith in the truth of the imagination, as faith in God is faith in
the truth and infinity of human feeling. Or: as faith in God is only
faith in the abstract nature of man, so faith in the heavenly life
is only faith in the abstract earthly life.

But the sum of the future life is happiness, the everlasting bliss of
personality, which is here limited and circumscribed by Nature. Faith
in the future life is therefore faith in the freedom of subjectivity
from the limits of Nature; it is faith in the eternity and infinitude
of personality, and not of personality viewed in relation to the idea
of the species, in which it for ever unfolds itself in new individuals,
but of personality as belonging to already existing individuals:
consequently, it is the faith of man in himself. But faith in the
kingdom of heaven is one with faith in God--the content of both
ideas is the same; God is pure absolute subjectivity released from
all natural limits; he is what individuals ought to be and will be:
faith in God is therefore the faith of man in the infinitude and truth
of his own nature; the Divine Being is the subjective human being in
his absolute freedom and unlimitedness.

Our most essential task is now fulfilled. We have reduced the
supermundane, supernatural, and superhuman nature of God to the
elements of human nature as its fundamental elements. Our process
of analysis has brought us again to the position with which we set
out. The beginning, middle and end of religion is Man.








