CHAPTER XX.

THE CONTRADICTION IN THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.


Religion is the relation of man to his own nature,--therein lies
its truth and its power of moral amelioration;--but to his nature
not recognised as his own, but regarded as another nature, separate,
nay, contradistinguished from his own: herein lies its untruth, its
limitation, its contradiction to reason and morality; herein lies
the noxious source of religious fanaticism, the chief metaphysical
principle of human sacrifices, in a word, the prima materia of all
the atrocities, all the horrible scenes, in the tragedy of religious
history.

The contemplation of the human nature as another, a separately
existent nature, is, however, in the original conception of religion
an involuntary, childlike, simple act of the mind, that is, one which
separates God and man just as immediately as it again identifies
them. But when religion advances in years, and, with years, in
understanding; when, within the bosom of religion, reflection on
religion is awakened, and the consciousness of the identity of the
divine being with the human begins to dawn,--in a word, when religion
becomes theology, the originally involuntary and harmless separation
of God from man becomes an intentional, excogitated separation, which
has no other object than to banish again from the consciousness this
identity which has already entered there.

Hence the nearer religion stands to its origin, the truer, the more
genuine it is, the less is its true nature disguised; that is to
say, in the origin of religion there is no qualitative or essential
distinction whatever between God and man. And the religious man is
not shocked at this identification; for his understanding is still
in harmony with his religion. Thus in ancient Judaism, Jehovah
was a being differing from the human individual in nothing but in
duration of existence; in his qualities, his inherent nature, he was
entirely similar to man,--had the same passions, the same human, nay,
even corporeal properties. Only in the later Judaism was Jehovah
separated in the strictest manner from man, and recourse was had
to allegory in order to give to the old anthropomorphisms another
sense than that which they originally had. So again in Christianity:
in its earliest records the divinity of Christ is not so decidedly
stamped as it afterwards became. With Paul especially, Christ is
still an undefined being, hovering between heaven and earth, between
God and man, or in general, one amongst the existences subordinate to
the highest,--the first of the angels, the first created, but still
created; begotten indeed for our sake; but then neither are angels and
men created, but begotten, for God is their Father also. The Church
first identified him with God, made him the exclusive Son of God,
defined his distinction from men and angels, and thus gave him the
monopoly of an eternal, uncreated existence.

In the genesis of ideas, the first mode in which reflection on
religion, or theology, makes the divine being a distinct being,
and places him outside of man, is by making the existence of God the
object of a formal proof.

The proofs of the existence of God have been pronounced contradictory
to the essential nature of religion. They are so, but only in their
form as proofs. Religion immediately represents the inner nature of
man as an objective, external being. And the proof aims at nothing
more than to prove that religion is right. The most perfect being is
that than which no higher can be conceived: God is the highest that man
conceives or can conceive. This premiss of the ontological proof--the
most interesting proof, because it proceeds from within--expresses
the inmost nature of religion. That which is the highest for man,
from which he can make no further abstraction, which is the positive
limit of his intellect, of his feeling, of his sentiment, that is to
him God--id quo nihil majus cogitari potest. But this highest being
would not be the highest if he did not exist; we could then conceive
a higher being who would be superior to him in the fact of existence;
the idea of the highest being directly precludes this fiction. Not to
exist is a deficiency; to exist is perfection, happiness, bliss. From
a being to whom man gives all, offers up all that is precious to him,
he cannot withhold the bliss of existence. The contradiction to the
religious spirit in the proof of the existence of God lies only in
this, that the existence is thought of separately, and thence arises
the appearance that God is a mere conception, a being existing in
idea only,--an appearance, however, which is immediately dissipated;
for the very result of the proof is, that to God belongs an existence
distinct from an ideal one, an existence apart from man, apart from
thought,--a real self-existence.

The proof therefore is only thus far discordant with the spirit of
religion, that it presents as a formal deduction the implicit enthymeme
or immediate conclusion of religion, exhibits in logical relation,
and therefore distinguishes, what religion immediately unites; for to
religion God is not a matter of abstract thought,--he is a present
truth and reality. But that every religion in its idea of God makes
a latent, unconscious inference, is confessed in its polemic against
other religions. "Ye heathens," says the Jew or the Christian, "were
able to conceive nothing higher as your deities because ye were sunk
in sinful desires. Your God rests on a conclusion, the premisses of
which are your sensual impulses, your passions. You thought thus: the
most excellent life is to live out one's impulses without restraint;
and because this life was the most excellent, the truest, you made it
your God. Your God was your carnal nature, your heaven only a free
theatre for the passions which, in society and in the conditions
of actual life generally, had to suffer restraint." But, naturally,
in relation to itself no religion is conscious of such an inference,
for the highest of which it is capable is its limit, has the force of
necessity, is not a thought, not a conception, but immediate reality.

The proofs of the existence of God have for their aim to make the
internal external, to separate it from man. [161] His existence being
proved, God is no longer a merely relative, but a noumenal being
(Ding an sich): he is not only a being for us, a being in our faith,
our feeling, our nature, he is a being in himself, a being external
to us,--in a word, not merely a belief, a feeling, a thought, but
also a real existence apart from belief, feeling, and thought. But
such an existence is no other than a sensational existence; i.e.,
an existence conceived according to the forms of our senses.

The idea of sensational existence is indeed already involved in
the characteristic expression "external to us." It is true that a
sophistical theology refuses to interpret the word "external" in
its proper, natural sense, and substitutes the indefinite expression
of independent, separate existence. But if the externality is only
figurative, the existence also is figurative. And yet we are here
only concerned with existence in the proper sense, and external
existence is alone the definite, real, unshrinking expression for
separate existence.

Real, sensational existence is that which is not dependent on my
own mental spontaneity or activity, but by which I am involuntarily
affected, which is when I am not, when I do not think of it or feel
it. The existence of God must therefore be in space--in general, a
qualitative, sensational existence. But God is not seen, not heard,
not perceived by the senses. He does not exist for me, if I do not
exist for him; if I do not believe in a God, there is no God for me. If
I am not devoutly disposed, if I do not raise myself above the life
of the senses, he has no place in my consciousness. Thus he exists
only in so far as he is felt, thought, believed in;--the addition
"for me" is unnecessary. His existence therefore is a real one, yet
at the same time not a real one;--a spiritual existence, says the
theologian. But spiritual existence is only an existence in thought,
in feeling, in belief; so that his existence is a medium between
sensational existence and conceptional existence, a medium full of
contradiction. Or: he is a sensational existence, to which however all
the conditions of sensational existence are wanting:--consequently an
existence at once sensational and not sensational, an existence which
contradicts the idea of the sensational, or only a vague existence in
general, which is fundamentally a sensational one, but which, in order
that this may not become evident, is divested of all the predicates
of a real, sensational existence. But such an "existence in general"
is self-contradictory. To existence belongs full, definite reality.

A necessary consequence of this contradiction is Atheism. The existence
of God is essentially an empirical existence, without having its
distinctive marks; it is in itself a matter of experience, and yet
in reality no object of experience. It calls upon man to seek it
in Reality: it impregnates his mind with sensational conceptions
and pretensions; hence, when these are not fulfilled--when, on the
contrary, he finds experience in contradiction with these conceptions,
he is perfectly justified in denying that existence.

Kant is well known to have maintained, in his critique of the proofs
of the existence of God, that that existence is not susceptible of
proof from reason. He did not merit, on this account, the blame
which was cast on him by Hegel. The idea of the existence of God
in those proofs is a thoroughly empirical one; but I cannot deduce
empirical existence from an à priori idea. The only real ground of
blame against Kant is, that in laying down this position he supposed
it to be something remarkable, whereas it is self-evident. Reason
cannot constitute itself an object of sense. I cannot, in thinking,
at the same time represent what I think as a sensible object, external
to me. The proof of the existence of God transcends the limits of the
reason; true; but in the same sense in which sight, hearing, smelling
transcend the limits of the reason. It is absurd to reproach reason
that it does not satisfy a demand which can only address itself
to the senses. Existence, empirical existence, is proved to me by
the senses alone; and in the question as to the being of God, the
existence implied has not the significance of inward reality, of truth,
but the significance of a formal, external existence. Hence there is
perfect truth in the allegation that the belief that God is or is not
has no consequence with respect to inward moral dispositions. It is
true that the thought: There is a God, is inspiring; but here the is
means inward reality; here the existence is a movement of inspiration,
an act of aspiration. Just in proportion as this existence becomes
a prosaic, an empirical truth, the inspiration is extinguished.

Religion, therefore, in so far as it is founded on the existence of
God as an empirical truth, is a matter of indifference to the inward
disposition. As, necessarily, in the religious cultus, ceremonies,
observances, sacraments, apart from the moral spirit or disposition,
become in themselves an important fact: so also, at last, belief in
the existence of God becomes, apart from the inherent quality, the
spiritual import of the idea of God, a chief point in religion. If
thou only believest in God--believest that God is, thou art already
saved. Whether under this God thou conceivest a really divine being
or a monster, a Nero or a Caligula, an image of thy passions, thy
revenge, or ambition, it is all one,--the main point is that thou
be not an atheist. The history of religion has amply confirmed
this consequence which we here draw from the idea of the divine
existence. If the existence of God, taken by itself, had not rooted
itself as a religious truth in minds, there would never have been
those infamous, senseless, horrible ideas of God which stigmatise the
history of religion and theology. The existence of God was a common,
external, and yet at the same time a holy thing:--what wonder, then,
if on this ground the commonest, rudest, most unholy conceptions and
opinions sprang up!

Atheism was supposed, and is even now supposed, to be the negation
of all moral principle, of all moral foundations and bonds: if
God is not, all distinction between good and bad, virtue and vice,
is abolished. Thus the distinction lies only in the existence of
God; the reality of virtue lies not in itself, but out of it. And
assuredly it is not from an attachment to virtue, from a conviction
of its intrinsic worth and importance, that the reality of it is
thus bound up with the existence of God. On the contrary, the belief
that God is the necessary condition of virtue is the belief in the
nothingness of virtue in itself.

It is indeed worthy of remark that the idea of the empirical
existence of God has been perfectly developed in modern times,
in which empiricism and materialism in general have arrived at
their full blow. It is true that even in the original, simple
religious mind, God is an empirical existence to be found in a place,
though above the earth. But here this conception has not so naked,
so prosaic a significance; the imagination identifies again the
external God with the soul of man. The imagination is, in general,
the true place of an existence which is absent, not present to
the senses, though nevertheless sensational in its essence. [162]
Only the imagination solves the contradiction in an existence which
is at once sensational and not sensational; only the imagination
is the preservative from atheism. In the imagination existence has
sensational effects,--existence affirms itself as a power; with the
essence of sensational existence the imagination associates also the
phenomena of sensational existence. Where the existence of God is a
living truth, an object on which the imagination exercises itself,
there also appearances of God are believed in. [163] Where, on the
contrary, the fire of the religious imagination is extinct, where
the sensational effects or appearances necessarily connected with an
essentially sensational existence cease, there the existence becomes
a dead, self-contradictory existence, which falls irrecoverably into
the negation of atheism.

The belief in the existence of God is the belief in a special
existence, separate from the existence of man and Nature. A special
existence can only be proved in a special manner. This faith is
therefore only then a true and living one when special effects,
immediate appearances of God, miracles, are believed in. Where, on the
other hand, the belief in God is identified with the belief in the
world, where the belief in God is no longer a special faith, where
the general being of the world takes possession of the whole man,
there also vanishes the belief in special effects and appearances
of God. Belief in God is wrecked, is stranded on the belief in the
world, in natural effects as the only true ones. As here the belief
in miracles is no longer anything more than the belief in historical,
past miracles, so the existence of God is also only an historical,
in itself atheistic conception.







