Part II.

THE FALSE OR THEOLOGICAL ESSENCE OF RELIGION.

    XIX.   The Essential Standpoint of Religion                  185
     XX.   The Contradiction in the Existence of God             197
    XXI.   The Contradiction in the Revelation of God            204
   XXII.   The Contradiction in the Nature of God in General     213
  XXIII.   The Contradiction in the Speculative Doctrine of
           God                                                   226
   XXIV.   The Contradiction in the Trinity                      232
    XXV.   The Contradiction in the Sacraments                   236
   XXVI.   The Contradiction of Faith and Love                   247
  XXVII.   Concluding Application                                270

APPENDIX.

SECTION

      1.   The Religious Emotions Purely Human                   281
      2.   God is Feeling Released from Limits                   283
      3.   God is the Highest Feeling of Self                    284
      4.   Distinction between the Pantheistic and Personal God  285
      5.   Nature without Interest for Christians                287
      6.   In God Man is his Own Object                          289
      7.   Christianity the Religion of Suffering                292
      8.   Mystery of the Trinity                                293
      9.   Creation out of Nothing                               297
     10.   Egoism of the Israelitish Religion                    298
     11.   The Idea of Providence                                299
     12.   Contradiction of Faith and Reason                     304
     13.   The Resurrection of Christ                            306
     14.   The Christian a Supermundane Being                    307
     15.   The Celibate and Monachism                            308
     16.   The Christian Heaven                                  315
     17.   What Faith Denies on Earth it Affirms in Heaven       316
     18.   Contradictions in the Sacraments                      317
     19.   Contradiction of Faith and Love                       320
     20.   Results of the Principle of Faith                     326
     21.   Contradiction of the God-Man                          332
     22.   Anthropology the Mystery of Theology                  336








THE ESSENCE OF CHRISTIANITY.

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTION.


§ 1. The Essential Nature of Man.

Religion has its basis in the essential difference between man and
the brute--the brutes have no religion. It is true that the old
uncritical writers on natural history attributed to the elephant,
among other laudable qualities, the virtue of religiousness; but
the religion of elephants belongs to the realm of fable. Cuvier,
one of the greatest authorities on the animal kingdom, assigns,
on the strength of his personal observations, no higher grade of
intelligence to the elephant than to the dog.

But what is this essential difference between man and the brute? The
most simple, general, and also the most popular answer to this
question is--consciousness:--but consciousness in the strict sense;
for the consciousness implied in the feeling of self as an individual,
in discrimination by the senses, in the perception and even judgment
of outward things according to definite sensible signs, cannot
be denied to the brutes. Consciousness in the strictest sense is
present only in a being to whom his species, his essential nature,
is an object of thought. The brute is indeed conscious of himself
as an individual--and he has accordingly the feeling of self as the
common centre of successive sensations--but not as a species: hence,
he is without that consciousness which in its nature, as in its name,
is akin to science. Where there is this higher consciousness there
is a capability of science. Science is the cognisance of species. In
practical life we have to do with individuals; in science, with
species. But only a being to whom his own species, his own nature,
is an object of thought, can make the essential nature of other things
or beings an object of thought.

Hence the brute has only a simple, man a twofold life: in the brute,
the inner life is one with the outer; man has both an inner and an
outer life. The inner life of man is the life which has relation to
his species, to his general, as distinguished from his individual,
nature. Man thinks--that is, he converses with himself. The brute can
exercise no function which has relation to its species without another
individual external to itself; but man can perform the functions
of thought and speech, which strictly imply such a relation, apart
from another individual. Man is himself at once I and thou; he can
put himself in the place of another, for this reason, that to him
his species, his essential nature, and not merely his individuality,
is an object of thought.

Religion being identical with the distinctive characteristic of man,
is then identical with self-consciousness--with the consciousness
which man has of his nature. But religion, expressed generally,
is consciousness of the infinite; thus it is and can be nothing
else than the consciousness which man has of his own--not finite
and limited, but infinite nature. A really finite being has not
even the faintest adumbration, still less consciousness, of an
infinite being, for the limit of the nature is also the limit of the
consciousness. The consciousness of the caterpillar, whose life is
confined to a particular species of plant, does not extend itself
beyond this narrow domain. It does, indeed, discriminate between
this plant and other plants, but more it knows not. A consciousness
so limited, but on account of that very limitation so infallible,
we do not call consciousness, but instinct. Consciousness, in
the strict or proper sense, is identical with consciousness of the
infinite; a limited consciousness is no consciousness; consciousness
is essentially infinite in its nature. [3] The consciousness of the
infinite is nothing else than the consciousness of the infinity of
the consciousness; or, in the consciousness of the infinite, the
conscious subject has for his object the infinity of his own nature.

What, then, is the nature of man, of which he is conscious, or what
constitutes the specific distinction, the proper humanity of man? [4]
Reason, Will, Affection. To a complete man belong the power of thought,
the power of will, the power of affection. The power of thought is
the light of the intellect, the power of will is energy of character,
the power of affection is love. Reason, love, force of will, are
perfections--the perfections of the human being--nay, more, they are
absolute perfections of being. To will, to love, to think, are the
highest powers, are the absolute nature of man as man, and the basis of
his existence. Man exists to think, to love, to will. Now that which
is the end, the ultimate aim, is also the true basis and principle of
a being. But what is the end of reason? Reason. Of love? Love. Of
will? Freedom of the will. We think for the sake of thinking;
love for the sake of loving; will for the sake of willing--i.e.,
that we may be free. True existence is thinking, loving, willing
existence. That alone is true, perfect, divine, which exists for its
own sake. But such is love, such is reason, such is will. The divine
trinity in man, above the individual man, is the unity of reason,
love, will. Reason, Will, Love, are not powers which man possesses,
for he is nothing without them, he is what he is only by them; they
are the constituent elements of his nature, which he neither has
nor makes, the animating, determining, governing powers--divine,
absolute powers--to which he can oppose no resistance. [5]

How can the feeling man resist feeling, the loving one love,
the rational one reason? Who has not experienced the overwhelming
power of melody? And what else is the power of melody but the power
of feeling? Music is the language of feeling; melody is audible
feeling--feeling communicating itself. Who has not experienced the
power of love, or at least heard of it? Which is the stronger--love
or the individual man? Is it man that possesses love, or is it not
much rather love that possesses man? When love impels a man to suffer
death even joyfully for the beloved one, is this death-conquering power
his own individual power, or is it not rather the power of love? And
who that ever truly thought has not experienced that quiet, subtle
power--the power of thought? When thou sinkest into deep reflection,
forgetting thyself and what is around thee, dost thou govern reason,
or is it not reason which governs and absorbs thee? Scientific
enthusiasm--is it not the most glorious triumph of intellect over
thee? The desire of knowledge--is it not a simply irresistible, and
all-conquering power? And when thou suppressest a passion, renouncest a
habit, in short, achievest a victory over thyself, is this victorious
power thy own personal power, or is it not rather the energy of will,
the force of morality, which seizes the mastery of thee, and fills
thee with indignation against thyself and thy individual weaknesses?

Man is nothing without an object. The great models of humanity,
such men as reveal to us what man is capable of, have attested the
truth of this proposition by their lives. They had only one dominant
passion--the realisation of the aim which was the essential object
of their activity. But the object to which a subject essentially,
necessarily relates, is nothing else than this subject's own, but
objective, nature. If it be an object common to several individuals of
the same species, but under various conditions, it is still, at least
as to the form under which it presents itself to each of them according
to their respective modifications, their own, but objective, nature.

Thus the Sun is the common object of the planets, but it is an object
to Mercury, to Venus, to Saturn, to Uranus, under other conditions
than to the Earth. Each planet has its own sun. The Sun which lights
and warms Uranus has no physical (only an astronomical, scientific)
existence for the Earth; and not only does the Sun appear different,
but it really is another sun on Uranus than on the Earth. The relation
of the Sun to the Earth is therefore at the same time a relation of
the Earth to itself, or to its own nature, for the measure of the
size and of the intensity of light which the Sun possesses as the
object of the Earth is the measure of the distance which determines
the peculiar nature of the Earth. Hence each planet has in its sun
the mirror of its own nature.

In the object which he contemplates, therefore, man becomes
acquainted with himself; consciousness of the objective is the
self-consciousness of man. We know the man by the object, by his
conception of what is external to himself; in it his nature becomes
evident; this object is his manifested nature, his true objective
ego. And this is true not merely of spiritual, but also of sensuous
objects. Even the objects which are the most remote from man, because
they are objects to him, and to the extent to which they are so,
are revelations of human nature. Even the moon, the sun, the stars,
call to man Gnothi seauton. That he sees them, and so sees them,
is an evidence of his own nature. The animal is sensible only of the
beam which immediately affects life; while man perceives the ray,
to him physically indifferent, of the remotest star. Man alone has
purely intellectual, disinterested joys and passions; the eye of man
alone keeps theoretic festivals. The eye which looks into the starry
heavens, which gazes at that light, alike useless and harmless, having
nothing in common with the earth and its necessities--this eye sees
in that light its own nature, its own origin. The eye is heavenly in
its nature. Hence man elevates himself above the earth only with the
eye; hence theory begins with the contemplation of the heavens. The
first philosophers were astronomers. It is the heavens that admonish
man of his destination, and remind him that he is destined not merely
to action, but also to contemplation.

The absolute to man is his own nature. The power of the object over
him is therefore the power of his own nature. Thus the power of the
object of feeling is the power of feeling itself; the power of the
object of the intellect is the power of the intellect itself; the
power of the object of the will is the power of the will itself. The
man who is affected by musical sounds is governed by feeling; by the
feeling, that is, which finds its corresponding element in musical
sounds. But it is not melody as such, it is only melody pregnant
with meaning and emotion, which has power over feeling. Feeling
is only acted on by that which conveys feeling, i.e., by itself,
its own nature. Thus also the will; thus, and infinitely more, the
intellect. Whatever kind of object, therefore, we are at any time
conscious of, we are always at the same time conscious of our own
nature; we can affirm nothing without affirming ourselves. And since
to will, to feel, to think, are perfections, essences, realities,
it is impossible that intellect, feeling, and will should feel or
perceive themselves as limited, finite powers, i.e., as worthless, as
nothing. For finiteness and nothingness are identical; finiteness is
only a euphemism for nothingness. Finiteness is the metaphysical, the
theoretical--nothingness the pathological, practical expression. What
is finite to the understanding is nothing to the heart. But it is
impossible that we should be conscious of will, feeling, and intellect,
as finite powers, because every perfect existence, every original
power and essence, is the immediate verification and affirmation of
itself. It is impossible to love, will, or think, without perceiving
these activities to be perfections--impossible to feel that one is
a loving, willing, thinking being, without experiencing an infinite
joy therein. Consciousness consists in a being becoming objective
to itself; hence it is nothing apart, nothing distinct from the
being which is conscious of itself. How could it otherwise become
conscious of itself? It is therefore impossible to be conscious of
a perfection as an imperfection, impossible to feel feeling limited,
to think thought limited.

Consciousness is self-verification, self-affirmation, self-love, joy
in one's own perfection. Consciousness is the characteristic mark
of a perfect nature; it exists only in a self-sufficing, complete
being. Even human vanity attests this truth. A man looks in the glass;
he has complacency in his appearance. This complacency is a necessary,
involuntary consequence of the completeness, the beauty of his form. A
beautiful form is satisfied in itself; it has necessarily joy in
itself--in self-contemplation. This complacency becomes vanity only
when a man piques himself on his form as being his individual form,
not when he admires it as a specimen of human beauty in general. It
is fitting that he should admire it thus: he can conceive no form more
beautiful, more sublime than the human. [6] Assuredly every being loves
itself, its existence--and fitly so. To exist is a good. Quidquid
essentia dignum est, scientia dignum est. Everything that exists
has value, is a being of distinction--at least this is true of the
species: hence it asserts, maintains itself. But the highest form of
self-assertion, the form which is itself a superiority, a perfection,
a bliss, a good, is consciousness.

Every limitation of the reason, or in general of the nature of man,
rests on a delusion, an error. It is true that the human being,
as an individual, can and must--herein consists his distinction
from the brute--feel and recognise himself to be limited; but he
can become conscious of his limits, his finiteness, only because
the perfection, the infinitude of his species, is perceived by him,
whether as an object of feeling, of conscience, or of the thinking
consciousness. If he makes his own limitations the limitations of
the species, this arises from the mistake that he identifies himself
immediately with the species--a mistake which is intimately connected
with the individual's love of ease, sloth, vanity, and egoism. For
a limitation which I know to be merely mine humiliates, shames, and
perturbs me. Hence to free myself from this feeling of shame, from this
state of dissatisfaction, I convert the limits of my individuality
into the limits of human nature in general. What is incomprehensible
to me is incomprehensible to others; why should I trouble myself
further? It is no fault of mine; my understanding is not to blame,
but the understanding of the race. But it is a ludicrous and even
culpable error to define as finite and limited what constitutes the
essence of man, the nature of the species, which is the absolute
nature of the individual. Every being is sufficient to itself. No
being can deny itself, i.e., its own nature; no being is a limited
one to itself. Rather, every being is in and by itself infinite--has
its God, its highest conceivable being, in itself. Every limit of a
being is cognisable only by another being out of and above him. The
life of the ephemera is extraordinarily short in comparison with
that of longer-lived creatures; but nevertheless, for the ephemera
this short life is as long as a life of years to others. The leaf on
which the caterpillar lives is for it a world, an infinite space.

That which makes a being what it is, is its talent, its power,
its wealth, its adornment. How can it possibly hold its existence
non-existence, its wealth poverty, its talent incapacity? If the
plants had eyes, taste, and judgment, each plant would declare its
own flower the most beautiful; for its comprehension, its taste,
would reach no farther than its natural power of production. What
the productive power of its nature has brought forth as the highest,
that must also its taste, its judgment, recognise and affirm as the
highest. What the nature affirms, the understanding, the taste, the
judgment, cannot deny; otherwise the understanding, the judgment, would
no longer be the understanding and judgment of this particular being,
but of some other. The measure of the nature is also the measure of
the understanding. If the nature is limited, so also is the feeling,
so also is the understanding. But to a limited being its limited
understanding is not felt to be a limitation; on the contrary,
it is perfectly happy and contented with this understanding; it
regards it, praises and values it, as a glorious, divine power; and
the limited understanding, on its part, values the limited nature
whose understanding it is. Each is exactly adapted to the other;
how should they be at issue with each other? A being's understanding
is its sphere of vision. As far as thou seest, so far extends thy
nature; and conversely. The eye of the brute reaches no farther than
its needs, and its nature no farther than its needs. And so far as
thy nature reaches, so far reaches thy unlimited self-consciousness,
so far art thou God. The discrepancy between the understanding and the
nature, between the power of conception and the power of production
in the human consciousness, on the one hand, is merely of individual
significance and has not a universal application; and, on the other
hand, it is only apparent. He who, having written a bad poem, knows
it to be bad, is in his intelligence, and therefore in his nature,
not so limited as he who, having written a bad poem, admires it and
thinks it good.

It follows that if thou thinkest the infinite, thou perceivest and
affirmest the infinitude of the power of thought; if thou feelest the
infinite, thou feelest and affirmest the infinitude of the power of
feeling. The object of the intellect is intellect objective to itself;
the object of feeling is feeling objective to itself. If thou hast no
sensibility, no feeling for music, thou perceivest in the finest music
nothing more than in the wind that whistles by thy ear, or than in the
brook which rushes past thy feet. What, then, is it which acts on thee
when thou art affected by melody? What dost thou perceive in it? What
else than the voice of thy own heart? Feeling speaks only to feeling;
feeling is comprehensible only by feeling, that is, by itself--for this
reason, that the object of feeling is nothing else than feeling. Music
is a monologue of emotion. But the dialogue of philosophy also is
in truth only a monologue of the intellect; thought speaks only to
thought. The splendours of the crystal charm the sense, but the
intellect is interested only in the laws of crystallisation. The
intellectual only is the object of the intellect. [7]

All therefore which, in the point of view of metaphysical,
transcendental speculation and religion, has the significance only
of the secondary, the subjective, the medium, the organ--has in
truth the significance of the primary, of the essence, of the object
itself. If, for example, feeling is the essential organ of religion,
the nature of God is nothing else than an expression of the nature
of feeling. The true but latent sense of the phrase, "Feeling is the
organ of the divine," is, feeling is the noblest, the most excellent,
i.e., the divine, in man. How couldst thou perceive the divine by
feeling, if feeling were not itself divine in its nature? The divine
assuredly is known only by means of the divine--God is known only by
himself. The divine nature which is discerned by feeling is in truth
nothing else than feeling enraptured, in ecstasy with itself--feeling
intoxicated with joy, blissful in its own plenitude.

It is already clear from this that where feeling is held to be
the organ of the infinite, the subjective essence of religion,--the
external data of religion lose their objective value. And thus, since
feeling has been held the cardinal principle in religion, the doctrines
of Christianity, formerly so sacred, have lost their importance. If,
from this point of view, some value is still conceded to Christian
ideas, it is a value springing entirely from the relation they bear to
feeling; if another object would excite the same emotions, it would be
just as welcome. But the object of religious feeling is become a matter
of indifference, only because when once feeling has been pronounced to
be the subjective essence of religion, it in fact is also the objective
essence of religion, though it may not be declared, at least directly,
to be such. I say directly; for indirectly this is certainly admitted,
when it is declared that feeling, as such, is religious, and thus
the distinction between specifically religious and irreligious, or at
least non-religious, feelings is abolished--a necessary consequence
of the point of view in which feeling only is regarded as the organ
of the divine. For on what other ground than that of its essence,
its nature, dost thou hold feeling to be the organ of the infinite,
the divine being? And is not the nature of feeling in general also the
nature of every special feeling, be its object what it may? What, then,
makes this feeling religious? A given object? Not at all; for this
object is itself a religious one only when it is not an object of the
cold understanding or memory, but of feeling. What then? The nature of
feeling--a nature of which every special feeling, without distinction
of objects, partakes. Thus, feeling is pronounced to be religious,
simply because it is feeling; the ground of its religiousness is its
own nature--lies in itself. But is not feeling thereby declared to
be itself the absolute, the divine? If feeling in itself is good,
religious, i.e., holy, divine, has not feeling its God in itself?

But if, notwithstanding, thou wilt posit an object of feeling,
but at the same time seekest to express thy feeling truly, without
introducing by thy reflection any foreign element, what remains
to thee but to distinguish between thy individual feeling and the
general nature of feeling;--to separate the universal in feeling from
the disturbing, adulterating influences with which feeling is bound up
in thee, under thy individual conditions? Hence what thou canst alone
contemplate, declare to be the infinite, and define as its essence,
is merely the nature of feeling. Thou hast thus no other definition
of God than this: God is pure, unlimited, free Feeling. Every other
God, whom thou supposest, is a God thrust upon thy feeling from
without. Feeling is atheistic in the sense of the orthodox belief,
which attaches religion to an external object; it denies an objective
God--it is itself God. In this point of view only the negation of
feeling is the negation of God. Thou art simply too cowardly or too
narrow to confess in words what thy feeling tacitly affirms. Fettered
by outward considerations, still in bondage to vulgar empiricism,
incapable of comprehending the spiritual grandeur of feeling, thou
art terrified before the religious atheism of thy heart. By this fear
thou destroyest the unity of thy feeling with itself, in imagining
to thyself an objective being distinct from thy feeling, and thus
necessarily sinking back into the old questions and doubts--is there a
God or not?--questions and doubts which vanish, nay, are impossible,
where feeling is defined as the essence of religion. Feeling is thy
own inward power, but at the same time a power distinct from thee,
and independent of thee; it is in thee, above thee; it is itself
that which constitutes the objective in thee--thy own being which
impresses thee as another being; in short, thy God. How wilt thou,
then, distinguish from this objective being within thee another
objective being? How wilt thou get beyond thy feeling?

But feeling has here been adduced only as an example. It is
the same with every other power, faculty, potentiality, reality,
activity--the name is indifferent--which is defined as the essential
organ of any object. Whatever is a subjective expression of a nature
is simultaneously also its objective expression. Man cannot get
beyond his true nature. He may indeed by means of the imagination
conceive individuals of another so-called higher kind, but he can
never get loose from his species, his nature; the conditions of
being, the positive final predicates which he gives to these other
individuals, are always determinations or qualities drawn from his
own nature--qualities in which he in truth only images and projects
himself. There may certainly be thinking beings besides men on the
other planets of our solar system. But by the supposition of such
beings we do not change our standing point--we extend our conceptions
quantitatively not qualitatively. For as surely as on the other planets
there are the same laws of motion, so surely are there the same laws of
perception and thought as here. In fact, we people the other planets,
not that we may place there different beings from ourselves, but more
beings of our own or of a similar nature. [8]



§ 2. The Essence of Religion Considered Generally.

What we have hitherto been maintaining generally, even with regard
to sensational impressions, of the relation between subject and
object, applies especially to the relation between the subject and
the religious object.

In the perceptions of the senses consciousness of the object
is distinguishable from consciousness of self; but in religion,
consciousness of the object and self-consciousness coincide. The
object of the senses is out of man, the religious object is within
him, and therefore as little forsakes him as his self-consciousness
or his conscience; it is the intimate, the closest object. "God," says
Augustine, for example, "is nearer, more related to us, and therefore
more easily known by us, than sensible, corporeal things." [9]
The object of the senses is in itself indifferent--independent of
the disposition or of the judgment; but the object of religion is a
selected object; the most excellent, the first, the supreme being;
it essentially presupposes a critical judgment, a discrimination
between the divine and the non-divine, between that which is worthy of
adoration and that which is not worthy. [10] And here may be applied,
without any limitation, the proposition: the object of any subject is
nothing else than the subject's own nature taken objectively. Such
as are a man's thoughts and dispositions, such is his God; so much
worth as a man has, so much and no more has his God. Consciousness
of God is self-consciousness, knowledge of God is self-knowledge. By
his God thou knowest the man, and by the man his God; the two are
identical. Whatever is God to a man, that is his heart and soul; and
conversely, God is the manifested inward nature, the expressed self
of a man,--religion the solemn unveiling of a man's hidden treasures,
the revelation of his intimate thoughts, the open confession of his
love-secrets.

But when religion--consciousness of God--is designated as the
self-consciousness of man, this is not to be understood as affirming
that the religious man is directly aware of this identity; for, on
the contrary, ignorance of it is fundamental to the peculiar nature of
religion. To preclude this misconception, it is better to say, religion
is man's earliest and also indirect form of self-knowledge. Hence,
religion everywhere precedes philosophy, as in the history of the
race, so also in that of the individual. Man first of all sees his
nature as if out of himself, before he finds it in himself. His
own nature is in the first instance contemplated by him as that
of another being. Religion is the childlike condition of humanity;
but the child sees his nature--man--out of himself; in childhood a
man is an object to himself, under the form of another man. Hence
the historical progress of religion consists in this: that what by
an earlier religion was regarded as objective, is now recognised as
subjective; that is, what was formerly contemplated and worshipped as
God is now perceived to be something human. What was at first religion
becomes at a later period idolatry; man is seen to have adored his own
nature. Man has given objectivity to himself, but has not recognised
the object as his own nature: a later religion takes this forward step;
every advance in religion is therefore a deeper self-knowledge. But
every particular religion, while it pronounces its predecessors
idolatrous, excepts itself--and necessarily so, otherwise it would no
longer be religion--from the fate, the common nature of all religions:
it imputes only to other religions what is the fault, if fault it be,
of religion in general. Because it has a different object, a different
tenor, because it has transcended the ideas of preceding religions,
it erroneously supposes itself exalted above the necessary eternal
laws which constitute the essence of religion--it fancies its object,
its ideas, to be superhuman. But the essence of religion, thus hidden
from the religious, is evident to the thinker, by whom religion is
viewed objectively, which it cannot be by its votaries. And it is our
task to show that the antithesis of divine and human is altogether
illusory, that it is nothing else than the antithesis between the
human nature in general and the human individual; that, consequently,
the object and contents of the Christian religion are altogether human.

Religion, at least the Christian, is the relation of man to himself,
or more correctly to his own nature (i.e., his subjective nature);
[11] but a relation to it, viewed as a nature apart from his own. The
divine being is nothing else than the human being, or, rather, the
human nature purified, freed from the limits of the individual man,
made objective--i.e., contemplated and revered as another, a distinct
being. All the attributes of the divine nature are, therefore,
attributes of the human nature. [12]

In relation to the attributes, the predicates, of the Divine Being,
this is admitted without hesitation, but by no means in relation
to the subject of these predicates. The negation of the subject is
held to be irreligion, nay, atheism; though not so the negation of
the predicates. But that which has no predicates or qualities, has no
effect upon me; that which has no effect upon me has no existence for
me. To deny all the qualities of a being is equivalent to denying the
being himself. A being without qualities is one which cannot become an
object to the mind, and such a being is virtually non-existent. Where
man deprives God of all qualities, God is no longer anything more
to him than a negative being. To the truly religious man, God is
not a being without qualities, because to him he is a positive,
real being. The theory that God cannot be defined, and consequently
cannot be known by man, is therefore the offspring of recent times,
a product of modern unbelief.

As reason is and can be pronounced finite only where man regards
sensual enjoyment, or religious emotion, or æsthetic contemplation,
or moral sentiment, as the absolute, the true; so the proposition that
God is unknowable or undefinable, can only be enunciated and become
fixed as a dogma, where this object has no longer any interest for the
intellect; where the real, the positive, alone has any hold on man,
where the real alone has for him the significance of the essential,
of the absolute, divine object, but where at the same time, in
contradiction with this purely worldly tendency, there yet exist some
old remains of religiousness. On the ground that God is unknowable, man
excuses himself to what is yet remaining of his religious conscience
for his forgetfulness of God, his absorption in the world: he denies
God practically by his conduct,--the world has possession of all his
thoughts and inclinations,--but he does not deny him theoretically, he
does not attack his existence; he lets that rest. But this existence
does not affect or incommode him; it is a merely negative existence,
an existence without existence, a self-contradictory existence,--a
state of being which, as to its effects, is not distinguishable from
non-being. The denial of determinate, positive predicates concerning
the divine nature is nothing else than a denial of religion, with,
however, an appearance of religion in its favour, so that it is not
recognised as a denial; it is simply a subtle, disguised atheism. The
alleged religious horror of limiting God by positive predicates is
only the irreligious wish to know nothing more of God, to banish God
from the mind. Dread of limitation is dread of existence. All real
existence, i.e., all existence which is truly such, is qualitative,
determinative existence. He who earnestly believes in the Divine
existence is not shocked at the attributing even of gross sensuous
qualities to God. He who dreads an existence that may give offence,
who shrinks from the grossness of a positive predicate, may as well
renounce existence altogether. A God who is injured by determinate
qualities has not the courage and the strength to exist. Qualities
are the fire, the vital breath, the oxygen, the salt of existence. An
existence in general, an existence without qualities, is an insipidity,
an absurdity. But there can be no more in God than is supplied by
religion. Only where man loses his taste for religion, and thus
religion itself becomes insipid, does the existence of God become an
insipid existence--an existence without qualities.

There is, however, a still milder way of denying the divine
predicates than the direct one just described. It is admitted that the
predicates of the divine nature are finite, and, more particularly,
human qualities, but their rejection is rejected; they are even
taken under protection, because it is necessary to man to have a
definite conception of God and since he is man he can form no other
than a human conception of him. In relation to God, it is said, these
predicates are certainly without any objective validity; but to me,
if he is to exist for me, he cannot appear otherwise than as he does
appear to me, namely, as a being with attributes analogous to the
human. But this distinction between what God is in himself, and what
he is for me destroys the peace of religion, and is besides in itself
an unfounded and untenable distinction. I cannot know whether God is
something else in himself or for himself than he is for me; what he is
to me is to me all that he is. For me, there lies in these predicates
under which he exists for me, what he is in himself, his very nature;
he is for me what he can alone ever be for me. The religious man finds
perfect satisfaction in that which God is in relation to himself;
of any other relation he knows nothing, for God is to him what he can
alone be to man. In the distinction above stated, man takes a point
of view above himself, i.e., above his nature, the absolute measure
of his being; but this transcendentalism is only an illusion; for I
can make the distinction between the object as it is in itself, and
the object as it is for me, only where an object can really appear
otherwise to me, not where it appears to me such as the absolute
measure of my nature determines it to appear--such as it must appear
to me. It is true that I may have a merely subjective conception,
i.e., one which does not arise out of the general constitution of my
species; but if my conception is determined by the constitution of
my species, the distinction between what an object is in itself, and
what it is for me ceases; for this conception is itself an absolute
one. The measure of the species is the absolute measure, law, and
criterion of man. And, indeed, religion has the conviction that its
conceptions, its predicates of God, are such as every man ought to
have, and must have, if he would have the true ones--that they are
the conceptions necessary to human nature; nay, further, that they
are objectively true, representing God as he is. To every religion
the gods of other religious are only notions concerning God, but its
own conception of God is to it God himself, the true God--God such as
he is in himself. Religion is satisfied only with a complete Deity,
a God without reservation; it will not have a mere phantasm of God; it
demands God himself. Religion gives up its own existence when it gives
up the nature of God; it is no longer a truth when it renounces the
possession of the true God. Scepticism is the arch-enemy of religion;
but the distinction between object and conception--between God as he
is in himself, and God as he is for me--is a sceptical distinction,
and therefore an irreligious one.

That which is to man the self-existent, the highest being, to which he
can conceive nothing higher--that is to him the Divine Being. How then
should he inquire concerning this being, what he is in himself? If God
were an object to the bird, he would be a winged being: the bird knows
nothing higher, nothing more blissful, than the winged condition. How
ludicrous would it be if this bird pronounced: To me God appears
as a bird, but what he is in himself I know not. To the bird the
highest nature is the bird-nature; take from him the conception of
this, and you take from him the conception of the highest being. How,
then, could he ask whether God in himself were winged? To ask whether
God is in himself what he is for me, is to ask whether God is God,
is to lift oneself above one's God, to rise up against him.

Wherever, therefore, this idea, that the religious predicates are
only anthropomorphisms, has taken possession of a man, there has
doubt, has unbelief, obtained the mastery of faith. And it is only
the inconsequence of faint-heartedness and intellectual imbecility
which does not proceed from this idea to the formal negation of
the predicates, and from thence to the negation of the subject
to which they relate. If thou doubtest the objective truth of the
predicates, thou must also doubt the objective truth of the subject
whose predicates they are. If thy predicates are anthropomorphisms,
the subject of them is an anthropomorphism too. If love, goodness,
personality, &c., are human attributes, so also is the subject which
thou presupposest, the existence of God, the belief that there is a
God, an anthropomorphism--a presupposition purely human. Whence knowest
thou that the belief in a God at all is not a limitation of man's mode
of conception? Higher beings--and thou supposest such--are perhaps so
blest in themselves, so at unity with themselves, that they are not
hung in suspense between themselves and a yet higher being. To know
God and not oneself to be God, to know blessedness and not oneself
to enjoy it, is a state of disunity, of unhappiness. Higher beings
know nothing of this unhappiness; they have no conception of that
which they are not.

Thou believest in love as a divine attribute because thou thyself
lovest; thou believest that God is a wise, benevolent being
because thou knowest nothing better in thyself than benevolence
and wisdom; and thou believest that God exists, that therefore he
is a subject--whatever exists is a subject, whether it be defined
as substance, person, essence, or otherwise--because thou thyself
existest, art thyself a subject. Thou knowest no higher human good than
to love, than to be good and wise; and even so thou knowest no higher
happiness than to exist, to be a subject; for the consciousness of
all reality, of all bliss, is for thee bound up in the consciousness
of being a subject, of existing. God is an existence, a subject to
thee, for the same reason that he is to thee a wise, a blessed, a
personal being. The distinction between the divine predicates and the
divine subject is only this, that to thee the subject, the existence,
does not appear an anthropomorphism, because the conception of it is
necessarily involved in thy own existence as a subject, whereas the
predicates do appear anthropomorphisms, because their necessity--the
necessity that God should be conscious, wise, good, &c.,--is not an
immediate necessity, identical with the being of man, but is evolved by
his self-consciousness, by the activity of his thought. I am a subject,
I exist, whether I be wise or unwise, good or bad. To exist is to man
the first datum; it constitutes the very idea of the subject; it is
presupposed by the predicates. Hence man relinquishes the predicates,
but the existence of God is to him a settled, irrefragable, absolutely
certain, objective truth. But, nevertheless, this distinction is
merely an apparent one. The necessity of the subject lies only in the
necessity of the predicate. Thou art a subject only in so far as thou
art a human subject; the certainty and reality of thy existence lie
only in the certainty and reality of thy human attributes. What the
subject is lies only in the predicate; the predicate is the truth of
the subject--the subject only the personified, existing predicate,
the predicate conceived as existing. Subject and predicate are
distinguished only as existence and essence. The negation of the
predicates is therefore the negation of the subject. What remains of
the human subject when abstracted from the human attributes? Even
in the language of common life the divine predicates--Providence,
Omniscience, Omnipotence--are put for the divine subject.

The certainty of the existence of God, of which it has been said that
it is as certain, nay, more certain to man than his own existence,
depends only on the certainty of the qualities of God--it is in
itself no immediate certainty. To the Christian the existence of the
Christian God only is a certainty; to the heathen that of the heathen
God only. The heathen did not doubt the existence of Jupiter, because
he took no offence at the nature of Jupiter, because he could conceive
of God under no other qualities, because to him these qualities were
a certainty, a divine reality. The reality of the predicate is the
sole guarantee of existence.

Whatever man conceives to be true, he immediately conceives to be
real (that is, to have an objective existence), because, originally,
only the real is true to him--true in opposition to what is merely
conceived, dreamed, imagined. The idea of being, of existence, is the
original idea of truth; or, originally, man makes truth dependent
on existence, subsequently, existence dependent on truth. Now God
is the nature of man regarded as absolute truth,--the truth of man;
but God, or, what is the same thing, religion, is as various as are
the conditions under which man conceives this his nature, regards
it as the highest being. These conditions, then, under which man
conceives God, are to him the truth, and for that reason they are
also the highest existence, or rather they are existence itself;
for only the emphatic, the highest existence, is existence, and
deserves this name. Therefore, God is an existent, real being, on
the very same ground that he is a particular, definite being; for
the qualities of God are nothing else than the essential qualities of
man himself, and a particular man is what he is, has his existence,
his reality, only in his particular conditions. Take away from the
Greek the quality of being Greek, and you take away his existence. On
this ground it is true that for a definite positive religion--that
is, relatively--the certainty of the existence of God is immediate;
for just as involuntarily, as necessarily, as the Greek was a Greek,
so necessarily were his gods Greek beings, so necessarily were they
real, existent beings. Religion is that conception of the nature of the
world and of man which is essential to, i.e., identical with, a man's
nature. But man does not stand above this his necessary conception;
on the contrary, it stands above him; it animates, determines, governs
him. The necessity of a proof, of a middle term to unite qualities
with existence, the possibility of a doubt, is abolished. Only that
which is apart from my own being is capable of being doubted by
me. How then can I doubt of God, who is my being? To doubt of God
is to doubt of myself. Only when God is thought of abstractly, when
his predicates are the result of philosophic abstraction, arises the
distinction or separation between subject and predicate, existence
and nature--arises the fiction that the existence or the subject is
something else than the predicate, something immediate, indubitable,
in distinction from the predicate, which is held to be doubtful. But
this is only a fiction. A God who has abstract predicates has also
an abstract existence. Existence, being, varies with varying qualities.

The identity of the subject and predicate is clearly evidenced by
the progressive development of religion, which is identical with
the progressive development of human culture. So long as man is
in a mere state of nature, so long is his god a mere nature-god--a
personification of some natural force. Where man inhabits houses, he
also encloses his gods in temples. The temple is only a manifestation
of the value which man attaches to beautiful buildings. Temples in
honour of religion are in truth temples in honour of architecture. With
the emerging of man from a state of savagery and wildness to one of
culture, with the distinction between what is fitting for man and
what is not fitting, arises simultaneously the distinction between
that which is fitting and that which is not fitting for God. God is
the idea of majesty, of the highest dignity: the religious sentiment
is the sentiment of supreme fitness. The later more cultured artists
of Greece were the first to embody in the statues of the gods the
ideas of dignity, of spiritual grandeur, of imperturbable repose
and serenity. But why were these qualities in their view attributes,
predicates of God? Because they were in themselves regarded by the
Greeks as divinities. Why did those artists exclude all disgusting
and low passions? Because they perceived them to be unbecoming,
unworthy, unhuman, and consequently ungodlike. The Homeric gods
eat and drink;--that implies eating and drinking is a divine
pleasure. Physical strength is an attribute of the Homeric gods:
Zeus is the strongest of the gods. Why? Because physical strength,
in and by itself, was regarded as something glorious, divine. To
the ancient Germans the highest virtues were those of the warrior;
therefore their supreme god was the god of war, Odin,--war, "the
original or oldest law." Not the attribute of the divinity, but
the divineness or deity of the attribute, is the first true Divine
Being. Thus what theology and philosophy have held to be God, the
Absolute, the Infinite, is not God; but that which they have held not
to be God is God: namely, the attribute, the quality, whatever has
reality. Hence he alone is the true atheist to whom the predicates of
the Divine Being,--for example, love, wisdom, justice,--are nothing;
not he to whom merely the subject of these predicates is nothing. And
in no wise is the negation of the subject necessarily also a negation
of the predicates considered in themselves. These have an intrinsic,
independent reality; they force their recognition upon man by their
very nature; they are self-evident truths to him; they prove, they
attest themselves. It does not follow that goodness, justice, wisdom,
are chimæras because the existence of God is a chimæra, nor truths
because this is a truth. The idea of God is dependent on the idea of
justice, of benevolence; a God who is not benevolent, not just, not
wise, is no God; but the converse does not hold. The fact is not that
a quality is divine because God has it, but that God has it because
it is in itself divine: because without it God would be a defective
being. Justice, wisdom, in general every quality which constitutes
the divinity of God, is determined and known by itself independently,
but the idea of God is determined by the qualities which have thus
been previously judged to be worthy of the divine nature; only in
the case in which I identify God and justice, in which I think of
God immediately as the reality of the idea of justice, is the idea
of God self-determined. But if God as a subject is the determined,
while the quality, the predicate, is the determining, then in truth the
rank of the godhead is due not to the subject, but to the predicate.

Not until several, and those contradictory, attributes are united in
one being, and this being is conceived as personal--the personality
being thus brought into especial prominence--not until then is
the origin of religion lost sight of, is it forgotten that what
the activity of the reflective power has converted into a predicate
distinguishable or separable from the subject, was originally the true
subject. Thus the Greeks and Romans deified accidents as substances;
virtues, states of mind, passions, as independent beings. Man,
especially the religious man, is to himself the measure of all things,
of all reality. Whatever strongly impresses a man, whatever produces
an unusual effect on his mind, if it be only a peculiar, inexplicable
sound or note, he personifies as a divine being. Religion embraces
all the objects of the world: everything existing has been an object
of religious reverence; in the nature and consciousness of religion
there is nothing else than what lies in the nature of man and in his
consciousness of himself and of the world. Religion has no material
exclusively its own. In Rome even the passions of fear and terror
had their temples. The Christians also made mental phenomena into
independent beings, their own feelings into qualities of things, the
passions which governed them into powers which governed the world,
in short, predicates of their own nature, whether recognised as such
or not, into independent subjective existences. Devils, cobolds,
witches, ghosts, angels, were sacred truths as long as the religious
spirit held undivided sway over mankind.

In order to banish from the mind the identity of the divine and human
predicates, and the consequent identity of the divine and human nature,
recourse is had to the idea that God, as the absolute, real Being,
has an infinite fulness of various predicates, of which we here know
only a part, and those such as are analogous to our own; while the
rest, by virtue of which God must thus have quite a different nature
from the human or that which is analogous to the human, we shall only
know in the future--that is, after death. But an infinite plenitude
or multitude of predicates which are really different, so different
that the one does not immediately involve the other, is realised
only in an infinite plenitude or multitude of different beings or
individuals. Thus the human nature presents an infinite abundance
of different predicates, and for that very reason it presents an
infinite abundance of different individuals. Each new man is a new
predicate, a new phasis of humanity. As many as are the men, so many
are the powers, the properties of humanity. It is true that there
are the same elements in every individual, but under such various
conditions and modifications that they appear new and peculiar. The
mystery of the inexhaustible fulness of the divine predicates is
therefore nothing else than the mystery of human nature considered
as an infinitely varied, infinitely modifiable, but, consequently,
phenomenal being. Only in the realm of the senses, only in space
and time, does there exist a being of really infinite qualities or
predicates. Where there are really different predicates there are
different times. One man is a distinguished musician, a distinguished
author, a distinguished physician; but he cannot compose music,
write books, and perform cures in the same moment of time. Time,
and not the Hegelian dialectic, is the medium of uniting opposites,
contradictories, in one and the same subject. But distinguished and
detached from the nature of man, and combined with the idea of God,
the infinite fulness of various predicates is a conception without
reality, a mere phantasy, a conception derived from the sensible
world, but without the essential conditions, without the truth of
sensible existence, a conception which stands in direct contradiction
with the Divine Being considered as a spiritual, i.e., an abstract,
simple, single being; for the predicates of God are precisely of
this character, that one involves all the others, because there
is no real difference between them. If, therefore, in the present
predicates I have not the future, in the present God not the future
God, then the future God is not the present, but they are two distinct
beings. [13] But this distinction is in contradiction with the unity
and simplicity of the theological God. Why is a given predicate a
predicate of God? Because it is divine in its nature, i.e., because it
expresses no limitation, no defect. Why are other predicates applied
to him? Because, however various in themselves, they agree in this,
that they all alike express perfection, unlimitedness. Hence I can
conceive innumerable predicates of God, because they must all agree
with the abstract idea of the Godhead, and must have in common that
which constitutes every single predicate a divine attribute. Thus it is
in the system of Spinoza. He speaks of an infinite number of attributes
of the divine substance, but he specifies none except Thought and
Extension. Why? Because it is a matter of indifference to know them;
nay, because they are in themselves indifferent, superfluous; for
with all these innumerable predicates, I yet always mean to say the
same thing as when I speak of Thought and Extension. Why is Thought
an attribute of substance? Because, according to Spinoza, it is
capable of being conceived by itself, because it expresses something
indivisible, perfect, infinite. Why Extension or Matter? For the same
reason. Thus, substance can have an indefinite number of predicates,
because it is not their specific definition, their difference, but
their identity, their equivalence, which makes them attributes of
substance. Or rather, substance has innumerable predicates only because
(how strange!) it has properly no predicate; that is, no definite,
real predicate. The indefinite unity which is the product of thought,
completes itself by the indefinite multiplicity which is the product of
the imagination. Because the predicate is not multum, it is multa. In
truth, the positive predicates are Thought and Extension. In these two
infinitely more is said than in the nameless innumerable predicates;
for they express something definite--in them I have something. But
substance is too indifferent, too apathetic to be something; that is,
to have qualities and passions; that it may not be something, it is
rather nothing.

Now, when it is shown that what the subject is lies entirely in
the attributes of the subject; that is, that the predicate is the
true subject; it is also proved that if the divine predicates are
attributes of the human nature, the subject of those predicates is also
of the human nature. But the divine predicates are partly general,
partly personal. The general predicates are the metaphysical, but
these serve only as external points of support to religion; they are
not the characteristic definitions of religion. It is the personal
predicates alone which constitute the essence of religion--in which
the Divine Being is the object of religion. Such are, for example,
that God is a Person, that he is the moral Lawgiver, the Father
of mankind, the Holy One, the Just, the Good, the Merciful. It is,
however, at once clear, or it will at least be clear in the sequel,
with regard to these and other definitions, that, especially as
applied to a personality, they are purely human definitions, and that
consequently man in religion--in his relation to God--is in relation
to his own nature; for to the religious sentiment these predicates
are not mere conceptions, mere images, which man forms of God,
to be distinguished from that which God is in himself, but truths,
facts, realities. Religion knows nothing of anthropomorphisms; to it
they are not anthropomorphisms. It is the very essence of religion,
that to it these definitions express the nature of God. They are
pronounced to be images only by the understanding, which reflects on
religion, and which while defending them yet before its own tribunal
denies them. But to the religious sentiment God is a real Father,
real Love and Mercy; for to it he is a real, living, personal being,
and therefore his attributes are also living and personal. Nay, the
definitions which are the most sufficing to the religious sentiment
are precisely those which give the most offence to the understanding,
and which in the process of reflection on religion it denies. Religion
is essentially emotion; hence, objectively also, emotion is to it
necessarily of a divine nature. Even anger appears to it an emotion
not unworthy of God, provided only there be a religious motive at
the foundation of this anger.

But here it is also essential to observe, and this phenomenon is an
extremely remarkable one, characterising the very core of religion,
that in proportion as the divine subject is in reality human, the
greater is the apparent difference between God and man; that is,
the more, by reflection on religion, by theology, is the identity of
the divine and human denied, and the human, considered as such, is
depreciated. [14] The reason of this is, that as what is positive in
the conception of the divine being can only be human, the conception
of man, as an object of consciousness, can only be negative. To
enrich God, man must become poor; that God may be all, man must be
nothing. But he desires to be nothing in himself, because what he takes
from himself is not lost to him, since it is preserved in God. Man has
his being in God; why then should he have it in himself? Where is the
necessity of positing the same thing twice, of having it twice? What
man withdraws from himself, what he renounces in himself, he only
enjoys in an incomparably higher and fuller measure in God.

The monks made a vow of chastity to God; they mortified the sexual
passion in themselves, but therefore they had in heaven, in the
Virgin Mary, the image of woman--an image of love. They could
the more easily dispense with real woman in proportion as an ideal
woman was an object of love to them. The greater the importance they
attached to the denial of sensuality, the greater the importance of
the heavenly virgin for them: she was to them in the place of Christ,
in the stead of God. The more the sensual tendencies are renounced,
the more sensual is the God to whom they are sacrificed. For whatever
is made an offering to God has an especial value attached to it; in it
God is supposed to have especial pleasure. That which is the highest
in the estimation of man is naturally the highest in the estimation
of his God; what pleases man pleases God also. The Hebrews did not
offer to Jehovah unclean, ill-conditioned animals; on the contrary,
those which they most highly prized, which they themselves ate,
were also the food of God (Cibus Dei, Lev. iii. 2). Wherever,
therefore, the denial of the sensual delights is made a special
offering, a sacrifice well-pleasing to God, there the highest value is
attached to the senses, and the sensuality which has been renounced
is unconsciously restored, in the fact that God takes the place
of the material delights which have been renounced. The nun weds
herself to God; she has a heavenly bridegroom, the monk a heavenly
bride. But the heavenly virgin is only a sensible presentation of
a general truth, having relation to the essence of religion. Man
denies as to himself only what he attributes to God. Religion
abstracts from man, from the world; but it can only abstract from
the limitations, from the phenomena; in short, from the negative,
not from the essence, the positive, of the world and humanity: hence,
in the very abstraction and negation it must recover that from which
it abstracts, or believes itself to abstract. And thus, in reality,
whatever religion consciously denies--always supposing that what is
denied by it is something essential, true, and consequently incapable
of being ultimately denied--it unconsciously restores in God. Thus,
in religion man denies his reason; of himself he knows nothing of God,
his thoughts are only worldly, earthly; he can only believe what God
reveals to him. But on this account the thoughts of God are human,
earthly thoughts: like man, he has plans in his mind, he accommodates
himself to circumstances and grades of intelligence, like a tutor
with his pupils; he calculates closely the effect of his gifts and
revelations; he observes man in all his doings; he knows all things,
even the most earthly, the commonest, the most trivial. In brief,
man in relation to God denies his own knowledge, his own thoughts,
that he may place them in God. Man gives up his personality; but in
return, God, the Almighty, infinite, unlimited being, is a person;
he denies human dignity, the human ego; but in return God is to him
a selfish, egoistical being, who in all things seeks only himself,
his own honour, his own ends; he represents God as simply seeking
the satisfaction of his own selfishness, while yet he frowns on that
of every other being; his God is the very luxury of egoism. [15]
Religion further denies goodness as a quality of human nature; man
is wicked, corrupt, incapable of good; but, on the other hand, God is
only good--the Good Being. Man's nature demands as an object goodness,
personified as God; but is it not hereby declared that goodness is an
essential tendency of man? If my heart is wicked, my understanding
perverted, how can I perceive and feel the holy to be holy, the
good to be good? Could I perceive the beauty of a fine picture if
my mind were æsthetically an absolute piece of perversion? Though I
may not be a painter, though I may not have the power of producing
what is beautiful myself, I must yet have æsthetic feeling, æsthetic
comprehension, since I perceive the beauty that is presented to me
externally. Either goodness does not exist at all for man, or, if it
does exist, therein is revealed to the individual man the holiness
and goodness of human nature. That which is absolutely opposed to
my nature, to which I am united by no bond of sympathy, is not even
conceivable or perceptible by me. The holy is in opposition to me
only as regards the modifications of my personality, but as regards my
fundamental nature it is in unity with me. The holy is a reproach to
my sinfulness; in it I recognise myself as a sinner; but in so doing,
while I blame myself, I acknowledge what I am not, but ought to be,
and what, for that very reason, I, according to my destination, can be;
for an "ought" which has no corresponding capability does not affect
me, is a ludicrous chimæra without any true relation to my mental
constitution. But when I acknowledge goodness as my destination, as my
law, I acknowledge it, whether consciously or unconsciously, as my own
nature. Another nature than my own, one different in quality, cannot
touch me. I can perceive sin as sin, only when I perceive it to be a
contradiction of myself with myself--that is, of my personality with
my fundamental nature. As a contradiction of the absolute, considered
as another being, the feeling of sin is inexplicable, unmeaning.

The distinction between Augustinianism and Pelagianism consists only
in this, that the former expresses after the manner of religion what
the latter expresses after the manner of Rationalism. Both say the
same thing, both vindicate the goodness of man; but Pelagianism does it
directly, in a rationalistic and moral form; Augustinianism indirectly,
in a mystical, that is, a religious form. [16] For that which is given
to man's God is in truth given to man himself; what a man declares
concerning God, he in truth declares concerning himself. Augustinianism
would be a truth, and a truth opposed to Pelagianism, only if man
had the devil for his God, and, with the consciousness that he was
the devil, honoured, reverenced, and worshipped him as the highest
being. But so long as man adores a good being as his God, so long
does he contemplate in God the goodness of his own nature.

As with the doctrine of the radical corruption of human nature, so is
it with the identical doctrine, that man can do nothing good, i.e.,
in truth, nothing of himself--by his own strength. For the denial of
human strength and spontaneous moral activity to be true, the moral
activity of God must also be denied; and we must say, with the Oriental
nihilist or pantheist: the Divine being is absolutely without will or
action, indifferent, knowing nothing of the discrimination between evil
and good. But he who defines God as an active being, and not only so,
but as morally active and morally critical,--as a being who loves,
works, and rewards good, punishes, rejects, and condemns evil,--he who
thus defines God only in appearance denies human activity, in fact,
making it the highest, the most real activity. He who makes God act
humanly, declares human activity to be divine; he says: A god who is
not active, and not morally or humanly active, is no god; and thus
he makes the idea of the Godhead dependent on the idea of activity,
that is, of human activity, for a higher he knows not.

Man--this is the mystery of religion--projects his being into
objectivity, [17] and then again makes himself an object to this
projected image of himself thus converted into a subject; he thinks of
himself, is an object to himself, but as the object of an object, of
another being than himself. Thus here. Man is an object to God. That
man is good or evil is not indifferent to God; no! He has a lively,
profound interest in man's being good; he wills that man should be
good, happy--for without goodness there is no happiness. Thus the
religious man virtually retracts the nothingness of human activity,
by making his dispositions and actions an object to God, by making
man the end of God--for that which is an object to the mind is
an end in action; by making the divine activity a means of human
salvation. God acts, that man may be good and happy. Thus man, while
he is apparently humiliated to the lowest degree, is in truth exalted
to the highest. Thus, in and through God, man has in view himself
alone. It is true that man places the aim of his action in God, but
God has no other aim of action than the moral and eternal salvation
of man: thus man has in fact no other aim than himself. The divine
activity is not distinct from the human.

How could the divine activity work on me as its object, nay, work
in me, if it were essentially different from me; how could it have
a human aim, the aim of ameliorating and blessing man, if it were
not itself human? Does not the purpose determine the nature of
the act? When man makes his moral improvement an aim to himself,
he has divine resolutions, divine projects; but also, when God seeks
the salvation of man, he has human ends and a human mode of activity
corresponding to these ends. Thus in God man has only his own activity
as an object. But for the very reason that he regards his own activity
as objective, goodness only as an object, he necessarily receives
the impulse, the motive not from himself, but from this object. He
contemplates his nature as external to himself, and this nature as
goodness; thus it is self-evident, it is mere tautology to say that
the impulse to good comes only from thence where he places the good.

God is the highest subjectivity of man abstracted from himself;
hence man can do nothing of himself, all goodness comes from God. The
more subjective God is, the more completely does man divest himself
of his subjectivity, because God is, per se, his relinquished self,
the possession of which he however again vindicates to himself. As
the action of the arteries drives the blood into the extremities,
and the action of the veins brings it back again, as life in general
consists in a perpetual systole and diastole; so is it in religion. In
the religious systole man propels his own nature from himself, he
throws himself outward; in the religious diastole he receives the
rejected nature into his heart again. God alone is the being who
acts of himself,--this is the force of repulsion in religion; God is
the being who acts in me, with me, through me, upon me, for me, is
the principle of my salvation, of my good dispositions and actions,
consequently my own good principle and nature,--this is the force of
attraction in religion.

The course of religious development which has been generally indicated
consists specifically in this, that man abstracts more and more from
God, and attributes more and more to himself. This is especially
apparent in the belief in revelation. That which to a later age or a
cultured people is given by nature or reason, is to an earlier age,
or to a yet uncultured people, given by God. Every tendency of man,
however natural--even the impulse to cleanliness, was conceived by
the Israelites as a positive divine ordinance. From this example
we again see that God is lowered, is conceived more entirely on
the type of ordinary humanity, in proportion as man detracts from
himself. How can the self-humiliation of man go further than when he
disclaims the capability of fulfilling spontaneously the requirements
of common decency? [18] The Christian religion, on the other hand,
distinguished the impulses and passions of man according to their
quality, their character; it represented only good emotions, good
dispositions, good thoughts, as revelations, operations--that is,
as dispositions, feelings, thoughts,--of God; for what God reveals is
a quality of God himself: that of which the heart is full overflows
the lips; as is the effect such is the cause; as the revelation,
such the being who reveals himself. A God who reveals himself in
good dispositions is a God whose essential attribute is only moral
perfection. The Christian religion distinguishes inward moral purity
from external physical purity; the Israelites identified the two. [19]
In relation to the Israelitish religion, the Christian religion is
one of criticism and freedom. The Israelite trusted himself to do
nothing except what was commanded by God; he was without will even
in external things; the authority of religion extended itself even
to his food. The Christian religion, on the other hand, in all these
external things made man dependent on himself, i.e., placed in man
what the Israelite placed out of himself in God. Israel is the most
complete presentation of Positivism in religion. In relation to the
Israelite, the Christian is an esprit fort, a free-thinker. Thus do
things change. What yesterday was still religion is no longer such
to-day; and what to-day is atheism, to-morrow will be religion.








