CHAPTER XXV.

THE CONTRADICTION IN THE SACRAMENTS.


As the objective essence of religion, the idea of God, resolves itself
into mere contradictions, so also, on grounds easily understood,
does its subjective essence.

The subjective elements of religion are on the one hand Faith and Love;
on the other hand, so far as it presents itself externally in a cultus,
the sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. The sacrament of Faith
is Baptism, the sacrament of Love is the Lord's Supper. In strictness
there are only two sacraments, as there are two subjective elements
in religion, Faith and Love: for Hope is only faith in relation to
the future; so that there is the same logical impropriety in making
it a distinct mental act as in making the Holy Ghost a distinct being.

The identity of the sacraments with the specific essence of religion as
hitherto developed is at once made evident, apart from other relations,
by the fact that they have for their basis natural materials or
things, to which, however, is attributed a significance and effect
in contradiction with their nature. Thus the material of baptism
is water, common, natural water, just as the material of religion
in general is common, natural humanity. But as religion alienates
our own nature from us, and represents it as not ours, so the water
of baptism is regarded as quite other than common water; for it has
not a physical but a hyperphysical power and significance; it is the
Lavacrum regenerationis, it purifies man from the stains of original
sin, expels the inborn devil, and reconciles with God. Thus it is
natural water only in appearance; in truth it is supernatural. In
other words: the baptismal water has supernatural effects (and that
which operates supernaturally is itself supernatural) only in idea,
only in the imagination.

And yet the material of Baptism is said to be natural water. Baptism
has no validity and efficacy if it is not performed with
water. Thus the natural quality of water has in itself value and
significance, since the supernatural effect of baptism is associated
in a supernatural manner with water only, and not with any other
material. God, by means of his omnipotence, could have united the same
effect to anything whatever. But he does not; he accommodates himself
to natural qualities; he chooses an element corresponding, analogous
to his operation. Thus the natural is not altogether set aside; on the
contrary, there always remains a certain analogy with the natural, an
appearance of naturalness. In like manner wine represents blood; bread,
flesh. [180] Even miracle is guided by analogies; water is changed into
wine or blood, one species into another, with the retention of the
indeterminate generic idea of liquidity. So it is here. Water is the
purest, clearest of liquids; in virtue of this its natural character
it is the image of the spotless nature of the Divine Spirit. In short,
water has a significance in itself, as water; it is on account of its
natural quality that it is consecrated and selected as the vehicle
of the Holy Spirit. So far there lies at the foundation of Baptism a
beautiful, profound natural significance. But, at the very same time,
this beautiful meaning is lost again because water has a transcendental
effect,--an effect which it has only through the supernatural power of
the Holy Spirit, and not through itself. The natural quality becomes
indifferent: he who makes wine out of water, can at will unite the
effects of baptismal water with any material whatsoever.

Baptism cannot be understood without the idea of miracle. Baptism
is itself a miracle. The same power which works miracles, and by
means of them, as a proof of the divinity of Christ, turns Jews and
Pagans into Christians,--this same power has instituted baptism and
operates in it. Christianity began with miracles, and it carries
itself forward with miracles. If the miraculous power of baptism
is denied, miracles in general must be denied. The miracle-working
water of baptism springs from the same source as the water which at
the wedding at Cana in Galilee was turned into wine.

The faith which is produced by miracle is not dependent on me, on
my spontaneity, on freedom of judgment and conviction. A miracle
which happens before my eyes I must believe, if I am not utterly
obdurate. Miracle compels me to believe in the divinity of the
miracle-worker. [181] It is true that in some cases it presupposes
faith, namely, where it appears in the light of a reward; but
with that exception it presupposes not so much actual faith as a
believing disposition, willingness, submission, in opposition to an
unbelieving, obdurate, and malignant disposition, like that of the
Pharisees. The end of miracle is to prove that the miracle-worker
is really that which he assumes to be. Faith based on miracle is the
only thoroughly warranted, well-grounded, objective faith. The faith
which is presupposed by miracle is only faith in a Messiah, a Christ
in general; but the faith that this very man is Christ--and this is
the main point--is first wrought by miracle as its consequence. This
presupposition even of an indeterminate faith is, however, by no
means necessary. Multitudes first became believers through miracles;
thus miracle was the cause of their faith. If then miracles do not
contradict Christianity,--and how should they contradict it?--neither
does the miraculous efficacy of baptism contradict it. On the
contrary, if baptism is to have a Christian significance it must
of necessity have a supernaturalistic one. Paul was converted by a
sudden miraculous appearance, when he was still full of hatred to
the Christians. Christianity took him by violence. It is in vain to
allege that with another than Paul this appearance would not have
had the same consequences, and that therefore the effect of it must
still be attributed to Paul. For if the same appearance had been
vouchsafed to others, they would assuredly have become as thoroughly
Christian as Paul. Is not divine grace omnipotent? The unbelief
and non-convertibility of the Pharisees is no counter-argument;
for from them grace was expressly withdrawn. The Messiah must
necessarily, according to a divine decree, be betrayed, maltreated
and crucified. For this purpose there must be individuals who should
maltreat and crucify him: and hence it was a prior necessity that
the divine grace should be withdrawn from those individuals. It
was not indeed totally withdrawn from them, but this was only in
order to aggravate their guilt, and by no means with the earnest
will to convert them. How would it be possible to resist the will
of God, supposing of course that it was his real will, not a mere
velleity? Paul himself represents his conversion as a work of divine
grace thoroughly unmerited on his part; [182] and quite correctly. Not
to resist divine grace, i.e., to accept divine grace, to allow it
to work upon one, is already something good, and consequently is an
effect of the Holy Spirit. Nothing is more perverse than the attempt
to reconcile miracle with freedom of inquiry and thought, or grace
with freedom of will. In religion the nature of man is regarded as
separate from man. The activity, the grace of God is the projected
spontaneity of man, Free Will made objective. [183]

It is the most flagrant inconsequence to adduce the experience that
men are not sanctified, not converted by baptism, as an argument
against its miraculous efficacy, as is done by rationalistic orthodox
theologians; [184] for all kinds of miracles, the objective power
of prayer, and in general all the supernatural truths of religion,
also contradict experience. He who appeals to experience renounces
faith. Where experience is a datum, there religious faith and feeling
have already vanished. The unbeliever denies the objective efficacy
of prayer only because it contradicts experience; the atheist goes
yet further,--he denies even the existence of God, because he does
not find it in experience. Inward experience creates no difficulty
to him; for what thou experiencest in thyself of another existence,
proves only that there is something in thee which thou thyself art
not, which works upon thee independently of thy personal will and
consciousness, without thy knowing what this mysterious something
is. But faith is stronger than experience. The facts which contradict
faith do not disturb it; it is happy in itself; it has eyes only for
itself, to all else it is blind.

It is true that religion, even on the standpoint of its mystical
materialism, always requires the co-operation of subjectivity, and
therefore requires it in the sacraments; but herein is exhibited its
contradiction with itself. And this contradiction is particularly
glaring in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper; for baptism is given
to infants,--though even in them, as a condition of its efficacy, the
co-operation of subjectivity is insisted on, but, singularly enough,
is supplied in the faith of others, in the faith of the parents,
or of their representatives, or of the church in general. [185]

The object in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper is the body of
Christ,--a real body; but the necessary predicates of reality are
wanting to it. Here we have again, in an example presented to the
senses, what we have found in the nature of religion in general. The
object or subject in the religious syntax is always a real human or
natural subject or predicate; but the closer definition, the essential
predicate of this predicate is denied. The subject is sensuous,
but the predicate is not sensuous, i.e., is contradictory to the
subject. I distinguish a real body from an imaginary one only by this,
that the former produces corporeal effects, involuntary effects, upon
me. If therefore the bread be the real body of God, the partaking of
it must produce in me immediate, involuntary sanctifying effects;
I need to make no special preparation, to bring with me no holy
disposition. If I eat an apple, the apple of itself gives rise to
the taste of apple. At the utmost I need nothing more than a healthy
stomach to perceive that the apple is an apple. The Catholics require
a state of fasting as a condition of partaking the Lord's Supper. This
is enough. I take hold of the body with my lips, I crush it with my
teeth, by my oesophagus it is carried into my stomach; I assimilate
it corporeally, not spiritually. [186] Why are its effects not held
to be corporeal? Why should not this body, which is a corporeal,
but at the same time heavenly, supernatural substance, also bring
forth in me corporeal and yet at the same time holy, supernatural
effects? If it is my disposition, my faith, which alone makes the
divine body a means of sanctification to me, which transubstantiates
the dry bread into pneumatic animal substance, why do I still need an
external object? It is I myself who give rise to the effect of the
body on me, and therefore to the reality of the body; I am acted on
by myself. Where is the objective truth and power? He who partakes
the Lord's Supper unworthily has nothing further than the physical
enjoyment of bread and wine. He who brings nothing, takes nothing
away. The specific difference of this bread from common natural bread
rests therefore only on the difference between the state of mind at
the table of the Lord, and the state of mind at any other table. "He
that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lord's body." [187] But this mental
state itself is dependent only on the significance which I give to
this bread. If it has for me the significance not of bread, but of
the body of Christ, then it has not the effect of common bread. In
the significance attached to it lies its effect. I do not eat to
satisfy hunger; hence I consume only a small quantity. Thus to go no
further than the quantity taken, which in every other act of taking
food plays an essential part, the significance of common bread is
externally set aside.

But this supernatural significance exists only in the imagination;
to the senses, the wine remains wine, the bread, bread. The Schoolmen
therefore had recourse to the precious distinction of substance and
accidents. All the accidents which constitute the nature of wine and
bread are still there; only that which is made up by these accidents,
the subject, the substance, is wanting, is changed into flesh and
blood. But all the properties together, whose combination forms this
unity, are the substance itself. What are wine and bread if I take
from them the properties which make them what they are? Nothing. Flesh
and blood have therefore no objective existence; otherwise they must
be an object to the unbelieving senses. On the contrary: the only
valid witnesses of an objective existence--taste, smell, touch,
sight--testify unanimously to the reality of the wine and bread,
and nothing else. The wine and bread are in reality natural, but in
imagination divine substances.

Faith is the power of the imagination, which makes the real unreal,
and the unreal real: in direct contradiction with the truth of the
senses, with the truth of reason. Faith denies what objective reason
affirms, and affirms what it denies. [188] The mystery of the Lord's
Supper is the mystery of faith: [189]--hence the partaking of it is the
highest, the most rapturous, blissful act of the believing soul. The
negation of objective truth which is not gratifying to feeling,
the truth of reality, of the objective world and reason,--a negation
which constitutes the essence of faith,--reaches its highest point
in the Lord's Supper; for faith here denies an immediately present,
evident, indubitable object, maintaining that it is not what the reason
and senses declare it to be, that it is only in appearance bread,
but in reality flesh. The position of the Schoolmen, that according
to the accidents it is bread, and according to the substance flesh,
is merely the abstract, explanatory, intellectual expression of what
faith accepts and declares, and has therefore no other meaning than
this: to the senses or to common perception it is bread, but in truth,
flesh. Where therefore the imaginative tendency of faith has assumed
such power over the senses and reason as to deny the most evident
sensible truths, it is no wonder if believers can raise themselves
to such a degree of exaltation as actually to see blood instead of
wine. Such examples Catholicism has to show. Little is wanting in order
to perceive externally what faith and imagination hold to be real.

So long as faith in the mystery of the Lord's Supper as a holy, nay
the holiest, highest truth, governed man, so long was his governing
principle the imagination. All criteria of reality and unreality, of
unreason and reason, had disappeared: anything whatever that could
be imagined passed for real possibility. Religion hallowed every
contradiction of reason, of the nature of things. Do not ridicule the
absurd questions of the Schoolmen! They were necessary consequences
of faith. That which is only a matter of feeling had to be made a
matter of reason, that which contradicts the understanding had to be
made not to contradict it. This was the fundamental contradiction of
Scholasticism, whence all other contradictions followed of course.

And it is of no particular importance whether I believe the Protestant
or the Catholic doctrine of the Lord's Supper. The sole distinction
is, that in Protestantism it is only on the tongue, in the act of
partaking, that flesh and blood are united in a thoroughly miraculous
manner with bread and wine; [190] while in Catholicism, it is before
the act of partaking, by the power of the priest,--who however here
acts only in the name of the Almighty,--that bread and wine are really
transmuted into flesh and blood. The Protestant prudently avoids a
definite explanation; he does not lay himself open, like the pious,
uncritical simplicity of Catholicism, whose God, as an external object,
can be devoured by a mouse: he shuts up his God within himself, where
he can no more be torn from him, and thus secures him as well from the
power of accident as from that of ridicule; yet, notwithstanding this,
he just as much as the Catholic consumes real flesh and blood in the
bread and wine. Slight indeed was the difference at first between
Protestants and Catholics in the doctrine of the Lord's Supper! Thus
at Anspach there arose a controversy on the question--"whether the body
of Christ enters the stomach, and is digested like other food?" [191]

But although the imaginative activity of faith makes the objective
existence the mere appearance, and the emotional, imaginary existence
the truth and reality; still, in itself or in truth, that which is
really objective is only the natural elements. Even the host in the pyx
of the Catholic priest is in itself only to faith a divine body,--this
external thing, into which he transubstantiates the divine being, is
only a thing of faith; for even here the body is not visible, tangible,
tasteable as a body. That is: the bread is only in its significance
flesh. It is true that to faith this significance has the sense of
actual existence;--as, in general, in the ecstasy of fervid feeling
that which signifies becomes the thing signified;--it is held not to
signify, but to be flesh. But this state of being flesh is not that of
real flesh; it is a state of being which is only believed in, imagined,
i.e., it has only the value, the quality, of a significance, a truth
conveyed in a symbol. [192] A thing which has a special significance
for me, is another thing in my imagination than in reality. The
thing signifying is not itself that which is signified. What it is,
is evident to the senses; what it signifies, is only in my feelings,
conception, imagination,--is only for me, not for others, is not
objectively present. So here. When therefore Zwinglius said that
the Lord's Supper has only a subjective significance, he said the
same thing as his opponents; only he disturbed the illusion of the
religious imagination; for that which "is" in the Lord's Supper, is
only an illusion of the imagination, but with the further illusion
that it is not an illusion. Zwinglius only expressed simply, nakedly,
prosaically, rationalistically, and therefore offensively, what the
others declared mystically, indirectly,--inasmuch as they confessed
[193] that the effect of the Lord's Supper depends only on a worthy
disposition or on faith; i.e., that the bread and wine are the flesh
and blood of the Lord, are the Lord himself, only for him for whom
they have the supernatural significance of the divine body, for on
this alone depends the worthy disposition, the religious emotion. [194]

But if the Lord's Supper effects nothing, consequently is nothing,--for
only that which produces effects, is,--without a certain state of mind,
without faith, then in faith alone lies its reality; the entire event
goes forward in the feelings alone. If the idea that I here receive
the real body of the Saviour acts on the religious feelings, this
idea itself arises from the feelings; it produces devout sentiments,
because it is itself a devout idea. Thus here also the religious
subject is acted on by himself as if by another being, through the
conception of an imaginary object. Therefore the process of the
Lord's Supper can quite well, even without the intermediation of
bread and wine, without any church ceremony, be accomplished in the
imagination. There are innumerable devout poems, the sole theme of
which is the blood of Christ. In these we have a genuinely poetical
celebration of the Lord's Supper. In the lively representation of the
suffering, bleeding Saviour, the soul identifies itself with him;
here the saint in poetic exaltation drinks the pure blood, unmixed
with any contradictory, material elements; here there is no disturbing
object between the idea of the blood and the blood itself.

But though the Lord's Supper, or a sacrament in general, is nothing
without a certain state of mind, without faith, nevertheless
religion presents the sacrament at the same time as something in
itself real, external, distinct from the human being, so that in the
religious consciousness the true thing, which is faith, is made only
a collateral thing, a condition, and the imaginary thing becomes the
principal thing. And the necessary, immanent consequences and effects
of this religious materialism, of this subordination of the human to
the supposed divine, of the subjective to the supposed objective,
of truth to imagination, of morality to religion,--the necessary
consequences are superstition and immorality: superstition, because
a thing has attributed to it an effect which does not lie in its
nature, because a thing is held up as not being what it in truth is,
because a mere conception passes for objective reality; immorality,
because necessarily, in feeling, the holiness of the action as such
is separated from morality, the partaking of the sacrament, even
apart from the state of mind, becomes a holy and saving act. Such,
at least, is the result in practice, which knows nothing of the
sophistical distinctions of theology. In general: wherever religion
places itself in contradiction with reason, it places itself also
in contradiction with the moral sense. Only with the sense of truth
coexists the sense of the right and good. Depravity of understanding is
always depravity of heart. He who deludes and cheats his understanding
has not a veracious, honourable heart; sophistry corrupts the whole
man. And the doctrine of the Lord's Supper is sophistry.

The Truth of the disposition, or of faith as a requisite to communion,
involves the Untruth of the bodily presence of God; and again the
Truth of the objective existence of the divine body involves the
Untruth of the disposition.







