CHAPTER XXII.

THE CONTRADICTION IN THE NATURE OF GOD IN GENERAL.


The grand principle, the central point of Christian sophistry, is
the idea of God. God is the human being, and yet he must be regarded
as another, a superhuman being. God is universal, abstract Being,
simply the idea of Being; and yet he must be conceived as a personal,
individual being;--or God is a person, and yet he must be regarded as
God, as universal, i.e., not as a personal being. God is; his existence
is certain, more certain than ours; he has an existence distinct from
us and from things in general, i.e., an individual existence; and yet
his existence must be held a spiritual one, i.e., an existence not
perceptible as a special one. One half of the definition is always in
contradiction with the other half: the statement of what must be held
always annihilates the statement of what is. The fundamental idea is
a contradiction which can be concealed only by sophisms. A God who
does not trouble himself about us, who does not hear our prayers,
who does not see us and love us, is no God; thus humanity is made
an essential predicate of God;--but at the same time it is said:
A God who does not exist in and by himself, out of men, above men,
as another being, is a phantom; and thus it is made an essential
predicate of God that he is non-human and extra-human. A God who is
not as we are, who has not consciousness, not intelligence, i.e., not
a personal understanding, a personal consciousness (as, for example,
the "substance" of Spinoza), is no God. Essential identity with us is
the chief condition of deity; the idea of deity is made dependent on
the idea of personality, of consciousness, quo nihil majus cogitari
potest. But it is said in the same breath, a God who is not essentially
distinguished from us is no God.

The essence of religion is the immediate, involuntary, unconscious
contemplation of the human nature as another, a distinct nature. But
when this projected image of human nature is made an object of
reflection, of theology, it becomes an inexhaustible mine of
falsehoods, illusions, contradictions, and sophisms.

A peculiarly characteristic artifice and pretext of Christian sophistry
is the doctrine of the unsearchableness, the incomprehensibility
of the divine nature. But, as will be shown, the secret of this
incomprehensibility is nothing further than that a known quality
is made into an unknown one, a natural quality into a supernatural,
i.e., an unnatural one, so as to produce the appearance, the illusion,
that the divine nature is different from the human, and is eo ipso
an incomprehensible one.

In the original sense of religion, the incomprehensibility of
God has only the significance of an impassioned expression. Thus,
when we are affected by a surprising phenomenon, we exclaim: It
is incredible, it is beyond conception! though afterwards, when we
recover our self-possession, we find the object of our astonishment
nothing less than incomprehensible. In the truly religious sense,
incomprehensibility is not the dead full stop which reflection places
wherever understanding deserts it, but a pathetic note of exclamation
marking the impression which the imagination makes on the feelings. The
imagination is the original organ of religion. Between God and man,
in the primitive sense of religion, there is on the one hand only a
distinction in relation to existence, according to which God, as a
self-subsistent being, is the antithesis of man as a dependent being;
on the other hand, there is only a quantitative distinction, i.e.,
a distinction derived from the imagination, for the distinctions
of the imagination are only quantitative. The infinity of God in
religion is quantitative infinity; God is and has all that man has,
but in an infinitely greater measure. The nature of God is the nature
of the imagination unfolded, made objective. [169] God is a being
conceived under the forms of the senses, but freed from the limits
of sense,--a being at once unlimited and sensational. But what is the
imagination?--limitless activity of the senses. God is eternal, i.e.,
he exists at all times; God is omnipresent, i.e., he exists in all
places; God is the omniscient being, i.e., the being to whom every
individual thing, every sensible existence, is an object without
distinction, without limitation of time and place.

Eternity and omnipresence are sensational qualities, for in them
there is no negation of existence in time and space, but only of
exclusive limitation to a particular time, to a particular place. In
like manner omniscience is a sensational quality, a sensational
knowledge. Religion has no hesitation in attributing to God himself
the nobler senses: God sees and hears all things. But the divine
omniscience is a power of knowing through the senses while yet the
necessary quality, the essential determination of actual knowledge
through the senses is denied to it. My senses present sensible
objects to me only separately and in succession; but God sees all
sensible things at once, all locality in an unlocal manner, all
temporal things in an untemporal manner, all objects of sense in an
unsensational manner. [170] That is to say: I extend the horizon of
my senses by the imagination; I form to myself a confused conception
of the whole of things; and this conception, which exalts me above the
limited standpoint of the senses, and therefore affects me agreeably,
I posit as a divine reality. I feel the fact that my knowledge is tied
to a local standpoint, to sensational experience, as a limitation;
what I feel as a limitation I do away with in my imagination, which
furnishes free space for the play of my feelings. This negativing of
limits by the imagination is the positing of omniscience as a divine
power and reality. But at the same time there is only a quantitative
distinction between omniscience and my knowledge; the quality of
the knowledge is the same. In fact, it would be impossible for me
to predicate omniscience of an object or being external to myself,
if this omniscience were essentially different from my own knowledge,
if it were not a mode of perception of my own, if it had nothing in
common with my own power of cognition. That which is recognised by the
senses is as much the object and content of the divine omniscience as
of my knowledge. Imagination does away only with the limit of quantity,
not of quality. The proposition that our knowledge is limited, means:
we know only some things, a few things, not all.

The beneficial influence of religion rests on this extension of the
sensational consciousness. In religion man is in the open air, sub
deo; in the sensational consciousness he is in his narrow confined
dwelling-house. Religion has relation essentially, originally--and
only in its origin is it something holy, true, pure, and good--to the
immediate sensational consciousness alone; it is the setting aside of
the limits of sense. Isolated, uninstructed men and nations preserve
religion in its original sense, because they themselves remain in
that mental state which is the source of religion. The more limited
a man's sphere of vision, the less he knows of history, Nature,
philosophy--the more ardently does he cling to his religion.

For this reason the religious man feels no need of culture. Why
had the Hebrews no art, no science, as the Greeks had? Because they
felt no need of it. To them this need was supplied by Jehovah. In
the divine omniscience man raises himself above the limits of his
own knowledge; [171] in the divine omnipresence, above the limits
of his local standpoint; in the divine eternity, above the limits
of his time. The religious man is happy in his imagination; he has
all things in nuce; his possessions are always portable. Jehovah
accompanies me everywhere; I need not travel out of myself; I have
in my God the sum of all treasures and precious things, of all that
is worth knowledge and remembrance. But culture is dependent on
external things; it has many and various wants, for it overcomes the
limits of sensational consciousness and life by real activity, not by
the magical power of the religious imagination. Hence the Christian
religion also, as has been often mentioned already, has in its essence
no principle of culture, for it triumphs over the limitations and
difficulties of earthly life only through the imagination, only in
God, in heaven. God is all that the heart needs and desires--all
good things, all blessings. "Dost thou desire love, or faithfulness,
or truth, or consolation, or perpetual presence?--this is always in
him without measure. Dost thou desire beauty?--he is the supremely
beautiful. Dost thou desire riches?--all riches are in him. Dost thou
desire power?--he is supremely powerful. Or whatever thy heart desires,
it is found a thousandfold in Him, in the best, the single good,
which is God." [172] But how can he who has all in God, who already
enjoys heavenly bliss in the imagination, experience that want, that
sense of poverty, which is the impulse to all culture? Culture has
no other object than to realise an earthly heaven; and the religious
heaven is only realised or won by religious activity.

The difference, however, between God and man, which is originally only
quantitative, is by reflection developed into a qualitative difference;
and thus what was originally only an emotional impression, an immediate
expression of admiration, of rapture, an influence of the imagination
on the feelings, has fixity given to it as an objective quality, as
real incomprehensibility. The favourite expression of reflection in
relation to this subject is, that we can indeed know concerning God
that he has such and such attributes, but not how he has them. For
example, that the predicate of the Creator essentially belongs to God,
that he created the world, and not out of matter already existing,
but out of nothing, by an act of almighty power,--this is clear,
certain--yes, indubitable; but how this is possible naturally passes
our understanding. That is to say: the generic idea is clear, certain,
but the specific idea is unclear, uncertain.

The idea of activity, of making, of creation, is in itself a divine
idea; it is therefore unhesitatingly applied to God. In activity, man
feels himself free, unlimited, happy; in passivity, limited, oppressed,
unhappy. Activity is the positive sense of one's personality. That is
positive which in man is accompanied with joy; hence God is, as we
have already said, the idea of pure, unlimited joy. We succeed only
in what we do willingly; joyful effort conquers all things. But that
is joyful activity which is in accordance with our nature, which we do
not feel as a limitation, and consequently not as a constraint. And the
happiest, the most blissful activity is that which is productive. To
read is delightful, reading is passive activity; but to produce what
is worthy to be read is more delightful still. It is more blessed to
give than to receive. Hence this attribute of the species--productive
activity--is assigned to God; that is, realised and made objective
as divine activity. But every special determination, every mode of
activity is abstracted, and only the fundamental determination, which,
however, is essentially human, namely, production of what is external
to self, is retained. God has not, like man, produced something in
particular, this or that, but all things; his activity is absolutely
universal, unlimited. Hence it is self-evident, it is a necessary
consequence, that the mode in which God has produced the All is
incomprehensible, because this activity is no mode of activity,
because the question concerning the how is here an absurdity,
a question which is excluded by the fundamental idea of unlimited
activity. Every special activity produces its effects in a special
manner, because there the activity itself is a determinate mode of
activity; and thence necessarily arises the question: How did it
produce this? But the answer to the question: How did God make the
world? has necessarily a negative issue, because the world-creating
activity in itself negatives every determinate activity, such as would
alone warrant the question, every mode of activity connected with a
determinate medium, i.e., with matter. This question illegitimately
foists in between the subject or producing activity, and the object
or thing produced, an irrelevant, nay, an excluded intermediate idea,
namely, the idea of particular, individual existence. The activity in
question has relation only to the collective--the All, the world; God
created all things, not some particular thing; the indefinite whole,
the All, as it is embraced by the imagination,--not the determinate,
the particular, as, in its particularity, it presents itself to the
senses, and as, in its totality as the universe, it presents itself
to the reason. Every particular thing arises in a natural way;
it is something determinate, and as such it has--what it is only
tautology to state--a determinate cause. It was not God, but carbon
that produced the diamond; a given salt owes its origin, not to God,
but to the combination of a particular acid with a particular base. God
only created all things together without distinction.

It is true that according to the religious conception, God has created
every individual thing, as included in the whole;--but only indirectly;
for he has not produced the individual in an individual manner,
the determinate in a determinate manner; otherwise he would be a
determinate or conditioned being. It is certainly incomprehensible
how out of this general, indeterminate, or unconditioned activity
the particular, the determinate, can have proceeded; but it is
so only because I here intrude the object of sensational, natural
experience, because I assign to the divine activity another object
than that which is proper to it. Religion has no physical conception
of the world; it has no interest in a natural explanation, which can
never be given but with a mode of origin. Origin is a theoretical,
natural-philosophical idea. The heathen philosophers busied themselves
with the origin of things. But the Christian religious consciousness
abhorred this idea as heathen, irreligious, and substituted the
practical or subjective idea of creation, which is nothing else than
a prohibition to conceive things as having arisen in a natural way,
an interdict on all physical science. The religious consciousness
connects the world immediately with God; it derives all from God,
because nothing is an object to him in its particularity and reality,
nothing is to him as it presents itself to our reason. All proceeds
from God:--that is enough, that perfectly satisfies the religious
consciousness. The question, how did God create? is an indirect doubt
that he did create the world. It was this question which brought man
to atheism, materialism, naturalism. To him who asks it, the world
is already an object of theory, of physical science, i.e., it is an
object to him in its reality, in its determinate constituents. It
is this mode of viewing the world which contradicts the idea of
unconditioned, immaterial activity: and this contradiction leads to
the negation of the fundamental idea--the creation.

The creation by omnipotence is in its place, is a truth, only when
all the phenomena of the world are derived from God. It becomes, as
has been already observed, a myth of past ages where physical science
introduces itself, where man makes the determinate causes, the how of
phenomena, the object of investigation. To the religious consciousness,
therefore, the creation is nothing incomprehensible, i.e.,
unsatisfying; at least it is so only in moments of irreligiousness,
of doubt, when the mind turns away from God to actual things; but it
is highly unsatisfactory to reflection, to theology, which looks with
one eye at heaven and with the other at earth. As the cause, so is
the effect. A flute sends forth the tones of a flute, not those of a
bassoon or a trumpet. If thou hearest the tones of a bassoon, but hast
never before seen or heard any wind-instrument but the flute, it will
certainly be inconceivable to thee how such tones can come out of a
flute. Thus it is here:--the comparison is only so far inappropriate
as the flute itself is a particular instrument. But imagine, if it
be possible, an absolutely universal instrument, which united in
itself all instruments, without being in itself a particular one;
thou wilt then see that it is an absurd contradiction to desire a
particular tone which only belongs to a particular instrument, from
an instrument which thou hast divested precisely of that which is
characteristic in all particular instruments.

But there also lies at the foundation of this dogma of
incomprehensibility the design of keeping the divine activity apart
from the human, of doing away with their similarity, or rather their
essential identity, so as to make the divine activity essentially
different from the human. This distinction between the divine and
human activity is "nothing." God makes,--he makes something external
to himself, as man does. Making is a genuine human idea. Nature gives
birth to, brings forth; man makes. Making is an act which I can omit,
a designed, premeditated, external act;--an act in which my inmost
being is not immediately concerned, in which, while active, I am not
at the same time passive, carried away by an internal impulse. On
the contrary, an activity which is identical with my being is not
indifferent, is necessary to me, as, for example, intellectual
production, which is an inward necessity to me, and for that reason
lays a deep hold on me, affects me pathologically. Intellectual
works are not made,--making is only the external activity applied
to them;--they arise in us. To make is an indifferent, therefore a
free, i.e., optional activity. Thus far then--that he makes--God is
entirely at one with man, not at all distinguished from him; but an
especial emphasis is laid on this, that his making is free, arbitrary,
at his pleasure. "It has pleased God" to create a world. Thus man
here deifies satisfaction in self-pleasing, in caprice and groundless
arbitrariness. The fundamentally human character of the divine activity
is by the idea of arbitrariness degraded into a human manifestation
of a low kind; God, from a mirror of human nature, is converted into
a mirror of human vanity and self-complacency.

And now all at once the harmony is changed into discord; man, hitherto
at one with himself, becomes divided:--God makes out of nothing;
he creates,--to make out of nothing is to create,--this is the
distinction. The positive condition--the act of making--is a human
one; but inasmuch as all that is determinate in this conception is
immediately denied, reflection steps in and makes the divine activity
not human. But with this negation, comprehension, understanding
comes to a stand; there remains only a negative, empty notion,
because conceivability is already exhausted, i.e., the distinction
between the divine and human determination is in truth a nothing,
a nihil negativum of the understanding. The naïve confession of this
is made in the supposition of "nothing" as an object.

God is Love, but not human love; Understanding, but not human
understanding,--no! an essentially different understanding. But wherein
consists this difference? I cannot conceive an understanding which
acts under other forms than those of our own understanding; I cannot
halve or quarter understanding so as to have several understandings;
I can only conceive one and the same understanding. It is true that
I can and even must conceive understanding in itself, i.e., free from
the limits of my individuality; but in so doing I only release it from
limitations essentially foreign to it; I do not set aside its essential
determinations or forms. Religious reflection, on the contrary,
denies precisely that determination or quality which makes a thing
what it is. Only that in which the divine understanding is identical
with the human is something, is understanding, is a real idea; while
that which is supposed to make it another--yes, essentially another
than the human--is objectively nothing, subjectively a mere chimera.

In all other definitions of the Divine Being the "nothing" which
constitutes the distinction is hidden; in the creation, on the
contrary, it is an evident, declared, objective nothing;--and is
therefore the official, notorious nothing of theology in distinction
from anthropology.

But the fundamental determination by which man makes his own nature
a foreign, incomprehensible nature is the idea of individuality
or--what is only a more abstract expression--personality. The
idea of the existence of God first realises itself in the idea of
revelation, and the idea of revelation first realises itself in
the idea of personality. God is a personal being:--this is the
spell which charms the ideal into the real, the subjective into
the objective. All predicates, all attributes of the Divine Being
are fundamentally human; but as attributes of a personal being, and
therefore of a being distinct from man and existing independently,
they appear immediately to be really other than human, yet so as
that at the same time the essential identity always remains at the
foundation. Hence reflection gives rise to the idea of so-called
anthropomorphisms. Anthropomorphisms are resemblances between God
and man. The attributes of the divine and of the human being are not
indeed the same, but they are analogous.

Thus personality is the antidote to pantheism; i.e., by the idea of
personality religious reflection expels from its thought the identity
of the divine and human nature. The rude but characteristic expression
of pantheism is: Man is an effluence or a portion of the Divine Being;
the religious expression is: Man is the image of God, or a being akin
to God;--for according to religion man does not spring from Nature, but
is of divine race, of divine origin. But kinship is a vague, evasive
expression. There are degrees of kinship, near and distant. What sort
of kinship is intended? For the relation of man to God there is but
one form of kinship which is appropriate,--the nearest, profoundest,
most sacred that can be conceived,--the relation of the child to the
father. According to this, God is the father of man, man the son, the
child of God. Here is posited at once the self-subsistence of God and
the dependence of man, and posited as an immediate object of feeling;
whereas in pantheism the part appears just as self-subsistent as the
whole, since this is represented as made up of its parts. Nevertheless
this distinction is only an appearance. The father is not a father
without the child; both together form a correlated being. In love
man renounces his independence, and reduces himself to a part; a
self-humiliation which is only compensated by the fact that the one
whom he loves at the same time voluntarily becomes a part also; that
they both submit to a higher power, the power of the spirit of family,
the power of love. Thus there is here the same relation between God
and man as in pantheism, save that in the one it is represented as
a personal, patriarchal relation, in the other as an impersonal,
general one,--save that pantheism expresses logically and therefore
definitely, directly, what religion invests with the imagination. The
correlation, or rather the identity of God and man is veiled in
religion by representing both as persons or individuals, and God as
a self-subsistent, independent being apart from his paternity:--an
independence which, however, is only apparent, for he who, like the
God of religion, is a father from the depths of the heart, has his
very life and being in his child.

The reciprocal and profound relation of dependence between God as
father and man as child cannot be shaken by the distinction that
only Christ is the true, natural son of God, and that men are but his
adopted sons; so that it is only to Christ as the only-begotten Son,
and by no means to men, that God stands in an essential relation
of dependence. For this distinction is only a theological, i.e., an
illusory one. God adopts only men, not brutes. The ground of adoption
lies in the human nature. The man adopted by divine grace is only
the man conscious of his divine nature and dignity. Moreover, the
only-begotten Son himself is nothing else than the idea of humanity,
than man preoccupied with himself, man hiding from himself and the
world in God,--the heavenly man. The Logos is latent, tacit man;
man is the revealed, expressed Logos. The Logos is only the prelude
of man. That which applies to the Logos applies also to the nature
of man. [173] But between God and the only-begotten Son there is no
real distinction,--he who knows the Son knows the Father also,--and
thus there is none between God and man.

It is the same with the idea that man is the image of God. The
image is here no dead, inanimate thing, but a living being. "Man is
the image of God," means nothing more than that man is a being who
resembles God. Similarity between living beings rests on natural
relationship. The idea of man being the image of God reduces itself
therefore to kinship; man is like God, because he is the child of
God. Resemblance is only kinship presented to the senses; from the
former we infer the latter.

But resemblance is just as deceptive, illusory, evasive an idea as
kinship. It is only the idea of personality which does away with the
identity of nature. Resemblance is identity which will not admit
itself to be identity, which hides itself behind a dim medium,
behind the vapour of the imagination. If I disperse this vapour,
I come to naked identity. The more similar beings are, the less are
they to to be distinguished; if I know the one, I know the other. It
is true that resemblance has its degrees. But also the resemblance
between God and man has its degrees. The good, pious man is more
like God than the man whose resemblance to Him is founded only on
the nature of man in general. And even with the pious man there is a
highest degree of resemblance to be supposed, though this may not be
obtained here below, but only in the future life. But that which man
is to become belongs already to him, at least so far as possibility is
concerned. The highest degree of resemblance is that where there is no
further distinction between two individuals or beings than that they
are two. The essential qualities, those by which we distinguish things
from each other, are the same in both. Hence I cannot distinguish them
in thought, by the reason,--for this all data are wanting;--I can
only distinguish them by figuring them as visible in my imagination
or by actually seeing them. If my eyes do not say, There are really
two separately existent beings, my reason will take both for one
and the same being. Nay, even my eyes may confound the one with the
other. Things are capable of being confounded with each other which
are distinguishable by the sense and not by the reason, or rather
which are different only as to existence, not as to essence. Persons
altogether alike have an extraordinary attraction not only for each
other, but for the imagination. Resemblance gives occasion to all
kinds of mystifications and illusions, because it is itself only an
illusion; my eyes mock my reason, for which the idea of an independent
existence is always allied to the idea of a determinate difference.

Religion is the mind's light, the rays of which are broken by the
medium of the imagination and the feelings, so as to make the same
being appear a double one. Resemblance is to the Reason identity,
which in the realm of reality is divided or broken up by immediate
sensational impressions, in the sphere of religion by the illusions
of the imagination; in short, that which is identical to the reason
is made separate by the idea of individuality or personality. I can
discover no distinction between father and child, archetype and image,
God and man, if I do not introduce the idea of personality. Resemblance
is here the external guise of identity;--the identity which reason,
the sense of truth, affirms, but which the imagination denies; the
identity which allows an appearance of distinction to remain,--a mere
phantasm, which says neither directly yes, nor directly no.







