CHAPTER XXVI.

THE CONTRADICTION OF FAITH AND LOVE.


The Sacraments are a sensible presentation of that contradiction
of idealism and materialism, of subjectivism and objectivism,
which belongs to the inmost nature of religion. But the sacraments
are nothing without Faith and Love. Hence the contradiction in the
sacraments carries us back to the primary contradiction of Faith
and Love.

The essence of religion, its latent nature, is the identity of the
divine being with the human; but the form of religion, or its apparent,
conscious nature, is the distinction between them. God is the human
being; but he presents himself to the religious consciousness as a
distinct being. Now, that which reveals the basis, the hidden essence
of religion, is Love; that which constitutes its conscious form is
Faith. Love identifies man with God and God with man, consequently it
identifies man with man; faith separates God from man, consequently it
separates man from man, for God is nothing else than the idea of the
species invested with a mystical form,--the separation of God from
man is therefore the separation of man from man, the unloosening of
the social bond. By faith religion places itself in contradiction with
morality, with reason, with the unsophisticated sense of truth in man;
by love, it opposes itself again to this contradiction. Faith isolates
God, it makes him a particular, distinct being: love universalises;
it makes God a common being, the love of whom is one with the love of
man. Faith produces in man an inward disunion, a disunion with himself,
and by consequence an outward disunion also; but love heals the wounds
which are made by faith in the heart of man. Faith makes belief in
its God a law: love is freedom,--it condemns not even the atheist,
because it is itself atheistic, itself denies, if not theoretically,
at least practically, the existence of a particular, individual God,
opposed to man. Love has God in itself: faith has God out of itself;
it estranges God from man, it makes him an external object.

Faith, being inherently external, proceeds even to the adoption
of outward fact as its object, and becomes historical faith. It is
therefore of the nature of faith that it can become a totally external
confession; and that with mere faith, as such, superstitious, magical
effects are associated. [195] The devils believe that God is, without
ceasing to be devils. Hence a distinction has been made between faith
in God, and belief that there is a God. [196] But even with this bare
belief in the existence of God, the assimilating power of love is
intermingled;--a power which by no means lies in the idea of faith
as such, and in so far as it relates to external things.

The only distinctions or judgments which are immanent to faith, which
spring out of itself, are the distinctions of right or genuine, and
wrong or false faith; or in general, of belief and unbelief. Faith
discriminates thus: This is true, that is false. And it claims truth
to itself alone. Faith has for its object a definite, specific truth,
which is necessarily united with negation. Faith is in its nature
exclusive. One thing alone is truth, one alone is God, one alone has
the monopoly of being the Son of God; all else is nothing, error,
delusion. Jehovah alone is the true God; all other gods are vain idols.

Faith has in its mind something peculiar to itself; it rests on a
peculiar revelation of God; it has not come to its possessions in an
ordinary way, that way which stands open to all men alike. What stands
open to all is common, and for that reason cannot form a special object
of faith. That God is the creator, all men could know from Nature;
but what this God is in person, can be known only by special grace,
is the object of a special faith. And because he is only revealed
in a peculiar manner, the object of this faith is himself a peculiar
being. The God of the Christians is indeed the God of the heathens,
but with a wide difference:--just such a difference as there is between
me as I am to a friend, and me as I am to a stranger, who only knows
me at a distance. God as he is an object to the Christians, is quite
another than as he is an object to the heathens. The Christians
know God personally, face to face. The heathens know only--and
even this is too large an admission--"what," and not "who," God
is; for which reason they fell into idolatry. The identity of the
heathens and Christians before God is therefore altogether vague;
what the heathens have in common with the Christians--if indeed
we consent to be so liberal as to admit anything in common between
them--is not that which is specifically Christian, not that which
constitutes faith. In whatsoever the Christians are Christians,
therein they are distinguished from the heathens; [197] and they are
Christians in virtue of their special knowledge of God; thus their
mark of distinction is God. Speciality is the salt which first gives a
flavour to the common being. What a being is in special, is the being
itself; he alone knows me, who knows me in specie. Thus the special
God, God as he is an object to the Christians, the personal God, is
alone God. And this God is unknown to heathens, and to unbelievers
in general; he does not exist for them. He is, indeed, said to exist
for the heathens; but mediately, on condition that they cease to be
heathens, and become Christians. Faith makes man partial and narrow;
it deprives him of the freedom and ability to estimate duly what
is different from himself. Faith is imprisoned within itself. It is
true that the philosophical, or, in general, any scientific theorist,
also limits himself by a definite system. But theoretic limitation,
however fettered, short-sighted and narrow-hearted it may be, has
still a freer character than faith, because the domain of theory
is in itself a free one, because here the ground of decision is the
nature of things, argument, reason. But faith refers the decision to
conscience and interest, to the instinctive desire of happiness; for
its object is a special, personal Being, urging himself on recognition,
and making salvation dependent on that recognition.

Faith gives man a peculiar sense of his own dignity and importance. The
believer finds himself distinguished above other men, exalted above
the natural man; he knows himself to be a person of distinction, in
the possession of peculiar privileges; believers are aristocrats,
unbelievers plebeians. God is this distinction and pre-eminence
of believers above unbelievers, personified. [198] Because faith
represents man's own nature as that of another being, the believer
does not contemplate his dignity immediately in himself, but in this
supposed distinct person. The consciousness of his own pre-eminence
presents itself as a consciousness of this person; he has the sense of
his own dignity in this divine personality. [199] As the servant feels
himself honoured in the dignity of his master, nay, fancies himself
greater than a free, independent man of lower rank than his master,
so it is with the believer. [200] He denies all merit in himself,
merely that he may leave all merit to his Lord, because his own
desire of honour is satisfied in the honour of his Lord. Faith is
arrogant, but it is distinguished from natural arrogance in this,
that it clothes its feeling of superiority, its pride, in the idea
of another person, for whom the believer is an object of peculiar
favour. This distinct person, however, is simply his own hidden self,
his personified, contented desire of happiness: for he has no other
qualities than these, that he is the benefactor, the Redeemer, the
Saviour--qualities in which the believer has reference only to himself,
to his own eternal salvation. In fact, we have here the characteristic
principle of religion, that it changes that which is naturally active
into the passive. The heathen elevates himself, the Christian feels
himself elevated. The Christian converts into a matter of feeling,
of receptivity, what to the heathen is a matter of spontaneity. The
humility of the believer is an inverted arrogance,--an arrogance
none the less because it has not the appearance, the external
characteristics of arrogance. He feels himself pre-eminent: this
pre-eminence, however, is not a result of his activity, but a matter
of grace; he has been made pre-eminent; he can do nothing towards
it himself. He does not make himself the end of his own activity,
but the end, the object of God.

Faith is essentially determinate, specific. God according to the
specific view taken of him by faith, is alone the true God. This
Jesus, such as I conceive him, is the Christ, the true, sole prophet,
the only-begotten Son of God. And this particular conception thou
must believe, if thou wouldst not forfeit thy salvation. Faith is
imperative. It is therefore necessary--it lies in the nature of
faith--that it be fixed as dogma. Dogma only gives a formula to
what faith had already on its tongue or in its mind. That when once
a fundamental dogma is established, it gives rise to more special
questions, which must also be thrown into a dogmatic form, that hence
there results a burdensome multiplicity of dogmas,--this is certainly
a fatal consequence, but does not do away with the necessity that
faith should fix itself in dogmas, in order that every one may know
definitely what he must believe and how he can win salvation.

That which in the present day, even from the standpoint of believing
Christianity, is rejected, is compassionated as an aberration, as a
misinterpretation, or is even ridiculed, is purely a consequence of the
inmost nature of faith. Faith is essentially illiberal, prejudiced;
for it is concerned not only with individual salvation, but with
the honour of God. And just as we are solicitous as to whether we
show due honour to a superior in rank, so it is with faith. The
apostle Paul is absorbed in the glory, the honour, the merits of
Christ. Dogmatic, exclusive, scrupulous particularity, lies in the
nature of faith. In food and other matters, indifferent to faith,
it is certainly liberal; but by no means in relation to objects
of faith. He who is not for Christ is against him; that which is
not christian is antichristian. But what is christian? This must be
absolutely determined, this cannot be free. If the articles of faith
are set down in books which proceed from various authors, handed
down in the form of incidental, mutually contradictory, occasional
dicta,--then dogmatic demarcation and definition are even an external
necessity. Christianity owes its perpetuation to the dogmatic formulas
of the Church.

It is only the believing unbelief of modern times which hides
itself behind the Bible, and opposes the biblical dicta to dogmatic
definitions, in order that it may set itself free from the limits
of dogma by arbitrary exegesis. But faith has already disappeared,
is become indifferent, when the determinate tenets of faith are
felt as limitations. It is only religious indifference under the
appearance of religion that makes the Bible, which in its nature and
origin is indefinite, a standard of faith, and under the pretext of
believing only the essential, retains nothing which deserves the name
of faith;--for example, substituting for the distinctly characterised
Son of God, held up by the Church, the vague negative definition of a
Sinless Man, who can claim to be the Son of God in a sense applicable
to no other being,--in a word, of a man, whom one may not trust oneself
to call either a man or a God. But that it is merely indifference
which makes a hiding-place for itself behind the Bible, is evident
from the fact that even what stands in the Bible, if it contradicts
the standpoint of the present day, is regarded as not obligatory,
or is even denied; nay, actions which are essentially Christian,
which are the logical consequences of faith, such as the separation
of believers from unbelievers, are now designated as unchristian.

The Church was perfectly justified in adjudging damnation to heretics
and unbelievers, [201] for this condemnation is involved in the nature
of faith. Faith at first appears to be only an unprejudiced separation
of believers from unbelievers; but this separation is a highly
critical distinction. The believer has God for him, the unbeliever,
against him;--it is only as a possible believer that the unbeliever
has God not against him;--and therein precisely lies the ground of
the requirement that he should leave the ranks of unbelief. But
that which has God against it is worthless, rejected, reprobate;
for that which has God against it is itself against God. To believe,
is synonymous with goodness; not to believe, with wickedness. Faith,
narrow and prejudiced refers all unbelief to the moral disposition. In
its view the unbeliever is an enemy to Christ out of obduracy, out
of wickedness. [202] Hence faith has fellowship with believers only;
unbelievers it rejects. It is well-disposed towards believers, but
ill-disposed towards unbelievers. In faith there lies a malignant
principle.

It is owing to the egoism, the vanity, the self-complacency of
Christians, that they can see the motes in the faith of non-christian
nations, but cannot perceive the beam in their own. It is only in
the mode in which faith embodies itself that Christians differ from
the followers of other religions. The distinction is founded only
on climate or on natural temperament. A warlike or ardently sensuous
people will naturally attest its distinctive religious character by
deeds, by force of arms. But the nature of faith as such is everywhere
the same. It is essential to faith to condemn, to anathematise. All
blessings, all good it accumulates on itself, on its God, as the
lover on his beloved; all curses, all hardship and evil it casts on
unbelief. The believer is blessed, well-pleasing to God, a partaker
of everlasting felicity; the unbeliever is accursed, rejected of God
and abjured by men: for what God rejects man must not receive, must
not indulge;--that would be a criticism of the divine judgment. The
Turks exterminate unbelievers with fire and sword, the Christians with
the flames of hell. But the fires of the other world blaze forth into
this, to glare through the night of unbelief. As the believer already
here below anticipates the joys of heaven, so the flames of the abyss
must be seen to flash here as a foretaste of the awaiting hell,--at
least in the moments when faith attains its highest enthusiasm. [203]
It is true that Christianity ordains no persecution of heretics, still
less conversion by force of arms. But so far as faith anathematises,
it necessarily generates hostile dispositions,--the dispositions
out of which the persecution of heretics arises. To love the man who
does not believe in Christ, is a sin against Christ, is to love the
enemy of Christ, [204] That which God, which Christ does not love,
man must not love; his love would be a contradiction of the divine
will, consequently a sin. God, it is true, loves all men; but only
when and because they are Christians, or at least may be and desire
to be such. To be a Christian is to be beloved by God; not to be a
Christian is to be hated by God, an object of the divine anger. [205]
The Christian must therefore love only Christians--others only
as possible Christians; he must only love what faith hallows and
blesses. Faith is the baptism of love. Love to man as man is only
natural love. Christian love is supernatural, glorified, sanctified
love; therefore it loves only what is Christian. The maxim, "Love
your enemies," has reference only to personal enemies, not to public
enemies, the enemies of God, the enemies of faith, unbelievers. He
who loves the men whom Christ denies, does not believe Christ, denies
his Lord and God. Faith abolishes the natural ties of humanity;
to universal, natural unity, it substitutes a particular unity.

Let it not be objected to this, that it is said in the Bible, "Judge
not, that ye be not judged;" and that thus, as faith leaves to God
the judgment, so it leaves to him the sentence of condemnation. This
and other similar sayings have authority only as the private law of
Christians, not as their public law; belong only to ethics, not to
dogmatics. It is an indication of indifference to faith, to introduce
such sayings into the region of dogma. The distinction between the
unbeliever and the man is a fruit of modern philanthropy. To faith,
the man is merged in the believer; to it, the essential difference
between man and the brute rests only on religious belief. Faith
alone comprehends in itself all virtues which can make man pleasing
to God; and God is the absolute measure, his pleasure the highest
law: the believer is thus alone the legitimate, normal man, man as
he ought to be, man as he is recognised by God. Wherever we find
Christians making a distinction between the man and the believer,
there the human mind has already severed itself from faith; there man
has value in himself, independently of faith. Hence faith is true,
unfeigned, only where the specific difference of faith operates in
all its severity. If the edge of this difference is blunted, faith
itself naturally becomes indifferent, effete. Faith is liberal only in
things intrinsically indifferent. The liberalism of the apostle Paul
presupposes the acceptance of the fundamental articles of faith. Where
everything is made to depend on the fundamental articles of faith,
there arises the distinction between essential and non-essential
belief. In the sphere of the non-essential there is no law,--there
you are free. But obviously it is only on condition of your leaving
the rights of faith intact, that faith allows you freedom.

It is therefore an altogether false defence to say, that faith leaves
judgment to God. It leaves to him only the moral judgment with respect
to faith, only the judgment as to its moral character, as to whether
the faith of Christians be feigned or genuine. So far as classes
are concerned, faith knows already whom God will place on the right
hand, and whom on the left; in relation to the persons who compose
the classes faith is uncertain; but that believers are heirs of the
Eternal Kingdom is beyond all doubt. Apart from this, however, the God
who distinguishes between believers and unbelievers, the condemning and
rewarding God, is nothing else than faith itself. What God condemns,
faith condemns, and vice versâ. Faith is a consuming fire to its
opposite. [206] This fire of faith regarded objectively, is the anger
of God, or what is the same thing, hell; for hell evidently has its
foundation in the anger of God. But this hell lies in faith itself, in
its sentence of damnation. The flames of hell are only the flashings of
the exterminating, vindictive glance which faith casts on unbelievers.

Thus faith is essentially a spirit of partisanship. He who is
not for Christ is against him. [207] Faith knows only friends or
enemies, it understands no neutrality; it is preoccupied only with
itself. Faith is essentially intolerant; essentially, because with
faith is always associated the illusion that its cause is the cause
of God, its honour his honour. The God of faith is nothing else than
the objective nature of faith--faith become an object to itself. Hence
in the religious consciousness also the cause of faith and the cause
of God are identified. God himself is interested: the interest of
faith is the nearest interest of God. "He who toucheth you," says the
prophet Zachariah, "toucheth the apple of His eye." [208] That which
wounds faith, wounds God, that which denies faith, denies God himself.

Faith knows no other distinction than that between the service of God
and the service of idols. Faith alone gives honour to God; unbelief
withdraws from God that which is due to him. Unbelief is an injury to
God, religious high treason. The heathens worship demons; their gods
are devils. "I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should
have fellowship with devils." [209] But the devil is the negation of
God; he hates God, wills that there should be no God. Thus faith is
blind to what there is of goodness and truth lying at the foundation
of heathen worship; it sees in everything which does not do homage
to its God, i.e., to itself, a worship of idols, and in the worship
of idols only the work of the devil. Faith must therefore, even in
feeling, be only negative towards this negation of God: it is by
inherent necessity intolerant towards its opposite, and in general
towards whatever does not thoroughly accord with itself. Tolerance
on its part would be intolerance towards God, who has the right to
unconditional, undivided sovereignty. Nothing ought to subsist,
nothing to exist, which does not acknowledge God, which does not
acknowledge faith:--"That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
of things in heaven and things on earth, and things under the earth;
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
the glory of the Father." [210] Therefore faith postulates a future,
a world where faith has no longer an opposite, or where at least
this opposite exists only in order to enhance the self-complacency
of triumphant faith. Hell sweetens the joys of happy believers. "The
elect will come forth to behold the torments of the ungodly, and at
this spectacle they will not be smitten with sorrow; on the contrary,
while they see the unspeakable sufferings of the ungodly, they,
intoxicated with joy, will thank God for their own salvation." [211]

Faith is the opposite of love. Love recognises virtue even in
sin, truth in error. It is only since the power of faith has been
supplanted by the power of the natural unity of mankind, the power
of reason, of humanity, that truth has been seen even in polytheism,
in idolatry generally,--or at least that there has been any attempt
to explain on positive grounds what faith, in its bigotry, derives
only from the devil. Hence love is reconcilable with reason alone,
not with faith; for as reason, so also love is free, universal, in its
nature; whereas faith is narrow-hearted, limited. Only where reason
rules, does universal love rule; reason is itself nothing else than
universal love. It was faith, not love, not reason, which invented
Hell. To love, Hell is a horror; to reason, an absurdity. It would
be a pitiable mistake to regard Hell as a mere aberration of faith,
a false faith. Hell stands already in the Bible. Faith is everywhere
like itself; at least positive religious faith, faith in the sense in
which it is here taken, and must be taken unless we would mix with it
the elements of reason, of culture,--a mixture which indeed renders
the character of faith unrecognisable.

Thus if faith does not contradict Christianity, neither do those
dispositions which result from faith, neither do the actions which
result from those dispositions. Faith condemns, anathematises; all the
actions, all the dispositions, which contradict love, humanity, reason,
accord with faith. All the horrors of Christian religious history,
which our believers aver not to be due to Christianity, have truly
arisen out of Christianity, because they have arisen out of faith. This
repudiation of them is indeed a necessary consequence of faith; for
faith claims for itself only what is good, everything bad it casts on
the shoulders of unbelief, or of misbelief, or of men in general. But
this very denial of faith that it is itself to blame for the evil in
Christianity, is a striking proof that it is really the originator
of that evil, because it is a proof of the narrowness, partiality,
and intolerance which render it well-disposed only to itself, to its
own adherents, but ill-disposed, unjust towards others. According to
faith, the good which Christians do, is not done by the man, but by
the Christian, by faith; but the evil which Christians do, is not done
by the Christian, but by the man. The evil which faith has wrought in
Christendom thus corresponds to the nature of faith,--of faith as it
is described in the oldest and most sacred records of Christianity,
of the Bible. "If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that
ye have received, let him be accursed," [212] anathema esto,
Gal. i. 9. "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers:
for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath
Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an
infidel? And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye
are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in
them and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you,"
2 Cor. iv. 14-17. "When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when he shall come to
be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that believe,"
2 Thess. i. 7-10. "Without faith it is impossible to please God,"
Heb. xi. 6. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life," John iii. 16. "Every spirit that confesseth that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that
confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God:
and this is the spirit of antichrist," 1 John iv. 2, 3. "Who is a
liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist
that denieth the Father and the Son," 1 John ii. 22. "Whosoever
transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not
God: he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the
Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed:
for he that biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds,"
2 John ix. 11. Thus speaks the apostle of love. But the love which
he celebrates is only the brotherly love of Christians. "God is the
Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe," 1 Tim. iv. 10. A
fatal "specially!" "Let us do good unto all men, especially unto them
who are of the household of faith," Gal. vi. 10. An equally pregnant
"especially!" "A man that is a heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject; knowing that he that is such is subverted, and
sinneth, being condemned of himself," [213] Titus iii. 10, 11. "He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth
not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him,"
[214] John iii. 36. "And whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea," Mark
ix. 42; Matt, xviii. 6. "He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned," Mark xvi. 16. The
distinction between faith as it is expressed in the Bible and faith
as it has exhibited itself in later times, is only the distinction
between the bud and the plant. In the bud I cannot so plainly see
what is obvious in the matured plant; and yet the plant lay already
in the bud. But that which is obvious, sophists of course will not
condescend to recognise; they confine themselves to the distinction
between explicit and implicit existence,--wilfully overlooking their
essential identity.

Faith necessarily passes into hatred, hatred into persecution, where
the power of faith meets with no contradiction, where it does not
find itself in collision with a power foreign to faith, the power
of love, of humanity, of the sense of justice. Faith left to itself
necessarily exalts itself above the laws of natural morality. The
doctrine of faith is the doctrine of duty towards God,--the highest
duty of faith. By how much God is higher than man, by so much higher
are duties to God than duties towards man; and duties towards God
necessarily come into collision with common human duties. God is not
only believed in, conceived as the universal being, the Father of men,
as Love:--such faith is the faith of love;--he is also represented as
a personal being, a being by himself. And so far as God is regarded as
separate from man, as an individual being, so far are duties to God
separated from duties to man:--faith is, in the religious sentiment,
separated from morality, from love. [215] Let it not be replied
that faith in God is faith in love, in goodness itself; and that
thus faith is itself an expression of a morally good disposition. In
the idea of personality, ethical definitions vanish; they are only
collateral things, mere accidents. The chief thing is the subject,
the divine Ego. Love to God himself, since it is love to a personal
being, is not a moral but a personal love. Innumerable devout hymns
breathe nothing but love to the Lord; but in this love there appears
no spark of an exalted moral idea or disposition.

Faith is the highest to itself, because its object is a divine
personality. Hence it makes salvation dependent on itself, not on
the fulfilment of common human duties. But that which has eternal
salvation as its consequence, necessarily becomes in the mind of
man the chief thing. As therefore inwardly morality is subordinate
to faith, so it must also be outwardly, practically subordinate,
nay, sacrificed, to faith. It is inevitable that there should be
actions in which faith exhibits itself in distinction from morality,
or rather in contradiction with it;--actions which are morally bad,
but which according to faith are laudable, because they have in view
the advantage of faith. All salvation depends on faith: it follows that
all again depends on the salvation of faith. If faith is endangered,
eternal salvation and the honour of God are endangered. Hence
faith absolves from everything; for, strictly considered, it is the
sole subjective good in man, as God is the sole good and positive
being:--the highest commandment therefore is: Believe! [216]

For the very reason that there is no natural, inherent connection
between faith and the moral disposition, that, on the contrary, it
lies in the nature of faith that it is indifferent to moral duties,
[217] that it sacrifices the love of man to the honour of God,--for
this reason it is required that faith should have good works as its
consequence, that it should prove itself by love. Faith destitute of
love, or indifferent to love, contradicts the reason, the natural sense
of right in man, moral feeling, on which love immediately urges itself
as a law. Hence faith, in contradiction with its intrinsic character,
has limits imposed on it by morality: a faith which effects nothing
good, which does not attest itself by love, comes to be held as not a
true and living faith. But this limitation does not arise out of faith
itself. It is the power of love, a power independent of faith, which
gives laws to it; for moral character is here made the criterion of
the genuineness of faith, the truth of faith is made dependent on the
truth of ethics:--a relation which, however, is subversive of faith.

Faith does indeed make man happy; but thus much is certain: it infuses
into him no really moral dispositions. If it ameliorate man, if it
have moral dispositions as its consequence, this proceeds solely
from the inward conviction of the irreversible reality of morals:--a
conviction independent of religious faith. It is morality alone, and
by no means faith, that cries out in the conscience of the believer:
thy faith is nothing, if it does not make thee good. It is not to be
denied that the assurance of eternal salvation, the forgiveness of
sins, the sense of favour and release from all punishment, inclines
man to do good. The man who has this confidence possesses all things;
he is happy; [218] he becomes indifferent to the good things of
this world; no envy, no avarice, no ambition, no sensual desire, can
enslave him; everything earthly vanishes in the prospect of heavenly
grace and eternal bliss. But in him good works do not proceed from
essentially virtuous dispositions. It is not love, not the object
of love, man, the basis of all morality, which is the motive of his
good works. No! he does good not for the sake of goodness itself,
not for the sake of man, but for the sake of God;--out of gratitude
to God, who has done all for him, and for whom therefore he must on
his side do all that lies in his power. He forsakes sin, because it
wounds God, his Saviour, his Benefactor. [219] The idea of virtue is
here the idea of compensatory sacrifice. God has sacrificed himself
for man; therefore man must sacrifice himself to God. The greater the
sacrifice the better the deed. The more anything contradicts man and
Nature, the greater the abnegation, the greater is the virtue. This
merely negative idea of goodness has been especially realised and
developed by Catholicism. Its highest moral idea is that of sacrifice;
hence the high significance attached to the denial of sexual love,--to
virginity. Chastity, or rather virginity, is the characteristic virtue
of the Catholic faith,--for this reason, that it has no basis in
Nature. It is the most fanatical, transcendental, fantastical virtue,
the virtue of supranaturalistic faith;--to faith, the highest virtue,
but in itself no virtue at all. Thus faith makes that a virtue which
intrinsically, substantially, is no virtue; it has therefore no sense
of virtue; it must necessarily depreciate true virtue because it so
exalts a merely apparent virtue, because it is guided by no idea but
that of the negation, the contradiction of human nature.

But although the deeds opposed to love which mark Christian religious
history, are in accordance with Christianity, and its antagonists
are therefore right in imputing to it the horrible actions resulting
from dogmatic creeds; those deeds nevertheless at the same time
contradict Christianity, because Christianity is not only a religion
of faith, but of love also,--pledges us not only to faith, but to
love. Uncharitable actions, hatred of heretics, at once accord and
clash with Christianity? how is that possible? Perfectly. Christianity
sanctions both the actions that spring out of love, and the actions
that spring from faith without love. If Christianity had made love
only its law, its adherents would be right,--the horrors of Christian
religious history could not be imputed to it; if it had made faith only
its law, the reproaches of its antagonists would be unconditionally,
unrestrictedly true. But Christianity has not made love free; it has
not raised itself to the height of accepting love as absolute. And
it has not given this freedom, nay, cannot give it, because it is a
religion,--and hence subjects love to the dominion of faith. Love is
only the exoteric, faith the esoteric doctrine of Christianity; love
is only the morality, faith the religion of the Christian religion.

God is love. This is the sublimest dictum of Christianity. But
the contradiction of faith and love is contained in the very
proposition. Love is only a predicate, God the subject. What, then,
is this subject in distinction from love? And I must necessarily ask
this question, make this distinction. The necessity of the distinction
would be done away with only if it were said conversely: Love is
God, love is the absolute being. Thus love would take the position
of the substance. In the proposition "God is love," the subject is
the darkness in which faith shrouds itself; the predicate is the
light, which first illuminates the intrinsically dark subject. In
the predicate I affirm love, in the subject faith. Love does not
alone fill my soul: I leave a place open for my uncharitableness by
thinking of God as a subject in distinction from the predicate. It is
therefore inevitable that at one moment I lose the thought of love,
at another the thought of God, that at one moment I sacrifice the
personality of God to the divinity of love, at another the divinity of
love to the personality of God. The history of Christianity has given
sufficient proof of this contradiction. Catholicism, especially, has
celebrated Love as the essential deity with so much enthusiasm, that
to it the personality of God has been entirely lost in this love. But
at the same time it has sacrificed love to the majesty of faith. Faith
clings to the self-subsistence of God; love does away with it. "God
is love," means, God is nothing by himself: he who loves, gives up
his egoistical independence; he makes what he loves indispensable,
essential to his existence. But while Self is being sunk in the
depths of love, the idea of the Person rises up again and disturbs
the harmony of the divine and human nature which had been established
by love. Faith advances with its pretensions, and allows only just so
much to Love as belongs to a predicate in the ordinary sense. It does
not permit love freely to unfold itself; it makes love the abstract,
and itself the concrete, the fact, the basis. The love of faith is
only a rhetorical figure, a poetical fiction of faith,--faith in
ecstasy. If faith comes to itself, Love is fled.

This theoretic contradiction must necessarily manifest itself
practically. Necessarily; for in Christianity love is tainted by faith,
it is not free, it is not apprehended truly. A love which is limited
by faith is an untrue love. [220] Love knows no law but itself; it is
divine through itself; it needs not the sanction of faith; it is its
own basis. The love which is bound by faith is a narrow-hearted, false
love, contradicting the idea of love, i.e., self-contradictory,--a love
which has only a semblance of holiness, for it hides in itself the
hatred that belongs to faith; it is only benevolent so long as faith
is not injured. Hence, in this contradiction with itself, in order
to retain the semblance of love, it falls into the most diabolical
sophisms, as we see in Augustine's apology for the persecution of
heretics. Love is limited by faith; hence it does not regard even
the uncharitable actions which faith suggests as in contradiction
with itself; it interprets the deeds of hatred which are committed
for the sake of faith as deeds of love. And it necessarily falls
into such contradictions, because the limitation of love by faith is
itself a contradiction. If it once is subjected to this limitation,
it has given up its own judgment, its inherent measure and criterion,
its self-subsistence; it is delivered up without power of resistance
to the promptings of faith.

Here we have again an example, that much which is not found in the
letter of the Bible, is nevertheless there in principle. We find the
same contradictions in the Bible as in Augustine, as in Catholicism
generally; only that in the latter they are definitely declared,
they are developed into a conspicuous, and therefore revolting
existence. The Bible curses through faith, blesses through love. But
the only love it knows is a love founded on faith. Thus here already
it is a love which curses, an unreliable love, a love which gives
me no guarantee that it will not turn into hatred; for if I do not
acknowledge the articles of faith, I am out of the sphere of love, a
child of hell, an object of anathema, of the anger of God, to whom the
existence of unbelievers is a vexation, a thorn in the eye. Christian
love has not overcome hell, because it has not overcome faith. Love
is in itself unbelieving, faith unloving. And love is unbelieving
because it knows nothing more divine than itself, because it believes
only in itself as absolute truth.

Christian love is already signalised as a particular, limited love, by
the very epithet, Christian. But love is in its nature universal. So
long as Christian love does not renounce its qualification of
Christian, does not make love, simply, its highest law, so long is it a
love which is injurious to the sense of truth, for the very office of
love is to abolish the distinction between Christianity and so-called
heathenism;--so long is it a love which by its particularity is in
contradiction with the nature of love, an abnormal, loveless love,
which has therefore long been justly an object of sarcasm. True love is
sufficient to itself; it needs no special title, no authority. Love is
the universal law of intelligence and Nature;--it is nothing else than
the realisation of the unity of the species through the medium of moral
sentiment. To found this love on the name of a person, is only possible
by the association of superstitious ideas, either of a religious or
speculative character. For with superstition is always associated
particularism, and with particularism, fanaticism. Love can only be
founded on the unity of the species, the unity of intelligence--on
the nature of mankind; then only is it a well-grounded love, safe
in its principle, guaranteed, free, for it is fed by the original
source of love, out of which the love of Christ himself arose. The
love of Christ was itself a derived love. He loved us not out of
himself, by virtue of his own authority, but by virtue of our common
human nature. A love which is based on his person is a particular,
exclusive love, which extends only so far as the acknowledgment of
this person extends, a love which does not rest on the proper ground
of love. Are we to love each other because Christ loved us? Such
love would be an affected, imitative love. Can we truly love each
other only if we love Christ? Is Christ the cause of love? Is he not
rather the apostle of love? Is not the ground of his love the unity
of human nature? Shall I love Christ more than mankind? Is not such
love a chimerical love? Can I step beyond the idea of the species? Can
I love anything higher than humanity? What ennobled Christ was love;
whatever qualities he had, he held in fealty to love; he was not the
proprietor of love, as he is represented to be in all superstitious
conceptions. The idea of love is an independent idea; I do not first
deduce it from the life of Christ; on the contrary, I revere that
life only because I find it accordant with the law, the idea of love.

This is already proved historically by the fact that the idea of love
was by no means first introduced into the consciousness of mankind with
and by Christianity,--is by no means peculiarly Christian. The horrors
of the Roman Empire present themselves with striking significance
in company with the appearance of this idea. The empire of policy
which united men after a manner corresponding with its own idea, was
coming to its necessary end. Political unity is a unity of force. The
despotism of Rome must turn in upon itself, destroy itself. But
it was precisely through this catastrophe of political existence
that man released himself entirely from the heart-stifling toils
of politics. In the place of Rome appeared the idea of humanity;
to the idea of dominion succeeded the idea of love. Even the Jews,
by imbibing the principle of humanity contained in Greek culture, had
by this time mollified their malignant religious separatism. Philo
celebrates love as the highest virtue. The extinction of national
differences lay in the idea of humanity itself. Thinking minds had
very early overstepped the civil and political separation of man
from man. Aristotle distinguishes the man from the slave, and places
the slave, as a man, on a level with his master, uniting them in
friendship. Epictetus, the slave, was a Stoic; Antoninus, the emperor,
was a Stoic also: thus did philosophy unite men. The Stoics taught
[221] that man was not born for his own sake, but for the sake of
others, i.e., for love: a principle which implies infinitely more
than the celebrated dictum of the Emperor Antoninus, which enjoined
the love of enemies. The practical principle of the Stoics is so
far the principle of love. The world is to them one city, men its
citizens. Seneca, in the sublimest sayings, extols love, clemency,
humanity, especially towards slaves. Thus political rigour and
patriotic narrowness were on the wane.

Christianity was a peculiar manifestation of these human tendencies;--a
popular, consequently a religious, and certainly a most intense
manifestation of this new principle of love. That which elsewhere
made itself apparent in the process of culture, expressed itself
here as religious feeling, as a matter of faith. Christianity thus
reduced a general unity to a particular one, it made love collateral
to faith; and by this means it placed itself in contradiction with
universal love. The unity was not referred to its true origin. National
differences indeed disappeared; but in their place difference of faith,
the opposition of Christian and un-Christian, more vehement than a
national antagonism, and also more malignant, made its appearance
in history.

All love founded on a special historical phenomenon contradicts,
as has been said, the nature of love, which endures no limits,
which triumphs over all particularity. Man is to be loved for man's
sake. Man is an object of love because he is an end in himself,
because he is a rational and loving being. This is the law of the
species, the law of the intelligence. Love should be immediate,
undetermined by anything else than its object;--nay, only as such
is it love. But if I interpose between my fellow-man and myself
the idea of an individuality, in whom the idea of the species is
supposed to be already realised, I annihilate the very soul of love,
I disturb the unity by the idea of a third external to us; for in that
case my fellow-man is an object of love to me only on account of his
resemblance or relation to this model, not for his own sake. Here all
the contradictions reappear which we have in the personality of God,
where the idea of the personality by itself, without regard to the
qualities which render it worthy of love and reverence, fixes itself
in the consciousness and feelings. Love is the subjective reality of
the species, as reason is its objective reality. In love, in reason,
the need of an intermediate person disappears. Christ is nothing
but an image, under which the unity of the species has impressed
itself on the popular consciousness. Christ loved men: he wished to
bless and unite them all without distinction of sex, age, rank, or
nationality. Christ is the love of mankind to itself embodied in an
image--in accordance with the nature of religion as we have developed
it--or contemplated as a person, but a person who (we mean, of course,
as a religious object) has only the significance of an image, who is
only ideal. For this reason love is pronounced to be the characteristic
mark of the disciples. But love, as has been said, is nothing else than
the active proof, the realisation of the unity of the race, through the
medium of the moral disposition. The species is not an abstraction;
it exists in feeling, in the moral sentiment, in the energy of
love. It is the species which infuses love into me. A loving heart
is the heart of the species throbbing in the individual. Thus Christ,
as the consciousness of love, is the consciousness of the species. We
are all one in Christ. Christ is the consciousness of our identity. He
therefore who loves man for the sake of man, who rises to the love of
the species, to universal love, adequate to the nature of the species,
[222] he is a Christian, is Christ himself. He does what Christ did,
what made Christ Christ. Thus, where there arises the consciousness
of the species as a species, the idea of humanity as a whole, Christ
disappears, without, however, his true nature disappearing; for he
was the substitute for the consciousness of the species, the image
under which it was made present to the people, and became the law of
the popular life.







