CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CONTRADICTION IN THE SPECULATIVE DOCTRINE OF GOD.


The personality of God is thus the means by which man converts the
qualities of his own nature into the qualities of another being,--of
a being external to himself. The personality of God is nothing else
than the projected personality of man.

On this process of projecting self outwards rests also the Hegelian
speculative doctrine, according to which man's consciousness of
God is the self-consciousness of God. God is thought, cognised by
us. According to speculation, God, in being thought by us, thinks
himself or is conscious of himself; speculation identifies the two
sides which religion separates. In this it is far deeper than religion,
for the fact of God being thought is not like the fact of an external
object being thought. God is an inward, spiritual being; thinking,
consciousness, is an inward, spiritual act; to think God is therefore
to affirm what God is, to establish the being of God as an act. That
God is thought, cognised, is essential; that this tree is thought, is
to the tree accidental, unessential. God is an indispensable thought,
a necessity of thought. But how is it possible that this necessity
should simply express the subjective, and not the objective also?--how
is it possible that God--if he is to exist for us, to be an object to
us--must necessarily be thought, if he is in himself like a block,
indifferent whether he be thought, cognised or not? No! it is not
possible. We are necessitated to regard the fact of God being thought
by us, as his thinking himself, or his self-consciousness.

Religious objectivism has two passives, two modes in which God
is thought. On the one hand, God is thought by us, on the other,
he is thought by himself. God thinks himself, independently of his
being thought by us: he has a self-consciousness distinct from,
independent of, our consciousness. This is certainly consistent
when once God is conceived as a real personality; for the real human
person thinks himself, and is thought by another; my thinking of him
is to him an indifferent, external fact. This is the last degree of
anthropopathism. In order to make God free and independent of all that
is human, he is regarded as a formal, real person, his thinking is
confined within himself, and the fact of his being thought is excluded
from him, and is represented as occurring in another being. This
indifference or independence with respect to us, to our thought,
is the attestation of a self-subsistent, i.e., external, personal
existence. It is true that religion also makes the fact of God being
thought into the self-thinking of God; but because this process goes
forward behind its consciousness, since God is immediately presupposed
as a self-existent personal being, the religious consciousness only
embraces the indifference of the two facts.

Even religion, however, does not abide by this indifference of the
two sides. God creates in order to reveal himself: creation is the
revelation of God. But for stones, plants, and animals there is no
God, but only for man; so that Nature exists for the sake of man,
and man purely for the sake of God. God glorifies himself in man:
man is the pride of God. God indeed knows himself even without man;
but so long as there is no other me, so long is he only a possible,
conceptional person. First when a difference from God, a non-divine
is posited, is God conscious of himself; first when he knows what
is not God, does he know what it is to be God, does he know the
bliss of his Godhead. First in the positing of what is other than
himself, of the world, does God posit himself as God. Is God almighty
without creation? No! Omnipotence first realises, proves itself in
creation. What is a power, a property, which does not exhibit, attest
itself? What is a force which affects nothing? a light that does not
illuminate? a wisdom which knows nothing, i.e., nothing real? And what
is omnipotence, what all other divine attributes, if man does not
exist? Man is nothing without God; but also, God is nothing without
man; [174] for only in man is God an object as God; only in man is
he God. The various qualities of man first give difference, which
is the ground of reality in God. The physical qualities of man make
God a physical being--God the Father, who is the creator of Nature,
i.e., the personified, anthropomorphised essence of Nature; [175]
the intellectual qualities of man make God an intellectual being, the
moral, a moral being. Human misery is the triumph of divine compassion;
sorrow for sin is the delight of the divine holiness. Life, fire,
emotion comes into God only through man. With the stubborn sinner
God is angry; over the repentant sinner he rejoices. Man is the
revealed God: in man the divine essence first realises and unfolds
itself. In the creation of Nature God goes out of himself, he has
relation to what is other than himself, but in man he returns into
himself:--man knows God, because in him God finds and knows himself,
feels himself as God. Where there is no pressure, no want, there is no
feeling;--and feeling is alone real knowledge. Who can know compassion
without having felt the want of it? justice without the experience
of injustice? happiness without the experience of distress? Thou
must feel what a thing is; otherwise thou wilt never learn to know
it. It is in man that the divine properties first become feelings,
i.e., man is the self-feeling of God;--and the feeling of God is the
real God; for the qualities of God are indeed only real qualities,
realities, as felt by man,--as feelings. If the experience of human
misery were outside of God, in a being personally separate from him,
compassion also would not be in God, and we should hence have again
the Being destitute of qualities, or more correctly the nothing, which
God was before man or without man. For example:--Whether I be a good
or sympathetic being--for that alone is good which gives, imparts
itself, bonum est communicativum sui,--is unknown to me before the
opportunity presents itself of showing goodness to another being. Only
in the act of imparting do I experience the happiness of beneficence,
the joy of generosity, of liberality. But is this joy apart from
the joy of the recipient? No; I rejoice because he rejoices. I feel
the wretchedness of another, I suffer with him; in alleviating his
wretchedness, I alleviate my own;--sympathy with suffering is itself
suffering. The joyful feeling of the giver is only the reflex,
the self-consciousness of the joy in the receiver. Their joy is a
common feeling, which accordingly makes itself visible in the union
of hands, of lips. So it is here. Just as the feeling of human misery
is human, so the feeling of divine compassion is human. It is only
a sense of the poverty of finiteness that gives a sense of the bliss
of infiniteness. Where the one is not, the other is not. The two are
inseparable,--inseparable the feeling of God as God, and the feeling
of man as man, inseparable the knowledge of man and the self-knowledge
of God. God is a Self only in the human self,--only in the human power
of discrimination, in the principle of difference that lies in the
human being. Thus compassion is only felt as a me, a self, a force,
i.e., as something special, through its opposite. The opposite of God
gives qualities to God, realises him, makes him a Self. God is God,
only through that which is not God. Herein we have also the mystery
of Jacob Böhme's doctrine. It must only be borne in mind that Jacob
Böhme, as a mystic and theologian, places outside of man the feelings
in which the divine being first realises himself, passes from nothing
to something, to a qualitative being apart from the feelings of man
(at least in imagination),--and that he makes them objective in the
form of natural qualities, but in such a way that these qualities still
only represent the impressions made on his feelings. It will then be
obvious that what the empirical religious consciousness first posits
with the real creation of Nature and of man, the mystical consciousness
places before the creation in the premundane God, in doing which,
however, it does away with the reality of the creation. For if God
has what is not-God, already in himself, he has no need first to
create what is not-God in order to be God. The creation of the world
is here a pure superfluity, or rather an impossibility; this God
for very reality does not come to reality; he is already in himself
the full and restless world. This is especially true of Schelling's
doctrine of God, who though made up of innumerable "potences" is yet
thoroughly impotent. Far more reasonable, therefore, is the empirical
religious consciousness, which makes God reveal, i.e., realise himself
in real man, real nature, and according to which man is created purely
for the praise and glory of God. That is to say, man is the mouth of
God, which articulates and accentuates the divine qualities as human
feelings. God wills that he be honoured, praised. Why? because the
passion of man for God is the self-consciousness of God. Nevertheless,
the religious consciousness separates these two properly inseparable
sides, since by means of the idea of personality it makes God and
man independent existences. Now the Hegelian speculation identifies
the two sides, but so as to leave the old contradiction still at
the foundation;--it is therefore only the consistent carrying out,
the completion of a religious truth. The learned mob was so blind
in its hatred towards Hegel as not to perceive that his doctrine, at
least in this relation, does not in fact contradict religion;--that
it contradicts it only in the same way as, in general, a developed,
consequent process of thought contradicts an undeveloped, inconsequent,
but nevertheless radically identical conception.

But if it is only in human feelings and wants that the divine
"nothing" becomes something, obtains qualities, then the being
of man is alone the real being of God,--man is the real God. And
if in the consciousness which man has of God first arises the
self-consciousness of God, then the human consciousness is, per
se, the divine consciousness. Why then dost thou alienate man's
consciousness from him, and make it the self-consciousness of a being
distinct from man, of that which is an object to him? Why dost thou
vindicate existence to God, to man only the consciousness of that
existence? God has his consciousness in man, and man his being in
God? Man's knowledge of God is God's knowledge of himself? What
a divorcing and contradiction! The true statement is this: man's
knowledge of God is man's knowledge of himself, of his own nature. Only
the unity of being and consciousness is truth. Where the consciousness
of God is, there is the being of God,--in man, therefore; in the being
of God it is only thy own being which is an object to thee, and what
presents itself before thy consciousness is simply what lies behind
it. If the divine qualities are human, the human qualities are divine.

Only when we abandon a philosophy of religion, or a theology, which is
distinct from psychology and anthropology, and recognise anthropology
as itself theology, do we attain to a true, self-satisfying identity
of the divine and human being, the identity of the human being with
itself. In every theory of the identity of the divine and human
which is not true identity, unity of the human nature with itself,
there still lies at the foundation a division, a separation into two,
since the identity is immediately abolished, or rather is supposed
to be abolished. Every theory of this kind is in contradiction with
itself and with the understanding,--is a half measure--a thing of
the imagination--a perversion, a distortion; which, however, the more
perverted and false it is, all the more appears to be profound.







