CHAPTER III. SERAPHITA-SERAPHITUS


After a pause, during which the pastor seemed to be gathering his
recollections, he continued in the following words:--

“Emanuel Swedenborg was born at Upsala in Sweden, in the month of
January, 1688, according to various authors,--in 1689, according to his
epitaph. His father was Bishop of Skara. Swedenborg lived eighty-five
years; his death occurred in London, March 29, 1772. I use that term to
convey the idea of a simple change of state. According to his disciples,
Swedenborg was seen at Jarvis and in Paris after that date. Allow me,
my dear Monsieur Wilfrid,” said Monsieur Becker, making a gesture to
prevent all interruption, “I relate these facts without either affirming
or denying them. Listen; afterwards you can think and say what you like.
I will inform you when I judge, criticise, and discuss these doctrines,
so as to keep clearly in view my own intellectual neutrality between HIM
and Reason.

“The life of Swedenborg was divided into two parts,” continued the
pastor. “From 1688 to 1745 Baron Emanuel Swedenborg appeared in the
world as a man of vast learning, esteemed and cherished for his virtues,
always irreproachable and constantly useful. While fulfilling high
public functions in Sweden, he published, between 1709 and 1740, several
important works on mineralogy, physics, mathematics, and astronomy,
which enlightened the world of learning. He originated a method of
building docks suitable for the reception of large vessels, and he
wrote many treatises on various important questions, such as the rise
of tides, the theory of the magnet and its qualities, the motion and
position of the earth and planets, and while Assessor in the Royal
College of Mines, on the proper system of working salt mines. He
discovered means to construct canal-locks or sluices; and he also
discovered and applied the simplest methods of extracting ore and of
working metals. In fact he studied no science without advancing it. In
youth he learned Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, also the oriental languages,
with which he became so familiar that many distinguished scholars
consulted him, and he was able to decipher the vestiges of the oldest
known books of Scripture, namely: ‘The Wars of Jehovah’ and ‘The
Enunciations,’ spoken of by Moses (Numbers xxi. 14, 15, 27-30), also
by Joshua, Jeremiah, and Samuel,--‘The Wars of Jehovah’ being the
historical part and ‘The Enunciations’ the prophetical part of the
Mosaical Books anterior to Genesis. Swedenborg even affirms that ‘the
Book of Jasher,’ the Book of the Righteous, mentioned by Joshua, was
in existence in Eastern Tartary, together with the doctrine of
Correspondences. A Frenchman has lately, so they tell me, justified
these statements of Swedenborg, by the discovery at Bagdad of several
portions of the Bible hitherto unknown to Europe. During the widespread
discussion on animal magnetism which took its rise in Paris, and in
which most men of Western science took an active part about the year
1785, Monsieur le Marquis de Thome vindicated the memory of Swedenborg
by calling attention to certain assertions made by the Commission
appointed by the King of France to investigate the subject. These
gentlemen declared that no theory of magnetism existed, whereas
Swedenborg had studied and promulgated it ever since the year 1720.
Monsieur de Thome seizes this opportunity to show the reason why so many
men of science relegated Swedenborg to oblivion while they delved into
his treasure-house and took his facts to aid their work. ‘Some of the
most illustrious of these men,’ said Monsieur de Thome, alluding to
the ‘Theory of the Earth’ by Buffon, ‘have had the meanness to wear the
plumage of the noble bird and refuse him all acknowledgment’; and he
proved, by masterly quotations drawn from the encyclopaedic works of
Swedenborg, that the great prophet had anticipated by over a century the
slow march of human science. It suffices to read his philosophical and
mineralogical works to be convinced of this. In one passage he is
seen as the precursor of modern chemistry by the announcement that the
productions of organized nature are decomposable and resolve into two
simple principles; also that water, air, and fire are _not elements_. In
another, he goes in a few words to the heart of magnetic mysteries and
deprives Mesmer of the honors of a first knowledge of them.

“There,” said Monsieur Becker, pointing to a long shelf against the
wall between the stove and the window on which were ranged books of all
sizes, “behold him! here are seventeen works from his pen, of which one,
his ‘Philosophical and Mineralogical Works,’ published in 1734, is in
three folio volumes. These productions, which prove the incontestable
knowledge of Swedenborg, were given to me by Monsieur Seraphitus, his
cousin and the father of Seraphita.

“In 1740,” continued Monsieur Becker, after a slight pause, “Swedenborg
fell into a state of absolute silence, from which he emerged to bid
farewell to all his earthly occupations; after which his thoughts turned
exclusively to the Spiritual Life. He received the first commands of
heaven in 1745, and he thus relates the nature of the vocation to
which he was called: One evening, in London, after dining with a great
appetite, a thick white mist seemed to fill his room. When the
vapor dispersed a creature in human form rose from one corner of the
apartment, and said in a stern tone, ‘Do not eat so much.’ He refrained.
The next night the same man returned, radiant in light, and said to him,
‘I am sent of God, who has chosen you to explain to men the meaning of
his Word and his Creation. I will tell you what to write.’ The vision
lasted but a few moments. The _angel_ was clothed in purple. During that
night the eyes of his _inner man_ were opened, and he was forced to
look into the heavens, into the world of spirits, and into hell,--three
separate spheres; where he encountered persons of his acquaintance who
had departed from their human form, some long since, others lately.
Thenceforth Swedenborg lived wholly in the spiritual life, remaining in
this world only as the messenger of God. His mission was ridiculed by
the incredulous, but his conduct was plainly that of a being superior
to humanity. In the first place, though limited in means to the bare
necessaries of life, he gave away enormous sums, and publicly, in
several cities, restored the fortunes of great commercial houses
when they were on the brink of failure. No one ever appealed to his
generosity who was not immediately satisfied. A sceptical Englishman,
determined to know the truth, followed him to Paris, and relates that
there his doors stood always open. One day a servant complained of this
apparent negligence, which laid him open to suspicion of thefts
that might be committed by others. ‘He need feel no anxiety,’ said
Swedenborg, smiling. ‘But I do not wonder at his fear; he cannot see the
guardian who protects my door.’ In fact, no matter in what country he
made his abode he never closed his doors, and nothing was ever
stolen from him. At Gottenburg--a town situated some sixty miles from
Stockholm--he announced, eight days before the news arrived by courier,
the conflagration which ravaged Stockholm, and the exact time at which
it took place. The Queen of Sweden wrote to her brother, the King, at
Berlin, that one of her ladies-in-waiting, who was ordered by the courts
to pay a sum of money which she was certain her husband had paid before
his death, went to Swedenborg and begged him to ask her husband where
she could find proof of the payment. The following day Swedenborg,
having done as the lady requested, pointed out the place where the
receipt would be found. He also begged the deceased to appear to
his wife, and the latter saw her husband in a dream, wrapped in a
dressing-gown which he wore just before his death; and he showed her the
paper in the place indicated by Swedenborg, where it had been securely
put away. At another time, embarking from London in a vessel commanded
by Captain Dixon, he overheard a lady asking if there were plenty of
provisions on board. ‘We do not want a great quantity,’ he said; ‘in
eight days and two hours we shall reach Stockholm,’--which actually
happened. This peculiar state of vision as to the things of the
earth--into which Swedenborg could put himself at will, and
which astonished those about him--was, nevertheless, but a feeble
representative of his faculty of looking into heaven.

“Not the least remarkable of his published visions is that in which he
relates his journeys through the Astral Regions; his descriptions
cannot fail to astonish the reader, partly through the crudity of their
details. A man whose scientific eminence is incontestable, and who
united in his own person powers of conception, will, and imagination,
would surely have invented better if he had invented at all. The
fantastic literature of the East offers nothing that can give an idea
of this astounding work, full of the essence of poetry, if it is
permissible to compare a work of faith with one of oriental fancy. The
transportation of Swedenborg by the Angel who served as guide to this
first journey is told with a sublimity which exceeds, by the distance
which God has placed betwixt the earth and the sun, the great epics of
Klopstock, Milton, Tasso, and Dante. This description, which serves in
fact as an introduction to his work on the Astral Regions, has never
been published; it is among the oral traditions left by Swedenborg to
the three disciples who were nearest to his heart. Monsieur Silverichm
has written them down. Monsieur Seraphitus endeavored more than once to
talk to me about them; but the recollection of his cousin’s words was so
burning a memory that he always stopped short at the first sentence and
became lost in a revery from which I could not rouse him.”

The old pastor sighed as he continued: “The baron told me that the
argument by which the Angel proved to Swedenborg that these bodies are
not made to wander through space puts all human science out of sight
beneath the grandeur of a divine logic. According to the Seer, the
inhabitants of Jupiter will not cultivate the sciences, which they call
darkness; those of Mercury abhor the expression of ideas by speech,
which seems to them too material,--their language is ocular; those of
Saturn are continually tempted by evil spirits; those of the Moon are as
small as six-year-old children, their voices issue from the abdomen, on
which they crawl; those of Venus are gigantic in height, but stupid, and
live by robbery,--although a part of this latter planet is inhabited by
beings of great sweetness, who live in the love of Good. In short, he
describes the customs and morals of all the peoples attached to the
different globes, and explains the general meaning of their existence as
related to the universe in terms so precise, giving explanations which
agree so well with their visible evolutions in the system of the world,
that some day, perhaps, scientific men will come to drink of these
living waters.

“Here,” said Monsieur Becker, taking down a book and opening it at a
mark, “here are the words with which he ended this work:--

“‘If any man doubts that I was transported through a vast number of
Astral Regions, let him recall my observation of the distances in that
other life, namely, that they exist only in relation to the external
state of man; now, being transformed within like unto the Angelic
Spirits of those Astral Spheres, I was able to understand them.’

“The circumstances to which we of this canton owe the presence among
us of Baron Seraphitus, the beloved cousin of Swedenborg, enabled me to
know all the events of the extraordinary life of that prophet. He has
lately been accused of imposture in certain quarters of Europe, and the
public prints reported the following fact based on a letter written
by the Chevalier Baylon. Swedenborg, they said, informed by certain
senators of a secret correspondence of the late Queen of Sweden with her
brother, the Prince of Prussia, revealed his knowledge of the secrets
contained in that correspondence to the Queen, making her believe he
had obtained this knowledge by supernatural means. A man worthy of all
confidence, Monsieur Charles-Leonhard de Stahlhammer, captain in
the Royal guard and knight of the Sword, answered the calumny with a
convincing letter.”

The pastor opened a drawer of his table and looked through a number of
papers until he found a gazette which he held out to Wilfrid, asking him
to read aloud the following letter:--

Stockholm, May 18, 1788.

  I have read with amazement a letter which purports to relate the
  interview of the famous Swedenborg with Queen Louisa-Ulrika. The
  circumstances therein stated are wholly false; and I hope the
  writer will excuse me for showing him by the following faithful
  narration, which can be proved by the testimony of many
  distinguished persons then present and still living, how
  completely he has been deceived.

  In 1758, shortly after the death of the Prince of Prussia
  Swedenborg came to court, where he was in the habit of attending
  regularly. He had scarcely entered the queen’s presence before she
  said to him: “Well, Mr. Assessor, have you seen my brother?”
   Swedenborg answered no, and the queen rejoined: “If you do see
  him, greet him for me.” In saying this she meant no more than a
  pleasant jest, and had no thought whatever of asking him for
  information about her brother. Eight days later (not twenty-four
  as stated, nor was the audience a private one), Swedenborg again
  came to court, but so early that the queen had not left her
  apartment called the White Room, where she was conversing with her
  maids-of-honor and other ladies attached to the court. Swedenborg
  did not wait until she came forth, but entered the said room and
  whispered something in her ear. The queen, overcome with
  amazement, was taken ill, and it was some time before she
  recovered herself. When she did so she said to those about her:
  “Only God and my brother knew the thing that he has just spoken
  of.” She admitted that it related to her last correspondence with
  the prince on a subject which was known to them alone. I cannot
  explain how Swedenborg came to know the contents of that letter,
  but I can affirm on my honor, that neither Count H---- (as the
  writer of the article states) nor any other person intercepted, or
  read, the queen’s letters. The senate allowed her to write to her
  brother in perfect security, considering the correspondence as of
  no interest to the State. It is evident that the author of the
  said article is ignorant of the character of Count H----. This
  honored gentleman, who has done many important services to his
  country, unites the qualities of a noble heart to gifts of mind,
  and his great age has not yet weakened these precious possessions.
  During his whole administration he added the weight of scrupulous
  integrity to his enlightened policy and openly declared himself
  the enemy of all secret intrigues and underhand dealings, which he
  regarded as unworthy means to attain an end. Neither did the
  writer of that article understand the Assessor Swedenborg. The
  only weakness of that essentially honest man was a belief in the
  apparition of spirits; but I knew him for many years, and I can
  affirm that he was as fully convinced that he met and talked with
  spirits as I am that I am writing at this moment. As a citizen and
  as a friend his integrity was absolute; he abhorred deception and
  led the most exemplary of lives. The version which the Chevalier
  Baylon gave of these facts is, therefore, entirely without
  justification; the visit stated to have been made to Swedenborg in
  the night-time by Count H---- and Count T---- is hereby
  contradicted. In conclusion, the writer of the letter may rest
  assured that I am not a follower of Swedenborg. The love of truth
  alone impels me to give this faithful account of a fact which has
  been so often stated with details that are entirely false. I
  certify to the truth of what I have written by adding my
  signature.

                                  Charles-Leonhard de Stahlhammer.


“The proofs which Swedenborg gave of his mission to the royal families
of Sweden and Prussia were no doubt the foundation of the belief in his
doctrines which is prevalent at the two courts,” said Monsieur Becker,
putting the gazette into the drawer. “However,” he continued, “I shall
not tell you all the facts of his visible and material life; indeed his
habits prevented them from being fully known. He lived a hidden life;
not seeking either riches or fame. He was even noted for a sort of
repugnance to making proselytes; he opened his mind to few persons, and
never showed his external powers of second-sight to any who were not
eminent in faith, wisdom, and love. He could recognize at a glance the
state of the soul of every person who approached him, and those whom he
desired to reach with his inward language he converted into Seers. After
the year 1745, his disciples never saw him do a single thing from any
human motive. One man alone, a Swedish priest, named Mathesius, set
afloat a story that he went mad in London in 1744. But a eulogium on
Swedenborg prepared with minute care as to all the known events of his
life, was pronounced after his death in 1772 on behalf of the Royal
Academy of Sciences in the Hall of the Nobles at Stockholm, by Monsieur
Sandels, counsellor of the Board of Mines. A declaration made before the
Lord Mayor of London gives the details of his last illness and death,
in which he received the ministrations of Monsieur Ferelius a Swedish
priest of the highest standing, and pastor of the Swedish Church in
London, Mathesius being his assistant. All persons present attested that
so far from denying the value of his writings Swedenborg firmly asserted
their truth. ‘In one hundred years,’ Monsieur Ferelius quotes him as
saying, ‘my doctrine will guide the _Church_.’ He predicted the day
and hour of his death. On that day, Sunday, March 29, 1772, hearing the
clock strike, he asked what time it was. ‘Five o’clock’ was the answer.
‘It is well,’ he answered; ‘thank you, God bless you.’ Ten minutes later
he tranquilly departed, breathing a gentle sigh. Simplicity, moderation,
and solitude were the features of his life. When he had finished writing
any of his books he sailed either for London or for Holland, where he
published them, and never spoke of them again. He published in this
way twenty-seven different treatises, all written, he said, from the
dictation of Angels. Be it true or false, few men have been strong
enough to endure the flames of oral illumination.

“There they all are,” said Monsieur Becker, pointing to a second shelf
on which were some sixty volumes. “The treatises on which the Divine
Spirit casts its most vivid gleams are seven in number, namely: ‘Heaven
and Hell’; ‘Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine Love and the Divine
Wisdom’; ‘Angelic Wisdom concerning the Divine Providence’; ‘The
Apocalypse Revealed’; ‘Conjugial Love and its Chaste Delights’; ‘The
True Christian Religion’; and ‘An Exposition of the Internal Sense.’
Swedenborg’s explanation of the Apocalypse begins with these words,”
 said Monsieur Becker, taking down and opening the volume nearest to him:
“‘Herein I have written nothing of mine own; I speak as I am bidden by
the Lord, who said, through the same angel, to John: “Thou shalt not
seal the sayings of this Prophecy.”’ (Revelation xxii. 10.)

“My dear Monsieur Wilfrid,” said the old man, looking at his guest, “I
often tremble in every limb as I read, during the long winter evenings
the awe-inspiring works in which this man declares with perfect
artlessness the wonders that are revealed to him. ‘I have seen,’ he
says, ‘Heaven and the Angels. The spiritual man sees his spiritual
fellows far better than the terrestrial man sees the men of earth. In
describing the wonders of heaven and beneath the heavens I obey the
Lord’s command. Others have the right to believe me or not as they
choose. I cannot put them into the state in which God has put me; it
is not in my power to enable them to converse with Angels, nor to work
miracles within their understanding; they alone can be the instrument of
their rise to angelic intercourse. It is now twenty-eight years since
I have lived in the Spiritual world with angels, and on earth with men;
for it pleased God to open the eyes of my spirit as he did that of Paul,
and of Daniel and Elisha.’

“And yet,” continued the pastor, thoughtfully, “certain persons have
had visions of the spiritual world through the complete detachment which
somnambulism produces between their external form and their inner being.
‘In this state,’ says Swedenborg in his treatise on Angelic Wisdom
(No. 257) ‘Man may rise into the region of celestial light because, his
corporeal senses being abolished, the influence of heaven acts without
hindrance on his inner man.’ Many persons who do not doubt that
Swedenborg received celestial revelations think that his writings are
not all the result of divine inspiration. Others insist on absolute
adherence to him; while admitting his many obscurities, they believe
that the imperfection of earthly language prevented the prophet from
clearly revealing those spiritual visions whose clouds disperse to
the eyes of those whom faith regenerates; for, to use the words of his
greatest disciple, ‘Flesh is but an external propagation.’ To poets and
to writers his presentation of the marvellous is amazing; to Seers it
is simply reality. To some Christians his descriptions have seemed
scandalous. Certain critics have ridiculed the celestial substance
of his temples, his golden palaces, his splendid cities where angels
disport themselves; they laugh at his groves of miraculous trees, his
gardens where the flowers speak and the air is white, and the mystical
stones, the sard, carbuncle, chrysolite, chrysoprase, jacinth,
chalcedony, beryl, the Urim and Thummim, are endowed with motion,
express celestial truths, and reply by variations of light to questions
put to them [‘True Christian Religion,’ 219). Many noble souls will not
admit his spiritual worlds where colors are heard in delightful concert,
where language flames and flashes, where the Word is writ in pointed
spiral letters [‘True Christian Religion,’ 278). Even in the North some
writers have laughed at the gates of pearl, and the diamonds which
stud the floors and walls of his New Jerusalem, where the most ordinary
utensils are made of the rarest substances of the globe. ‘But,’ say his
disciples, ‘because such things are sparsely scattered on this earth
does it follow that they are not abundant in other worlds? On earth
they are terrestrial substances, whereas in heaven they assume celestial
forms and are in keeping with angels.’ In this connection Swedenborg
has used the very words of Jesus Christ, who said, ‘If I have told you
earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things?’

“Monsieur,” continued the pastor, with an emphatic gesture, “I have read
the whole of Swedenborg’s works; and I say it with pride, because I have
done it and yet retained my reason. In reading him men either miss his
meaning or become Seers like him. Though I have evaded both extremes, I
have often experienced unheard-of delights, deep emotions, inward joys,
which alone can reveal to us the plenitude of truth,--the evidence of
celestial Light. All things here below seem small indeed when the soul
is lost in the perusal of these Treatises. It is impossible not to be
amazed when we think that in the short space of thirty years this man
wrote and published, on the truths of the Spiritual World, twenty-five
quarto volumes, composed in Latin, of which the shortest has five
hundred pages, all of them printed in small type. He left, they say,
twenty others in London, bequeathed to his nephew, Monsieur Silverichm,
formerly almoner to the King of Sweden. Certainly a man who, between the
ages of twenty and sixty, had already exhausted himself in publishing
a series of encyclopaedical works, must have received supernatural
assistance in composing these later stupendous treatises, at an age,
too, when human vigor is on the wane. You will find in these writings
thousands of propositions, all numbered, none of which have been
refuted. Throughout we see method and precision; the presence of the
spirit issuing and flowing down from a single fact,--the existence of
angels. His ‘True Christian Religion,’ which sums up his whole doctrine
and is vigorous with light, was conceived and written at the age of
eighty-three. In fact, his amazing vigor and omniscience are not denied
by any of his critics, not even by his enemies.

“Nevertheless,” said Monsieur Becker, slowly, “though I have drunk deep
in this torrent of divine light, God has not opened the eyes of my inner
being, and I judge these writings by the reason of an unregenerated man.
I have often felt that the _inspired_ Swedenborg must have misunderstood
the Angels. I have laughed over certain visions which, according to his
disciples, I ought to have believed with veneration. I have failed to
imagine the spiral writing of the Angels or their golden belts, on
which the gold is of great or lesser thickness. If, for example, this
statement, ‘Some angels are solitary,’ affected me powerfully for a
time, I was, on reflection, unable to reconcile this solitude with their
marriages. I have not understood why the Virgin Mary should continue to
wear blue satin garments in heaven. I have even dared to ask myself why
those gigantic demons, Enakim and Hephilim, came so frequently to fight
the cherubim on the apocalyptic plains of Armageddon; and I cannot
explain to my own mind how Satans can argue with Angels. Monsieur le
Baron Seraphitus assured me that those details concerned only the angels
who live on earth in human form. The visions of the prophet are
often blurred with grotesque figures. One of his spiritual tales,
or ‘Memorable relations,’ as he called them, begins thus: ‘I see the
spirits assembling, they have hats upon their heads.’ In another of
these Memorabilia he receives from heaven a bit of paper, on which he
saw, he says, the hieroglyphics of the primitive peoples, which were
composed of curved lines traced from the finger-rings that are worn in
heaven. However, perhaps I am wrong; possibly the material absurdities
with which his works are strewn have spiritual significations.
Otherwise, how shall we account for the growing influence of his
religion? His church numbers to-day more than seven hundred thousand
believers,--as many in the United States of America as in England, where
there are seven thousand Swedenborgians in the city of Manchester alone.
Many men of high rank in knowledge and in social position in Germany, in
Prussia, and in the Northern kingdoms have publicly adopted the beliefs
of Swedenborg; which, I may remark, are more comforting than those of
all other Christian communions. I wish I had the power to explain to you
clearly in succinct language the leading points of the doctrine on which
Swedenborg founded his church; but I fear such a summary, made from
recollection, would be necessarily defective. I shall, therefore,
allow myself to speak only of those ‘Arcana’ which concern the birth of
Seraphita.”

Here Monsieur Becker paused, as though composing his mind to gather up
his ideas. Presently he continued, as follows:--

“After establishing mathematically that man lives eternally in spheres
of either a lower or a higher grade, Swedenborg applies the term
‘Spiritual Angels’ to beings who in this world are prepared for heaven,
where they become angels. According to him, God has not created angels;
none exist who have not been men upon the earth. The earth is the
nursery-ground of heaven. The Angels are therefore not Angels as
such [‘Angelic Wisdom,’ 57), they are transformed through their close
conjunction with God; which conjunction God never refuses, because the
essence of God is not negative, but essentially active. The spiritual
angels pass through three natures of love, because man is only
regenerated through successive stages [‘True Religion’). First, the
_love of self_: the supreme expression of this love is human genius,
whose works are worshipped. Next, _love of life_: this love produces
prophets,--great men whom the world accepts as guides and proclaims
to be divine. Lastly, _love of heaven_, and this creates the Spiritual
Angel. These angels are, so to speak, the flowers of humanity, which
culminates in them and works for that culmination. They must possess
either the love of heaven or the wisdom of heaven, but always Love
before Wisdom.

“Thus the transformation of the natural man is into Love. To reach this
first degree, his previous existences must have passed through Hope and
Charity, which prepare him for Faith and Prayer. The ideas acquired
by the exercise of these virtues are transmitted to each of the human
envelopes within which are hidden the metamorphoses of the _inner
being_; for nothing is separate, each existence is necessary to the
other existences. Hope cannot advance without Charity, nor Faith
without Prayer; they are the four fronts of a solid square. ‘One virtue
missing,’ he said, ‘and the Spiritual Angel is like a broken pearl.’
Each of these existences is therefore a circle in which revolves the
celestial riches of the inner being. The perfection of the Spiritual
Angels comes from this mysterious progression in which nothing is lost
of the high qualities that are successfully acquired to attain each
glorious incarnation; for at each transformation they cast away
unconsciously the flesh and its errors. When the man lives in Love he
has shed all evil passions: Hope, Charity, Faith, and Prayer have, in
the words of Isaiah, purged the dross of his inner being, which can
never more be polluted by earthly affections. Hence the grand saying
of Christ quoted by Saint Matthew, ‘Lay up for yourselves treasures
in Heaven where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,’ and those still
grander words: ‘If ye were of this world the world would love you, but I
have chosen you out of the world; be ye therefore perfect as your Father
in heaven is perfect.’

“The second transformation of man is to Wisdom. Wisdom is the
understanding of celestial things to which the Spirit is brought by
Love. The Spirit of Love has acquired strength, the result of all
vanquished terrestrial passions; it loves God blindly. But the Spirit of
Wisdom has risen to understanding and knows why it loves. The wings of
the one are spread and bear the spirit to God; the wings of the other
are held down by the awe that comes of understanding: the spirit knows
God. The one longs incessantly to see God and to fly to Him; the other
attains to Him and trembles. The union effected between the Spirit of
Love and the Spirit of Wisdom carries the human being into a Divine
state during which time his soul is _woman_ and his body _man_, the last
human manifestation in which the Spirit conquers Form, or Form still
struggles against the Spirit,--for Form, that is, the flesh, is
ignorant, rebels, and desires to continue gross. This supreme trial
creates untold sufferings seen by Heaven alone,--the agony of Christ in
the Garden of Olives.

“After death the first heaven opens to this dual and purified human
nature. Therefore it is that man dies in despair while the Spirit
dies in ecstasy. Thus, the _natural_, the state of beings not yet
regenerated; the _spiritual_, the state of those who have become Angelic
Spirits, and the _divine_, the state in which the Angel exists before
he breaks from his covering of flesh, are the three degrees of existence
through which man enters heaven. One of Swedenborg’s thoughts expressed
in his own words will explain to you with wonderful clearness the
difference between the _natural_ and the _spiritual_. ‘To the minds of
men,’ he says, ‘the Natural passes into the Spiritual; they regard the
world under its visible aspects, they perceive it only as it can be
realized by their senses. But to the apprehension of Angelic Spirits,
the Spiritual passes into the Natural; they regard the world in its
inward essence and not in its form.’ Thus human sciences are but
analyses of form. The man of science as the world goes is purely
external like his knowledge; his inner being is only used to preserve
his aptitude for the perception of external truths. The Angelic Spirit
goes far beyond that; his knowledge is the thought of which human
science is but the utterance; he derives that knowledge from the Logos,
and learns the law of _correspondences_ by which the world is placed
in unison with heaven. The _word of God_ was wholly written by pure
Correspondences, and covers an esoteric or spiritual meaning, which
according to the science of Correspondences, cannot be understood.
‘There exist,’ says Swedenborg [‘Celestial Doctrine’ 26), ‘innumerable
Arcana within the hidden meaning of the Correspondences. Thus the men
who scoff at the books of the Prophets where the Word is enshrined are
as densely ignorant as those other men who know nothing of a science and
yet ridicule its truths. To know the Correspondences which exist between
the things visible and ponderable in the terrestrial world and the
things invisible and imponderable in the spiritual world, is to hold
heaven within our comprehension. All the objects of the manifold
creations having emanated from God necessarily enfold a hidden meaning;
according, indeed, to the grand thought of Isaiah, ‘The earth is a
garment.’

“This mysterious link between Heaven and the smallest atoms of created
matter constitutes what Swedenborg calls a Celestial Arcanum, and
his treatise on the ‘Celestial Arcana’ in which he explains the
correspondences or significances of the Natural with, and to, the
Spiritual, giving, to use the words of Jacob Boehm, the sign and seal
of all things, occupies not less than sixteen volumes containing thirty
thousand propositions. ‘This marvellous knowledge of Correspondences
which the goodness of God granted to Swedenborg,’ says one of his
disciples, ‘is the secret of the interest which draws men to his works.
According to him, all things are derived from heaven, all things lead
back to heaven. His writings are sublime and clear; he speaks in heaven,
and earth hears him. Take one of his sentences by itself and a volume
could be made of it’; and the disciple quotes the following passages
taken from a thousand others that would answer the same purpose.

“‘The kingdom of heaven,’ says Swedenborg [‘Celestial Arcana’), ‘is the
kingdom of motives. _Action_ is born in heaven, thence into the world,
and, by degrees, to the infinitely remote parts of earth. Terrestrial
effects being thus linked to celestial causes, all things are
_correspondent_ and _significant_. Man is the means of union between the
Natural and the Spiritual.’

“The Angelic Spirits therefore know the very nature of the
Correspondences which link to heaven all earthly things; they know,
too, the inner meaning of the prophetic words which foretell their
evolutions. Thus to these Spirits everything here below has its
significance; the tiniest flower is a thought,--a life which corresponds
to certain lineaments of the Great Whole, of which they have a constant
intuition. To them Adultery and the excesses spoken of in Scripture and
by the Prophets, often garbled by self-styled scholars, mean the state
of those souls which in this world persist in tainting themselves with
earthly affections, thus compelling their divorce from Heaven. Clouds
signify the veil of the Most High. Torches, shew-bread, horses and
horsemen, harlots, precious stones, in short, everything named in
Scripture, has to them a clear-cut meaning, and reveals the future of
terrestrial facts in their relation to Heaven. They penetrate the
truths contained in the Revelation of Saint John the divine, which human
science has subsequently demonstrated and proved materially; such, for
instance, as the following [‘big,’ said Swedenborg, ‘with many human
sciences’): ‘I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven
and the first earth were passed away’ (Revelation xxi. 1). These Spirits
know the supper at which the flesh of kings and the flesh of all men,
free and bond, is eaten, to which an Angel standing in the sun has
bidden them. They see the winged woman, clothed with the sun, and the
mailed man. ‘The horse of the Apocalypse,’ says Swedenborg, ‘is the
visible image of human intellect ridden by Death, for it bears within
itself the elements of its own destruction.’ Moreover, they can
distinguish beings concealed under forms which to ignorant eyes
would seem fantastic. When a man is disposed to receive the prophetic
afflation of Correspondences, it rouses within him a perception of the
Word; he comprehends that the creations are transformations only; his
intellect is sharpened, a burning thirst takes possession of him which
only Heaven can quench. He conceives, according to the greater or lesser
perfection of his inner being, the power of the Angelic Spirits; and he
advances, led by Desire (the least imperfect state of unregenerated man)
towards Hope, the gateway to the world of Spirits, whence he reaches
Prayer, which gives him the Key of Heaven.

“What being here below would not desire to render himself worthy of
entrance into the sphere of those who live in secret by Love and Wisdom?
Here on earth, during their lifetime, such spirits remain pure; they
neither see, nor think, nor speak like other men. There are two ways by
which perception comes,--one internal, the other external. Man is wholly
external, the Angelic Spirit wholly internal. The Spirit goes to
the depth of Numbers, possesses a full sense of them, knows their
significances. It controls Motion, and by reason of its ubiquity it
shares in all things. ‘An Angel,’ says Swedenborg, ‘is ever present to
a man when desired’ [‘Angelic Wisdom’); for the Angel has the gift of
detaching himself from his body, and he sees into heaven as the
prophets and as Swedenborg himself saw into it. ‘In this state,’ writes
Swedenborg [‘True Religion,’ 136), ‘the spirit of a man may move from
one place to another, his body remaining where it is,--a condition in
which I lived for over twenty-six years.’ It is thus that we should
interpret all Biblical statements which begin, ‘The Spirit led me.’
Angelic Wisdom is to human wisdom what the innumerable forces of nature
are to its action, which is one. All things live again, and move and
have their being in the Spirit, which is in God. Saint Paul expresses
this truth when he says, ‘In Deo sumus, movemur, et vivimus,’--we live,
we act, we are in God.

“Earth offers no hindrance to the Angelic Spirit, just as the Word
offers him no obscurity. His approaching divinity enables him to see the
thought of God veiled in the Logos, just as, living by his inner being,
the Spirit is in communion with the hidden meaning of all things on this
earth. Science is the language of the Temporal world, Love is that of
the Spiritual world. Thus man takes note of more than he is able
to explain, while the Angelic Spirit sees and comprehends. Science
depresses man; Love exalts the Angel. Science is still seeking, Love
has found. Man judges Nature according to his own relations to her; the
Angelic Spirit judges it in its relation to Heaven. In short, all things
have a voice for the Spirit. Spirits are in the secret of the harmony of
all creations with each other; they comprehend the spirit of sound, the
spirit of color, the spirit of vegetable life; they can question the
mineral, and the mineral makes answer to their thoughts. What to them
are sciences and the treasures of the earth when they grasp all things
by the eye at all moments, when the worlds which absorb the minds of so
many men are to them but the last step from which they spring to God?
Love of heaven, or the Wisdom of heaven, is made manifest to them by a
circle of light which surrounds them, and is visible to the Elect.
Their innocence, of which that of children is a symbol, possesses,
nevertheless, a knowledge which children have not; they are both
innocent and learned. ‘And,’ says Swedenborg, ‘the innocence of Heaven
makes such an impression upon the soul that those whom it affects keep
a rapturous memory of it which lasts them all their lives, as I myself
have experienced. It is perhaps sufficient,’ he goes on, ‘to have only a
minimum perception of it to be forever changed, to long to enter Heaven
and the sphere of Hope.’

“His doctrine of Marriage can be reduced to the following words: ‘The
Lord has taken the beauty and the grace of the life of man and bestowed
them upon woman. When man is not reunited to this beauty and this grace
of his life, he is harsh, sad, and sullen; when he is reunited to them
he is joyful and complete.’ The Angels are ever at the perfect point
of beauty. Marriages are celebrated by wondrous ceremonies. In these
unions, which produce no children, man contributes the _understanding_,
woman the _will_; they become one being, one Flesh here below, and pass
to heaven clothed in the celestial form. On this earth, the natural
attraction of the sexes towards enjoyment is an Effect which allures,
fatigues and disgusts; but in the form celestial the pair, now _one_ in
Spirit find within theirself a ceaseless source of joy. Swedenborg was
led to see these nuptials of the Spirits, which in the words of Saint
Luke (xx. 35) are neither marrying nor giving in marriage, and which
inspire none but spiritual pleasures. An Angel offered to make him
witness of such a marriage and bore him thither on his wings (the wings
are a symbol and not a reality). The Angel clothed him in a wedding
garment and when Swedenborg, finding himself thus robed in light, asked
why, the answer was: ‘For these events, our garments are illuminated;
they shine; they are made nuptial.’ [‘Conjugial Love,’ 19, 20, 21.) Then
he saw the two Angels, one coming from the South, the other from the
East; the Angel of the South was in a chariot drawn by two white horses,
with reins of the color and brilliance of the dawn; but lo, when they
were near him in the sky, chariot and horses vanished. The Angel of the
East, clothed in crimson, and the Angel of the South, in purple, drew
together, like breaths, and mingled: one was the Angel of Love, the
other the Angel of Wisdom. Swedenborg’s guide told him that the two
Angels had been linked together on earth by an inward friendship and
ever united though separated in life by great distances. Consent, the
essence of all good marriage upon earth, is the habitual state of Angels
in Heaven. Love is the light of their world. The eternal rapture of
Angels comes from the faculty that God communicates to them to
render back to Him the joy they feel through Him. This reciprocity of
infinitude forms their life. They become infinite by participating of
the essence of God, who generates Himself by Himself.

“The immensity of the Heavens where the Angels dwell is such that if man
were endowed with sight as rapid as the darting of light from the sun to
the earth, and if he gazed throughout eternity, his eyes could not reach
the horizon, nor find an end. Light alone can give an idea of the joys
of heaven. ‘It is,’ says Swedenborg [‘Angelic Wisdom,’ 7, 25, 26, 27),
‘a vapor of the virtue of God, a pure emanation of His splendor, beside
which our greatest brilliance is obscurity. It can compass all; it can
renew all, and is never absorbed: it environs the Angel and unites him
to God by infinite joys which multiply infinitely of themselves. This
Light destroys whosoever is not prepared to receive it. No one here
below, nor yet in Heaven can see God and live. This is the meaning of
the saying (Exodus xix. 12, 13, 21-23) “Take heed to yourselves that ye
go not up into the mount--lest ye break through unto the Lord to gaze,
and many perish.” And again (Exodus xxxiv. 29-35), “When Moses came down
from Mount Sinai with the two Tables of testimony in his hand, his face
shone, so that he put a veil upon it when he spake with the people, lest
any of them die.” The Transfiguration of Jesus Christ likewise revealed
the light surrounding the Messengers from on high and the ineffable joys
of the Angels who are forever imbued with it. “His face,” says Saint
Matthew (xvii. 1-5), “did shine as the sun and his raiment was white as
the light--and a bright cloud overshadowed them.”’

“When a planet contains only those beings who reject the Lord, when his
word is ignored, then the Angelic Spirits are gathered together by the
four winds, and God sends forth an Exterminating Angel to change the
face of the refractory earth, which in the immensity of this universe is
to Him what an unfruitful seed is to Nature. Approaching the globe, this
Exterminating Angel, borne by a comet, causes the planet to turn upon
its axis, and the lands lately covered by the seas reappear, adorned in
freshness and obedient to the laws proclaimed in Genesis; the Word of
God is once more powerful on this new earth, which everywhere exhibits
the effects of terrestrial waters and celestial flames. The light
brought by the Angel from On High, causes the sun to pale. ‘Then,’ says
Isaiah, (xix. 20) ‘men will hide in the clefts of the rock and roll
themselves in the dust of the earth.’ ‘They will cry to the mountains’
(Revelation), ‘Fall on us! and to the seas, Swallow us up! Hide us from
the face of Him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb!’ The Lamb is the great figure and hope of the Angels misjudged and
persecuted here below. Christ himself has said, ‘Blessed are those who
mourn! Blessed are the simple-hearted! Blessed are they that love!’--All
Swedenborg is there! Suffer, Believe, Love. To love truly must we not
suffer? must we not believe? Love begets Strength, Strength bestows
Wisdom, thence Intelligence; for Strength and Wisdom demand Will. To
be intelligent, is not that to Know, to Wish, and to Will,--the three
attributes of the Angelic Spirit? ‘If the universe has a meaning,’
Monsieur Saint-Martin said to me when I met him during a journey which
he made in Sweden, ‘surely this is the one most worthy of God.’

“But, Monsieur,” continued the pastor after a thoughtful pause, “of what
avail to you are these shreds of thoughts taken here and there from
the vast extent of a work of which no true idea can be given except
by comparing it to a river of light, to billows of flame? When a man
plunges into it he is carried away as by an awful current. Dante’s poem
seems but a speck to the reader submerged in the almost Biblical
verses with which Swedenborg renders palpable the Celestial Worlds,
as Beethoven built his palaces of harmony with thousands of notes, as
architects have reared cathedrals with millions of stones. We roll in
soundless depths, where our minds will not always sustain us. Ah, surely
a great and powerful intellect is needed to bring us back, safe and
sound, to our own social beliefs.

“Swedenborg,” resumed the pastor, “was particularly attached to the
Baron de Seraphitz, whose name, according to an old Swedish custom, had
taken from time immemorial the Latin termination of ‘us.’ The baron was
an ardent disciple of the Swedish prophet, who had opened the eyes of
his Inner-Man and brought him to a life in conformity with the decrees
from On-High. He sought for an Angelic Spirit among women; Swedenborg
found her for him in a vision. His bride was the daughter of a London
shoemaker, in whom, said Swedenborg, the life of Heaven shone, she
having passed through all anterior trials. After the death, that is, the
transformation of the prophet, the baron came to Jarvis to accomplish
his celestial nuptials with the observances of Prayer. As for me, who
am not a Seer, I have only known the terrestrial works of this couple.
Their lives were those of saints whose virtues are the glory of the
Roman Church. They ameliorated the condition of our people; they
supplied them all with means in return for work,--little, perhaps,
but enough for all their wants. Those who lived with them in constant
intercourse never saw them show a sign of anger or impatience; they were
constantly beneficent and gentle, full of courtesy and loving-kindness;
their marriage was the harmony of two souls indissolubly united. Two
eiders winging the same flight, the sound in the echo, the thought in
the word,--these, perhaps, are true images of their union. Every one
here in Jarvis loved them with an affection which I can compare only
to the love of a plant for the sun. The wife was simple in her manners,
beautiful in form, lovely in face, with a dignity of bearing like that
of august personages. In 1783, being then twenty-six years old, she
conceived a child; her pregnancy was to the pair a solemn joy. They
prepared to bid the earth farewell; for they told me they should be
transformed when their child had passed the state of infancy which
needed their fostering care until the strength to exist alone should be
given to her.

“Their child was born,--the Seraphita we are now concerned with. From
the moment of her conception father and mother lived a still more
solitary life than in the past, lifting themselves up to heaven by
Prayer. They hoped to see Swedenborg, and faith realized their hope.
The day on which Seraphita came into the world Swedenborg appeared in
Jarvis, and filled the room of the new-born child with light. I was told
that he said, ‘The work is accomplished; the Heavens rejoice!’ Sounds of
unknown melodies were heard throughout the house, seeming to come
from the four points of heaven on the wings of the wind. The spirit of
Swedenborg led the father forth to the shores of the fiord and there
quitted him. Certain inhabitants of Jarvis, having approached Monsieur
Seraphitus as he stood on the shore, heard him repeat those blissful
words of Scripture: ‘How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of Him
who is sent of God!’

“I had left the parsonage on my way to baptize the infant and name
it, and perform the other duties required by law, when I met the baron
returning to the house. ‘Your ministrations are superfluous,’ he said;
‘our child is to be without name on this earth. You must not baptize in
the waters of an earthly Church one who has just been immersed in the
fires of Heaven. This child will remain a blossom, it will not grow old;
you will see it pass away. You exist, but our child has life; you have
outward senses, the child has none, its being is always inward.’ These
words were uttered in so strange and supernatural a voice that I was
more affected by them than by the shining of his face, from which light
appeared to exude. His appearance realized the phantasmal ideas which we
form of inspired beings as we read the prophesies of the Bible. But such
effects are not rare among our mountains, where the nitre of perpetual
snows produces extraordinary phenomena in the human organization.

“I asked him the cause of his emotion. ‘Swedenborg came to us; he has
just left me; I have breathed the air of heaven,’ he replied. ‘Under
what form did he appear?’ I said. ‘Under his earthly form; dressed as
he was the last time I saw him in London, at the house of Richard
Shearsmith, Coldbath-fields, in July, 1771. He wore his brown frieze
coat with steel buttons, his waistcoat buttoned to the throat, a white
cravat, and the same magisterial wig rolled and powdered at the sides
and raised high in front, showing his vast and luminous brow, in keeping
with the noble square face, where all is power and tranquillity. I
recognized the large nose with its fiery nostril, the mouth that
ever smiled,--angelic mouth from which these words, the pledge of my
happiness, have just issued, “We shall meet soon.”’

“The conviction that shone on the baron’s face forbade all discussion; I
listened in silence. His voice had a contagious heat which made my bosom
burn within me; his fanaticism stirred my heart as the anger of another
makes our nerves vibrate. I followed him in silence to his house, where
I saw the nameless child lying mysteriously folded to its mother’s
breast. The babe heard my step and turned its head toward me; its
eyes were not those of an ordinary child. To give you an idea of the
impression I received, I must say that already they saw and thought. The
childhood of this predestined being was attended by circumstances quite
extraordinary in our climate. For nine years our winters were milder
and our summers longer than usual. This phenomenon gave rise to several
discussions among scientific men; but none of their explanations seemed
sufficient to academicians, and the baron smiled when I told him of
them. The child was never seen in its nudity as other children are; it
was never touched by man or woman, but lived a sacred thing upon the
mother’s breast, and it never cried. If you question old David he will
confirm these facts about his mistress, for whom he feels an adoration
like that of Louis IX. for the saint whose name he bore.

“At nine years of age the child began to pray; prayer is her life. You
saw her in the church at Christmas, the only day on which she comes
there; she is separated from the other worshippers by a visible space.
If that space does not exist between herself and men she suffers. That
is why she passes nearly all her time alone in the chateau. The events
of her life are unknown; she is seldom seen; her days are spent in the
state of mystical contemplation which was, so Catholic writers tell us,
habitual with the early Christian solitaries, in whom the oral tradition
of Christ’s own words still remained. Her mind, her soul, her body, all
within her is virgin as the snow on those mountains. At ten years of
age she was just what you see her now. When she was nine her father and
mother expired together, without pain or visible malady, after naming
the day and hour at which they would cease to be. Standing at their
feet she looked at them with a calm eye, not showing either sadness, or
grief, or joy, or curiosity. When we approached to remove the two bodies
she said, ‘Carry them away!’ ‘Seraphita,’ I said, for so we called her,
‘are you not affected by the death of your father and your mother
who loved you so much?’ ‘Dead?’ she answered, ‘no, they live in me
forever--That is nothing,’ she pointed without emotion to the bodies
they were bearing away. I then saw her for the third time only since her
birth. In church it is difficult to distinguish her; she stands near
a column which, seen from the pulpit, is in shadow, so that I cannot
observe her features.

“Of all the servants of the household there remained after the death of
the master and mistress only old David, who, in spite of his eighty-two
years, suffices to wait on his mistress. Some of our Jarvis people tell
wonderful tales about her. These have a certain weight in a land so
essentially conducive to mystery as ours; and I am now studying the
treatise on Incantations by Jean Wier and other works relating to
demonology, where pretended supernatural events are recorded, hoping to
find facts analogous to those which are attributed to her.”

“Then you do not believe in her?” said Wilfrid.

“Oh yes, I do,” said the pastor, genially, “I think her a very
capricious girl; a little spoilt by her parents, who turned her head
with the religious ideas I have just revealed to you.”

Minna shook her head in a way that gently expressed contradiction.

“Poor girl!” continued the old man, “her parents bequeathed to her that
fatal exaltation of soul which misleads mystics and renders them all
more or less mad. She subjects herself to fasts which horrify poor
David. The good old man is like a sensitive plant which quivers at the
slightest breeze, and glows under the first sun-ray. His mistress, whose
incomprehensible language has become his, is the breeze and the sun-ray
to him; in his eyes her feet are diamonds and her brow is strewn with
stars; she walks environed with a white and luminous atmosphere; her
voice is accompanied by music; she has the gift of rendering herself
invisible. If you ask to see her, he will tell you she has gone to the
_astral regions_. It is difficult to believe such a story, is it not?
You know all miracles bear more or less resemblance to the story of the
Golden Tooth. We have our golden tooth in Jarvis, that is all. Duncker
the fisherman asserts that he has seen her plunge into the fiord and
come up in the shape of an eider-duck, at other times walking on the
billows of a storm. Fergus, who leads the flocks to the saeters, says
that in rainy weather a circle of clear sky can be seen over the Swedish
castle; and that the heavens are always blue above Seraphita’s head when
she is on the mountain. Many women hear the tones of a mighty organ when
Seraphita enters the church, and ask their neighbors earnestly if they
too do not hear them. But my daughter, for whom during the last two
years Seraphita has shown much affection, has never heard this music,
and has never perceived the heavenly perfumes which, they say, make the
air fragrant about her when she moves. Minna, to be sure, has often on
returning from their walks together expressed to me the delight of a
young girl in the beauties of our spring-time, in the spicy odors of
budding larches and pines and the earliest flowers; but after our long
winters what can be more natural than such pleasure? The companionship
of this so-called spirit has nothing so very extraordinary in it, has
it, my child?”

“The secrets of that spirit are not mine,” said Minna. “Near it I know
all, away from it I know nothing; near that exquisite life I am no
longer myself, far from it I forget all. The time we pass together is
a dream which my memory scarcely retains. I may have heard yet not
remember the music which the women tell of; in that presence, I may have
breathed celestial perfumes, seen the glory of the heavens, and yet be
unable to recollect them here.”

“What astonishes me most,” resumed the pastor, addressing Wilfrid, “is
to notice that you suffer from being near her.”

“Near her!” exclaimed the stranger, “she has never so much as let
me touch her hand. When she saw me for the first time her glance
intimidated me; she said: ‘You are welcome here, for you were to come.’
I fancied that she knew me. I trembled. It is fear that forces me to
believe in her.”

“With me it is love,” said Minna, without a blush.

“Are you making fun of me?” said Monsieur Becker, laughing
good-humoredly; “you my daughter, in calling yourself a Spirit of Love,
and you, Monsieur Wilfrid, in pretending to be a Spirit of Wisdom?”

He drank a glass of beer and so did not see the singular look which
Wilfrid cast upon Minna.

“Jesting apart,” resumed the old gentleman, “I have been much astonished
to hear that these two mad-caps ascended to the summit of the Falberg;
it must be a girlish exaggeration; they probably went to the crest of a
ledge. It is impossible to reach the peaks of the Falberg.”

“If so, father,” said Minna, in an agitated voice, “I must have been
under the power of a spirit; for indeed we reached the summit of the
Ice-Cap.”

“This is really serious,” said Monsieur Becker. “Minna is always
truthful.”

“Monsieur Becker,” said Wilfrid, “I swear to you that Seraphita
exercises such extraordinary power over me that I know no language in
which I can give you the least idea of it. She has revealed to me things
known to myself alone.”

“Somnambulism!” said the old man. “A great many such effects are related
by Jean Wier as phenomena easily explained and formerly observed in
Egypt.”

“Lend me Swedenborg’s theosophical works,” said Wilfrid, “and let me
plunge into those gulfs of light,--you have given me a thirst for them.”

Monsieur Becker took down a volume and gave it to his guest, who
instantly began to read it. It was about nine o’clock in the evening.
The serving-woman brought in the supper. Minna made tea. The repast
over, each turned silently to his or her occupation; the pastor read the
Incantations; Wilfrid pursued the spirit of Swedenborg; and the young
girl continued to sew, her mind absorbed in recollections. It was a true
Norwegian evening--peaceful, studious, and domestic; full of thoughts,
flowers blooming beneath the snow. Wilfrid, as he devoured the pages of
the prophet, lived by his inner senses only; the pastor, looking up at
times from his book, called Minna’s attention to the absorption of
their guest with an air that was half-serious, half-jesting. To Minna’s
thoughts the face of Seraphitus smiled upon her as it hovered above the
clouds of smoke which enveloped them. The clock struck twelve. Suddenly
the outer door was opened violently. Heavy but hurried steps, the steps
of a terrified old man, were heard in the narrow vestibule between the
two doors; then David burst into the parlor.

“Danger, danger!” he cried. “Come! come, all! The evil spirits are
unchained! Fiery mitres are on their heads! Demons, Vertumni, Sirens!
they tempt her as Jesus was tempted on the mountain! Come, come! and
drive them away.”

“Do you not recognize the language of Swedenborg?” said the pastor,
laughing, to Wilfrid. “Here it is; pure from the source.”

But Wilfrid and Minna were gazing in terror at old David, who, with hair
erect, and eyes distraught, his legs trembling and covered with snow,
for he had come without snow-shoes, stood swaying from side to side, as
if some boisterous wind were shaking him.

“Is he harmed?” cried Minna.

“The devils hope and try to conquer her,” replied the old man.

The words made Wilfrid’s pulses throb.

“For the last five hours she has stood erect, her eyes raised to heaven
and her arms extended; she suffers, she cries to God. I cannot cross the
barrier; Hell has posted the Vertumni as sentinels. They have set up an
iron wall between her and her old David. She wants me, but what can I
do? Oh, help me! help me! Come and pray!”

The old man’s despair was terrible to see.

“The Light of God is defending her,” he went on, with infectious faith,
“but oh! she might yield to violence.”

“Silence, David! you are raving. This is a matter to be verified. We
will go with you,” said the pastor, “and you shall see that there are no
Vertumni, nor Satans, nor Sirens, in that house.”

“Your father is blind,” whispered David to Minna.

Wilfrid, on whom the reading of Swedenborg’s first treatise, which he
had rapidly gone through, had produced a powerful effect, was already in
the corridor putting on his skees; Minna was ready in a few moments, and
both left the old men far behind as they darted forward to the Swedish
castle.

“Do you hear that cracking sound?” said Wilfrid.

“The ice of the fiord stirs,” answered Minna; “the spring is coming.”

Wilfrid was silent. When the two reached the courtyard they were
conscious that they had neither the faculty nor the strength to enter
the house.

“What think you of her?” asked Wilfrid.

“See that radiance!” cried Minna, going towards the window of the salon.
“He is there! How beautiful! O my Seraphitus, take me!”

The exclamation was uttered inwardly. She saw Seraphitus standing erect,
lightly swathed in an opal-tinted mist that disappeared at a little
distance from the body, which seemed almost phosphorescent.

“How beautiful she is!” cried Wilfrid, mentally.

Just then Monsieur Becker arrived, followed by David; he saw his
daughter and guest standing before the window; going up to them, he
looked into the salon and said quietly, “Well, my good David, she is
only saying her prayers.”

“Ah, but try to enter, Monsieur.”

“Why disturb those who pray?” answered the pastor.

At this instant the moon, rising above the Falberg, cast its rays upon
the window. All three turned round, attracted by this natural effect
which made them quiver; when they turned back to again look at Seraphita
she had disappeared.

“How strange!” exclaimed Wilfrid.

“I hear delightful sounds,” said Minna.

“Well,” said the pastor, “it is all plain enough; she is going to bed.”

David had entered the house. The others took their way back in silence;
none of them interpreted the vision in the same manner,--Monsieur Becker
doubted, Minna adored, Wilfrid longed.

Wilfrid was a man about thirty-six years of age. His figure, though
broadly developed, was not wanting in symmetry. Like most men who
distinguish themselves above their fellows, he was of medium height; his
chest and shoulders were broad, and his neck short,--a characteristic of
those whose hearts are near their heads; his hair was black, thick, and
fine; his eyes, of a yellow brown, had, as it were, a solar brilliancy,
which proclaimed with what avidity his nature aspired to Light. Though
these strong and virile features were defective through the absence
of an inward peace,--granted only to a life without storms or
conflicts,--they plainly showed the inexhaustible resources of impetuous
senses and the appetites of instinct; just as every motion revealed
the perfection of the man’s physical apparatus, the flexibility of
his senses, and their fidelity when brought into play. This man might
contend with savages, and hear, as they do, the tread of enemies in
distant forests; he could follow a scent in the air, a trail on the
ground, or see on the horizon the signal of a friend. His sleep was
light, like that of all creatures who will not allow themselves to be
surprised. His body came quickly into harmony with the climate of any
country where his tempestuous life conducted him. Art and science would
have admired his organization in the light of a human model. Everything
about him was symmetrical and well-balanced,--action and heart,
intelligence and will. At first sight he might be classed among purely
instinctive beings, who give themselves blindly up to the material wants
of life; but in the very morning of his days he had flung himself into
a higher social world, with which his feelings harmonized; study had
widened his mind, reflection had sharpened his power of thought, and the
sciences had enlarged his understanding. He had studied human laws,--the
working of self-interests brought into conflict by the passions, and he
seemed to have early familiarized himself with the abstractions on which
societies rest. He had pored over books,--those deeds of dead humanity;
he had spent whole nights of pleasure in every European capital; he had
slept on fields of battle the night before the combat and the night that
followed victory. His stormy youth may have flung him on the deck of
some corsair and sent him among the contrasting regions of the globe;
thus it was that he knew the actions of a living humanity. He knew the
present and the past,--a double history; that of to-day, that of other
days. Many men have been, like Wilfrid, equally powerful by the Hand, by
the Heart, by the Head; like him, the majority have abused their triple
power. But though this man still held by certain outward liens to the
slimy side of humanity, he belonged also and positively to the sphere
where force is intelligent. In spite of the many veils which enveloped
his soul, there were certain ineffable symptoms of this fact which were
visible to pure spirits, to the eyes of the child whose innocence has
known no breath of evil passions, to the eyes of the old man who has
lived to regain his purity.

These signs revealed a Cain for whom there was still hope,--one who
seemed as though he were seeking absolution from the ends of the
earth. Minna suspected the galley-slave of glory in the man; Seraphita
recognized him. Both admired and both pitied him. Whence came their
prescience? Nothing could be more simple nor yet more extraordinary.
As soon as we seek to penetrate the secrets of Nature, where nothing
is secret, and where it is only necessary to have the eyes to see, we
perceive that the simple produces the marvellous.

“Seraphitus,” said Minna one evening a few days after Wilfrid’s arrival
in Jarvis, “you read the soul of this stranger while I have only vague
impressions of it. He chills me or else he excites me; but you seem to
know the cause of this cold and of this heat; tell me what it means, for
you know all about him.”

“Yes, I have seen the causes,” said Seraphitus, lowing his large
eyelids.

“By what power?” asked the curious Minna.

“I have the gift of Specialism,” he answered. “Specialism is an inward
sight which can penetrate all things; you will only understand its full
meaning through a comparison. In the great cities of Europe where works
are produced by which the human Hand seeks to represent the effects of
the moral nature was well as those of the physical nature, there are
glorious men who express ideas in marble. The sculptor acts on the
stone; he fashions it; he puts a realm of ideas into it. There
are statues which the hand of man has endowed with the faculty of
representing the noble side of humanity, or the whole evil side; most
men see in such marbles a human figure and nothing more; a few other
men, a little higher in the scale of being, perceive a fraction of the
thoughts expressed in the statue; but the Initiates in the secrets of
art are of the same intellect as the sculptor; they see in his work
the whole universe of his thought. Such persons are in themselves the
principles of art; they bear within them a mirror which reflects nature
in her slightest manifestations. Well! so it is with me; I have within
me a mirror before which the moral nature, with its causes and effects,
appears and is reflected. Entering thus into the consciousness of others
I am able to divine both the future and the past. How? do you still ask
how? Imagine that the marble statue is the body of a man, a piece of
statuary in which we see the emotion, sentiment, passion, vice or crime,
virtue or repentance which the creating hand has put into it, and
you will then comprehend how it is that I read the soul of this
foreigner--though what I have said does not explain the gift of
Specialism; for to conceive the nature of that gift we must possess it.”

Though Wilfrid belonged to the two first divisions of humanity, the men
of force and the men of thought, yet his excesses, his tumultuous life,
and his misdeeds had often turned him towards Faith; for doubt has two
sides; a side to the light and a side to the darkness. Wilfrid had too
closely clasped the world under its forms of Matter and of Mind not to
have acquired that thirst for the unknown, that longing to _go beyond_
which lay their grasp upon the men who know, and wish, and will.
But neither his knowledge, nor his actions, nor his will, had found
direction. He had fled from social life from necessity; as a great
criminal seeks the cloister. Remorse, that virtue of weak beings,
did not touch him. Remorse is impotence, impotence which sins again.
Repentance alone is powerful; it ends all. But in traversing the world,
which he made his cloister, Wilfrid had found no balm for his wounds; he
saw nothing in nature to which he could attach himself. In him, despair
had dried the sources of desire. He was one of those beings who, having
gone through all passions and come out victorious, have nothing more to
raise in their hot-beds, and who, lacking opportunity to put themselves
at the head of their fellow-men to trample under iron heel entire
populations, buy, at the price of a horrible martyrdom, the faculty of
ruining themselves in some belief,--rocks sublime, which await the touch
of a wand that comes not to bring the waters gushing from their far-off
spring.

Led by a scheme of his restless, inquiring life to the shores of Norway,
the sudden arrival of winter had detained the wanderer at Jarvis. The
day on which, for the first time, he saw Seraphita, the whole past of
his life faded from his mind. The young girl excited emotions which he
had thought could never be revived. The ashes gave forth a lingering
flame at the first murmurings of that voice. Who has ever felt himself
return to youth and purity after growing cold and numb with age and
soiled with impurity? Suddenly, Wilfrid loved as he had never loved; he
loved secretly, with faith, with fear, with inward madness. His life was
stirred to the very source of his being at the mere thought of seeing
Seraphita. As he listened to her he was transported into unknown worlds;
he was mute before her, she magnetized him. There, beneath the snows,
among the glaciers, bloomed the celestial flower to which his hopes, so
long betrayed, aspired; the sight of which awakened ideas of freshness,
purity, and faith which grouped about his soul and lifted it to higher
regions,--as Angels bear to heaven the Elect in those symbolic pictures
inspired by the guardian spirit of a great master. Celestial perfumes
softened the granite hardness of the rocky scene; light endowed with
speech shed its divine melodies on the path of him who looked to heaven.
After emptying the cup of terrestrial love which his teeth had bitten as
he drank it, he saw before him the chalice of salvation where the limpid
waters sparkled, making thirsty for ineffable delights whoever dare
apply his lips burning with a faith so strong that the crystal shall not
be shattered.

But Wilfrid now encountered the wall of brass for which he had been
seeking up and down the earth. He went impetuously to Seraphita, meaning
to express the whole force and bearing of a passion under which he
bounded like the fabled horse beneath the iron horseman, firm in his
saddle, whom nothing moves while the efforts of the fiery animal only
made the rider heavier and more solid. He sought her to relate his
life,--to prove the grandeur of his soul by the grandeur of his faults,
to show the ruins of his desert. But no sooner had he crossed
her threshold, and found himself within the zone of those eyes of
scintillating azure, that met no limits forward and left none behind,
than he grew calm and submissive, as a lion, springing on his prey in
the plains of Africa, receives from the wings of the wind a message
of love, and stops his bound. A gulf opened before him, into which his
frenzied words fell and disappeared, and from which uprose a voice which
changed his being; he became as a child, a child of sixteen, timid and
frightened before this maiden with serene brow, this white figure whose
inalterable calm was like the cruel impassibility of human justice. The
combat between them had never ceased until this evening, when with a
glance she brought him down, as a falcon making his dizzy spirals in
the air around his prey causes it to fall stupefied to earth, before
carrying it to his eyrie.

We may note within ourselves many a long struggle the end of which is
one of our own actions,--struggles which are, as it were, the reverse
side of humanity. This reverse side belongs to God; the obverse side to
men. More than once Seraphita had proved to Wilfrid that she knew this
hidden and ever varied side, which is to the majority of men a second
being. Often she said to him in her dove-like voice: “Why all this
vehemence?” when on his way to her he had sworn she should be his.
Wilfrid was, however, strong enough to raise the cry of revolt to which
he had given utterance in Monsieur Becker’s study. The narrative of
the old pastor had calmed him. Sceptical and derisive as he was, he saw
belief like a sidereal brilliance dawning on his life. He asked himself
if Seraphita were not an exile from the higher spheres seeking the
homeward way. The fanciful deifications of all ordinary lovers he could
not give to this lily of Norway in whose divinity he believed. Why lived
she here beside this fiord? What did she? Questions that received no
answer filled his mind. Above all, what was about to happen between
them? What fate had brought him there? To him, Seraphita was the
motionless marble, light nevertheless as a vapor, which Minna had seen
that day poised above the precipices of the Falberg. Could she thus
stand on the edge of all gulfs without danger, without a tremor of the
arching eyebrows, or a quiver of the light of the eye? If his love was
to be without hope, it was not without curiosity.

From the moment when Wilfrid suspected the ethereal nature of the
enchantress who had told him the secrets of his life in melodious
utterance, he had longed to try to subject her, to keep her to himself,
to tear her from the heaven where, perhaps, she was awaited. Earth and
Humanity seized their prey; he would imitate them. His pride, the only
sentiment through which man can long be exalted, would make him happy in
this triumph for the rest of his life. The idea sent the blood boiling
through his veins, and his heart swelled. If he did not succeed, he
would destroy her,--it is so natural to destroy that which we cannot
possess, to deny what we cannot comprehend, to insult that which we
envy.

On the morrow, Wilfrid, laden with ideas which the extraordinary events
of the previous night naturally awakened in his mind, resolved to
question David, and went to find him on the pretext of asking after
Seraphita’s health. Though Monsieur Becker spoke of the old servant as
falling into dotage, Wilfrid relied on his own perspicacity to discover
scraps of truth in the torrent of the old man’s rambling talk.

David had the immovable, undecided, physiognomy of an octogenarian.
Under his white hair lay a forehead lined with wrinkles like the stone
courses of a ruined wall; and his face was furrowed like the bed of a
dried-up torrent. His life seemed to have retreated wholly to the eyes,
where light still shone, though its gleams were obscured by a mistiness
which seemed to indicate either an active mental alienation or the
stupid stare of drunkenness. His slow and heavy movements betrayed the
glacial weight of age, and communicated an icy influence to whoever
allowed themselves to look long at him,--for he possessed the magnetic
force of torpor. His limited intelligence was only roused by the sight,
the hearing, or the recollection of his mistress. She was the soul of
this wholly material fragment of an existence. Any one seeing David
alone by himself would have thought him a corpse; let Seraphita enter,
let her voice be heard, or a mention of her be made, and the dead came
forth from his grave and recovered speech and motion. The dry bones
were not more truly awakened by the divine breath in the valley of
Jehoshaphat, and never was that apocalyptic vision better realized than
in this Lazarus issuing from the sepulchre into life at the voice of
a young girl. His language, which was always figurative and often
incomprehensible, prevented the inhabitants of the village from talking
with him; but they respected a mind that deviated so utterly from common
ways,--a thing which the masses instinctively admire.

Wilfrid found him in the antechamber, apparently asleep beside the
stove. Like a dog who recognizes a friend of the family, the old man
raised his eyes, saw the foreigner, and did not stir.

“Where is she?” inquired Wilfrid, sitting down beside him.

David fluttered his fingers in the air as if to express the flight of a
bird.

“Does she still suffer?” asked Wilfrid.

“Beings vowed to Heaven are able so to suffer that suffering does not
lessen their love; this is the mark of the true faith,” answered the old
man, solemnly, like an instrument which, on being touched, gives forth
an accidental note.

“Who taught you those words?”

“The Spirit.”

“What happened to her last night? Did you force your way past the
Vertumni standing sentinel? did you evade the Mammons?”

“Yes”; answered David, as though awaking from a dream.

The misty gleam of his eyes melted into a ray that came direct from
the soul and made it by degrees brilliant as that of an eagle, as
intelligent as that of a poet.

“What did you see?” asked Wilfrid, astonished at this sudden change.

“I saw Species and Shapes; I heard the Spirit of all things; I beheld
the revolt of the Evil Ones; I listened to the words of the Good. Seven
devils came, and seven archangels descended from on high. The archangels
stood apart and looked on through veils. The devils were close by; they
shone, they acted. Mammon came on his pearly shell in the shape of a
beautiful naked woman; her snowy body dazzled the eye, no human form
ever equalled it; and he said, ‘I am Pleasure; thou shalt possess me!’
Lucifer, prince of serpents, was there in sovereign robes; his Manhood
was glorious as the beauty of an angel, and he said, ‘Humanity shall be
at thy feet!’ The Queen of misers,--she who gives back naught that she
has ever received,--the Sea, came wrapped in her virent mantle; she
opened her bosom, she showed her gems, she brought forth her treasures
and offered them; waves of sapphire and of emerald came at her bidding;
her hidden wonders stirred, they rose to the surface of her breast, they
spoke; the rarest pearl of Ocean spread its iridescent wings and gave
voice to its marine melodies, saying, ‘Twin daughter of suffering, we
are sisters! await me; let us go together; all I need is to become a
Woman.’ The Bird with the wings of an eagle and the paws of a lion, the
head of a woman and the body of a horse, the Animal, fell down before
her and licked her feet, and promised seven hundred years of plenty to
her best-beloved daughter. Then came the most formidable of all, the
Child, weeping at her knees, and saying, ‘Wilt thou leave me, feeble
and suffering as I am? oh, my mother, stay!’ and he played with her,
and shed languor on the air, and the Heavens themselves had pity for
his wail. The Virgin of pure song brought forth her choirs to relax the
soul. The Kings of the East came with their slaves, their armies, and
their women; the Wounded asked her for succor, the Sorrowful stretched
forth their hands: ‘Do not leave us! do not leave us!’ they cried. I,
too, I cried, ‘Do not leave us! we adore thee! stay!’ Flowers, bursting
from the seed, bathed her in their fragrance which uttered, ‘Stay!’ The
giant Enakim came forth from Jupiter, leading Gold and its friends and
all the Spirits of the Astral Regions which are joined with him, and
they said, ‘We are thine for seven hundred years.’ At last came Death on
his pale horse, crying, ‘I will obey thee!’ One and all fell prostrate
before her. Could you but have seen them! They covered as it were a vast
plain, and they cried aloud to her, ‘We have nurtured thee, thou art our
child; do not abandon us!’ At length Life issued from her Ruby Waters,
and said, ‘I will not leave thee!’ then, finding Seraphita silent, she
flamed upon her as the sun, crying out, ‘I am light!’ ‘_The light_
is there!’ cried Seraphita, pointing to the clouds where stood the
archangels; but she was wearied out; Desire had wrung her nerves, she
could only cry, ‘My God! my God!’ Ah! many an Angelic Spirit, scaling
the mountain and nigh to the summit, has set his foot upon a rolling
stone which plunged him back into the abyss! All these lost Spirits
adored her constancy; they stood around her,--a choir without a
song,--weeping and whispering, ‘Courage!’ At last she conquered;
Desire--let loose upon her in every Shape and every Species--was
vanquished. She stood in prayer, and when at last her eyes were lifted
she saw the feet of Angels circling in the Heavens.”

“She saw the feet of Angels?” repeated Wilfrid.

“Yes,” said the old man.

“Was it a dream that she told you?” asked Wilfrid.

“A dream as real as your life,” answered David; “I was there.”

The calm assurance of the old servant affected Wilfrid powerfully.
He went away asking himself whether these visions were any less
extraordinary than those he had read of in Swedenborg the night before.

“If Spirits exist, they must act,” he was saying to himself as he
entered the parsonage, where he found Monsieur Becker alone.

“Dear pastor,” he said, “Seraphita is connected with us in form only,
and even that form is inexplicable. Do not think me a madman or a lover;
a profound conviction cannot be argued with. Convert my belief into
scientific theories, and let us try to enlighten each other. To-morrow
evening we shall both be with her.”

“What then?” said Monsieur Becker.

“If her eye ignores space,” replied Wilfrid, “if her thought is an
intelligent sight which enables her to perceive all things in their
essence, and to connect them with the general evolution of the universe,
if, in a word, she sees and knows all, let us seat the Pythoness on her
tripod, let us force this pitiless eagle by threats to spread its wings!
Help me! I breathe a fire which burns my vitals; I must quench it or it
will consume me. I have found a prey at last, and it shall be mine!”

“The conquest will be difficult,” said the pastor, “because this girl
is--”

“Is what?” cried Wilfrid.

“Mad,” said the old man.

“I will not dispute her madness, but neither must you dispute her
wonderful powers. Dear Monsieur Becker, she has often confounded me with
her learning. Has she travelled?”

“From her house to the fiord, no further.”

“Never left this place!” exclaimed Wilfrid. “Then she must have read
immensely.”

“Not a page, not one iota! I am the only person who possesses any books
in Jarvis. The works of Swedenborg--the only books that were in the
chateau--you see before you. She has never looked into a single one of
them.”

“Have you tried to talk with her?”

“What good would that do?”

“Does no one live with her in that house?”

“She has no friends but you and Minna, nor any servant except old
David.”

“It cannot be that she knows nothing of science nor of art.”

“Who should teach her?” said the pastor.

“But if she can discuss such matters pertinently, as she has often done
with me, what do you make of it?”

“The girl may have acquired through years of silence the faculties
enjoyed by Apollonius of Tyana and other pretended sorcerers burned
by the Inquisition, which did not choose to admit the fact of
second-sight.”

“If she can speak Arabic, what would you say to that?”

“The history of medical science gives many authentic instances of girls
who have spoken languages entirely unknown to them.”

“What can I do?” exclaimed Wilfrid. “She knows of secrets in my past
life known only to me.”

“I shall be curious if she can tell me thoughts that I have confided to
no living person,” said Monsieur Becker.

Minna entered the room.

“Well, my daughter, and how is your familiar spirit?”

“He suffers, father,” she answered, bowing to Wilfrid. “Human passions,
clothed in their false riches, surrounded him all night, and showed him
all the glories of the world. But you think these things mere tales.”

“Tales as beautiful to those who read them in their brains as the
‘Arabian Nights’ to common minds,” said the pastor, smiling.

“Did not Satan carry our Savior to the pinnacle of the Temple, and show
him all the kingdoms of the world?” she said.

“The Evangelists,” replied her father, “did not correct their copies
very carefully, and several versions are in existence.”

“You believe in the reality of these visions?” said Wilfrid to Minna.

“Who can doubt when he relates them.”

“He?” demanded Wilfrid. “Who?”

“He who is there,” replied Minna, motioning towards the chateau.

“Are you speaking of Seraphita?” he said.

The young girl bent her head, and looked at him with an expression of
gentle mischief.

“You too!” exclaimed Wilfrid, “you take pleasure in confounding me. Who
and what is she? What do you think of her?”

“What I feel is inexplicable,” said Minna, blushing.

“You are all crazy!” cried the pastor.

“Farewell, until to-morrow evening,” said Wilfrid.




