CHAPTER XLII.

INSTANCES OF DROWNED PERSONS RECOVERING THEIR HEALTH.


Here follow some instances of drowned persons[568] who came to
themselves several days after they were believed to be dead. Peclin
relates the story of a gardener of Troninghalm, in Sweden, who was
still alive, and sixty-five years of age, when the author wrote. This
man being on the ice to assist another man who had fallen into the
water, the ice broke under him, and he sunk under water to the depth
of eight ells, his feet sticking in the mud: he remained sixteen hours
before they drew him out of the water. In this condition, he lost all
sense, except that he thought he heard the bells ringing at Stockholm.
He felt the water, which entered his body, not by his mouth, but his
ears. After having sought for him during sixteen hours, they caught
hold of his head with a hook, and drew him out of the water; they
placed him between sheets, put him near the fire, rubbed him, shook
him, and at last brought him to himself. The king and court would see
him and hear his story, and gave him a pension.

A woman of the same country, after having been three days in the
water, was also revived by the same means as the gardener. Another
person named Janas, having drowned himself at seventeen years of age,
was taken out of the water seven weeks after; they warmed him, and
brought him back to life.

M. D'Egly, of the Royal Academy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres, at
Paris, relates, that a Swiss, an expert diver, having plunged down
into one of the hollows in the bed of the river, where he hoped to
find fine fish, remained there about nine hours; they drew him out of
the water after having hurt him in several places with their hooks. M.
D'Egly, seeing that the water bubbled strongly from his mouth,
maintained that he was not dead. They made him throw up as much water
as he could for three quarters of an hour, wrapped him up in hot
linen, put him to bed, bled him, and saved him.

Some have been recovered after being seven weeks in the water, others
after a less time; for instance, Gocellin, a nephew of the Archbishop
of Cologne, having fallen into the Rhine, remained under water for
fifteen hours before they could find him again; at the end of that
time, they carried him to the tomb of St. Suitbert, and he recovered
his health.[569]

The same St. Suitbert resuscitated also another young man who had been
drowned several hours. But the author who relates these miracles is of
no great authority.

Several instances are related of drowned persons who have remained
under water for several days, and at last recovered and enjoyed good
health. In the second part of the dissertation on the uncertainty of
the signs of death, by M. Bruhier, physician, printed at Paris in
1744, pp. 102, 103, &c., it is shown that they have seen some who have
been under water forty-eight hours, others during three days, and
during eight days. He adds to this the example of the insect
chrysalis, which passes all the winter without giving any signs of
life, and the aquatic insects which remain all the winter motionless
in the mud; which also happens to the frogs and toads; ants even,
against the common opinion, are during the winter in a death-like
state, which ceases only on the return of spring. Swallows, in the
northern countries, bury themselves in heaps, in the lakes and ponds,
in rivers even, in the sea, in the sand, in the holes of walls, and
the hollows of trees, or at the bottom of caverns; whilst other kinds
of swallows cross the sea to find warmer and more temperate climes.

What has just been said of swallows being found at the bottom of
lakes, ponds, and rivers, is commonly remarked in Silesia, Poland,
Bohemia, and Moravia. Sometimes even storks are fished up as if dead,
having their beaks fixed in the anus of one another; many of these
have been seen in the environs of Geneva, and even in the environs of
Metz, in the year 1467.

To these may be added quails and herons. Sparrows and cuckoos have
been found during the winter in hollow trees, torpid and without the
least appearance of life, which being warmed recovered themselves and
took flight. We know that hedgehogs, marmots, sloths, and serpents,
live underground without breathing, and the circulation of the blood
is very feeble in them during all the winter. It is even said that
bears sleep during almost all that period.


Footnotes:

[568] Guill. Derham, Extrait. Peclin, c. x. de aëre et alim. def.

[569] Vita S. Suitberti, apud Surium, I. Martii.




CHAPTER XLIII.

INSTANCES OF WOMEN WHO HAVE BEEN BELIEVED TO BE DEAD, AND WHO HAVE
COME TO LIFE AGAIN.


Very clever physicians assert[570] that in cases of the suffocation of
the womb, a woman may live thirty days without breathing. I know that
a very excellent woman was six-and-thirty hours without giving any
sign of life. Everybody thought she was dead, and they wanted to
enshroud her, but her husband always opposed it. At the end of
thirty-six hours she came to herself, and has lived a long time since
then. She told them that she heard very well all that was said about
her, and knew that they wanted to lay her out; but her torpor was such
that she could not surmount it, and she should have let them do
whatever they pleased without the least resistance.

This applies to what St. Augustine says of the priest Pretextas, who
in his trances and swoons heard, as if from afar off, what was said,
and nevertheless would have let himself be burned, and his flesh cut,
without opposing it or feeling it.

Corneille le Bruyn,[571] in his Voyages, relates that he saw at
Damietta, in Egypt, a Turk whom they called the Dead Child, because
when his mother was with child with him, she fell ill, and as they
believed she was dead, they buried her pretty quickly, according to
the custom of the country, where they let the dead remain but a very
short time unburied, above all during the plague. She was put into a
vault which this Turk had for the sepulture of his family.

Towards evening, some hours after the interment of this woman, it
entered the mind of the Turk her husband, that the child she bore
might still be alive; he then had the vault opened, and found that his
wife had delivered herself, and that his child was alive, but the
mother was dead. Some people said that the child had been heard to
cry, and that it was on receiving intimation of this that the father
had the tomb opened. This man, surnamed the Dead Child, was still
living in 1677. Le Bruyn thinks that the woman was dead when her child
was born; but being dead, it would not have been possible for her to
bring him into the world. It must be remembered, that in Egypt, where
this happened, the women have an extraordinary facility of delivery,
as both ancients and moderns bear witness, and that this woman was
simply shut up in a vault, without being covered with earth.

A woman at Strasburg, who was with child, being reputed to be dead,
was buried in a subterranean vault;[572] at the end of some time, this
vault having been opened for another body to be placed in it, the
woman was found out of the coffin lying on the ground, and having
between her hands a child, of which she had delivered herself, and
whose arm she held in her mouth, as if she would fain eat it.

Another woman, a Spaniard,[573] the wife of Francisco Aravallos, of
Suasso, being dead, or believed to be so, in the last months of her
pregnancy, was put in the ground; her husband, whom they had sent for
from the country, whither he had gone on business, would see his wife
at the church, and had her exhumed: hardly had they opened the coffin,
when they heard the cry of a child, who was making efforts to leave
the bosom of its mother.

He was taken away alive and lived a long time, being known by the name
of the Child of the Earth; and since then he was lieutenant-general of
the town of Héréz, on the frontier of Spain. These instances might be
multiplied to infinity, of persons buried alive, and of others who
have recovered as they were being carried to the grave, and others who
have been taken out of it by fortuitous circumstances. Upon this
subject you may consult the new work of Messrs. Vinslow and Bruyer,
and those authors who have expressly treated on this subject.[574]
These gentlemen, the doctors, derive from thence a very wise and very
judicious conclusion, which is, that people should never be buried
without the absolute certainty of their being dead, above all in times
of pestilence, and in certain maladies in which those who are
suffering under them lose on a sudden both sense and motion.


Footnotes:

[570] Le Clerc, Hist. de la Médecine.

[571] Corneille le Bruyn, tom. i. p. 579.

[572] Cronstand, Philos. veter. restit.

[573] Gaspard Reïes, Campus Elysias jucund.

[574] Page 167, des additions de M. Bruhier.




