CHAPTER LVII.

THE VISION OF SAINT FURSIUS.


The Life of St. Fursius,[634] written a short time after his death,
which happened about the year 653, reports several visions seen by
this holy man. Being grievously ill, and unable to stir, he saw
himself in the midst of the darkness raised up, as it were, by the
hands of three angels, who carried him out of the world, then brought
him back to it, and made his soul re-enter his body, to complete the
destination assigned him by God. Then he found himself in the midst of
several people, who wept for him as if he were dead, and told him how,
the day before, he had fallen down in a swoon, so that they believed
him to be dead. He could have wished to have some intelligent persons
about him to relate to them what he had seen; but having no one near
him but rustics, he asked for and received the communion of the body
and blood of the Saviour, and continued three days longer awake.

The following Tuesday, he fell into a similar swoon, in the middle of
the night; his feet became cold, and raising his hands to pray, he
received death with joy. Then he saw the same three angels descend who
had already guided him. They raised him as the first time, but instead
of the agreeable and melodious songs which he had then heard, he could
now hear only the frightful howlings of the demons, who began to fight
against him, and shoot inflamed darts at him. The Angel of the Lord
received them on his buckler, and extinguished them. The devil
reproached Fursius with some bad thoughts, and some human weaknesses,
but the angels defended him, saying, "If he has not committed any
capital sins, he shall not perish."

As the devil could not reproach him with anything that was worthy of
eternal death, he saw two saints from his own country--St. Béan and
St. Medan, who comforted him and announced to him the evils with which
God would punish mankind, principally because of the sins of the
doctors or learned men of the church, and the princes who governed the
people;--the doctors for neglecting to declare the word of God, and
the princes for the bad examples they gave their people. After which,
they sent him back into his body again. He returned into it with
repugnance, and began to relate all that he had seen; they poured
spring water upon his body, and he felt a great warmth between his
shoulders. After this, he began to preach throughout Hibernia; and the
Venerable Bede[635] says that there was in his monastery an aged monk
who said that he had learned from a grave personage well worthy of
belief, that he had heard these visions described by St. Fursius
himself. This saint had not the least doubt that his soul was really
separated from his body, when he was carried away in his trance.


Footnotes:

[634] Vita Sti. Fursci, apud Bolland. 16 Januarii, pp. 37, 38. Item,
pp. 47, 48. Sæcul. xi. Bened. p. 299.

[635] Bede, lib. iii. Hist. c. 19.




CHAPTER LVIII.

VISION OF A PROTESTANT OF YORK, AND OTHERS.


Here is another instance, which happened in 1698 to one of the
so-called reformed religion.[636] A minister of the county of York, at
a place called Hipley, and whose name was Henry Vatz (Watts), being
struck with apoplexy the 15th of August, was on the 17th placed in a
coffin to be buried. But as they were about to put him in the grave,
he uttered a loud cry, which frightened all the persons who had
attended him to the grave; they took him quickly out of the coffin,
and as soon as he had come to himself, he related several surprising
things which he said had been revealed to him during his trance, which
had lasted eight-and-forty hours. The 24th of the same month, he
preached a very moving discourse to those who had accompanied him the
day they were carrying him to the tomb.

People may, if they please, treat all that we have related as dreams
and tales, but it cannot be denied that we recognize in these
resurrections, and in these narrations of men who have come to life
again after their real or seeming death, the belief of the church
concerning hell, paradise, purgatory, the efficacy of prayers for the
dead, and the apparitions of angels and demons who torment the damned,
and of the souls who have yet something to expiate in the other world.

We see also, that which has a visible connection with the matter we
are treating upon--persons really dead, and others regarded as such,
who return to life in health and live a long time afterwards. Lastly,
we may observe therein opinions on the state of souls after this life,
which are nearly the same as among the Hebrews, Egyptians, Greeks,
Romans, barbarous nations, and Christians. If the Hungarian ghosts do
not speak of what they have seen in the other world, it is either that
they are not really dead, or more likely that all which is related of
these _revenans_ is fabulous and chimerical. I will add some more
instances which will serve to confirm the belief of the primitive
church on the subject of apparitions.

St. Perpetua, who suffered martyrdom in Africa in 202 or 203, being in
prison for the faith, saw a brother named Dinocrates, who had died at
the age of seven years of a cancer in the cheek; she saw him as if in
a very large dungeon, so that they could not approach each other. He
seemed to be placed in a reservoir of water, the sides of which were
higher than himself, so that he could not reach the water, for which
he appeared to thirst very much. Perpetua was much moved at this, and
prayed to God with tears and groans for his relief. Some days after,
she saw in spirit the same Dinocrates, well clothed, washed, and
refreshed, and the water of the reservoir in which he was, only came
up to his middle, and on the edge a cup, from which he drank, without
the water diminishing, and the skin of the cancer in his cheek well
healed, so that nothing now remained of the cancer but the scar. By
these things she understood that Dinocrates was no longer in pain.

Dinocrates was there apparently[637] to expiate some faults which he
had committed since his baptism, for Perpetua says a little before
this that only her father had remained in infidelity.

The same St. Perpetua, being in prison some days before she suffered
martyrdom[638] had a vision of the deacon Pomponius, who had suffered
martyrdom some days before, and who said to her, "Come, we are waiting
for you." He led her through a rugged and winding path into the arena
of the amphitheatre, where she had to combat with a very ugly
Egyptian, accompanied by some other men like him. Perpetua found
herself changed into a man, and began to fight naked, assisted by some
well-made youths who came to her service and assistance.

Then she beheld a man of extraordinary size, who cried aloud, "If the
Egyptian gains the victory over her, he will kill her with his sword;
but if she conquers, she shall have this branch ornamented with golden
apples for her reward." Perpetua began the combat, and having
overthrown the Egyptian, trampled his head under her feet. The people
shouted victory, and Perpetua approaching him who held the branch
above mentioned, he put it in her hands, and said to her, "Peace be
with you." Then she awoke, and understood that she would have to
combat, not against wild beasts, but against the devil.

Saturus, one of the companions of the martyrdom of St. Perpetua, had
also a vision, which he relates thus: "We had suffered martyrdom, and
were disengaged from this mortal body. Four angels carried us towards
the East without touching us. We arrived at a place shining with
intense lustre; Perpetua was at my side, and I said unto her, 'Behold
what the Lord promised us.'

"We entered a large garden full of trees and flowers; the four angels
who had borne us thither placed us in the hands of other angels, who
conducted us by a wide road to a place where we found Jocondus,
Saturninus, and Artazes, who had suffered with us, and invited us to
come and salute the Lord. We followed them, and beheld in the midst of
this place the Almighty, crowned with dazzling light, and we heard
repeated incessantly by those around him, Holy! holy! holy! They
raised us towards him, and we stopped before his throne. We gave him
the kiss of peace, and he stroked our faces with his hand.

"We came out, and we saw before the door the bishop Optatus and the
priest Aspasius, who threw themselves at our feet. We raised and
embraced them. We recognized in this place several of our brethren and
some martyrs." Such was the vision of Saturus.

There are visions of all sorts; of holy martyrs, and of holy angels.
It is related of St. Exuperus, bishop of Thoulouse,[639] that having
conceived the design of transporting the relics of St. Saturnus, a
former bishop of that church, to place them in a new church built in
his honor, he could with difficulty resolve to take this holy body
from the tomb, fearing to displease the saint, or to diminish the
honor which was due to him. But while in this doubt, he had a vision
which gave him to understand that this translation would neither
lessen the respect which was due to the ashes of the martyr, nor be
prejudicial to his honor; but that on the contrary it would contribute
to the salvation of the faithful, and to the greater glorification of
God.

Some days before[640] St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, suffered
martyrdom, in 258, he had a vision, not being as yet quite asleep, in
which a young man whose height was extraordinary, seemed to lead him
to the Prætorium before the Proconsul, who was seated on his tribunal.
This magistrate, having caught sight of Cyprian, began to write his
sentence before he had interrogated him as was usual. Cyprian knew not
what the sentence condemned him to; but the young man above mentioned,
and who was behind the judge, made a sign by opening his hand and
spreading in form of a sword, that he was condemned to have his head
cut off.

Cyprian easily understood what was meant by this sign, and having
earnestly requested to be allowed a day's delay to put his affairs in
order, the judge, having granted his request, again wrote upon his
tablets, and the young man by a sign of his hand let him know that the
delay was granted. These predictions were exactly fulfilled, and we
see many similar ones in the works of St. Cyprian.

St. Fructueux, Bishop of Tarragona,[641] who suffered martyrdom in
259, was seen after his death ascending to heaven with the deacons who
had suffered with him; they appeared as if they were still attached to
the stakes near which they had been burnt. They were seen by two
Christians, who showed them to the wife and daughter of Emilian, who
had condemned them. The saint appeared to Emilian himself and to the
Christians, who had taken away their ashes, and desired that they
might be all collected in one spot. We see similar apparitions[642] in
the acts of St. James, of St. Marienus, martyrs, and some others who
suffered in Numidia in 259. We may observe the like[643] in the acts
of St. Montanus, St. Lucius, and other African martyrs in 259 or 260,
and in those of St. Vincent, a martyr in Spain, in 304, and in the
life of St. Theodore, martyr, in 306, of whose sufferings St. Gregory
of Nicea has written an account. Everybody knows what happened at
Sebastus, in Armenia, in the martyrdom of the famous forty martyrs, of
whom St. Basil the Great has written the eulogium. One of the forty,
overcome by the excess of cold, which was extreme, threw himself into
a hot bath that was prepared just by. Then he who guarded them having
perceived some angels who brought crowns to the thirty-nine who had
persevered in their sufferings, despoiled himself of his garments,
joined himself to the martyrs, and declared himself a Christian.

All these instances invincibly prove that, at least in the first ages
of the church, the greatest and most learned bishops, the holy
martyrs, and the generality of the faithful, were well persuaded of
the possibility and reality of apparitions.


Footnotes:

[636] Larrey, Hist. de Louis XIV. year 1698, p. 68.

[637] Aug. lib. i. de Origine Animæ.

[638] Ibid. p. 97.

[639] Aug. lib. i. de Origine Animæ, p. 132.

[640] Acta Martyr. Sincera, p. 212. Vita et Passio S. Cypriani, p.
268.

[641] Acta Martyr. Sincera, pp. 219, 221.

[642] Acta Martyr. Sincera, p. 226.

[643] Ibid. pp. 231-233, 237.




