CHAPTER X.

OTHER INSTANCES OF GHOSTS--CONTINUATION OF THE GLEANER.


In a certain canton of Hungary, named in Latin _Oppida Heidanum_,
beyond the Tibisk, _vulgo_ Teiss, that is to say, between that river
which waters the fortunate territory of Tokay and Transylvania, the
people known by the name of _Heyducqs_[463] believe that certain dead
persons, whom they call vampires, suck all the blood from the living,
so that these become visibly attenuated, whilst the corpses, like
leeches, fill themselves with blood in such abundance that it is seen
to come from them by the conduits, and even oozing through the pores.
This opinion has just been confirmed by several facts which cannot be
doubted, from the rank of the witnesses who have certified them. We
will here relate some of the most remarkable.

About five years ago, a certain Heyducq, inhabitant of Madreiga, named
Arnald Paul, was crushed to death by the fall of a wagonload of hay.
Thirty days after his death four persons died suddenly, and in the
same manner in which according to the tradition of the country, those
die who are molested by vampires. They then remembered that this
Arnald Paul had often related that in the environs of Cassovia, and on
the frontiers of Turkish Servia, he had often been tormented by a
Turkish vampire; for they believe also that those who have been
passive vampires during life become active ones after their death,
that is to say, that those who have been sucked suck also in their
turn; but that he had found means to cure himself by eating earth from
the grave of the vampire, and smearing himself with his blood; a
precaution which, however, did not prevent him from becoming so after
his death, since, on being exhumed forty days after his interment,
they found on his corpse all the indications of an arch-vampire. His
body was red, his hair, nails, and beard had all grown again, and his
veins were replete with fluid blood, which flowed from all parts of
his body upon the winding-sheet which encompassed him. The hadnagi, or
bailli of the village, in whose presence the exhumation took place,
and who was skilled in vampirism, had, according to custom, a very
sharp stake driven into the heart of the defunct Arnald Paul, and
which pierced his body through and through, which made him, as they
say, utter a frightful shriek, as if he had been alive: that done,
they cut off his head, and burnt the whole body. After that they
performed the same on the corpses of the four other persons who died
of vampirism, fearing that they in their turn might cause the death of
others.

All these performances, however, could not prevent the recommencement
of these fatal prodigies towards the end of last year, that is to say,
five years after, when several inhabitants of the same village
perished miserably. In the space of three months, seventeen persons of
different sexes and different ages died of vampirism; some without
being ill, and others after languishing two or three days. It is
reported, amongst other things, that a girl named Stanoska, daughter
of the Heyducq Jotiützo, who went to bed in perfect health, awoke in
the middle of the night all in a tremble, uttering terrible shrieks,
and saying that the son of the Heyducq Millo who had been dead nine
weeks, had nearly strangled her in her sleep. She fell into a languid
state from that moment, and at the end of three days she died. What
this girl had said of Millo's son made him known at once for a
vampire: he was exhumed, and found to be such. The principal people of
the place, with the doctors and surgeons, examined how vampirism could
have sprung up again after the precautions they had taken some years
before.

They discovered at last, after much search, that the defunct Arnald
Paul had killed not only the four persons of whom we have spoken, but
also several oxen, of which the new vampires had eaten, and amongst
others the son of Millo. Upon these indications they resolved to
disinter all those who had died within a certain time, &c. Amongst
forty, seventeen were found with all the most evident signs of
vampirism; so they transfixed their hearts and cut off their heads
also, and then cast their ashes into the river.

All the informations and executions we have just mentioned were made
juridically, in proper form, and attested by several officers who were
garrisoned in the country, by the chief surgeons of the regiments, and
by the principal inhabitants of the place. The verbal process of it
was sent towards the end of last January to the Imperial Counsel of
War at Vienna, which had established a military commission to examine
into the truth of all these circumstances.

Such was the declaration of the Hadnagi Barriarar and the ancient
Heyducqs; and it was signed by Battuer, first lieutenant of the
regiment of Alexander of Wurtemburg, Clickstenger, surgeon-in-chief of
the regiment of Frustemburch, three other surgeons of the company, and
Guoichitz, captain at Stallach.


Footnotes:

[463] This story is apparently the same which we related before under
the name of Haidamaque, and which happened in 1729 or 1730.




CHAPTER XI.

ARGUMENTS OF THE AUTHOR OF THE "LETTRES JUIVES," ON THE SUBJECT OF
THESE PRETENDED GHOSTS.


There are two different ways of effacing the opinion concerning these
pretended ghosts, and showing the impossibility of the effects which
are made to be produced by corpses entirely deprived of sensation. The
first is, to explain by physical causes all the prodigies of
vampirism; the second is, to deny totally the truth of these stories;
and the latter means, without doubt, is the surest and the wisest. But
as there are persons to whom the authority of a certificate given by
people in a certain place appears a plain demonstration of the
reality of the most absurd story, before I show how little they ought
to rely on the formalities of the law in matters which relate solely
to philosophy, I will for a moment suppose that several persons do
really die of the disease which they term vampirism.

I lay down at first this principle, that it may be that there are
corpses which, although interred some days, shed fluid blood through
the conduits of their body. I add, moreover, that it is very easy for
certain people to fancy themselves sucked by vampires, and that the
fear caused by that fancy should make a revolution in their frame
sufficiently violent to deprive them of life. Being occupied all day
with the terror inspired by these pretended ghosts or _revenans_, is
it very extraordinary, that during their sleep the idea of these
phantoms should present itself to their imagination and cause them
such violent terror? that some of them die of it instantaneously, and
others a short time afterwards? How many instances have we not seen of
people who expired with fright in a moment? and has not joy itself
sometimes produced an equally fatal effect?

I have seen in the Leipsic journals[464] an account of a little work
entitled, _Philosophicæ et Christianæ Cogitationes de Vampiriis, à
Joanne Christophoro Herenbergio_; "Philosophical and Christian
Thoughts upon Vampires, by John Christopher Herenberg," at
Gerolferliste, in 1733, in 8vo. The author names a pretty large number
of writers who have already discussed this matter; he speaks, _en
passant_, of a spectre which appeared to him at noonday. He maintains
that the vampires do not cause the death of the living, and that all
that is said about them ought to be attributed only to the troubled
fancy of the invalids; he proves by divers experiments that the
imagination is capable of causing very great derangements in the body,
and the humors of the body; he shows that in Sclavonia they impaled
murderers, and drove a stake through the heart of the culprit; that
they used the same chastisement for vampires, supposing them to be the
authors of the death of those whose blood they were said to suck. He
gives some examples of this punishment exercised upon them, the one in
the year 1337, and the other in 1347. He speaks of the opinion of
those who believe that the dead eat in their tombs; a sentiment of
which he endeavors to prove the antiquity by the authority of
Tertullian, at the beginning of his book on the Resurrection, and by
that of St. Augustine, b. viii. c. 27, on the City of God, and in
Sermon xv. on the Saints.

Such are nearly the contents of the work of M. Herenberg on vampires.
The passage of Tertullian[465] which he cites, proves very well that
the pagans offered food to their dead, even to those whose bodies had
been burned, believing that their spirits regaled themselves with it:
_Defunctis parentant, et quidem impensissimo studio, pro moribus eorum
pro temporibus esculentorum, ut quos sentire quicquam negant escam
desiderare proesumant._ This concerns only the pagans.

But St. Augustine, in several places, speaks of the custom of the
Christians, above all those of Africa, of carrying to the tombs meats
and wine, which they placed upon them as a repast of devotion, and to
which the poor were invited, in whose favor these offerings were
principally instituted. This practice is founded on the passage of the
book of Tobit;--"Place your bread and wine on the sepulchre of the
just, and be careful not to eat or drink of it with sinners." St.
Monico, the mother of St. Augustine,[466] having desired to do at
Milan what she had been accustomed to do in Africa, St. Ambrose,
bishop of Milan, testified that he did not approve of this practice,
which was unknown in his church. The holy woman restrained herself to
carrying thither a basket full of fruits and wine, of which she
partook very soberly with the women who accompanied her, leaving the
rest for the poor. St. Augustine remarks, in the same passage, that
some intemperate Christians abused these offerings by drinking wine to
excess: _Ne ulla occasio se ingurgitandi daretur ebriosis._

St. Augustine,[467] however, by his preaching and remonstrances, did
so much good, that he entirely uprooted this custom, which was common
throughout the African Church, and the abuse of which was too general.
In his books on the City of God,[468] he avows that this usage is
neither general nor approved in the Church, and that those who
practice it content themselves with offering this food upon the tombs
of the martyrs, in order that through their merits these offerings
should be sanctified; after which they carry them away, and make use
of them for their own nourishment and that of the poor: _Quicumque
suas epulas eò deferant, quad quidem à melioribus Christianis non fit,
et in plerisque terrarum nulla talis est consuetudo; tamen quicumque
id faciunt, quas cùm appossuerint, orant, et auferunt, ut vescantur
vel ex eis etiam indigentibus largiantur._ It appears, from two
sermons which have been attributed to St. Augustine,[469] that in
former times this custom had crept in at Rome, but did not subsist
there any time, and was blamed and condemned.

Now, if it were true that the dead could eat in their tombs, and that
they had a wish or occasion to eat, as is believed by those of whom
Tertullian speaks, and as it appears may be inferred from the custom
of carrying fruit and wine to be placed on the graves of martyrs and
other Christians, I think even that I have good proof that in certain
places they placed near the bodies of the dead, whether buried in the
cemeteries or the churches, meat, wine, and other liquors. I have in
our study several vases of clay and glass, and even plates, where may
be seen small bones of pig and fowls, all found deep underground in
the church of the Abbey of St. Mansuy, near the town of Toul.

It has been remarked to me that these vestiges found in the ground
were plunged in virgin earth which had never been disturbed, and near
certain vases or urns filled with ashes, and containing some small
bones which the flames could not consume; and as it is known that the
Christians did not burn their dead, and that these vases we are
speaking of are placed beneath the disturbed earth, in which the
graves of Christians are found, it has been inferred, with much
semblance of probability, that these vases with the food and beverage
buried near them, were intended not for Christians but for heathens.
The latter, then, at least, believed that the dead ate in the other
life. There is no doubt that the ancient Gauls[470] were persuaded of
this; they are often represented on their tombs with bottles in their
hands, and baskets and other comestibles, or drinking vessels and
goblets;[471] they carried with them even the contracts and bonds for
what was due to them, to have it paid to them in Hades. _Negotiorum
ratio, etiam exactio crediti deferebatur ad inferos._

Now, if they believed that the dead ate in their tombs, that they
could return to earth, visit, console, instruct, or disturb the
living, and predict to them their approaching death, the return of
vampires is neither impossible nor incredible in the opinion of these
ancients.

But as all that is said of dead men who eat in their graves and out of
their graves is chimerical and beyond all likelihood, and the thing is
even impossible and incredible, whatever may be the number and quality
of those who have believed it, or appeared to believe it, I shall
always say that the return (to earth) of the vampires is
unmaintainable and impracticable.


Footnotes:

[464] Supplem. ad visu Erudit. Lips. an. 1738, tom. ii.

[465] Tertull. de Resurrect. initio.

[466] Aug. Confess. lib. vi. c. 2.

[467] Aug. Epist. 22, ad Aurel. Carthag. et Epist. 29, ad Alipi. Item
de Moribus Eccl. c. 34.

[468] Aug. lib. viii. de Civit. Dei, c. 27.

[469] Aug. Serm. 35, de Sanctis, nunc in Appendice, c. 5. Serm. cxc.
cxci. p. 328.

[470] Antiquité expliquée, tom. iv. p. 80.

[471] Mela. lib. ii. c. 4.




