CHAPTER VI.

A WOMAN TAKEN ALIVE FROM HER GRAVE.


We read in a new work, a story which has some connection with this
subject. A shopkeeper of the Rue St. Honoré, at Paris, had promised
his daughter to one of his friends, a shopkeeper like himself,
residing also in the same street. A financier having presented himself
as a husband for this young girl, was accepted instead of the young
man to whom she had been promised. The marriage was accomplished, and
the young bride falling ill, was looked upon as dead, enshrouded and
interred. The first lover having an idea that she had fallen into a
lethargy or a trance, had her taken out of the ground during the
night; they brought her to herself and he espoused her. They crossed
the channel, and lived quietly in England for some years. At the end
of ten years, they returned to Paris, where the first husband having
recognized his wife in a public walk, claimed her in a court of
justice; and this was the subject of a great law suit.

The wife and her (second) husband defended themselves on the ground
that death had broken the bonds of the first marriage. The first
husband was even accused of having caused his wife to be too
precipitately interred. The lovers foreseeing that they might be
non-suited, again withdrew to a foreign land, where they ended their
days. This circumstance is so singular that our readers will have some
difficulty in giving credence to it. I only give it as it is told. It
is for those who advance the fact to guarantee and prove it.

Who can say that, in the story of Phlegon, the young Philinium was not
thus placed in the vault without being dead, and that every night she
came to see her lover Machates? That was much easier for her than
would have been the return of the Parisian woman, who had been
enshrouded, buried, and remained covered with earth, and enveloped in
linen, during a pretty long time.

The other example related in the same work, is of a girl who fell into
a trance and was regarded as dead, and became enceinte during this
interval, without knowing the author of her pregnancy. It was a monk,
who, having made himself known, asserted that his vows should be
annulled, he having been forced into the sacred profession. A great
lawsuit ensued upon it, of which the documents are preserved to this
day. The monk obtained a dispensation from his vows, and married the
young girl.

This instance may be adduced with that of Philinium, and the young
woman of the Rue St. Honoré. It is possible that these persons might
not be dead, and consequently not restored to life.




CHAPTER VII.

LET US NOW EXAMINE THE FACT OF THE REVENANS OR VAMPIRES OF MORAVIA.


I have been told by the late Monsieur de Vassimont, counsellor of the
Chamber of the Counts of Bar, that having been sent into Moravia by
his late Royal Highness Leopold, first Duke of Lorraine, for the
affairs of my Lord the Prince Charles his brother, Bishop of Olmutz
and Osnaburgh, he was informed by public report that it was common
enough in that country to see men who had died some time before,
present themselves in a party, and sit down to table with persons of
their acquaintance without saying anything; but that nodding to one of
the party, he would infallibly die some days afterwards. This fact was
confirmed by several persons, and amongst others by an old curé, who
said he had seen more than one instance of it.

The bishops and priests of the country consulted Rome on so
extraordinary a fact; but they received no answer, because,
apparently, all those things were regarded there as simple visions, or
popular fancies. They afterwards bethought themselves of taking up the
corpses of those who came back in that way, of burning them, or of
destroying them in some other manner. Thus they delivered themselves
from the importunity of these spectres, which are now much less
frequently seen than before. So said that good priest.

These apparitions have given rise to a little work, entitled _Magia
Posthuma_, printed at Olmutz, in 1706, composed by Charles Ferdinand
de Schertz, dedicated to Prince Charles, of Lorraine, Bishop of Olmutz
and Osnaburgh. The author relates that, in a certain village, a woman
being just dead, who had taken all her sacraments, she was buried in
the usual way in the cemetery. Four days after her decease, the
inhabitants of this village heard a great noise and extraordinary
uproar, and saw a spectre, which appeared sometimes in the shape of a
dog, sometimes in the form of a man, not to one person only, but to
several, and caused them great pain, grasping their throats, and
compressing their stomachs, so as to suffocate them. It bruised almost
the whole body, and reduced them to extreme weakness, so that they
became pale, lean and attenuated.

The spectre attacked even the animals, and some cows were found
debilitated and half dead. Sometimes it tied them together by their
tails. These animals gave sufficient evidence by their bellowing of
the pain they suffered. The horses seemed overcome with fatigue, all
in a perspiration, principally on the back; heated, out of breath,
covered with foam, as they are after a long and rough journey. These
calamities lasted several months.

The author whom I have mentioned examines the affair in a lawyer-like
way, and reasons much on the fact and the law. He asks if, supposing
that those disturbances, those noises and vexations proceeded from
that person who is suspected of causing them, they can burn her, as is
done to other ghosts who do harm to the living. He relates several
instances of similar apparitions, and of the evils which ensued; as of
a shepherd of the village of Blow, near the town of Kadam, in Bohemia,
who appeared during some time, and called certain persons, who never
failed to die within eight days after. The peasants of Blow took up
the body of this shepherd, and fixed it in the ground with a stake
which they drove through it.

This man, when in that condition, derided them for what they made him
suffer, and told them they were very good to give him thus a stick to
defend himself from the dogs. The same night he got up again, and by
his presence alarmed several persons, and strangled more amongst them
than he had hitherto done. Afterwards, they delivered him into the
hands of the executioner, who put him in a cart to carry him beyond
the village and there burn him. This corpse howled like a madman, and
moved his feet and hands as if alive. And when they again pierced him
through with stakes he uttered very loud cries, and a great quantity
of bright vermilion blood flowed from him. At last he was consumed,
and this execution put an end to the appearance and hauntings of this
spectre.

The same has been practiced in other places, where similar ghosts have
been seen; and when they have been taken out of the ground they have
appeared red, with their limbs supple and pliable, without worms or
decay; but not without a great stink. The author cites divers other
writers, who attest what he says of these spectres, which still
appear, he says, pretty often in the mountains of Silesia and Moravia.
They are seen by night and by day; the things which once belonged to
them are seen to move themselves and change their place without being
touched by any one. The only remedy for these apparitions is to cut
off the heads and burn the bodies of those who come back to haunt
people.

At any rate, they do not proceed to this without a form of justicial
law. They call for and hear the witnesses; they examine the arguments;
they look at the exhumed bodies, to see if they can find any of the
usual marks which lead them to conjecture that they are the parties
who molest the living, as the mobility and suppleness of the limbs,
the fluidity of the blood, and the flesh remaining uncorrupted. If all
these marks are found, then these bodies are given up to the
executioner, who burns them. It sometimes happens that the spectres
appear again for three or four days after the execution. Sometimes the
interment of the bodies of suspicious persons is deferred for six or
seven weeks. When they do not decay, and their limbs remain as supple
and pliable as when they were alive, then they burn them. It is
affirmed as certain that the clothes of these persons move without any
one living touching them; and within a short time, continues our
author, a spectre was seen at Olmutz, which threw stones, and gave
great trouble to the inhabitants.




