CHAPTER XXXVIII.

INSTANCES OF PERSONS WHO HAVE PROMISED TO GIVE EACH OTHER NEWS OF THE
OTHER WORLD AFTER THEIR DEATH.


The story of the Marquis de Rambouillet, who appeared after his death
to the Marquis de Précy, is very celebrated. These two lords,
conversing on the subject of the other world, like people who were not
very strongly persuaded of the truth of all that is said upon it,
promised each other that the first of the two who died should bring
the news of it to the other. The Marquis de Rambouillet set off for
Flanders, where the war was then carried on; and the Marquis de Précy
remained at Paris, detained by a low fever. Six weeks after, in broad
day, he heard some one undraw his bed-curtains, and turning to see who
it was, he perceived the Marquis de Rambouillet, in buff-leather
jacket and boots. He sprang from his bed to embrace his friend; but
Rambouillet, stepping back a few paces, told him that he was come to
keep his word as he had promised--that all that was said of the next
life was very certain--that he must change his conduct, and in the
first action wherein he was engaged he would lose his life.

Précy again attempted to embrace his friend, but he embraced only
empty air. Then Rambouillet, seeing that his friend was incredulous as
to what he said, showed him where he had received the wound in his
side, whence the blood still seemed to flow. Précy soon after
received, by the post, confirmation of the death of the Marquis de
Rambouillet; and being himself some time after, during the civil wars,
at the battle of the Faubourg of St. Antoine, he was there killed.

Peter the Venerable, Abbot of Clugni,[551] relates a very similar
story. A gentleman named Humbert, son of a lord named Guichard de
Belioc, in the diocese of Macon, having declared war against the other
principal men in his neighborhood, a gentleman named Geoffrey d'Iden
received in the mélée a wound of which he died immediately.

About two months afterwards, this same Geoffrey appeared to a
gentleman named Milo d'Ansa, and begged him to tell Humbert de Belioc,
in whose service he had lost his life, that he was tormented for
having assisted him in an unjust war, and for not having expiated his
sins by penance before he died; that he begged him to have compassion
on him, and on his own father, Guichard, who had left him great
wealth, of which he made a bad use, and of which a part had been badly
acquired. That in truth Guichard, the father of Humbert, had embraced
a religious life at Clugni; but that he had not time to satisfy the
justice of God for the sins of his past life; that he conjured him to
have mass performed for him and for his father, to give alms, and to
employ the prayers of good people, to procure them both a prompt
deliverance from the pains they endured. He added, "Tell him, that if
he will not mind what you say, I shall be obliged to go to him myself,
and announce to him what I have just told you."

Milo d'Ansa acquitted himself faithfully of his commission; Humbert
was frightened at it, but it did not make him better. Still, fearing
that Guichard, his father, or Geoffrey d'Iden might come and disturb
him, above all during the night, he dare not remain alone, and would
always have one of his people by him.

One morning, then, as he was lying awake in his bed, he beheld in his
presence Geoffrey, armed as in a day of battle, who showed him the
mortal wound he had received, and which appeared yet quite fresh. He
reproached him keenly for his want of pity towards his own father, who
was groaning in torment. "Take care," added he, "that God does not
treat you rigorously, and refuse to you that mercy which you refuse to
us; and, above all, take care not to execute your intention of going
to the wars with Count Amedeus. If you go, you will there lose both
life and property."

He said, and Humbert was about to reply, when the Squire Vichard de
Maracy, Humbert's counselor, arrived from mass, and immediately the
dead man disappeared. From that moment, Humbert endeavored seriously
to relieve his father Geoffrey, and resolved to take a journey to
Jerusalem to expiate his sins. Peter the Venerable had been well
informed of all the details of this story, which occurred in the year
he went into Spain, and made a great noise in the country. The
Cardinal Baronius,[552] a very grave and respectable man, says that he
had heard from several very sensible people, and who have often heard
it preached to the people, and in particular from Michael Mercati,
Prothonotary of the Holy See, a man of acknowledged probity and well
informed, above all in the platonic philosophy, to which he applied
himself unweariedly with Marsilius Ficin, his friend, as zealous as
himself for the doctrine of Plato.

One day, these two great philosophers were conversing on the
immortality of the soul, and if it remained and existed after the
death of the body. After having had much discourse on this matter,
they promised each other, and shook hands upon it, that the first of
them who quitted this world should come and tell the other somewhat of
the state of the other life.

Having thus separated, it happened some time afterwards that the same
Michael Mercati, being wide awake and studying, one morning very
early, the same philosophical matters, heard on a sudden a noise like
a horseman who was coming hastily to his door, and at the same he
heard the voice of his friend Marsilius Ficin, who cried out to him,
"Michael, Michael, nothing is more true than what is said of the other
life." At the same, Michael opened his window, and saw Marsilius
mounted on a white horse, who was galloping away. Michael cried out to
him to stop, but he continued his course till Michael could no longer
see him.

Marsilius Ficin was at that time dwelling at Florence, and died there
at the same hour that he had appeared and spoken to his friend. The
latter wrote directly to Florence, to inquire into the truth of the
circumstance; and they replied to him that Marsilius had died at the
same moment that Michael had heard his voice and the noise of his
horse at his door. Ever after that adventure, Michael Mercati,
although very regular in his conduct before then, became quite an
altered man, and lived in so exemplary a manner that he became a
perfect model of Christian life. We find a great many such instances
in Henri Morus, and in Joshua Grandville, in his work entitled
"Sadduceeism Combated."

Here is one taken from the life of B. Joseph de Lionisse, a missionary
capuchin.[553] One day, when he was conversing with his companion on
the duties of religion, and the fidelity which God requires of those
who have consecrated themselves to them, of the reward reserved for
those who are perfectly religious, and the severe justice which he
exercises against unfaithful servants, Brother Joseph said to him,
"Let us promise each other mutually that the one who dies the first
will appear to the other, if God allows him so to do, to inform him of
what passes in the other world, and the condition in which he finds
himself." "I am willing," replied the holy companion; "I give you my
word upon it." "And I pledge you mine," replied Brother Joseph.

Some days after this, the pious companion was attacked by a malady
which brought him to the tomb. Brother Joseph felt this the more
sensibly, because he knew better than the others all the virtues of
this holy monk. He had no doubt of the fulfilment of their agreement,
or that the deceased would appear to him, when he least thought of it,
to acquit himself of his promise.

In effect, one day when Brother Joseph had retired to his room, in the
afternoon, he saw a young capuchin enter horribly haggard, with a pale
thin face, who saluted him with a feeble, trembling voice. As, at the
sight of this spectre, Joseph appeared a little disturbed, "Don't be
alarmed," it said to him; "I am come here as permitted by God, to
fulfill my promise, and to tell you that I have the happiness to be
amongst the elect through the mercy of the Lord. But learn that it is
even more difficult to be saved than is thought in this world; that
God, whose wisdom can penetrate the most secret folds of the heart,
weighs exactly the actions which we have done during life, the
thoughts, wishes, and motives, which we propose to ourselves in
acting; and as much as he is inexorable in regard to sinners, so much
is he good, indulgent, and rich in mercy, towards those just souls who
have served him in this life." At these words, the phantom
dissappeared.

Here follows an instance of a spirit which comes after death to visit
his friend without having made an agreement with him to do so.[554]
Peter Garmate, Bishop of Cracow, was translated to the archbishopric
of Gnesnes, in 1548, and obtained a dispensation from Paul III. to
retain still his bishopric of Cracow. This prelate, after having led a
very irregular life during his youth, began towards the end of his
life, to perform many charitable actions, feeding every day a hundred
poor, to whom he sent food from his own table. And when he traveled,
he was followed by two wagons, loaded with coats and shirts, which he
distributed amongst the poor according as they needed them.

One day, when he was preparing to go to church, towards evening, (it
being the eve of a festival,) and he was alone in his closet, he
suddenly beheld before him a gentleman named Curosius, who had been
dead some time, with whom he had formerly been too intimately
associated in evil doing.

The Archbishop Gamrate was at first affrighted, but the defunct
reassured him and told him that he was of the number of the blessed.
"What!" said the prelate to him; "after such a life as you led! For
you know the excesses which both you and myself committed in our
youth." "I know it," replied the defunct; "but this is what saved me.
One day, when in Germany, I found myself with a man who uttered
blasphemous discourse, most injurious to the Holy Virgin. I was
irritated at it, and gave him a blow; we drew our swords; I killed
him; and for fear of being arrested and punished as a homicide, I
took flight without reflecting much on the action I had committed. But
at the hour of death, I found myself most terribly disturbed by
remorse on my past life, and I only expected certain destruction; when
the Holy Virgin came to my aid, and made such powerful intercession
for me with her Son, that she obtained for me the pardon of my sins;
and I have the happiness to enjoy beatitude. For yourself, who have
only six months to live, I am sent to warn you, that in consideration
of your alms, and your charity to the poor, God will show you mercy,
and expects you to do penance. Profit while it is time, and expiate
your past sins." After having said this, he disappeared; and the
archbishop, bursting into tears, began to live in so Christianly a
manner that he was the edification of all who knew him. He related the
circumstance to his most intimate friends, and died in 1545, after
having directed the Church of Gnesnes for about five years.

The daughter of Dumoulin, a celebrated lawyer, having been inhumanly
massacred in her dwelling,[555] appeared by night to her husband, who
was wide awake, and declared to him the names of those who had killed
herself and her children, conjuring him to revenge her death.


Footnotes:

[551] Biblioth. Cluniæ. de Miraculis, lib. i. c. 7, p. 1290.

[552] Baronius ad an. Christi 401. Annal. tom. v.

[553] Tom. i. p. 64, _et seq._

[554] Stephâni Damalevini Historia, p. 291. apud Ranald continuat
Baronii, ad. an. 1545. tom. xxi art. 62.

[555] Le Loyer, lib. iii. pp. 46, 47.




