CHAPTER XXXVII.

INSTANCES OF DEVOTING OR DOOMING AMONGST CHRISTIANS.


Hector Boëthius,[550] in his History of Scotland, relates that Duffus,
king of that country, falling ill of a disorder unknown to the
physicians, was consumed by a slow fever, passed his nights without
sleep, and insensibly wasted away; his body melted in perspiration
every night; he became weak, languid, and in a dying state, without,
however, his pulse undergoing any alteration. Everything was done to
relieve him, but uselessly. His life was despaired of, and those about
him began to suspect some evil spell. In the mean time, the people of
Moray, a county of Scotland, mutinied, supposing that the king must
soon sink under his malady.

It was whispered abroad that the king had been bewitched by some
witches who lived at Forres, a little town in the north of Scotland.
People were sent there to arrest them, and they were surprised in
their dwellings, where one of them was basting an image of King
Duffus, made of wax, turning on a wooden spit before a large fire,
before which she was reciting certain magical prayers; and she
affirmed that as the figure melted the king would lose his strength,
and at last he would die when the figure should be entirely melted.
These women declared that they had been hired to perform these evil
spells by the principal men of the county of Moray, who only awaited
the king's decease to burst into open revolt.

These witches were immediately arrested and burnt at the stake. The
king was much better, and in a few days he perfectly recovered his
health. This account is found also in the History of Scotland by
Buchanan, who says he heard it from his elders.

He makes the King Duffus live in 960, and he who has added notes to
the text of these historians, says that this custom of melting waxen
images by magic art, to occasion the death of certain persons, was not
unknown to the Romans, as appears from Virgil and Ovid; and of this we
have related a sufficient number of instances. But it must be owned
that all which is related concerning it is very doubtful; not that
wizards and witches have not been found who have attempted to cause
the death of persons of high rank by these means, and who attributed
the effect to the demon, but there is little appearance that they ever
succeeded in it. If magicians possessed the secret of thus occasioning
the death of any one they pleased, where is the prince, prelate, or
lord who would be safe? If they could thus roast them slowly to death,
why not kill them at once, by throwing the waxen image in the fire?
Who can have given such power to the devil? Is it the Almighty, to
satisfy the revenge of an insignificant woman, or the jealousy of
lovers of either sex?

M. de St. André, physician to the king, in his Letters on Witchcraft,
would explain the effects of these devotings, supposing them to be
true, by the evaporation of animal spirits, which, proceeding from the
bodies of the wizards or witches, and uniting with the atoms which
fall from the wax, and the atoms of the fire, which render them still
more pungent, should fly towards the person they desire to bewitch,
and cause in him or her sensations of heat or pain, more or less
violent according to the action of the fire. But I do not think that
this clever man finds many to approve of his idea. The shortest way,
in my opinion, would be, to deny the effects of these charms; for if
these effects are real, they are inexplicable by physics, and can only
be attributed to the devil.

We read in the History of the Archbishops of Treves that Eberard,
archbishop of that church, who died in 1067, having threatened to send
away the Jews from his city, if they did not embrace Christianity,
these unhappy people, being reduced to despair, suborned an
ecclesiastic, who for money baptized for them, by the name of the
bishop, a waxen image, to which they tied wicks or wax tapers, and
lighted them on Holy Saturday (Easter Eve), as the prelate was going
solemnly to administer the baptismal rite.

Whilst he was occupied in this holy function, the statue being half
consumed, Eberard felt himself extremely ill; he was led into the
vestry, where he soon after expired.

The Pope John XXII., in 1317, complained, in public letters, that some
scoundrels had attempted his life by similar operations; and he
appeared persuaded of their power, and that he had been preserved from
death only by the particular protection of God. "We inform you," says
he, "that some traitors have conspired against us, and against some of
our brothers the cardinals, and have prepared beverages and images to
take away our life, which they have sought to do on every occasion;
but God has always preserved us." The letter is dated the 27th of
July.

From the 27th of February, the pope had issued a commission to inform
against these poisoners; his letter is addressed to Bartholomew,
Bishop of Fréjus, who had succeeded the pope in that see, and to
Peter Tessier, doctor _en decret_, afterwards cardinal. The pope says
therein, in substance--We have heard that John de Limoges, Jacques de
Crabançon, Jean d'Arrant, physician, and some others, have applied
themselves, through a damnable curiosity, to necromancy and other
magical arts, on which they have books; that they have often made use
of mirrors, and images consecrated in their manner; that, placing
themselves within circles, they have often invoked the evil spirits to
occasion the death of men by the might of their enchantments, or by
sending maladies which abridge their days. Sometimes they have
enclosed demons in mirrors, or circles, or rings, to interrogate them,
not only on the past, but on the future, and made predictions. They
pretend to have made many experiments in these matters, and fearlessly
assert, that they can not only by means of certain beverages, or
certain meats, but by simple words, abridge or prolong life, and cure
all sorts of diseases.

The pope gave a similar commission, April 22d, 1317, to the Bishop of
Riés, to the same Pierre Tessier, to Pierre Després, and two others,
to inquire into the conspiracy formed against him and against the
cardinals; and in this commission he says:--"They have prepared
beverages to poison us, and not having been able conveniently to make
us take them, they have had waxen images, made with our names, to
attack our lives, by pricking these images with magical enchantments,
and innovations of demons; but God has preserved us, and caused three
of these images to fall into our hands."

We see a description of similar charms in a letter, written three
years after, to the Inquisitor of Carcassone, by William de Godin,
Cardinal-Bishop of Sabina, in which he says:--"The pope commands you
to inquire and proceed against those who sacrifice to demons, worship
them, or pay them homage, by giving them for a token a written paper,
or something else, to bind the demon, or to work some charm by
invoking him; who, abusing the sacrament of baptism, baptize images of
wax, or of other matters with invocation of demons; who abuse the
eucharist, or consecrated wafer, or other sacraments, by exercising
their evil spells. You will proceed against them with the prelates, as
you do in matters of heresy; for the pope gives you the power to do
so." The letter is dated from Avignon, the 22d of August, 1320.

At the trial of Enguerrand de Marigni, they brought forward a wizard
whom they had surprised making waxen images, representing King Louis
le Hutin and Charles de Valois, and meaning to kill them by pricking
or melting these images.

It is related also that Cosmo Rugieri, a Florentine, a great atheist
and pretended magician, had a secret chamber, where he shut himself up
alone, and pricked with a needle a wax image representing the king,
after having loaded it with maledictions and devoted it to destruction
by horrible enchantments, hoping thus to cause the prince to languish
away and die.

Whether these conjurations, these waxen images, these magical words,
may have produced their effects or not, it proves at any rate the
opinion that was entertained on the subject--the ill will of the
wizards, and the fear in which they were held. Although their
enchantments and imprecations might not be followed by any effect, it
is apparently thought that experience on that point made them dreaded,
whether with reason or not.

The general ignorance of physics made people at that time take many
things to be supernatural which were simply the effects of natural
causes; and as it is certain, as our faith teaches us, that God has
often permitted demons to deceive mankind by prodigies, and do them
injury by extraordinary means, it was supposed without examining into
the matter that there was an art of magic and sure rules for
discovering certain secrets, or causing certain evils by means of
demons; as if God had not always been the Supreme Master, to permit or
to hinder them; or as if He would have ratified the compacts made with
evil spirits.

But on examining closely this pretended magic, we have found nothing
but poisonings, attended by superstition and imposture. All that we
have just related of the effects of magic, enchantments, and
witchcraft, which were pretended to cause such terrible effects on the
bodies and the possessions of mankind, and all that is recounted of
doomings, evocations, and magic figures, which, being consumed by
fire, occasioned the death of those who were destined or enchanted,
relate but very imperfectly to the affair of vampires, which we are
treating of in this volume; unless it may be said that those ghosts
are raised and evoked by magic art, and that the persons who fancy
themselves strangled and finally stricken with death by vampires, only
suffer these miseries through the malice of the demon, who makes their
deceased parents or relations appear to them, and produces all these
effects upon them; or simply strikes the imagination of the persons to
whom it happens, and makes them believe that it is their deceased
relations, who come to torment and kill them; although in all this it
is only an imagination strongly affected which acts upon them.

We may also connect with the history of ghosts what is related of
certain persons who have promised each other to return after their
death, and to reveal what passes in the other world, and the state in
which they find themselves.


Footnotes:

[550] Hector Boëthius, Hist. Scot. lib. xi. c. 216, 219.




