CHAPTER XIII.

BELIEF AND WILL.

     '_Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
     righteousness._'


Arguments are like the seed, or like the soul, as Paul conceived of it,
which he compared to seed. They are not quickened unless they die. As
long as they remain for us in the form of arguments they do no work.
Their work begins only, after a time and in secret, when they have sunk
down into the memory, and have been left to lie there; when the
hostility and distrust they were regarded with dies away; when,
unperceived, they melt into the mental system, and, becoming part of
oneself, effect a turning round of the soul. This is true, at least,
when the matters dealt with are such as have engaged us here. It may be
true, too, of those who discern and urge the arguments, just as well as
of those upon whom they urge them. But the immediate barrenness of much
patient and careful reasoning should not make us think that it is lost
labour. One way or other it will some day bear its fruit. Sometimes the
intellect is the servant of the heart. At other times the heart must
follow slowly upon the heels of the intellect.

And such is the case now. For centuries man's faith and all his loftier
feelings had their way made plain before them. The whole empire of human
thought belonged to them. But this old state of things endures no
longer. Upon this Empire, as upon that of Rome, calamity has at last
fallen. A horde of intellectual barbarians has burst in upon it, and has
occupied by force the length and breadth of it. The result has been
astounding. Had the invaders been barbarians only, they might have been
repelled easily; but they were barbarians armed with the most powerful
weapons of civilisation. They were a phenomenon new to history: they
showed us real knowledge in the hands of real ignorance; and the work of
the combination thus far has been ruin, not reorganisation. Few great
movements at the beginning have been conscious of their own true
tendency; but no great movement has mistaken it like modern Positivism.
Seeing just too well to have the true instinct of blindness, and too ill
to have the proper guidance from sight, it has tightened its clutch upon
the world of thought, only to impart to it its own confusion. What lies
before men now is to reduce this confusion to order, by a patient and
calm employment of the intellect. Intellect itself will never re-kindle
faith, or restore any of those powers that are at present so failing and
so feeble; but it will work like a pioneer to prepare their way before
them, if they are ever revived otherwise, encouraged in its labours,
perhaps not even by hope, but at any rate by the hope of hope.

As a pioneer, and not as a preacher, I have tried to indicate the real
position in which modern knowledge has placed us, and the way in which
it puts the problem of life before us. I have tried to show that,
whatever ultimately its tendency may prove to be, it cannot be the
tendency that, by the school that has given it to us, it is supposed to
have been; and that it either does a great deal more than that school
thinks it does, or a great deal less. History would teach us this, even
if nothing else did. The school in question has proceeded from denial to
denial, thinking at each successive moment that it had reached its final
halting-place, and had struck at last on a solid and firm foundation.
First, it denied the Church to assert the Bible; then it denied the
Bible to assert God; then it denied God to assert the moral dignity of
man: and there, if it could remain, it would. But what it would do is of
no avail. It is not its own master; it is compelled to move onwards; and
now, under the force of its own relentless logic, this last
resting-place is beginning to fail also. It professed to compensate for
its denials of God's existence by a freer and more convincing
re-assertion of man's dignity. But the principles which obliged it to
deny the first belief are found to be even more fatal to the
substitute. '_Unless I have seen with my eyes I will not believe_,'
expresses a certain mental tendency that has always had existence. But
till Science and its positive methods began to dawn on the world, this
tendency was vague and wavering. Positive Science supplied it with solid
nutriment. Its body grew denser; its shape more and more definite; and
now the completed portent is spreading its denials through the whole
universe. So far as spirit goes and spiritual aspirations, it has left
existence empty, swept and garnished. If spirit is to enter in again and
dwell there, we must seek by other methods for it. Modern thought has
not created a new doubt; it has simply made perfect an old one; and has
advanced it from the distant regions of theory into the very middle of
our hearts and lives. It has made the question of belief or of unbelief
the supreme practical question for us. It has forced us to stake
everything on the cast of a single die. What are we? Have we been
hitherto deceived in ourselves, or have we not? And is every hope that
has hitherto nerved our lives, melting at last away from us, utterly and
for ever? Or are we indeed what we have been taught to think we are?
Have we indeed some aims that we may still call high and holy--still
some aims that are more than transitory? And have we still some right to
that reverence that we have learnt to cherish for ourselves?

Here lie the difficulties. The battle is to be fought here--here at the
very threshold--at the entrance to the spiritual world. Are we moral and
spiritual beings, or are we not? That is the decisive question, which we
must say our Yes or No to. If, with our eyes open, and with all our
hearts, it be given us to say Yes--to say Yes without fear, and firmly,
and in the face of everything--then there will be little more to fear.
We shall have fought the good fight, we shall have kept the faith; and
whatever we lack more, will without doubt be added to us. From this
belief in ourselves we shall pass to the belief in God, as its only
rational basis and its only emotional completion; and, perhaps, from a
belief in God, to a recognition of His audible voice amongst us. But at
any rate, whatever after-difficulties beset us, they will not be new
difficulties; only those we had braved at first, showing themselves more
clearly.

But that first decision--how shall we make it? Who or what shall help
us, or give us counsel? There is no evidence that can do so in the
sensible world around us. The universe, as positive thought approaches
it, is blind and dumb about it. Science and history are sullen, and
blind, and dumb. They await upon our decision before they will utter a
single word to us: and that decision, if we have a will at all, it lies
with our own will--with our will alone, to make. It may, indeed, be said
that the will has to create itself by an initial exercise of itself, in
an assent to its own existence. If it can do this, one set of obstacles
is surmounted; but others yet confront us. The world into which the
moral will has borne itself--not a material world, but a spiritual--a
world which the will's existence alone makes possible, this world is not
silent, like the other, but it is torn and divided against itself, and
is resonant with unending contradictions. Its first aspect is that of a
place of torture, a hell of the intellect, in which reason is to be
racked for ever by a tribe of sphinx-like monsters, themselves
despairing. Good and evil inhabit there, confronting each other, for
ever unreconciled: _there_ is omnipotent power baffled, and omnipotent
mercy unexercised. Is the will strong enough to hold on through this
baffling and monstrous world, and not to shrink back and bid the vision
vanish? Can we still resolve to say, 'I believe, although it is
impossible'? Is the will to assert our own moral nature--our own
birthright in eternity, strong enough to bear us on?

The trial is a hard one, and whilst we doubt and hesitate under it the
universal silence of the vast physical world itself disheartens us. Who
are we, in the midst of this unheeding universe, that we can claim for
ourselves so supreme a heritage; that we can assert for ourselves other
laws than those which seem to be all-pervading, and that we can dream
of breaking through them into a something else beyond?

And yet it may be that faith will succeed and conquer sight--that the
preciousness of the treasure we cling to will nerve us with enough
strength to retain it. It may be that man, having seen the way that,
unaided, he is forced to go, will change his attitude; that, finding
only weakness in pride, he will seek for strength in humility, and will
again learn to say, '_I believe, although I never can comprehend_.' Once
let him say this, his path will again grow clearer for him. Through
confusion, and doubt, and darkness, the brightness of God's countenance
will again be visible; and by-and-by again he may hear the Word calling
him. From his first assent to his own moral nature he _must_ rise to a
theism, and he _may_ rise to the recognition of a Church--to a visible
embodiment of that moral nature of his, as directed and joined to its
one aim and end--to its delight, and its desire, and its completion.
Then he will see all that is high and holy taking a distinct and helping
form for him. Grace and mercy will come to him through set and certain
channels. His nature will be redeemed visibly from its weakness and from
its littleness--redeemed, not in dreams or in fancy, but in fact. God
Himself will be his brother and his father; he will be near akin to the
Power that _is_ always, and _is_ everywhere. His love of virtue will be
no longer a mere taste of his own: it will be the discernment and
taking to himself of the eternal strength and of the eternal treasure;
and, whatever he most reveres in mother, or wife, or sister--this he
will know is holy, everywhere and for ever, and is exalted high over all
things in one of like nature with theirs, the Mother of grace, the
Parent of sweet clemency, who will protect him from the enemy, and save
him in the hour of death.

Such is the conception of himself, and of his place in existence, that,
always implicit in man, man has at last developed. He has at last
conceived his race--the faithful of it--as the bride of God. Is this
majestic conception a true one, or is it a dream only, with no abiding
substance? Is it merely a misty vision rising up like an exhalation from
the earth, or does a something more come down to it out of heaven, and
strike into it substance and reality? This figure of human dreams has
grown and grown in stature: does anything divine descend to it, and so
much as touch its lips or its lifted hands? If so, it is but the work of
a moment. The contact is complete. Life, and truth, and force, like an
electric current, pass into the whole frame. It lives, it moves, it
breathes: it has a body and a being: the divine and the eternal is
indeed dwelling amongst us. And thus, though mature knowledge may seem,
as it still widens, to deepen the night around us; though the universe
yawn wider on all sides of us, in vaster depths, in more unfathomable,
soulless gulfs; though the roar of the loom of time grow more audible
and more deafening in our ears--yet through the night and through the
darkness the divine light of our lives will only burn the clearer: and
this speck of a world as it moves through the blank immensity will bear
the light of all the worlds upon its bosom.

Thinkers like Mr. Leslie Stephen say that such beliefs as these belong
to dreamland; and they are welcome if they please to keep their names.
Their terminology at least has this merit, that it recognises the
dualism of the two orders of things it deals with. Let them keep their
names if they will; and in their language the case amounts to this--that
it is only for the sake of the dreams that visit it that the world of
reality has any certain value for us. Will not the dreams continue, when
the reality has passed away?




G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS have in preparation a series of volumes, to be
issued under the title of

CURRENT DISCUSSION,

A COLLECTION FROM THE CHIEF ENGLISH ESSAYS ON QUESTIONS
OF THE TIME.

The series will be edited by Edward L. Burlingame, and is
designed to bring together, for the convenience of readers and for a
lasting place in the library, those important and representative papers
from recent English periodicals, which may fairly be said to form the
best history of the thought and investigation of the last few years. It
is characteristic of recent thought and science, that a much larger
proportion than ever before of their most important work has appeared in
the form of contributions to reviews and magazines; the thinkers of the
day submitting their results at once to the great public, which is
easiest reached in this way, and holding their discussions before a
large audience, rather than in the old form of monographs reaching the
special student only. As a consequence there are subjects of the deepest
present and permanent interest, almost all of whose literature exists
only in the shape of detached papers, individually so famous that their
topics and opinions are in everybody's mouth--yet collectively only
accessible, for re-reading and comparison, to those who have carefully
preserved them, or who are painstaking enough to study long files of
periodicals.

In so collecting these separate papers as to give the reader a fair if
not complete view of the discussions in which they form a part; to make
them convenient for reference in the future progress of those
discussions; and especially to enable them to be preserved as an
important part of the history of modern thought,--it is believed that
this series will do a service that will be widely appreciated.

Such papers naturally include three classes:--those which by their
originality have recently led discussion into altogether new channels;
those which have attracted deserved attention as powerful special pleas
upon one side or the other in great current questions; and finally,
purely critical and analytical dissertations. The series will aim to
include the best representatives of each of these classes of expression.

It is designed to arrange the essays included in the Series under such
general divisions as the following, to each of which one or more volumes
will be devoted:--

INTERNATIONAL POLITICS,
NATURAL SCIENCE,
RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERY,
QUESTIONS OF BELIEF,
ECONOMICAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCE,
HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY,
LITERARY TOPICS.

Among the material selected for the first volume (International
Politics), which will be issued immediately, are the following papers:

    Archibald Forbes's Essay on "The Russians, Turks, and Bulgarians;"
    Vsct. Stratford de Redcliffe's "Turkey;" Mr. Gladstone's
    "Montenegro;" Professor Goldwin Smith's Paper on "The Political
    Destiny of Canada," and his Essay called "The Slaveholder and the
    Turk;" Professor Blackie's "Prussia in the Nineteenth Century;"
    Edward Dicey's "Future of Egypt;" Louis Kossuth's "What is in Store
    for Europe;" and Professor Freeman's "Relation of the English People
    to the War."

Among the contents of the second volume (Questions of Belief), are:

    The two well-known "Modern Symposia;" the Discussion by Professor
    Huxley, Mr. Hutton, Sir J.F. Stephen, Lord Selborne, James
    Martineau, Frederic Harrison, the Dean of St. Paul's, the Duke of
    Argyll, and others, on "The Influence Upon Morality of a Decline in
    a Religious Belief;" and the Discussion by Huxley, Hutton, Lord
    Blatchford, the Hon. Roden Noel, Lord Selborne, Canon Barry, Greg,
    the Rev. Baldwin Brown, Frederic Harrison, and others, on "The Soul
    and Future Life." Also, Professor Calderwood's "Ethical Aspects of
    the Development Theory;" Mr. G.H. Lewes's Paper on "The Course of
    Modern Thought;" Thomas Hughes on "The Condition and Prospects Of
    the Church of England;" W.H. Mallock's "Is Life Worth Living?"
    Frederic Harrison's "The Soul and Future Life;" and the Rev. R.F.
    Littledale's "The Pantheistic Factor in Christian Thought."

The volumes will be printed in a handsome crown octavo form, and will
sell for about $1.50 each.

G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS, 182 Fifth Avenue, New York.




PUBLICATIONS OF G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS.


=A History of American Literature.= By Moses Coit Tyler, Professor of
English Literature in the University of Michigan. Volumes I and II,
comprising the period, 1607-1765. Large 8vo, about 700 pages, handsomely
bound in cloth, extra, gilt top, $5.00; half calf, extra, $9 50

     The History of American Literature, now offered to the public, is
     the first attempt ever made to give a systematic and critical
     account of the literary development of the American people. It is
     not a mere cyclopaedia of literature, or a series of detached
     biographical sketches accompanied by literary extracts: but an
     analytic and sustained narrative of our literary history from the
     earliest English settlement in America down to the present time.
     The work is the result of original and independent studies
     prosecuted by the author for the past ten years, and gives an
     altogether new analysis of American literary forces and results
     during nearly three centuries. The present two volumes--a complete
     work in themselves--cover the whole field of our history during the
     colonial time.

     "An important national work."--_New York Tribune._

     "The literary event of the decade."--_Hartford Courant._

     "A book more interesting than half the new novels."--_The Nation._

     "A work of great and permanent importance."--_New York Evening
     Post._

     "One of the most valuable publications of the century."--_Boston
     Post._

     "A book actually fascinating from beginning to end."--Prest.
     J.B. Angell.

     "As the work stands, it may rightfully claim a place on the library
     table of every cultivated American."--_New York Times._

     "No work of similar scope and magnitude and erudition exists, or
     has been attempted in this country."--_New York Evangelist._

     "A unique and valuable work."--_Chicago Tribune._

     "A work which will rank with those of Sismondi, Ticknor, and
     Taine."--_New York Evening Express._

     "It is this philosophical character of the work which brings it not
     far distant from the works of Taine, of Buckle, and of
     Lecky."--_Buffalo Express._

     "One can hardly speak too strongly in praise of these
     conscientious, careful and successful volumes, which deserve to be
     studied alike by scholars and patriots."--_Rev. Henry Martyn
     Dexter, D.D._

     "But the plan of Professor Tyler's book is so vast and its
     execution so fearless, that no reader can expect or wish to agree
     with all its personal judgments. It is a book truly admirable, both
     in design and in general execution; the learning is great, the
     treatment wise, the style fresh and vigorous. Here and there occurs
     a phrase which a severer revision would perhaps exclude, but all
     such criticisms are trivial in view of so signal a success. Like
     Parkman, Professor Tyler may almost be said to have created, not
     merely his volumes, but their theme. Like Parkman, at any rate, he
     has taken a whole department of human history, rescued it from
     oblivion, and made it henceforward a matter of deep interest to
     every thinking mind."--T.W. Higginson, in _The Nation_.

     "The work betrays acute philosophical insight, a rare power of
     historical research, and a cultivated literary habit, which was
     perhaps no less essential than the two former conditions, to its
     successful accomplishment. The style of the author is marked by
     vigor, originality, comprehensiveness, and a curious instinct in
     the selection of words. In this latter respect, though not in the
     moulding of sentences, the reader may perhaps be reminded of the
     choice and fragrant vocabulary of Washington Irving, whose words
     alone often leave an exquisite odor like the perfume of sweet-briar
     and arbutus."--George Ripley, in the _Tribune_.

     "Professor Moses Coit Tyler's 'History of American Literature,' of
     which the first two volumes have just been issued, will take rank
     at once as a book of lasting value, even though the author should
     advance no further than he has already done in the scheme of his
     work. We are not unmindful of the eminent historians this country
     has produced, when we express our opinion that his history is the
     best study of American historic material that has been written by
     an American. There has been manifestly no limit to the enthusiasm,
     conscientiousness and industry with which he has possessed himself
     of the entire body of the literature of which he treats, and at the
     same time he has displayed the qualities of a true literary artist
     in giving form, color and perspective to his work."--Daniel
     Gray, in the _Buffalo Courier_.


=VAN LAUN. The History of French Literature.=

By Henri Van Laun, Translator of Taine's "History of English
Literature," "the Works of Moliere," etc.

Vol I. From its Origin to the Renaissance. 8vo, cloth
extra                                                           $2 50

Vol. II. From the Renaissance to the Close of the Reign
of Louis XIV. 8vo, cloth extra                                  $2 50

Vol. III. From the Reign of Louis XIV. to that of
Napoleon III. 8vo, cloth extra                                  $2 50

The set, three volumes, in box, half calf, $15.00; cloth extra,  7 50

     "We have to deal with a people essentially spirited and
     intellectual, whose spirit and intellect have been invariably the
     wonder and admiration, if not the model and mold of contemporary
     thought, and whose literary triumphs remain to this day among the
     most notable landmarks of modern literature." * * *--_Extract from
     Author's Preface._

     "Mr. Van Laun has not given us a mere critical study of the works
     he considers, but has done his best to bring their authors, their
     way of life, and the ways of those around them, before us in a
     living likeness."--_London Daily News._

     "This history is extremely interesting in its exposition of the
     literary progress of the age, in connection with the social and
     political influences which helped to mould the character and the
     destinies of the people."--_Boston Daily Globe._

     "It is full of keenest interest for every person who knows or
     wishes to learn anything of French literature, or of French
     literary history or biography. Scarcely any book of recent origin,
     indeed, is better fitted than this to win general favor with all
     classes of persons."--_N.Y. Evening-Post._

=THIERS= (Louis Adolphe) =Life of.= By Francois Le Goff,
Docteur-es-lettres, Author of a "History of the Government of National
Defense in the Provinces," etc. Translated, from the author's
unpublished manuscript, by Theodore Stanton, A.M. Octavo, with
Portrait, cloth extra. (In Press.)

     This book is written especially for the American public by M.
     Francois Le Goff, of Paris, a French publicist of the
     Conservative-Republican school, who knew Thiers personally and who
     is thoroughly conversant with the history and politics of France.
     Besides the biographical narrative, which is enlivened by many
     fresh anecdotes, the writer attempts to present such a connected
     view of French political history for the last fifty years, as will
     throw light upon the present crisis in France, so incomprehensible
     to most Americans. The work will also be interesting as an able
     defense of the unity of Thiers' political life, a position rarely
     assumed by even the most ardent friends of the great statesman. It
     is illustrated by a fac-simile of his handwriting and autograph, a
     view of his home, etc.

=BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES.= First Series. =Contemporary Statesmen of Europe.=
Edited by Thomas Wentworth Higginson.

They are handsomely printed in square 16mo, and attractively bound in
cloth extra. Price per vol.                                     $1 50

Vol.  I. English Statesmen. By T.W. Higginson.
 "   II. English Radical Leaders. By R.J. Hinton.
 "  III. French Leaders. By Edward King.
 "   IV. German Political Leaders. By Herbert Tuttle.

     These volumes are planned to meet the desire which exists for
     accurate and graphic information in regard to the leaders of
     political action in other countries. They will give portraitures of
     the men and analysis of their lives and work, that will be vivid
     and picturesque, as well as accurate and faithful, and that will
     combine the authority of careful historic narration with the
     interest attaching to anecdote and personal delineation.

     "Compact and readable * * * leaves little to be desired."--_N.Y.
     Nation._


Transcriber's Note:

Page 232--Changed spelling of conquerer to conqueror.






End of Project Gutenberg's Is Life Worth Living?, by William Hurrell Mallock



