CHAPTER VII

LAW, FREE WILL, PERSONALITY

    “——And this main miracle that thou art thou,
    With power on thine own act and on the world.”

                                        Tennyson.


There is, according to Mr. Herbert Spencer, a question lying at the
root of all ethics, a question which must be “definitely raised and
answered before entering on any ethical discussion.”[125] This is “the
question of late much agitated, Is life worth living?”[126] I confess
that this question does not seem to me at all a radical or pressing one
in comparison with another of which Mr. Spencer, in his Data of Ethics,
takes no account whatever—the question whether we have any real choice
in the way we ought to live so as to make life of value, or in other
words whether there is an ‘ought’ in the business at all. Can any man
regulate his own living? Is he not, even while he lives and thinks,

    Rolled round in Earth’s diurnal course
      With rocks and stones and trees,

as much a helpless victim of external forces as they are? Does the
realm of natural _law_ extend to human actions and volitions; and if
so, must it not be an illusion to suppose that these can possess any
ethical quality whatever?

A great deal of the perplexity attaching to the old problem, how to
reconcile human free will with divine predestination and omniscience,
has, it seems to me, been carried forward quite needlessly into the new
problem of the reconciliation of free will with the reign of natural
law. The problem in the old form which occupied Milton’s rebel angels
has scarcely any meaning for modern thought. Human actions are a part
of the world of phenomena, existing in time and space. When we think
in that sphere of things we conceive the Deity as the synthesis of
all things, and as the intellect can never arrive at this synthesis,
it follows that we can never represent the Deity in terms of the
intellect. An infinitely wise, infinitely good and powerful Being _has
no definable relation to the phenomenal world at all_. Therefore there
can be no question either of reconcilement or of opposition between
the attributes of each. God has not planned beforehand the course of
the world because (speaking in this sphere) God _is_ the world—past,
present, and to come; and His being is in process of completion by
the world’s development. In another sphere, behind the veils of space
and time, of causality and of sense, resides the Eternal Beauty, the
Eternal Wisdom, the Eternal Love, approachable indeed by those who
come to it “as a little child,” but evading the questionings of the
intellect.

But the modern problem of Determinism and Free Will has meaning enough
for us all, without bringing any transcendental relation into the
question. Let us state briefly the position of the Determinists. It
is held by them that every human thought—in fact, every mental change
whether of the nature of volition, thought, or emotion—is a necessary
effect of certain antecedent causes, just like every change in the
material world. Every act of will is, on this view, the mechanically
accurate resultant of two forces: (_a_) the particular nature of the
man who wills; (_b_) the circumstances which supplied the occasion for
the volition. It would seem to follow from this that no man can be held
morally accountable for his actions. Were we sufficiently acquainted
with his nature and with the course of external circumstances, we could
predict his action throughout his whole lifetime as surely as we can
foretell an eclipse. He is what he has been made by the circumstances
of his life acting on the whole mental and temperamental make-up which
he inherited from his parents. He does good or ill as a tree bears
good fruit or bad according to its nature and to the treatment it has
received.

The old theory of Free Will, which was content to declare that each
man’s choice in any ethical situation presented to him by life was not
imposed on him by the will of a Deity but was _his own_ choice, thus
making him responsible to God and man for his acts, evidently requires
to be restated in view of the conception of scientific Determinism
just described, which does not seek to impose on man the will of any
other personal being. But when we come to restate it, the distinction
between Free Will and Determinism appears to be by no means so clear
and intelligible as it seemed at first sight. The essence of the
Determinist theory is simply that the same man will always, under the
same set of external circumstances, act in exactly the same way. But
how far does the advocate of Free Will really deny this? Imagine a man
whom we regard as a type of honour and integrity, a General Gordon, for
instance, in the position of being offered a bribe to betray a trust
reposed in him. We are quite assured that he would reject it, and that
he would reject it again and again to the end of the chapter. So long
as his mind and character remained unchanged, his action would never
vary. Was his will therefore not free? And if so, how do we distinguish
its freedom from scientific Determinism?

We shall find that while the statement of the Determinist position is
quite easy and simple, the statement of Free Will, the explanation of
what we really mean when we talk of the will being ‘free,’ is, when we
look closely into it, a matter of much intricacy. Believers in Free
Will, says J. S. Mill in his essay ‘On Social Freedom,’ are those who
“believe, in fact, that they themselves can, within certain limits,
do what they please.”[127] This is, indeed, the answer which comes at
once to the lips of the average man when Socratically interrogated as
to what he means by Free Will. But the nature of the limits is just
the critical part of the question. I cannot fly because I please. I
cannot write a line of poetry because I please. Can I live a saintly
life because I please? Perhaps not, it may be replied; but after all
Free Will does not essentially mean the external fact of doing, it
means the internal act of choosing—let us substitute the word ‘choose’
for the word ‘do’ and see what we arrive at. Very well, then; I can
choose what I please: let us try this formula. But at once we perceive
that this is a tautological expression, for what I ‘please’ to do is
simply what I choose. So the formula is finally stripped to this bare
expression, ‘I can choose.’ But now the Determinist will say, ‘Who
denies it?’ The psychological process known as ‘choosing’ is within
every one’s experience. The question as to what governs the choice
remains untouched. The core of the problem, then, has been found to
lie not in the word ‘do,’ not in the word ‘please,’ not in the word
‘choose.’ Where is it then? It is not in ‘can,’ for ‘I can choose’ adds
nothing philosophically to the contents of ‘I choose.’

_The core of the problem is the word ‘I.’_ And until we have settled
what ‘I’ am, we shall not reach a clear issue between Free Will and
Determinism.

So the test which we have applied to human actions with a view to
finding out whether they conform to law as do physical phenomena or
not—the test, namely, whether they always come out the same under the
same circumstances or not—breaks down. The ‘circumstances’ include the
man himself, and the question ‘What is a man?’ turns out to be the real
point at issue.

The Determinist usually belongs to a school which has a clear and
simple answer to this question. Man, for him, is a complex of vessels,
nerves, ganglia, and molecular configurations of brain matter
responding to external stimuli as uniformly and inevitably as a plant.
Consciousness is merely a sort of by-product of this mechanism, which
would go on just the same without it.[128]

But this view is in direct contradiction to the deepest and clearest
deliverance of human consciousness, which affirms that I am a
deliberative and ruling Mind, and bids me regard my Will as Reason in
action. I seem to know this so intimately and profoundly that if it
is an illusion there appears to be nothing else in the world of which
I can ever venture to feel sure. We know the outside world only at two
removes. The external object has first to impress itself in some as yet
unexplained manner on our physical organism, and the latter has then
in a manner equally mysterious to produce a state of consciousness in
the observer. But consciousness, in Man, can turn upon and interrogate
itself; it is subject and object in one; and its deliverances, so far
as they go, so far as they are pure deliverances of consciousness with
no argumentative deduction subtly mingled with them, are the truest
things we know or ever can know. I do not see how they can possibly be
brought to the test by any other kind of knowledge: _they_ are the test
of everything.

We find, then, that when we talk of ‘free’ choice as the prerogative
of man what we mean at bottom is the choice of a self-determining
Mind. We find, also, that while for every event in the physical world
we are obliged to assume an antecedent cause, we are under no such
obligation as regards Mind. When we have traced any sequence of causes
and effects up to a Mind, we require to go no further. We can conceive
a self-determining Mind. If man is such, or so far as he is such, his
will is what we call free.

But to say that we are profoundly conscious of the existence of our
will does not by any means get rid of the difficulties connected with
this belief, and it is incumbent on us either to attempt a solution of
them or frankly to dismiss them as, for the present, insoluble.


If possible, to begin with, we must obtain a clear idea of the
difference of the will from other forms of vital action.

At one end of the ascending scale of organic life we see an animalcule
swimming in the direction in which it is attracted by food. At the
other end, we find a man in the full flush of conscious life going
deliberately to a shocking death rather than deny his faith or break
a trust. What is the essential difference between the action of
the animalcule and that of the martyr? To the Determinist there is
none. Both are alike the inevitable response to certain stimuli from
the outside world acting on a certain nervous system. But there is
one difference in the _circumstances_ of the action which will be
admitted by all. The animalcule has no _choice_. The martyr has. The
animalcule-consciousness has not been developed to the point at which
it can take in alternative courses of action and compare them with
one another. It is doubtful to me whether any of the lower animals or
even of the lower races of man can really do this. At any rate there
can clearly be no Will where there is no distinct consciousness of
at least two possible courses of action. The Will, therefore, must
be regarded as coming for the first time into action when a certain
stage in the development of consciousness has been reached, the stage
at which man is fully conscious of more than one motive. Furthermore,
even when the consciousness has been developed to this point we cannot
recognize a true act of will unless, _on that particular occasion_,
two or more motives were fully present. For instance, a lad brought
up in a thieves’ kitchen, when he sees an opportunity for stealing a
purse, cannot properly be said to have any counter-motive to the theft.
And common sense, without having philosophically analyzed the matter,
quite recognizes this position of affairs and graduates the moral
responsibility of every criminal action roughly in accordance with the
facilities which the subject has had for ‘knowing better.’

Two or more motives, then, fully present to consciousness, form the
conditions under which alone the Will can be said to act. This is in
accord with the whole scheme of evolution. The presence of certain
conditions gradually evokes the faculty or organ which deals with them.
But here an important question arises. When these motives differ from
each other morally, can the Will be said ever to choose the evil one?
Has it any moral bent? And if not, what is the use of it?

There is no doubt that the ascription to the Will of a certain moral
character, and that a very lofty one, is characteristic of nearly
all thinkers who accept its existence at all. “Ill for him,” writes
Tennyson in lines of Sophoclean dignity,

            “Who, bettering not with time
    Corrupts the strength of heaven-descended Will,”

as though evil came from the corruption and slackness of Will, not from
its wrong direction.

In the ethics of Plato it was a cardinal principle that men did evil
only through ignorance. Make the soul conscious of goodness, and
it could not fail to follow it. Yet it seems that this doctrine,
strongly as it appeals to the moral sense of man, would, if held with
philosophic rigour, really make the Will unfree. No man can truly
choose the good who is unable to choose the evil. The Platonic doctrine
may, however, be fully accounted for, and even put in a form in which
it can, to a great extent, be justified, if we give weight to the
following considerations. Moral action is usually recognized in the
renunciation of a strong personal gratification for the sake of some
social or other altruistic end. Now in such cases we are always sure
that the two motives have been duly present, the moral motive, for
otherwise it would not have been followed, and the personal motive,
for these are common to all living things, they are at the base of our
being, and our own experience tells us only too well how insistent
and powerful such motives are. The volitional character of such an
act is therefore manifest. But if the lower motive be followed, the
significance of the event is more obscure. For we all understand these
lower motives,[129] and they are fairly uniform over the whole of
humanity. We can always take for granted that they are present in full
force. The martyr undoubtedly hates the idea of being burnt. But we are
not so sure of the other class of motives. We cannot in every case feel
certain (unless the event has verified it) that _they_ were distinctly
in view, for man’s moral nature is still only at the beginning of its
development, we are still far from having evolved anything like a
universal moral code, not to speak of the instincts for obeying it. We
are inclined to assume, therefore, and I think we are perfectly right
in assuming, that when the Will appears in human action it is far more
often to good purpose than to evil. In order that it may be free to act
on any ethical question, there must be a sufficient degree of ethical
development; the character of moral worth must have been impressed upon
the spirit. In the strength and stay which it affords to such a spirit,
the faculty of Will is most clearly recognized and honoured.

We are now in a position to meet one of the gravest of the objections
which have been brought against the doctrine of Free Will. If
temperament and circumstance, it is urged, determine human action,
there is, of course, no place for the Will—it is a mere illusion.
But if Will is present and is supreme, how can temperament and
circumstance play the part they manifestly do—how does the history of
man come to present, as we have seen, an aspect so strikingly similar
to that of the orderly evolution of physical organisms under natural
law? If you bring in Will at all as an arbiter of human action, do you
not thereby drive out everything else?

The answer will be clear to those who accept the foregoing analysis of
the elements of choice. The Will is neither a faculty of perception
nor a faculty of judgment, but a power of free choice. Free as it
is, _it can only act on what is presented to it_; and here, beyond
question, it is subject to serious limitations. Every man has round
his soul, as it were, a refracting medium, through which the external
objects that excite the Will to action must normally pass before they
reach the centres of decision and control. And this medium is probably
never quite the same in any two individuals. Often it is very widely
different. The sight of an unguarded heap of treasure may appear to
one man simply in the aspect of a perfectly legitimate opportunity for
enriching himself. To another man it may come as a violent temptation
to do what he knows in his soul to be wrong. A third, equally needy,
equally capable of enjoying all that wealth represents, may never have
a thought on the subject except that of protecting the treasure for its
true owner. The object is the same, the physical perception of it is
the same, but the ‘apperception’ in each case is as different as Peter
Bell’s perception of the “primrose by the river’s brim” was from that
of Wordsworth. This difference is caused by the modifying influence
of temperament, training, all that forms a man’s disposition, whether
acquired or inherited. It is as though each man moved in an atmosphere,
an _aura_ of his own which colours all the objects of his thought.
Whether _every_ invitation to action that can be presented to the Will
must necessarily pass through this _aura_ is a very obscure question
and one on which I do not at present wish to dogmatize. But it is
certain that the great majority pass through it.

Thus on every occasion where the Will is exercised, it has to act not
only on the facts which are perceived but _as_ they are perceived. Now
so far as the influence of what is called apperception is concerned
we are in the realm of natural law. Each man, to that extent, is
unquestionably under the dominion of his environment, that is to say of
geographic, historic, social, and other influences which affect whole
communities, and which vary but slowly when they vary at all. The Will,
in fact, acts within the framework of nature and its laws exactly as
does that directive agency to which, in the view of the writer, is to
be attributed the phenomenon of progressive evolution from lower forms
of life to higher forms, that is, from forms which admit of less life
to those which admit of more. The Will is really this directive agency
coming into consciousness in Mind.

In all life, whether human, animal, or material, there is an element
of change and an element of constancy. Between these poles it moves
and has its being, nor could life, as we know it, exist for a moment
if either of these two opposing but complementary principles were
withdrawn. We have now seen that with a full belief in the innovating
and incalculable quality of the Will, with the infinite vistas which
that belief opens up to human hope and effort, there is yet ample room
for the opposing and equally necessary element in life, the element
of constancy, uniformity, law. Human Will does not come into nature
as a catastrophic force—it develops _pari passu_ with the development
of consciousness; and it will naturally be found in its highest
development where the whole nature is most wholesomely attuned to the
purposes of the cosmic Will.


We have now to notice certain grave objections which every student
of modern science and philosophy will expect to see dealt with by a
defender of the principle of Free Will.

It has been objected from the evolutionist standpoint that, as no
one attributes Free Will to the lower forms of animal life, it is
impossible to conceive it as having arisen in man except by a miracle.
At what point, it is asked, did it first appear? And if one cannot
fix the point, the presumption is supposed to be that it has never
appeared at all. It will be remembered that some scientific thinkers
such as Mr. A. R. Wallace, and one may add Prof. Reinke, have been so
much impressed by the mental difference between man and the beasts that
they have assumed the gulf to have been bridged by a catastrophic or
miraculous act and not by any evolutionary process.

Now I quite admit that one cannot conceive mind being evolved from
not-mind. But neither can I conceive life being evolved from not-life,
nor, in fact, when one looks into the process minutely, can I believe
in anything whatever, physical or spiritual, turning into something
else. I conceive the evolutionary process strictly as the ‘unfolding’
of latent capacities, faculties, organs, by means of psychic agencies
acting within the framework of the fixed relations which we call
natural law. The fact that one cannot lay one’s finger on the exact
point in the history of nature where mind and will began to be is not
relevant to the question whether they are now present or not. As well
might one be challenged to fix the moment when the embryo becomes a
man. There are _no_ such exact points in nature. If there were, nature
would be discontinuous, and the smallest real discontinuity in nature
would be enough to shatter the frame of the universe.

From another side it has been urged that the conception of the
continuity or oneness of the universe is fatal to Free Will. The
Monist, according to that brilliant champion of chaos, Mr. William
James,[130] must believe in a universe fixed like cast-iron in all its
parts, for, being all interrelated, not one of them can be different
without altering the whole structure of things.

But does not Mr. James here overlook the fact that essential oneness
is not incompatible with temporal incompleteness? The universe is one,
true—but this one universe comprises not only all that has been and
that is, but all that will be. It is to be conceived at present as
a growing organism; it will not be a fixed and completed whole till
time is at an end. On this basis I see no difficulty in fitting into a
Monistic scheme of thought Mr. James’s admirable statement of the Free
Will position:—

    “Our acts, our turning-places, where we seem to ourselves to make
    ourselves and grow, are the parts of the world to which we are
    closest, the parts of which our knowledge is most intimate and
    complete. Why should we not take them at their face-value? Why may
    they not be the actual turning-places and growing-places _of the
    world_—why not the workshop of being where we catch _fact_ in the
    making?”[131]

The next and last objection I propose to deal with cuts closer to
the heart of the question and will have to occupy us, I hope not
unfruitfully, for some time.

I instanced some time ago the case of martyrdom as one in which every
one would recognize the action of the Will, if it can be recognized
anywhere. Let me recall that extremest form of martyrdom which John
Stuart Mill once declared himself ready to face rather than outrage
his moral sense. Speaking in his Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s
Philosophy of what passed in his day for the ‘orthodox’ conception of
the Supreme Being he wrote:—

    “Whatever power such a being may have over me, there is one thing
    which he shall not do: he shall not compel me to worship him. I
    will call no being good, who is not what I mean when I apply that
    epithet to my fellow creatures; and if such a being can sentence me
    to hell for not so calling him, to hell I will go.”[132]

Mill, as we see, relied on his personal freedom of Will to stiffen
his neck against any homage to a Power whom his moral sense declared
unworthy of reverence. But a modern physiologist would tell him—and
even if the fact be not fully demonstrated at present, it would,
I think, be very rash for any psychologist to deny it—that by a
slight change in the molecular configuration of the brain cells the
heroic recusant could have been turned into a devout worshipper of
any being who was able to exhibit the credentials of superior force.
Such a change would certainly not be beyond the powers of a being who
had heaven and hell at his disposal; even a skilful surgeon might
accomplish it. What, then, is the freedom of the Will worth (it may
be asked) if the direction it takes is at the mercy of the physical
configuration of our brain-matter? And the ‘I’ which, we say, wills—if
material changes can thus profoundly alter its character, how can we
attribute to it any kind of real and independent existence? Must not
the complete dispersal of the molecules of the brain at death cause
the ‘I’ to vanish altogether like a blown-out flame? Must it not be at
their mercy during the brief illusion of existence?

Our discussion has thus plunged us into the intricate question of the
relations of mind and matter, and we must pause to dwell on it for a
while.

What is matter? Nobody can tell. It is that which resists when we
push against it—a tactile or muscular sensation. It is that of which
two portions cannot occupy the same space at the same time—a visual
sensation. It is the source of certain sensations; and the most recent
physical investigations points to its being composed of innumerable
centres of _force_. But force manifesting itself in orderly and
harmonious fashion is Reason. If, then, Reason is at the base of
things, Matter ceases to be a bogey.

Still the fact remains that it is not I and it is not You, and the real
cogency of the physiological argument against Free Will and the soul
(which, as we saw, must stand or fall together) is that something done,
perhaps by mere accident, to this Not-me, can, it appears, powerfully
influence and change the Me in spite of all the will I can exert to the
contrary. The fact that I, the innermost I, can be got at through my
brain, means philosophically exactly the same as the old superstition
according to which I can be got at by an enemy who sticks a waxen image
of me full of pins and dissolves it before a fire. And _normally_
(there seem to me good reasons for not going further than that),
_normally_, it is _only_ through Matter that the Me can be reached and
influenced at all, even by the other Me’s in the universe. Now Matter,
whatever else we may say about it, is certainly under the law of
causation.

From the other, the spiritualistic, side of the argument, it has been
sought to meet the above considerations by an interesting analogy.
Matter (the brain in this case) may, it is urged, be regarded as the
instrument by which, under present conditions, Thought manifests itself
and acts. You can take a piano and put it out of tune or otherwise
damage it, so as to render it incapable of conveying the real mind of
the performer, who, nevertheless, remains quite unaffected. The soul
is the invisible performer. You can damage the brain so that the soul
_can no longer express itself_ under the conditions of our present
existence, but it is an entirely unwarrantable inference to say that
you have thereby damaged or destroyed the soul itself. The analogy of
physical energy will make this clear. You can make an engine work by
the oxidization of coal, but this process can only loosely be described
as the source of the energy which is manifested by the engine. All that
one does by burning the coal is to turn potential energy into active or
kinetic energy. When the engine goes to pieces, or the coal burns out,
not a particle of energy is lost; it merely goes back into the shape of
potential energy again.

I think this reply is substantially a sound and effective one. At the
same time it must be allowed that the physiological argument is more
subtle than is usually recognized by those who try to meet it as above.
You may so damage a piano as to render it incapable of being properly
played on—you may get from it the incoherent janglings of insanity,
without affecting our belief in the existence of a real musician
behind these unintelligible manifestations. But how if it can be shown
that certain mechanical alterations will result, not in nonsense but,
let us say, in bringing out mere Offenbach when the performer has
always hitherto been wont to play Beethoven? A simple injury to the
instrument, it may justly be argued, has no such vital significance as
this change in the nature of the thing expressed. Shall we not have to
conclude that the man really _is_ the instrument, that the mind is a
phenomenon accompanying the temporary combination of certain material
constituents, lasting only as long as that combination shall endure and
varying _pro tanto_ with everything that causes it to vary?

Now, for my own part, I must confess that if mind with all its nobler
manifestations such as Will, Love, Duty, and so forth, be a mere
rainbow hovering above the cataract of material force, it does not seem
to me worth while to discuss anything, for we, mere particles that
glimmer for a moment, can never affect anything, and must soon be where
nothing can any longer affect us. It is happily quite true as Santayana
says in his Reason in Science,[133] that people who do not think about
these matters at all may “know how to live cheerily and virtuously for
life’s own sake” on the strength of the normal source of vitality which
has made for its own ends from the beginning of things without the aid
of our consciousness or criticism. But this consciousness, turning
inward as well as outward, this questioning and speculative spirit,
are themselves forms of vitality, phases in the gradual conquest of
Nothingness (_i.e._ undifferentiated Being) by Life. We stunt and maim
ourselves if we try to keep them aloof. It is true that in encouraging
them we may often seem to be turning the terrible, two-edged weapon
of Analysis against our own higher life. Be it so! We have taken that
sword in hand; we have cut down with it a hundred forms of superstition
and wrong; and the time to sheath it is not yet. Whatever dangers there
may be in it, we must face those dangers; and though it may be left to
another generation completely to overcome them, let that generation,
at least, say of us that we did not drop our weapons on the field of
battle, even if our own life-blood sometimes flowed upon the blade.[134]

Let us now return to that analogy of the piano and the unseen player
and see if we can get some more light from it than has yet appeared. In
view of the last considerations which were urged in this connexion—the
possibility of effecting not merely the ruin of the instrument but
the more vital change of the character of the music it will perform,
we must slightly alter one of the terms of the comparison. The analogy
will be a strikingly close and suggestive one if we bring into view
the latest development in musical mechanism, the pianola. Suppose that
the music-rolls of a pianola were made of different sizes and shapes
according to the different classes of music. There would then, let
us say, be one kind of roll for classical music, another for Italian
opera, another for Palestrinian polyphony, another for music-hall
ditties, and subvarieties of all these. Now let us suppose that
each pianola were so constructed as to take some particular type of
music easily, other types with more difficulty, and others, again,
not at all, and let us assume that all these types are continually
being presented for performance. The construction of the pianola
will then correspond to the physical constitution of the brain.
This constitution, in each case, is the material equivalent of the
dominance of a particular kind of personality, or what we have called
above _aura_. But the records which have lately been so much studied
of cases of what is called ‘multiple personality’ tend to show that
in each of us there _are_ several distinct personalities—or if that
word seems to beg an important question as to the unitary character of
personality, let us say streams of consciousness—which are pressing
for manifestation. The brain selects automatically among these,
and normally keeps one particular type to the front. But just as a
mechanical alteration in our hypothetical pianola might entirely change
the type of music it would play, so a lesion or shock of any kind might
change, more or less, the type of personality which a particular brain
was fitted to express; and such cases are, of course, well known to
occur.

But now we come to a fact than which none is better known, none
more absolutely verifiable in experience, but to which there is
nothing in the least analogous in the pianola or any other piece of
mechanism taken by itself. I can, with time and toil, with patience
and resolution, _change the structure of my brain_ and make easy
for it that which before was difficult or impossible. Within limits
which cannot be defined (because human life is too short), I can even
adapt it to the expression of a new type of personality. No musical
instrument can do that to itself. One would have to call in for that
purpose the initiating and controlling force of the man who made
it.[135]

A conscious pianola, even if we supposed it to possess the endowment of
memory, would only recognize itself as a succession of sensations. The
hegemonic faculty, the sense of command and control, which Plato[136]
laid his finger on, as indicating the difference between a human
personality and a musical mechanism, and which Hermann Lotze,[137] in
the full light of modern science, still thought valid for the same
purpose, would be wanting. Man does not live in the moment. As Goethe
wrote in some of his greatest lines—lines that read like hammer-strokes
nailing up the charter of human right:—

    Nur allein der Mensch
    Vermag das Unmögliche;
    Er unterscheidet,
    Wählet und richtet;
    Er kann dem Augenblick
    Dauer verleihn.[138]

Behind the mechanism of the pianola, behind the mechanism of the brain,
there stands this living directive force of which we can give no
scientific account whatever—we can only say that it is there. Indeed,
it is just at this point that all comparison between mechanism, as
usually understood, and vital action of any kind must break down. But
the fact is that mechanism is usually not understood at all. I spoke
above of a piece of mechanism taken by itself. But in truth we cannot
take it by itself. Nothing in nature can be truly isolated, it only
exists in relation to other things. Every machine has a soul, the soul
of the man who made or who works it. Without that it would be merely
scrap-iron; and even as scrap-iron it has relations with things about
it—air, water, acids, and the like. In these relations we detect the
soul of nature. Nothing exists by itself—nor even, permanently, _as_
itself. The living universe of our experience is not a Being but an
Acting and a Becoming. It is precisely this fact which, on the one
hand, imposes a mysterious limit on the intellect, and, on the other,
opens a boundless horizon before the will.


The human brain, the most highly organized form of protoplasm known to
us, may be called in one sense a machine through which the personal
will, the moral emotions, the æsthetic sense, the faculties of
reasoning, have to assert themselves in action. But to say that they
would never have existed but for this special form of protoplasm is to
say that they were created by it out of nothing. And, no doubt, one
can say that, one can _say_ anything; but one cannot think it. I do
not see how to represent the matter to our thought except by supposing
that every stage in physical evolution is accompanied by what has been
called ‘involution,’ a drawing in, from the potentialities of Being,
of powers and faculties of living for which the opportunity to become
actual had ripened.

An image may make clearer what I mean, and I offer it only for this
purpose, well knowing that “the best in this kind are but shadows.”
Suppose that a man were enclosed in a sheath composed of metal having
certain peculiar properties: it is opaque when cold, but when heated
it becomes transparent, and the hotter it is the more transparent it
grows. Such a substance might easily exist, at any rate it is entirely
conceivable. We must assume in addition that the heat is not such as
to be injurious to the occupant. Now a man enclosed in such a sheath
would, when it was at the proper temperature, see what was going on
around him; he could also be seen, he could hold communication with
other men, and direct operations which he wished carried out. If the
sheath, in addition to being transparent at the right temperature,
were also, under the same conditions, flexible, and fitted him like a
skin, he could do things himself. If it got cold, however, and thereby
became, in the measure of its coolness, opaque and rigid, the man
would be shut off from all communication or interaction with the world
outside, he would be what we call dead.

I suggest that Consciousness with all its attendant phenomena is
represented by the man, the sheath is Matter, the heat is Life. Matter,
historically, precedes the manifestation of consciousness, but as it is
never without a certain degree of life, so, even in the nebular form in
which it exists before it has cohered into worlds and systems, it is
not without the element of directivity, of harmonious inter-relation
and interaction. A higher organization of life makes possible the
subtler sensitiveness of the vegetable kingdom. The most vital, the
most highly organized form of matter we know is the human brain and
nervous system. Here the sheath has assumed a considerable degree of
transparency and flexibility. But doubtless a far higher degree of
organization is possible, and when this is reached the capacities of
consciousness will have developed to an extent altogether inconceivable
to us at present, though every now and then some exceptionally
constituted individual gives us a hint of stages of development as yet
far beyond the capacities of the race in general.

We may conceive matter, then, as being constantly fanned up into the
heat of life, _i.e._ as elaborating forms into which consciousness can
enter and through which it can act. And we observe that consciousness,
when it has found a suitable form, can act on it and improve it. Two
questions now arise. The first is: Why should consciousness have need
of these forms at all? And the second is: If it has this need, what
becomes of the individual consciousness when the form has grown
finally cold in death and is resolved into its inorganic elements?

To the first question I cannot suggest any answer, except the obvious
one that an individual consciousness must have some forms through
which it can have relations with things not itself. In the world, as
we have it, it is _generally_ true—it would be unwise to venture any
absolute statement on the subject—that consciousness only enters into
relation with another consciousness, or with matter, by means of the
peculiarly organized form of matter which we call a brain. I must leave
the question there. Thought and research, and the advance in physical
organization which I have referred to, may, in the near or distant
future, throw further light upon it. It is not a difficulty, but it is
certainly a mystery.

As regards the second question, that of personal immortality, all
we are justified in concluding on the negative side is that when a
certain body and brain have perished, consciousness can express itself
through _that_ form no more. But consciousness itself cannot be less
indestructible than everything else that exists. We may, so far as I
can see, either conceive an individual consciousness at death as being
resolved into the general consciousness from which it sprang, even
as the matter composing any organic being is resolved into inorganic
matter, or we may suppose that, having won and consolidated its
selfhood by what it has done and what it has endured in the flesh, the
selfhood is thenceforth capable of an independent existence under forms
at present beyond our ken.

Either of these conceptions implies what we call the ‘immortality’ of
the soul, the real and permanent significance of the experiences of the
soul. Here a little further elucidation may be desirable. I have spoken
of the possibility of the soul or self being resolved into something
which one can only describe as a general spiritual substance related
to individual souls as matter in general is related to particular
material organisms. But the parallel with matter must not be pushed
too far. A material organism, being composed of different substances,
can be disintegrated. But consciousness cannot, strictly speaking,
suffer disintegration, for it has no different substances into which
to disintegrate. It can, however, as we see, appear in the form of
a number of different personalities; and this, the normal existing
condition, is the psychical analogue to physical disintegration.
If these personalities are again to merge into one impersonal
consciousness, the process would not be comparable to disintegration;
it would be the very reverse; it would be reintegration; and the
process, therefore, implies nothing resembling the loss or dissipation
of any form of psychic being.

Further, we have to observe that when a material organism perishes
and is disintegrated, there is, so far as we can see, an utter and
complete end of it. The human brain, for example, quite apart from its
association with a consciousness, has in the course of its development
and activity gone through a marvellous chain of processes, in which
electric and molecular force, undulations, radiations, and probably
other physical factors of which we have no conception at present,
have played a part. Yet when the brain dies and is resolved into so
much ammonia, phosphorus, carbon, gases, and what not, these elements
differ in no whit from other ammonia, phosphorus, and carbon in the
world. For any ulterior purpose they are neither better nor worse;
they are wholly unchanged, by all the extraordinary history which
they have passed through under the spell of life. This is equally
true of the elements, nervous and other, of any living being. But the
physical system of every living being below man is organized for two
ends only: (1) the upkeep, during its lifetime, of its own physical
powers; (2) the reproduction and multiplication of its kind.[139]
When an organism has fulfilled these functions, it is justified; the
object of life has been attained. These functions, of course, persist
in man, but he has added to them many others; his brain has to serve
him for ethics, art, philosophy, religion, and is therefore organized
with a subtlety quite unknown in the animal world. Here, then, is a
kind of organic action which has no significance whatever _except in
relation to consciousness_. If it have none there it has none at all,
it is absolutely irrational and futile. Now the molecular and other
action of a beast’s brain has reference to its physical life, and it
passes on this physical life to its descendants. But the action, or
a great part of the action, of a man’s brain has reference to his
consciousness, and of this he passes on at most the potentiality. A
lion’s cub is a lion; a philosopher’s child is not necessarily or even
probably a philosopher. That path of development, whatever we may say
about the lion, must have its goal elsewhere. We must, if the universe
is not irrational, believe that in some way consciousness, whether
after the death of the body it persists in individual form or not,
_carries forward into the new state the results of its experiences,
its acquisitions, its losses, in the bodily relation_. These are not
transitory, not indifferent; “great or small they furnish their parts
toward the soul.”


The reader will have probably noticed that one consideration of the
greatest moment has been left untouched. I have spoken of matter and
consciousness as of two separate things, and of the former as prior to
the latter. This is a form of thought imposed upon us by the space and
time relations by which our being is conditioned. But it is evident
that the interaction of the two cannot be fortuitous. We cannot suppose
that matter pursued its long course of evolution, refining and
subtilizing at every stage to admit more and more of the activity of
consciousness, in total disconnexion with that consciousness. The two
must be co-ordinated in some higher synthesis. Could we escape from the
limitations of our thought we should see them, therefore, not as two,
but one, and we should see that the meanest form of being has an aspect
in which it belongs to eternity.




