CHAPTER VIII

THE ETHICAL CRITERION

    “Things have life—God is life.”—Spinoza.

    “I am come that they may have life, and that they may have it more
    abundantly.”—Rabbi Bar-elahin.


The view of the meaning and purpose of cosmic development set forth in
the preceding chapters must clearly have a bearing on the principles
of human conduct. Men above a certain stage of culture do not live
by blind instinct. They endeavour to harmonize their lives with
some conception of the _ratio essendi_ of the world in which they
find themselves, and in so doing they are most truly men. The Stoic
expressed this attempt in the simple formula, ‘Live according to
Nature.’ But nature is not simple, and the endeavour to interpret
nature has led to some very divergent ideals of human conduct.

Every one who has meditated on the subject at all has become
aware that the world which we see and hear and feel, the world of
sense-perception, is not all that we have to do with. Behind the
visible and material world there lies the invisible, the _X_ world,
which we cannot weigh and analyze, but the existence and potency
of which we are compelled to assume. It is the literal truth to say
that no man can take a single step even in the most mundane and
practical affairs of life without a belief, implicit or explicit, in
the spiritual unity and reality underlying the fleeting panorama of
sense-impressions. Nothing else can give him any assurance of the
constancy, the orderly inter-relation, of the phenomena with which he
has to deal, and with which he could not deal intelligently did not
this constancy exist. Now when man begins to be aware that there is
something more in the world than is immediately apparent to sense,
his thinking on the subject may take several different lines, but it
is probable that all of them may be referred to one or other of two
main divisions, the Dualistic and the Monistic.[140] The Dualist will
regard the world of sense-perception, whether originally produced and
organized by the invisible or not, as now more or less independent of
the latter, or even hostile to it, and he will generally interpret
his own being as something properly belonging to the invisible world
but for a time mysteriously and unhappily entangled, through the
flesh, with the other. This is Platonic theology, carried by Paul into
Christianity, and it eventuates, when driven to its conclusion by a
rigorous and inhuman logic, in Asceticism. Instead of the Stoic, ‘Live
according to Nature’ (a formula in complete harmony, it may be noted,
with the Stoic Pantheism), we get, as the formula for ideal conduct,
‘Deny Nature, think the flesh a burden and a shame, fit yourself for
the time when your real self will cast it off as a filthy garment.’

On the other hand the Monistic view represented in ancient Europe by
the great Stoic school, and in modern times by names such as those of
Spinoza, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Lotze, Walt Whitman, refuses to separate
the visible and the invisible worlds. The former _is_ the latter, made
partially accessible to our minds. Man is a part of nature, bound
up in all his being with the framework of the Universe. The flesh
is not a bond on the spirit but an instrument of life, and what we
acquire through it is just as valuable and as eternal as anything
else. “Objects gross and the unseen soul are one,” says Whitman—the
distinction between subject and object, the perceiver and the
perceived, as Schopenhauer argues, is but a mode of cognition.

That the human mind can rest only in some kind of Monism, that Dualism
must be regarded as a natural but a passing phase of thought, based on
a hasty interpretation of certain aspects of man’s moral experience,
would seem to follow from what has been urged previously from the _a
priori_ side of the question.[141] Indeed, it may be doubted whether
there are any thinkers who seriously maintain the Dualistic view as
a philosophic doctrine. Many, however, including the whole school of
Catholic theology, with its ascetic ideal and its doctrine of eternal
hell, turn practically Dualist in the sphere of ethics, while they
would be horrified at a suspicion of anything but the purest Monism in
their conception of the ultimate reality of being. The cause of this
inconsistency is evident. We feel instinctively that no distinction in
the world of our present experience goes deeper than the distinction
between moral good and moral evil. We feel the danger of obliterating
this distinction, and setting loose the greedy and violent passions of
man to work their will unchecked by any sense of right and wrong. And
undoubtedly the Monistic principle might, by a shallow interpretation
of it, be held to obliterate the distinction. If God is One, it
might be argued, and God is All, then evil is justified in the world
equally with goodness, and the sense of duty is, what shall we say? an
illusion, a superstition, a relic of fetishism. Hence the practical
Dualism on the ethical and eschatological side which has found its
way into Monistic thought. It is brought in to save morality. But
inconsistencies like this do not last for ever; they can only persist
where thought has become atrophied, and Dualism is now rapidly
disappearing from the religious thought of Europe. What is to take its
place? The problem before us is to discover a basis for ethics on the
Monistic hypothesis without the slightest acceptance of the facile
solutions offered by Dualism. If we succeed in that, and establish a
real Monistic meaning for the terms _right_ and _wrong_, we shall next
have to deal with the sanction of the law of righteousness, and to show
_why_ it should be obeyed even, if necessary, at the cost of pain and
death.


And first, let us unreservedly admit that on the Monistic view the
distinction between right and wrong, moral good and moral evil, is not
fundamental. Both must be regarded as moving towards comprehension in
some unity as yet unimaginable by man. Without renouncing his faith,
the Monist can never escape from that position, and he must be true
to the light whatever the apparent consequences may be. A greater
Power than he will look after the consequences: ταῦτα τῷ θεῷ μελήσει.

But, on the other hand, this distinction may be just as real and vital
as any other in the world of experience. Nobody thinks that pleasure
and pain are indifferent because they are both necessary forms of
active life, or that beauty and ugliness are indifferent, or that
success and failure are indifferent. How we strain for success in a
game, for instance, although we are perfectly well aware that the game
is the real object, not the triumph! Yet without the possibilities of
triumph or defeat, there would be no game. The problem is really part
of the primal mystery of the origin of cosmic life. If we assume at
the beginning of things (so far as we can conceive a beginning) one
infinite, homogeneous, absolutely undifferentiated Existence, and then
conceive this Existence as impelled to act, and to become conscious of
itself, it is plain that to do so it must differentiate itself. There
must arise within it the relations of subject and object, simple and
complex, better and worse, and all that is involved in change, variety,
progression. And this applies as much to the moral life as to the
life of the senses. It has often been pointed out that if there were
no Wrong to strive with there would be no visible and active Right.
Were there no hate, love would be incapable of the noblest part of its
ministry. Were there no weakness, strength could never have been called
on for the strain by which it is developed. And if good should ever
overcome and absorb evil the stage thus attained will assuredly reveal
some new contrast of pursuit and avoidance perhaps as strange to us now
as moral distinctions would be to the lower animals.

The Monist will also urge that nature, as we behold it, is not a
fixed and rounded entity, but is something in process of completion.
We must therefore interpret nature not alone by its contents at any
given moment, but by its drift and tendency. This is precisely the
consideration which separates Pantheism as enlightened by science from
the Pantheism of a primitive nature-worship. In it, the Greek and the
Hebrew ideals are blended and reconciled.

But what, for ethical purposes, _is_ this drift and tendency? What
significance do I mean to attach to the terms moral good and moral
evil? It is hardly necessary to say that I do not propose in a couple
of chapters of one short book to elaborate an ethical system with all
its groundwork, and with details ramifying into every branch of ethical
action, as Mr. Herbert Spencer has essayed to do in his Data of Ethics.
All I can do here, or in any section of this book, is to indicate a
_way_ of looking at things—at nature, at human life, at art—in which
the meaning of the universe has seemed to become intelligible and
satisfying to my own thought. Having found the way, every one must use
it for himself or herself. I can, in the present work, go no further
into detail than is necessary to make my meaning clear; to set whatever
readers I may find at my point of view. If I can at all succeed in
doing this, let them use their own eyes: they will find a wonderful
landscape, vital, fresh and boundless, opening before them.

The conception of ethical law which I wish to put forward differs
from what is commonly understood as evolutionary or scientific ethics
at the present day. This system appears ultimately to rest on Jeremy
Bentham as its founder, but Bentham’s later disciples have modified
his doctrine at various points by a deeper appreciation of the
difficulties of the position. They have approximated more closely to
what I consider to be the truth, but they have never shaken off the
entanglement of the original false position of the modern founder
of the school. Bentham, who pursued “the greatest happiness of the
greatest number” through the medium of the most depressing system of
philosophy which the world has ever known, made Pleasure the ultimate
criterion of moral action and declared for the summary striking out
of the word ‘ought’ from the language of morals, as corresponding to
an idea which, so far as it rested on any reality, was merely a relic
of primitive superstition.[142] But J. S. Mill saw that the sentiment
of duty and moral obligation was based on something deeper and more
instinctive than a word misunderstood, and that it often survived in
persons singularly free from superstition. He sought its origin in the
psychology and physiology of man, and interpreted it, on the principle
of association of ideas, as a survival of the deep impression made by
punishments and rewards attached respectively to different classes
of actions in each man’s early life.[143] The position was a more
rational and scientific one than that of Bentham, but it still failed
to account for the _a priori_ character of the moral sense, the ready
responsiveness with which early training evokes in man the sentiment of
duty.

It seemed, as it were, to have been somehow _prepared beforehand_ and
to lie latent awaiting only the right touch to spring into action.
Finally, Herbert Spencer, who may be said to have brought all this
line of thinking to its climax, seized on the evolution doctrine as
explaining this intuitive and innate quality of ethical feeling. It
_was_ prepared beforehand, far back in the ancestry of the race. Not
the punishments and rewards applied to the modern individual in his own
person, but those which affected his near and remote progenitors, had,
in the course of countless generations, built up “moral perceptions”
resulting from “inherited modifications caused by accumulated
experiences.”[144] The moral sense, therefore, is _now_ really innate
because inherited, but was once acquired by the operation of pleasures
and pains arising from man’s intercourse with nature and with his
fellows. And the ultimate moral criterion in the present day remains
simply the striking of a balance between pleasure and pain.[145]

It is clear that if the Lamarckian doctrine of the inheritance of
acquired characteristics is a delusion, the bottom is at once knocked
out of the Spencerian system of ethics. But apart from this, that
system, on the historical side at least, is vitiated by the cardinal
defect in Mr. Spencer’s mind—his failure to appreciate the true nature
of the data with which he had to deal. The philosophic mind is not
a mere logic-machine. It must include the faculty of vision, the
vital perception of the objects of thought, as well as the faculty
of observing and of generalizing about their action and reaction on
each other, and from this point of view Mr. Spencer’s deficiency as a
philosopher is enormous. A vital perception of the object in this case
makes us at once aware that you cannot evolve a sense of Duty, “stern
daughter of the voice of God,” out of pleasures and pains. Pleasures
and pains _per se_ will yield nothing to the end of the chapter but the
sense or the recollection of pleasure and of pain. It is as impossible
in psychology as it is in mechanics to juggle more power out of the end
of a sequence of causes and effects than you put in at the beginning.

But what has a natural ethics to put in the place of pleasure as the
goal of right action? The question is answered when we ask, What does
Nature herself put? Nature is said to have no morals, yet a mother bird
will imperil and often lose its life for the sake of its young. Is it
seeking pleasure then? Certainly not—it is protecting and fostering
life, the life of the race. And here, as we have insisted so often,
is the master-impulse of nature. We are taking a false and contracted
view when we assume that a living thing can have no other goal of
action except pleasure. Far earlier than the appearance of man in
the world is the appearance of the social instinct which prompts the
individual to live, and if necessary to die, for the larger life of
the race. What really begins in man is the power to think of himself,
to choose, to analyze, the power to say, Why? To this question the
science of ethics must provide an answer if it can—that, in fact, is
its origin and function. But if it binds itself to provide an answer
in terms of pleasure, it is entering the lists with naked Egotism at
a fatal disadvantage. On that ground, it seems to me, Egotism must
always win. But it is not the only ground. Nature knows a whole world
of impulse and effort which has nothing to do with pleasure. _Nature
does not directly want pleasure at all, but is resolved, at the cost
of pleasure and everything else, to have life._ Now life is maintained
at its highest point by _harmony_—a harmony of the faculties with
each other and, as a whole, with the mighty life outside them. And,
as Santayana admirably says, “harmony when made to rule in life gives
reason a noble satisfaction which we call happiness. Happiness is
impossible and even inconceivable to a mind without scope and without
pause, a mind driven by craving, pleasure, and fear.”[146] In this
sense we may say that happiness is organically connected with right
action.[147] But right action in itself is simply the action which best
subserves the central purpose of nature. If that purpose is summed up
in the one word Life, we must think of the moral sense, if we would
not go astray and be bewildered, in terms of living and not in terms
of enjoying. To take the greatest of exemplars, who can venture to
affirm that Christ had more pleasure living as he did and uttering to
the last syllable the message that was given him to deliver, than if
he had prudently restrained himself and led the life of a decent and
respectable artisan in his Syrian village? Indeed, even if we take very
long views, who can affirm that, on the whole, he has by his life and
death increased the sum of pleasure in the world? I doubt it very much.
No one can deny that it is most questionable. To think of the matter in
terms of pleasure seems to lead to nothing but perplexity and doubt.
But there can be no doubt whatever that he lived to the full the life
that it was in him to live, and that he immensely deepened and enriched
the spiritual life of man. When we fix our minds on life as the goal
and depth and fulness of life as the criterion, we come out at once
into the clear light where high inspirations are born and justified.
But it is not only the conception of life as existing for pleasure that
I think a true ethics will repudiate. We must clear our minds of the
idea that life has any goal outside itself—pleasure, moral discipline,
or what not. We must fully realize the conception of life as its own
goal, its own complete satisfaction and justification. Whoever has done
this will feel as if he had escaped from a jungle of contradiction
and gloom, where man can only live at all by clearing some little
space for his church and his homestead, and giving up the rest to the
powers of darkness. Yet a step brings him to a point of view from which
the physical, the animal and the human features of the world’s vast
landscape seem to flow into a happy and organic union, where every part
becomes luminous with meaning and charged with divine purpose.

Moral action then, I conceive, as a _certain kind_ of life-promoting
action. It is action which promotes life in the whole as opposed to the
part, which sacrifices the lower, narrower, more immediate life for the
fuller, nobler, more permanent life, whenever they are found to clash.
It does not differ in kind from other wholesome vital action, but it
differs in the heightening, the saliency, the intention conferred upon
it by the circumstances under which it is taken. And if we ask how it
was evolved in man, the answer is that it was there already in the
instincts of the lower animals, which are never, as man often so sadly
is, at odds with their true functions and duties. It is not morality
which has been evolved in man, but the capacity for immorality, due to
his personal self-consciousness.

The ultimate question, then, as regards the abstract morality of any
act or class of acts must be, Does it make for life? Does it tend to
help man towards the maximum development _of all his faculties and
capacities_? These faculties and capacities are what the universe
has now evolved at the highest level of which we have any knowledge.
None of them is evil, except in so far as it may thwart and stunt the
development of others. In the harmony of the whole range of man’s
powers of sense and spirit lies the golden ideal which none of us
may realize, but for which each of us may strive; or—for such is the
supreme and fatal prerogative of man—which he may set himself to
dishonour and deny.




