CHAPTER IX

THE ETHICAL SANCTION

    “Far, far, how far? from o’er the gates of Birth,
    The faint horizons, all the bounds of earth.”

                                             Tennyson.


Ethical philosophy centres on two main points—the ethical criterion
and the ethical sanction. We have to ask ourselves, What kind of life
ought I to live, and secondly, Why ought I to live it? The first of
these questions we have answered simply thus: Life is self-justified;
in merely living we fulfil the whole purpose of nature; and as life
is a thing admitting of degrees it follows that that life is best in
which there is most of life. But this does not mean apparent life for
the individual at the present moment. It means most life for the Whole,
so far as the individual acts upon the Whole. And he acts on it in two
ways—first (one which is often overlooked) by _living his own life_
which is equally a part of that Whole whether he lives on a desert
island or in the heart of a city; and secondly by the influence he
radiates on other lives with which his own is socially related.

This, it is clear, is quite the same thing as to say that the right
life for any man is that in which _for him_ there is most of life—the
richest and the fullest life—_if he were to go on living indefinitely_.
For whatever depresses or exalts life in the Whole must ultimately
depress or exalt it in the individual also; the two interests are
clearly identical _in the long run_. This ‘long run’ or universal
point of view, which makes identical the interests of the Whole
and the interests of the individual, gives to a natural ethics the
criterion for all human action. It gives the contents, though not the
cogency—with this we have to deal in the present chapter—of the word
‘ought.’

By the mere fact of his social relations with other men each individual
is continually being trained to take this view, to harmonize together
his egoistic and his altruistic instincts; and is continually amassing
a store of social experiences out of which a universal moral code is
gradually shaping itself. “Life,” it has been well said, “has saved up
much wisdom.” Ethical wisdom, in this regard, will clearly involve such
kind of action, of organization, as will afford to each individual the
fullest opportunities for vital development in mind and body.

The life in which there is most of life! By holding fast to this clue
we shall, I think, see our way through many of the obscurities in
which, partly by the search for an extra-natural basis of morality,
partly by the reactionary attempt to base morality simply on the
striking of a balance between pleasures and pains, the philosophy
of right and wrong has been involved. We get a natural basis for
establishing a scale in human action, a distinction between ‘higher’
and ‘lower,’ without which a philosophic ethics is clearly impossible.
I do not, of course, mean to say that it is possible to apply a
mechanical rule and measure to moral action in the manner of Catholic
casuistry, according to which it is a venial sin to steal 19s. 6d. but
a mortal sin to steal £1.[148] Still, the existence of a natural scale
is evident at once when we consider the fact that man is constantly
being placed in positions in which his action may either thwart and
depress life, or simply maintain it, or markedly enrich and extend
it. The ethical quality of his action appears to arise from the fact
that it is possible for him, under the impulse of immediate personal
gratification, to do things which if commonly done by men would destroy
the beauty and order of human life. The interests of the whole and of
the individual may be identical, as we have said, in the long run, but
at the moment they are often in violent conflict. Allowing for the
fact that it is never possible in nature to draw a sharp dividing
line between different classes of being, and to say absolutely that
things are _thus_ on one side of it and _thus_ on the other, we may
repeat that this opposition between the long-run or universal and the
momentary or personal interest is a characteristic of human life as
opposed to that of the lower animals. It arises from the strong sense
of individuality, of selfhood, which emerges in man and of which the
animals know little or nothing. In itself it is a new and noble power
of life, but it has its fatal and mischievous aspect. Without it we
should know neither good nor evil. Personality is at once man’s pride
and his fall.

With this sense of selfhood there have grown up in humanity the
faculties of Conscience and of Will. Conscience I interpret as the
sense of what is due to the Whole, to the nobler and more permanent
self. Inasmuch as man is only gradually discovering what it really
is that the Whole demands of us, it follows that the utterances of
conscience may be misdirected, and that they need to be corrected and
purified by intelligence and experience. We see here an example of
that principle of the combination of evolution and involution which
alone seems to make intelligible the development of life. Never, by
organizing into a social system a multitude of individual appetencies,
can one produce a moral sense, a conscience. But neither is conscience
concerned to give the true laws of that organization. It adds its
peculiar _numen_, its sanctity, to every effort to Set up a mark of
everlasting light Above the howling senses’ ebb and flow, and though
the mark itself may, indeed must, shift and be transformed with the
ripening insight of man, yet, as between it and the temptations of
sense, conscience must always be obeyed. Now as nature is organically
one, we should expect to find this truth not dependent merely on an
intuitive perception but written in the experiences of life. And is
not this exactly what we do find? The ethical ideals of Judaism, of
Hinduism, and of Roman Catholicism, with their extreme reliance on
external observance and ritual, are lower, no doubt, than those of
Christianity as conceived, say, by St. Paul. Yet let a Jew or a Hindu
turn Christian, or a Catholic turn Protestant or Freethinker, for the
mere sake of material advantages or an easier way of living, and a
general moral deterioration seems at once to set in.[149] Whenever a
man allows his sense of personal ease and gratification to overpower
his sense of what is due to his fellow man, to his own higher self,
to his God, he weakens his will and his capacity for living the nobler
life. Ultimately he destroys the capacity altogether, and with it
vanishes even that for which he sinned, the capacity for pleasure
itself. The poison of self-indulgence will slacken and corrupt
every fibre of his moral and physical being. To grasp at pleasure
indiscriminately, recklessly, greedily is a way that makes not for
life but death. On the other hand, the capacity for renunciation and
self-control, the following of the law of love, the passion for justice
and equality, not only grow strong by exercise but, far from injuring
the other capacities which it may, on occasion, be right to suppress
for their sake, they rather intensify these. As self-indulgence
corrupts and fatigues the whole man, even on the self-indulgent side,
so duty and righteousness vitalize and brace the whole man, both on
their own side and the other. For Nature is one—sweet and mighty are
the powers which conspire to create the harmony she loves in the
spirits faithful to her world-wide revelation.

Now since the moral faculties bear this common stamp upon them,
that they are those which oppose to the temptations of personal
gratification the sense of duty to something outside ourselves, and
since, when these two clash, the claim of the moral law is always to
be obeyed, it is inevitable that men will sometimes take the denial of
personal gratification for an end _per se_ and attach to it a notion
of peculiar holiness and purity. And this error will be intensified by
the ancient and inveterate habit of regarding the Supreme Being as a
malignant Power, to be propitiated by suffering. Thus we get the false
sanction with its Ascetic ideal which has appeared so often in history.
It is the other extreme to licence, and rests equally on disregard
for the rational ideal of Sophrosyne or Temperance which lies between
them. Yet it may truly be said that asceticism has its due place in
the world. The ascetic life cannot indeed be the ideal life for any
one who holds that plenitude of life is the true ideal. But it may be
the best life for this or that individual. A nature maimed or scathed
from birth, or by unhappy fortune, may best be able to realize itself
in complete withdrawal from the interests of ordinary social life. Such
withdrawal may also be necessary for the pioneer or leader of a cause,
for a great reformer, for a teacher absorbed in his mission.

Philosophy, in fact, has its saints and ascetics as well as any
religion that rests on extra-natural sanctions. But in each case the
ascetic ideal rests on quite a different basis.

Looking broadly at the part which religious Orders have played in the
religious and intellectual history of Europe, it may well be doubted
whether even the most gracious and human figure in the history of
asceticism, Francis of Assisi, would not have better served his time
and land by the natural development, in secular life and activity, of
the beautiful if sometimes wildly ebullient character portrayed in the
records of his youth, than by cutting away half his life in order to
force the other half into a distorted rarity. In recognizing the beauty
and sweetness of his nature let us not be misled into attributing it
in any degree to the influence of that fatal miasma from a faith more
ancient than any religion which has a name and place on earth to-day,
the dim terror of the unseen which has embodied itself for ages in
expiatory sacrifices and rites of blood and pain.

Had Francis not been a saint he would certainly have been one of his
country’s greatest poets.[150] Different minds will probably estimate
differently the loss and gain. As a poet he produced the ‘Canticle of
the Sun’; as an ascetic, the Franciscan Order. Now it is fair to point
out that this, like other Orders of his church, must not be judged
by what it is like in times when it is surrounded by watchful and
by no means adorant eyes. A Catholic religious Order in a Catholic
country naturally lives and moves in an atmosphere of veneration.
To preserve this atmosphere pure from the sceptical thought which,
from the monastic point of view, would vitiate it so dangerously,
is naturally a prime object of every religious community; hence the
bigotries, superstitions, and tyrannies of which these communities
have so often been the sources or agents, from the days of Hypatia to
the days of Dreyfus. Such communities, developing themselves under
such circumstances, cannot attract many men of intellect and character
to join them. They rapidly deteriorate, and European literature from
Boccaccio and Chaucer to Erasmus shows us the repute in which they
come to be held by the uncloistered intellect. A false ideal may
stimulate, but it poisons. St. Francis, dreaming that he serves God
by making himself blind to God’s world through a course of pitiless
austerities,[151] produces an Order whose licence in one generation
after his death has become a scandal to Christendom.[152]

Let us turn now to the theory of asceticism as conceived by the
humane and rational spirit of Stoic philosophy. Epictetus—to my mind
the greatest ethical thinker of antiquity—has a valuable and carefully
reasoned chapter on the subject in his Dissertations. In reading this
after, let us say, The Little Flowers of St. Francis, one seems to
pass from the drugged atmosphere of a mediæval church to the free air
and sunlight of the world. The ascetic, or Cynic as he was called in
Stoic phraseology, is painted for us as a man who adventures himself to
the extreme limit of abnegation, not from any mystic sentiment of the
holiness of pain and poverty, but simply to help himself and others to
realize the soul’s independence of external things. It was a cardinal
doctrine of Stoicism (as it was of the Christianity of Christ) that the
things which a man wrought and thought, the things under the control
of his will, were the only things that really mattered. What happened
to a man from outside was, indeed, of great importance in regard to
how he dealt with it; in itself it was of none; it was like a ball
in a game which you have to do your best to catch, knowing well that
you do so not for the sake of the ball but of the game. Such was the
Stoic view of life, and the Cynic represented not the perfected Stoic,
not an ideal towards which all should tend—for the ideal was that of
citizenship and well-ordered social life—but simply the method of
verification which consists in taking an extreme case and showing that
one’s theory will fit in with it. And so Diogenes lived in a barrel
instead of a house, and asked nothing of Alexander except to stand out
of his light. It is not more pleasing to God, not better in any way,
that a man should live in a barrel rather than in a house, that he
should be single rather than married, poor rather than rich; yet in the
chances and changes of this mortal life all these things may happen to
a man, will he, nill he, and the point is to show that he may still
be confident and cheerful, knowing that his true self is untouched by
these calamities. And while St. Francis and the more devoted of his
followers so tortured and wrecked the body which St. Paul had called
the temple of the Holy Spirit that many of them perished or had to
linger out their lives in the infirmary,[153] with the Cynic the
cultivation of the body and its faculties was a part of his discipline.

    “For,” says Epictetus,[154] “if he shall appear consumptive, meagre
    and pale, his witness hath not the same emphasis. Not only by
    showing forth the things of the spirit must he convince foolish
    men that it is possible, without the things that are admired of
    them, to be good and wise, but also in his body must he show that
    plain and simple and open-air living are not mischievous even to
    the body: ‘Behold, even of this I am a witness, I and my body.’ So
    Diogenes was wont to do, for he went about radiant with health, and
    with his very body he turned many to good. But a Cynic that men
    pity seems to be a beggar—all men turn away from him, all stumble
    at him. For he must not appear squalid; so that neither in this
    respect shall he scare men away; but his very austerity should be
    cleanly and pleasing.”

How sane and wholesome, how wisely adapted to the fundamental facts of
life, is the Stoic ideal as compared with the monastic! In it we see
that there is a place in a natural ethics for a rational asceticism.
Of such there will always be need—we must admit, whatever we may think
of the ‘spirituality’ of self-destruction, that there are, and are
always likely to be, many more men and women who deteriorate in soul
and body through petty acts of self-indulgence than who do so by an
excess of austerity. And this makes it all the more necessary that the
matter should be conceived rightly, reasonably, from the side of a
reverence for life and its manifestations, not from that of disdain and
repulsion; that we should take hold of it (to quote Epictetus again)
by the handle by which it can be carried, not that by which theory and
experience alike have shown that it never can. When Tennyson wrote
“Move upward, working out the beast,” he was not so well inspired as
in some of his other appreciations of modern science. The religious
ascetic aims at working out the beast—not so Nature, who does not
progress by substituting one form of living for another, but by growing
from a central core and continually harmonizing the old radical
elements of being with the new assimilations. One _can_, perhaps,
work out the beast—what cannot the will achieve? But the beast surely
avenges himself, and often in terrible fashion.


When, however, we have recognized the false sanction and the false
ideal associated with it, we have still the more difficult problem of
establishing the true. If Righteousness—to use that term for all kinds
of action ethically right—is to be followed in the interests of life,
how can it ever be required that much suffering, and even death itself
may have to be faced for its sake? Man is a part of a Whole—in the
effective realization of that conception all ethics is summed up—but he
is also an individual. Why should the individual give way to the Whole
if their interests seem to clash? In other words, though we have the
contents, the static significance of the word ‘ought,’ we have still to
find its dynamic significance, its cogency.

Every beast does what it ‘ought’ without any question, and this
constantly involves acts of co-operation or self-sacrifice for the
interests of the race. In man, ethical action has a greater value for
life, simply because, unlike the beast, he is able to question its
grounds and to forgo it if he chooses. He observes, as we have said,
that the ‘long run’ or universal point of view is often in conflict
with the individual point of view. “Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die” is the extreme expression of the individual point of view. It
has been called a ‘pig-philosophy,’ and if the expression is just, it
is not because the pig will die to-morrow, for it will probably live as
long as anything else, but because no matter how long it lives it is,
_qua_ pig, incapable of any other form of life.

But a man is capable of other forms of life, and to realize these he
must keep the pig-life in check, not despising or disowning it, but
restraining it, lest it should throw him out of harmony. Unchecked, it
will do that in the long run; but what if he is to have no long run?
Where the lower life can yield an hour of delight, why deny it for the
sake of a higher life, if in the next hour both must end together?

I confess that I see no escape from the implied conclusion if the
premiss is true. But if the view of life outlined in these pages be
true, then this premiss is palpably false. Neither the higher nor the
lower life can ever have any end, though no doubt they may pass into
forms outside the category of Time, in which the terms beginning and
end have no longer any meaning. Life is not dependent on its visible
and tangible forms. The question here involved is one on which the
drift of certain modern speculations in physics obliges us to dwell for
a little.

The question of the present inhabitability of Mars or other planets has
been much debated of late, pro and con. Opinions differ on this point;
but there is a very general agreement among physicists that the state
of the moon, cold, dead, and barren as a burnt-out cinder, must, by the
equalization of energy, be sooner or later the necessary fate of every
planet and of every sun in the universe. Science has thus apparently
come to justify by its solemn verdict that cry of the Latin poet, more
charged with the pathos of eternal death than perhaps any other human
utterance:—

    “Soles occidere et redire possunt:
    Nobis, cum semel occidit brevis lux,
    Nox est perpetua una dormienda.”[155]

The conditions under which life is possible will then no longer exist.
One nothingness awaits the saint, the sage, the ox, the oak tree, and
the fungus. “Life,” says Le Dantec, “has not always existed on the
earth”; we are to regard it as merely “a surface accident in the
history of the thermic evolution of the globe.”[156]

This remark, which is one that a thermometer might be expected to make
if it could talk, is in Le Dantec’s mouth probably no more than a
little rhetorical fling at orthodoxy, for it is really answered by his
whole book. His main thesis is “the absence of all essential difference
and all absolute discontinuity between living and not-living matter.”
“A surface accident” can hardly be a reasonable description of a
development thus prepared for in the essential nature of the substance
of the world. But other physicists have lately cut deeper, and will not
allow the suns of Catullus, even when cold, to set and rise again for
ever. According to the very interesting and apparently well-supported
speculations of Gustave Le Bon,[157] all matter is at present engaged
in that process of disintegration of which radium offers the most
conspicuous example. The energy which produces life and response of all
kinds is explained as simply the result of this long, disintegrating
process, and may be compared to the action of a released spring,
seeking its state of quiescence and immobility.[158] When the process
is complete, matter will be resolved into the primordial Something
from which it somehow originated. And where will the saint and the
sage, or anything that we can recognize as life, be then?

The answer to all this rises to the mind at once when we abandon
the point of view of the thermometer and place ourselves at that of
rational Man. This Matter, on whose states life is supposed to be
dependent, is, after all, known to us only through the fact that we
are living to observe it. If it disappeared, no doubt we should cease
to see it, and if it were transformed we should see it otherwise, but
to make the life which sees dependent on our seeing anything exactly
as it appears now on this globe is surely the wildest of assumptions.
We observe that life makes use of certain conditions of matter—a
certain range of temperature, the presence of certain minerals and
gases—in order to express itself. We regard these conditions as the
product of a Power which desires life and has produced them to obtain
it. But there may be many other conditions too. All we can tell is
that beyond certain physical limits our senses cannot perceive life
or get responses from it. M. Le Dantec would, no doubt, treat as an
illusion the belief that man can communicate with and be responded to
by a Power, a Life, transcending that of which the senses inform us. I
am, with the multitude of men, profoundly convinced that we can. But
leaving this entirely aside, is it not evident that, even as there are
invisible rays in the spectrum which are now and then discovered by
some unexpected chemical or electrical action, so there may be modes
of living of which none of our present senses can give us the faintest
conception? Whoever may deny this possibility, and on whatever grounds,
it certainly cannot be denied on any grounds that physics or biology
are aware of. And to those who believe that life is the central thing,
and that matter exists only for it, the possibility is a certainty,
for life must have been when as yet matter was not—life set it going.
To convey the idea that everything that exists, however it may be
transformed, is part of a divine Whole which cannot die because it is
essential Life, we say that it is ‘immortal,’ and conceive ourselves
as existing after death in a spiritual form just as the body exists
after the bodily death in other bodily forms. Whether time and space,
or even personality, will exist for us after death we dare not say;
we are totally unable to imagine the conditions of such an existence.
But we can perfectly grasp the broad fact that whatever we do and are,
whatever we think, whatever transacts itself even in the unconscious
sphere of our existence, must have eternal endurance and significance
because it is knit with the eternal Whole.

    “To the foot,” says Epictetus, “I shall say that it is according to
    Nature that it be clean; but if you take it as a foot, and not as a
    solitary thing, it shall beseem it to go into the mud, and to tread
    on thorns, and perchance to be cut off, for the sake of the whole;
    otherwise it is no longer a foot.

    “And some such thing we should suppose about ourselves also. What
    art thou? A man. Look at thyself as a solitary creature, and it is
    according to Nature for thee to live to old age, to grow rich, and
    to keep good health. But if thou look upon thyself as a man, and as
    a part of a certain whole, for the sake of that whole it may become
    thee now to have sickness, now to sail the seas, and run into
    peril, now to suffer need, and perchance to die before thy time.

    “Why, then, dost thou bear it hard? Knowest thou not that, as the
    foot, alone, is not a foot, _so thou, alone, art not a man_.”[159]

The broad fact on which a system of natural ethics must be based, if
it is to have any ethical quality at all, is that _the individual
life finds its goal in the cosmic life_, not in pleasure, or any
other term by which we may choose to express a sensation of personal
enjoyment. The distinction between the _bonum honestum_ and the _bonum
delectabile_ is really a valid one—it is no invention of moralists
“suckled in a creed outworn,” but is revealed by a study of life and
its manifestations to have been deeply rooted in nature from a period
far anterior to the advent of man upon the earth. In man, the _bonum
honestum_ takes the form mainly of what Epictetus calls the sense of
“natural fellowship” among men, and what Christ expressed in the
word which gave to the ideas of Stoicism the penetrating power they
had lacked, the great and divine word, Love. But we must never forget
that even this word will not take us to our end and sum up a system of
ethical thought unless we rightly conceive the ultimate object to which
it is directed. This is not the visible community of men, nor even that
of all nature, now existing or to exist in the future. It is the ideal,
eternal community, of which every man remains equally an organic part,
whether he has any means of physical communication with his fellows or
not. It is that without which the visible community, with all its laws
and inter-relations, would never have come into being. It is the “city
of God,” builded without hands, the Universal Polity whose “troubled
image,” as Plato says, we discern in the polity we know.

When Socrates, after his sentence, lay in prison awaiting the summons
to die, his friends gathered round him entreating him to make his
escape, and explaining to him the safe and easy means they had provided
for that end. Freely and cheerfully as was his wont, delighting in the
play of dialectical fence, he debated the matter with them. Then he
laid dialectics aside, and spoke to them from the heights of vision.
Rightly or wrongly, he declared, the laws of his mother-city, to
which he owed all he had and all he was, had bidden him die. Whatever
happened now, there could be no escape in the end. Some day he must
face death, and stand before the Laws of the Underworld. What answer
should he make to Them when they demanded how he had dealt in life by
their brethren in the world above?

This grand impersonation of the eternal Laws in their kinship with
the laws of the visible world illumines a whole region of thought,
extending far beyond the limits of the particular moral question which
evoked it. It strikes the note of all high thinking on man’s duty to
man. The laws, written or unwritten, that govern societies of men can
claim no reverence from the individual who does not feel that they are
the shadows or copies of laws belonging to the sphere of the eternal.

It is one thing to admit that the social relations of mankind give the
start to ethical feeling, provide it with a wide and varied field of
action, and with a criterion as to what is right and what is not. It is
quite another to argue that this ethical feeling is merely a product of
these relations, and has, apart from them, no meaning or purpose. This
is another case of the principle which I have described before[160] in
speaking of Evolution and Involution. Without both of these I cannot
see how any movement from one state of being to another is to be
accounted for. People, or even animals, living in communities find that
mutual aid is useful to them, and they practise it. The utilitarian
school think, when they have demonstrated this, that the whole ethical
question is solved. But in reality they have not even approached it.
Mutual aid is useful? Well, then, it is useful. How are we going to
get any further? How are we going to account for love, duty, fidelity,
self-sacrifice? Because certain things appear in the world under
certain conditions we have, many of us, got into a slipshod way of
saying that they are the product of these conditions, but a strict
examination of the terms will frequently show that they are nothing
of the kind. There is no valid reason why social life and mutual aid
should not go on for ever without producing anything higher than the
sense of mutual advantage. The nobler passions do indeed come into life
when the proper stage of social evolution has been reached, but their
source is not within the bounds of the visible order, nor do I see how
they can ever justify themselves with reference to it alone. Neither,
on the other hand, can they be realized without it. The divine air
which we breathe on the mountain height is not made by the mountain,
but we must climb the mountain to breathe it. Every step we take
upwards in the visible order is, as it were, the discovery of something
in that invisible order which is its spiritual counterpart and gives it
its spiritual significance.


I have said that ethics is for life; but to the individual it must
sometimes appear to be rather for death than for life, unless he knows
that there is a life beyond the visible life. In this faith only—in
whatever varied forms the intellect of man has embodied and expressed
it—are martyrdoms possible. And martyrdoms have been so often the great
turning-points and inspirations of human history that an ethics which
cannot justify them would seem to be an ethics at odds with nature.
Consider from our point of view the significance of the two martyrdoms
of history which have most deeply impressed and influenced the minds of
men.

Socrates had no gospel, no new truth to proclaim. He dissociated
himself from the ‘rationalistic’ theories of his time, not indeed
because he was particularly attached to ancient ideas in religion, but
because theorizing on these subjects had no interest for him.[161] On
his trial he expressly disclaimed heretical views on religion. It is
clear that these were only charged against him because the real offence
was no crime in Athenian or any other law. The real offence was that
Socrates was a relentless critic, within reach of whose tongue no
patriotic rhetorician could feel himself confident and comfortable.
It was a time of rhetorical patriotism in Athens. From the bitter
humiliation of the Peloponnesian War had arisen an impulse towards
national regeneration, a genuine and worthy impulse in itself, but
one which unfortunately took shape not in a manly facing of facts, a
courageous march forward to the future, but rather in a panic-stricken
retreat to old conservative formulas and bigotries, to the abandonment
of which by cultivated Athenians was ascribed all the evil that had
fallen on the city. Socrates, however, delighted in taking popular
convictions and reducing them by a series of ingenious interrogations
to their verifiable residuum of truth, if there happened to be any.
They commonly emerged from the ordeal in a dilapidated condition. At a
time when the whole city was high strung with patriotic fervour while
inwardly very uncertain about its principles of action, the presence of
a thinker like Socrates, with his pitiless arraignment of every gaudy
fallacy before the bar of Reason, was a continual scandal and offence,
and was easily interpreted as a public danger. Had he consented to
keep silent, and affected to fall in with the general trend of public
sentiment, he would, as he well knew, have been safe. But he refused
all compliance and compromise, and declared with absolute truth that
Athens would do better to reward him for stinging it into a perception
of realities than to punish him for the wholesome pain of the process.
So he went with clear-sighted deliberation to his death, and that
death, so wonderfully recorded for us by the greatest prose writer
of all time, has ennobled all criticism, all sceptical thought,
thenceforward. None can think lightly of what Socrates thought it worth
his while to die for.

Turn to the death of Christ, and into how different an atmosphere
we seem to pass! No philosopher has here recorded for us the death
of a philosopher. Myth and legend have clustered round the great
event—the Jewish conception of an expiatory sacrifice—the truer and
profounder myth of a slain and re-arisen God—and these have wrapped
the Crucifixion in such a cloud of mystical light and colour that the
outlines of the historical fact are lost to view. When this cloud is
pierced, however, an intelligible human transaction remains. In Christ
the luminous purity of Greek reason was so blended with the religious
fervour of the Eastern mind that he may justly be called the ideal
man, the Son of Man and of God, the incarnation of the divine thought.
Unlike Socrates, he was distinctly a heretic in his place and time.
He appeared among a people deeply religious but one in whom religion
had taken the form of an immense fabric of ceremonial and observance,
guarded and administered by a special caste who conceived themselves as
the appointed vehicle of the will of God for the untaught multitude.
To this multitude Christ went direct. He led them straight to the
ancient founts of light and life, disregarding the narrow channels
hewn by Pharisaic formalism. He bade them open their eyes and see for
themselves; he taught them that the truth was for all men; beside the
conceptions of the authorized religion he set new conceptions which
made the old seem barren or ludicrous. The people heard him gladly,
and the great fabric of Pharisaism was manifestly tottering. The fury
of a monopolist caste was aroused. There is no more merciless anger
than the anger of the religious monopolist who sees his monopoly
threatened, and to this anger Christ fell a victim. As Socrates died
for the right to disbelieve, so Christ died for the right to believe,
and whatever the churches have made of him he has inspired every
revolt against priestcraft and authority ever since. No creed is worth
living for which is not worth dying for. Christ’s death and spiritual
resurrection[162] set the seal on this truth and gave the world the
most signal instance in history of triumph arising out of defeat and
death.

Volumes of argument and analysis could not confute an ethical system so
effectually and so severely as the bare fact that it looked paltry or
incongruous beside such lives and deaths as these.


The conclusions we have reached in this discussion of the basis of a
natural ethics may now be summed up. We have interpreted the object of
phenomenal Being as Life.

The ethical quality of life lies in its conscious and active harmony
with the Whole.

The motive for ethical action lies in the fact that we are a part of
that Whole. The sense of this relation is as deep a part of man’s
nature as the sense of his selfhood, or deeper.

To live for Others, then, is no more the true epitome of a natural
ethics than is, to live for Self. The true epitome is, Live for the
Whole—the Whole which includes both others and yourself, which is
greater than all humanity, yet is capable of being faithfully served in
the silence of one human breast.

We have now before us, therefore, a clear conception of the criterion
and the sanction of ethical action. The criterion is applied when we
ask of anything done by man, “Does it further life in the Whole?” The
sanction is found in the fact that each of us is an organic part of
that Whole. The richest and fullest life is evidently to be won by the
most complete development of all our faculties which is allowed us by
our opportunities. Ethics, therefore, exists for life, not life for
ethics. This simple proposition arises inevitably from the scientific
conception of the world. The greatest of fallacies is to conceive life
as existing for any other object whatsoever, or to define its aim as
something more or less remote from our present existence. Our ‘eternal
life’ is not something to come—we are living it here and now. This is
not a pilgrimage or a place of preparation; it leads us to no heaven,
no hell, no distant judgment seat. We are before that judgment seat
every hour; the heaven and the hell which it dispenses are the daily
experiences through which we move; and the saints and prophets of this
faith are those who have felt most deeply and revealed most profoundly
the great realities of existence, hidden from us not so much by the
darkness of the grave as by the impalpable veils of use and wont. The
grave has mystery indeed but no terror of gloom for those who realize
that the universe is but an eddy on the stream of life. By that eddy we
see the stream, we feel its power and movement; and we know that the
substance of which it is made is the stuff of life itself.




PART III: ART




