CHAPTER VI

THE DIRECTIVE THEORY OF EVOLUTION

    “Who is there that cannot distinguish between the actual cause
    of a thing and that without which the cause could never be a
    cause?”—Plato, Phædo.


The problem set at the close of our first chapter was to find a fit
explanation of the guiding power apparent in natural phenomena. We
have not been able to interpret this guiding power either in terms of
conscious, intelligent contrivance or in terms of blind, mechanical
law. The investigations which followed have led us up to another
explanation. We have seen that the vivifying, transforming, progressive
power in nature may be conceived as a power of Response. Every particle
of matter, organic and inorganic, has this power. Every particle of
matter can react and respond to some stimulus. The more it can respond
to, the higher it is in the scale of being. And we have found, as I
think, one constant and universal stimulus to which both the fixity of
nature’s laws and the plasticity of her mysterious substance may be
conceived as a response. This stimulus is the call of Life. Stimulus
and response taken together constitute the directive force in obedience
to which the world unfolds itself in the evolutionary process. We have
been led to interpret nature as the concrete expression of the will to
live, a will which for the first time comes into rational consciousness
in man. Having brought this conception, I hope, into clear light, it
is the aim of the present chapter to illustrate and enforce it in more
detail, and thus to gain a secure foundation for the application of
the conception to the more strictly human problems with which we have
ultimately to deal.

It must be confessed that the existence in nature of any directive
power transcending and utilizing the mechanical forces and relations
of matter, call it ‘vital force,’ the ‘hand of Providence,’ the ‘_X_’
of evolution, or what one will, has never readily been admitted by
scientific naturalists. They feel that, if once admitted, it offers a
prompt and facile explanation of every difficulty, and is available as
the cheap resource of all those who study nature with a view to the
grinding of their moral or religious axes, rather than to the discovery
of truth. Those who feel obliged to believe in the existence of some
such power are therefore bound to be more than ordinarily on their
guard against all loose thinking. They must not be content with vague
generalities, but must be prepared to indicate as exactly as possible
the distinction existing between the mechanical and the non-mechanical
or transcendental agencies in nature. It does not follow that one’s
account of the matter will prove to be exactly true in every detail.
One must always speak in such matters with that wise reservation of
Socrates, “If this be not the truth, something of the kind is.” But it
is not allowable to fall back on that “something of the kind” until an
attempt has been made definitely to establish the “kind,” by searching
into the inmost heart of the fact.

The fact here is the responsive power of living protoplasm. It will be
well to examine it first in its operation in an individual organism
before we consider it in relation to the species.

Reaction or response of a chemical and mechanical type takes place
alike in dead matter and in living organisms, but certain stimuli
will induce action in an organism which they could not possibly
induce in a mineral. For in every cell, as Reinke well says, there
are a chemist and an architect who guide its energies, and who have
something quite different from chemistry and physics in view. Consider
the following case. Every tuber of a potato plant is covered with
a light skin composed of a corky substance intended to protect the
internal structure from injury. This skin is produced by the action of
the surface cells of the tuber. Chemically and physically these cells
are just the same as the cells in the interior of the tuber. But the
interior cells do not produce this corky substance, because it would
be injurious to the plant if they did. The cells below the surface
of the tuber, though they are by no means secluded from the chemical
influences of the earth around them, behave quite differently from
those actually in contact with the earth.

Now let us take our tuber, slice it in half, and replace it in the
earth again. If we look at it again in a few days we shall find that
the interior cells, now exposed by the cutting, have done what they
could not or did not do before—they have produced a layer of skin to
cover the exposed surface of the tuber just as if they had been surface
cells from the outset.

This kind of response seems to take us quite out of the region of
chemical and physical action as understood in the case of inorganic
matter. It is a response directed to maintaining as far as possible the
life and form of the organism, a thing which mere chemical action in
mineral substances never does.

It may perhaps, however, be argued that the actual contact with the
earth has a possible chemical stimulus which is not communicable to
cells even a hair’s-breadth below the surface, and that the cells laid
bare by slicing react as they do simply because they are exposed to
this stimulus. Let us take, then, another common and typical case of
response to altered conditions in plant life.

The taproot of a tree, as we have seen,[86] grows straight downwards
towards the centre of the earth in obedience to the stimulus given
by the pull of gravitation. The same stimulus impels the stem to
shoot upwards, and the other roots and the branches to grow more or
less laterally. New growth always takes place at the extreme tip of
the shoot or root. Lay bare the taproot, cut away this growing tip,
and that root can grow no more; no fresh tip charged with vegetative
vitality can form itself over the scar. But mark what happens!
The nearest lateral root, instead of pursuing its normal course,
straightway begins to bend downwards and takes the place of the
mutilated taproot. Similarly if the leading shoot of the stem is nipped
off, the nearest lateral branch will turn upwards. In this case the
lateral root or shoot has not been subjected to any new influences
whatever, or at least to none of a chemical or physical nature. Yet it
responds, not to anything affecting itself, but to the needs of the
organism as a whole.[87]

None of the forces which living organisms have in common with minerals
will account for this kind of response.

How are we to represent to our minds the nature of the forces which
apply to the innumerable cases of which the above is a type? Reinke,
who deals exhaustively with this question, conceives the vitality of
living things, manifested in growth, development, and reproduction,
as lodged in what he calls “Dominants.”[88] These dominants exist
in all parts of the organism, and govern those processes which
ordinary physical laws do not explain, _i.e._ the phenomena which
are specifically vital. They are not themselves chemical or physical
energies, but they guide these energies toward the fulfilment of the
objects of life.

    “Dominants,” he writes,[89] “are those secondary[90] forces in the
    organism whose existence we recognize in their operations, but
    which we cannot further analyse. Thus I understand under this form
    that principle of control which takes effect in every organism and
    which sways whatever energies are available just as men use tools
    and machines. Since this control is manifold in its manifestations,
    one is obliged, when seeking for a technical designation for
    it, to express it in the plural. The dominants are therefore an
    abstraction; a symbol for phenomena, just like the conceptions,
    Force, Matter, the Atom, etc.; the term has been devised in order
    to provide a short explanatory description of certain essential
    processes.

    “I therefore repel the objection, if anyone should make it, that
    the dominants are a fiction, a troop of ghosts with which I have
    peopled the cells and organs of animals and plants. They are, in
    some sense, merely a paraphrase of the description of certain
    phenomena, a personification of forces not to be ranged under the
    conception of energy—the _directive_ impulses in the animal and
    vegetable world.”

To continue Reinke’s explanation: Two different classes of dominants
are to be recognized. These are the operative and the formative. The
former control principally the chemical activities of the organism, as
when a plant turns inorganic substances into sugar, albumen, etc.; the
latter are the invisible architects in the organism who control its
form and structure. Both are heritable, and are capable of modification
within certain limits. Closely bound up with matter and energy, they
are neither matter nor energy. They can be indefinitely multiplied and
(to all appearance) totally destroyed. Their multiplication does not
abstract energy from other known sources, nor does their destruction
restore it; they do not therefore come (visibly) under the law of the
conservation of energy. They operate entirely within the framework of
natural laws, and can only utilize what energies are available for
them at the given time and place. Every cell has its dominants; and as
an organism is a synthesis, not a mere aggregate, of cells, so its
individual dominant is a synthesis of the dominants of its parts. The
evolution of species, like the development of an embryo, is under the
control of dominants. The conditions under which they work for this end
are material and physical; these conditions can, to a great extent, be
ascertained and defined, but the driving force lies beyond scientific
analysis.

Such is the conception of Reinke; and taken as he presents it, that is
to say, merely as a kind of working hypothesis, as a means of making
intelligible a vast and various mass of phenomena, it seems admirably
suited to its purpose. It remains to add, though Reinke himself does
not say so, that this conception of the dominants appears to harmonize
remarkably with what has been put forward in regard to cell-structure
and reproduction. The chromosomes are probably the material vehicles
of the dominants; in fact, Weismann’s determinants seem to be the
same thing under another name, though Weismann conceives them rather
from the point of view of the scientist, and Reinke from that of the
metaphysician.


We have now arrived at an intellectual conception under which to range
the phenomena (not the ultimate nature) of vital response. Let us apply
it to the question of evolution. The following passage from Henslow’s
Origin of Plant Structures[91] may serve to introduce this part of our
discussion:—

    “The question ... resolves itself into this: which probability or
    hypothesis do _the facts_ of the case seem to favour most, viz.
    that _indefinite_ variations arise from some assumed internal
    causes, of which variations only those in harmony with the
    environment survive, and are said, therefore, metaphorically,
    to be selected by it; or is it that the external forces of the
    environment excite the variability which is inherent in plants,
    and call into action the responsive power of the protoplasm in the
    various species of plants, which thus _all_ tend to put on the
    same, or similar, or at least adaptive and _definite_ variations
    of one sort or another, so that there are _no_ indiscriminate or
    wasted variations[92] at all? I know an abundance of facts which
    support the latter contention, but none whatever in illustration of
    the former hypothesis.”

Here is the action of the dominants in evolution placed in the
clearest light. To prove the truth of Professor Henslow’s contention
it is necessary not only to study organisms in situations where they
have been established for many generations or centuries, but to see
how they behave on transportation to a new kind of environment. The
cases which can be adduced are numerous and convincing. Thus Mr. D.
Dewar reported to Mr. Henslow that on introducing at Kew a cress,
_Arabis anachortica_, found in cave-like situations in the Alps, and
having very thin, papery leaves, it turned, when raised from seed,
into a different species, _Arabis alpina_. The change took only three
generations to accomplish.[93]

Bulbous roots have it among their functions to store up moisture
for the plant they belong to. Haeckel has shown that the grass _Poa
bulbosa_, on being cultivated in moist soil, almost lost its bulbous
character. Contrariwise we find that many plants not bulbous elsewhere
are observed to be so when growing on the dry Karoo in South Africa.[94]

Spines on a plant are usual accompaniments of dryness in soil or
atmosphere. _Ononis spinosa_ has an excessively spiny variety, termed
_horrida_, which is found on maritime sands. Grown in very rich moist
situations, it gradually loses its spines and they ultimately disappear
entirely.[95]

In the animal world experimental cultivation is not at all so easy,
but the facts observed all go to support the view that the response to
environment is direct and definite. The small shrimp-like crustacean,
_Artemia salina_ is a case frequently quoted. It lives in salt pools
by the Black Sea, and it has been found that by breeding it in water
of which the salinity is gradually decreased, the creature in a few
generations assumes a type commonly assigned not merely to a different
species but to a different genus—_Branchipus stagnalis_.[96]

Perhaps the most remarkable instance of a transformation produced
by the influence of environment is that of the Mexican water-newt,
Axolotl. When gradually accustomed to live on dry land, this creature
usually throws off its gills, develops lungs, alters the shape of its
tail, and takes on all the characteristics of a terrestrial instead of
an aquatic reptile. This transformation does not take generations to
accomplish—it happens in one individual in the course of a few weeks
or months. When found in the terrestrial form, the Axolotl is called
_Amblystoma tigrinum_, and is classed among the salamanders. Its
progeny are then _Amblystomas_, and they do not naturally revert to the
Axolotl type, although under certain circumstances the steps of this
amazing transformation can be retraced. The Axolotl is not a larva in
the ordinary sense of the word, for it is not an imperfect creature;
it is sexually mature, and in most cases, in nature, probably never
develops into an _Amblystoma_, nor do the progeny of the _Amblystomas_
begin as Axolotls. What we have here is probably, as Weismann plausibly
suggests, a case of a species which has almost reached the stage of
evolution from an aquatic into a terrestrial form, so that a sufficient
impulse from its environment suffices to send it over the border.
Internal forces have evidently prepared the way for the change, and
the process does not in the least resemble the mechanical selection of
suitable characters from a crowd of fortuitous variations.[97]

The case of the Porto Santo rabbit may also be quoted in this
connexion. In the year 1419 the young born of a tame Spanish rabbit
were put ashore on the island of Porto Santo near Madeira. No rabbits
then existed on the island. They have since increased enormously, and
have quite changed their appearance. They have acquired a peculiar
colour, are very small, rat-like in shape, have nocturnal habits, and
are noted for their extreme wildness. They no longer pair with the
European rabbit. The case was observed by Haeckel, who styled the new
species _Lepus Huxleyi_.[98]


Cases like the foregoing show the organism affected during its process
of transformation by large elemental influences, and the response to
these influences is so familiar that often it does not surprise us. We
veil the real mystery of the process by talking of the chemical and
other physical properties of protoplasm which render this response
possible. But when we come to the protective mimicry of stinging
insects by stingless ones, of leaves by butterflies, and so forth,
these physical explanations manifestly fail us. The explanation
which assumes the building up of these extraordinary resemblances
bit by bit, through natural selection working upon a multitude of
fortuitous variations, fails us as completely. It would be difficult
to accept it if only a single species of insect showed these mimetic
markings. The unlikelihood of their production by mere chance in the
case not of one but of hundreds of species of butterflies, flies, and
caterpillars is stupendous, and defies all calculation. It must, we
repeat, always be borne in mind that, if chance variations are all we
can postulate, these variations must at first be confined to one or
few individuals, and that the influence of intercrossing would always
be at work to obliterate individual peculiarities before they could
develop to the point of affording any protection worth mentioning. We
are bound, therefore, so far as I can see, to conclude, first, that
these mimetic markings originate not in individuals but in the species
as a whole, and are an expression of the communal life of the species;
secondly, that they are a real and direct response to the external
conditions of danger from attacks of birds, etc., and of protection
afforded by deceiving these foes through mimicry of something which
they do not care to attack. They can only originate in the dominants
of the reproductive cells, and there, where undoubtedly forces and
affinities of which we have no conception are ever at work, the
initial changes take place. These changes, no doubt, take place by
forming new combinations or modifications of existing dominants. The
directive force must have something to work on. It does not follow
that because some things are possible to it therefore all things are.
It is not to be expected, for instance, that human beings, although it
would be a great advantage to them to fly, could ever develop wings,
like the conventional angels of mediæval art, for that would violate
the essential character of the archetypal form. It is true, however,
that life is ultimately responsible for the material with which it
works as well as the directive agency that breathes through it. This
point is of importance and must be made perfectly clear. The view of
cosmic action here put forward does not contemplate ‘interventions’
in the order of nature from a source outside it. There never was a
moment when, if _law_ prevailed, one result would take place, while
another result actually does occur in obedience to some mysterious
life-force. No; it is the life-impulse which makes the law, obeys it
and utilizes it. One can never say, “Such and such would have happened
if the life-force had not been in action, but, as it was, the event
was so-and-so”; for if it were not in action nothing would ever happen
at all—the Universe would be the Eternal Nothing. One might as well
speculate as to what would happen in a game of whist if nobody held
a trump. The voluntary limitations under which nature works resemble,
in the conception here put forward, the playing of a game, say a game
of ‘Patience,’ where there is only one player, who plays the game with
himself. There are laws to be obeyed, combinations which are necessary,
but a guiding force can take advantage of the conditions as they arise
and lead them to a certain end. If there were no laws and conditions
there would be no game. If, on the other hand, matter were absolutely
plastic life could not realize itself; nature’s game would be finished
ere it was begun. A concrete illustration may, while we are on this
topic, serve to suggest the kind of limitations under which nature
seems to work.[99] During the last century or so the African elephant
has been ruthlessly hunted down for its ivory, and since rifles and
expanding bullets came into play the process of extermination has been
greatly hastened. Elephants are now, I believe, protected by law over
a great part of South Africa, but if it were not for this the species
would at present be in considerable danger of extinction. The case is
very like that of the _Kallima_ butterfly and similar mimetic forms
before they acquired their protective markings. Now, how might we
expect nature to attempt the protection of the elephant? Doubtless by
increased fleetness, cunning, watchfulness, capacity of one kind or
another for concealing itself from hostile observation. But could we
look for any such development as, for example, a deterioration in the
quality of the ivory? Suppose, for example, the interior structure of
the tusk were to become spongy and cellular instead of being dense.
The tusk, if coated with hard enamel, might be almost if not quite as
useful to the elephant, but it would cease to be of any use for most
of the purposes to which it is now applied by man. The protection
would be most effective; yet we know that nothing of this kind can
possibly take place, though intrinsically the process would be far less
remarkable than the painting of the butterfly’s wing. It cannot take
place because it would either imply a supernatural knowledge on the
part of the evolution-dominants of the elephant tribe of the _reasons_
why it is hunted, or a conscious supervising and co-ordinating power
above nature, a manlike Deity, omnipotent and omniscient, such as Paley
assumed; to both of which explanations the actual processes of nature
stand uncompromisingly opposed.


It is much easier to say what the life-impulse is not than what it is.
I cannot, for my own part, conceive it as personal or conscious, in
the sense in which I feel myself a conscious person. If we ask, Has
it or has it not the quality of intelligence? we shall find both the
affirmative and the negative answers equally hard to square with the
facts. Our own intelligences working in a mysterious relation to a
bodily organism are perhaps fundamentally incapable of forming a clear
idea of the nature of the cosmic intelligence which is revealed to
us in the outside world, “like the dim view of a country seen in the
twilight, with forms half extricated from the darkness, with broken
lines, and isolated masses.”[100]

But those who find it difficult to believe that anything having
the nature of intelligence is at work in the physical world might
reflect on the striking analogy which that world offers to a certain
sphere where it is quite certain that the human spirit, including its
intelligence as well as its appetites and instincts, is the governing
power. Social institutions are a product of the human spirit. Yet the
development of these institutions is extraordinarily like that of the
functions and structures of an animal or vegetable organism. The value
of Mr. Herbert Spencer’s philosophic system may be disputed on many
points, but his elaborate analysis of the phenomena of social life and
his exposition of the minute analogies they exhibit to the processes
of evolution in nature must always remain a landmark indicating the
conquest of a great territory of human thought.[101] Here, as in
nature, we find a principle of movement and progress conflicting with
a principle of inertia. We find all grades of development existing at
the same time. We see the gradual progression, by means of all kinds
of by-ways, to a goal which one might have expected intelligence to
attain simply and directly. We see parallels in human societies to
arteries, nerves, to co-ordinating and ruling brain-centres, to the
specialization of different members or organs for different tasks;
and we see all these things growing up slowly, from point to point,
in obedience to immediate and pressing requirements. We find, both
in nature and in society, survivals of past structures, whose use is
gone, carried forward into new stages of development. A particularly
interesting analogy is that of structures which develop to meet one
kind of requirement, and, on the cessation of that, persist into a
further stage and are then modified to meet quite other requirements.
Thus the swim-bladder of the fish became, it is supposed, the lung
of the terrestrial animal. We may compare this with the development
of municipal institutions. Originally intended to enable bodies of
craftsmen and merchants to make head against the aggressions of a
feudal aristocracy they have survived the fall of feudalism, and have
become more important than ever as independent agencies for carrying on
the functions of social administration and education.

Thus, operations in the physical world which certainly do not look as
if they were the work of intelligence, as we understand it, are seen to
be closely paralleled by transactions in the history of man’s social
life. The development of life, in fact, is carried forward when the
plane of human consciousness is reached on just the same lines as those
which prevailed on the vegetable and the animal plane: there is no
breach of continuity in the broad outlines of evolutionary progress. It
is difficult to over-estimate the significance of this fact.

Perhaps nothing that man has evolved is so purely a work of mind as
Language. Here, the analogy with the phenomena of physical evolution is
very close and very illuminating. As in nature, the ultimate origins
are obscure—we can only form hypotheses as to how language came to
arise from the cries of animals, as we can only form hypotheses
how life arose from the play of molecular forces. But when both
are once established on the earth we see in them the same general
features—unity, in a few leading types, branching out into infinite
modifications in subordinate groups. Greek, Erse, German, Russian,
Sanskrit are all Aryan tongues and have all a common ancestry. They
differ widely among each other, but all alike are marked off from
the Semitic or the Mongolian families. So a man, a snake, a bear, a
fish are all vertebrates, and belong to a type essentially distinct
from that of a lobster or a snail. As in nature, we find all stages
of development existing at the same time—some lines of development
show a rapid advance, some a very slow one. Some types have, in both
cases, perished completely—there are fossil languages as there are
fossil species. A new invention, an advance _per saltum_, without
the utilization of existing constituents, is almost as rare in the
evolution of language as in that of species. Just as the lung is
developed from the swim-bladder, so the human mind, in the development
of language, takes hold of whatever existing form will suit its purpose
and transforms it to another end, as when it takes a word for ‘breath’
and makes it ‘spirit.’ There are laws governing the development of
root-forms, linguistic or physical, in various different orders or
species. The same osseous framework yields us in one class of animal a
hand, in another a hoof, in another a paw, in another (as in bats) a
wing. So in language the same root yields us the words, in different
languages, for _shining_, _showing_, _speaking_, _proving_, _a face_,
_a story_, _whiteness_. Another gives us, _young_, a _stepmother_,
a certain _musical string_, a _messenger_.[102] Contrariwise we see
both in nature and in language forms which have grown from entirely
different roots into a close external and functional similarity. What
unlearned observer would suspect that a whale was not a fish, and that
it descends from a furry land animal with four legs, or that the Latin
_Deus_ and the Greek _Theos_ with their perfect identity of meaning and
their almost perfect identity of sound have probably a widely divergent
etymological pedigree?[103]

On the other hand, the etymological identity of such words as _évêque_
and _bishop_ is as obscure on the surface as would probably be the
relationship of a greyhound with a bull-dog to an anatomist who saw
them only in fossil form.

Again we note that languages, like species, when they send out a
migratory colony, are capable of gradual transformation to meet new
conditions, and of marked divergence from the parent stock. Thus
English, as spoken and written in the United States, in spite of
the retaining influence of a common literary tradition, is steadily
diverging from the English of Great Britain.[104] So with the French
of Canada, the Spanish of South America, and the Dutch of the Cape. We
note also in both cases that curious phenomenon, the survival of the
useless relics of earlier structure, e.g. in the silent letters which
reveal the historic origin of innumerable English words, which are
paralleled in nature by the vermiform appendix of man, or the splint
bones in a horse, or the rudimentary legs of the whale or the python.

But analogies of detail like these, interesting as they are, are not
the main thing. The main thing is the _organic likeness_ prevailing
between the work of nature and this work of man—the likeness of growing
and developing structures, with their response to immediate needs,
their development by specialization of function, their lack of a
strict logical scheme, their anomalies and capricious variations, and
their control of these variations within certain archetypal forms. The
substance of language is sound, as the substance of life is protoplasm.
Phonetic laws govern the one as mechanical and chemical laws do the
other. But phonetic laws and the capability of producing sound could
never have made a language. The evolution of language is urged forward
by the constant pressure and expansion of human thought; and on human
thought, in its turn, it reacts, giving the stimulus and the starting
ground for fresh expansion. We have the heart of the analogy before
us now. _As thought acts on language so the pressure and expansion
of the life-impulse acts on the forms of matter._ Let us see whither
the comparison leads us. Language is a product of the human mind, but
not of _a_ mind. When a human mind consciously applies itself to the
fashioning of a language it produces Esperanto. If we were living in
an Esperanto universe, such as Paley makes out this to be, we might
draw Paley’s easy conclusions as to its Maker; but the reality is
very unlike that. On the other hand, if mind has produced the natural
languages which we see, with all their anomalies, imperfections, and
slow organic growth, then the corresponding phenomena in nature, as the
evolution doctrine has brought them out, are evidently no bar to the
belief that mind has had a part in this work also. I should go farther
and say that the facts compel a belief in the existence in nature of
something that can only be described in terms of mind. In other words,
the universe is, at bottom, rational.


It is true that the cosmic Reason acts not as a single personal
being, but more or less independently at a multitude of points. But
it must not be forgotten that it is observed, up to a certain point,
to act through groups as well as through units. Even the life and
structure of a single cell show us distinct parts acting in harmonious
subordination to the interests of the whole. An organism composed of
many of these cells exhibits a series of syntheses or groupings rising
in comprehensiveness and complexity till the individual is complete and
the wheel of development has come full circle, beginning with a single
unit and ending with a complex unit. But the synthetic movement of
cosmic control does not end there,[105] for aggregates of individuals
can be collectively animated by it. The numerous cases of co-operation
among animals of the same species are an instance of this. All animals
which live in communities exhibit this co-operation habitually, and
many others do so occasionally. When Professor Eimer, as we have seen,
reflected on the phenomena of reproduction and heredity in ants and
bees, he was driven, like Oken, to account for them by regarding these
creatures as “discontinuous organs” of one being, having the same
power of affecting each other as have the distinct, though connected,
parts of any single animal or plant.[106] As an illustrative analogy,
helping us to understand the invisible bond of the communal life of a
species, this conception is of service, but I hardly think that we are
in a position at present to affirm it in any exact and literal sense.
Can we, however, trace the analogy, as Oken did, beyond species, and
show anything of the nature of an adaptation of one order of beings
to the use of another? To do so convincingly, it is evident that
the adaptation must be of _no_ use to the creature possessing it;
for, if it were, we might expect to see it evolved, whether it were
incidentally of use to a neighbour species or not. Honey, for instance,
though apparently of no _direct_ use to flowers, is secreted by them
because it attracts insects, and insects fertilize the flowers. If
flowers secreted honey solely for insects’ use, deriving no benefit
from their visits, we should have a case of a synthesis of communal
life wider than that of the species. Are there such cases, or does
every species fight exclusively for its own hand?

    “If,” wrote Darwin, “it could be proved that any part of the
    structure of any one species had been formed for the exclusive good
    of another species, it would annihilate my theory, for such could
    not have been produced through natural selection.”[107]

Certainly it could not, but neither could other adaptations. Natural
selection, as Darwin knew well enough, does not “produce” anything—all
it can do is to depress the less favourable variations presented to
it in favour of the more favourable ones. As Darwin never professed
to have sounded the depths of the problem of variation, it is not
clear why variations favourable to another species than the one in
which they occur should be presumed to be impossible. It is true that
they would not illustrate or come under the operation of natural
selection, but neither would they contradict it—they would simply be
outside it. Individuals unquestionably exhibit modifications intended
not for their own personal benefit, but for that of the species—for
instance, the maternal instincts. The modification of a part in the
interest of the whole to which it belongs may, perhaps, turn out to
have the same essential significance whether the part is an organ
or instinct belonging to the synthesis called an individual, or an
individual belonging to the synthesis called a species, or a species
belonging to some fauna or flora of the globe. In any case, the
question where synthesis is arrested, and where the fight for one’s
own hand begins, is one of great interest and must be here briefly
discussed. Cases such as those of which Darwin rejected the possibility
certainly appear to be rare, if they exist at all. The naturalists of
the older school, of course, saw them everywhere—the rattlesnake’s
rattle was to warn its victims, the colouring of flowers was to give
pleasure to man, and so forth. Most of these cases have been exploded
by modern research. The modern naturalists, however, may not be right
in refusing to see them anywhere. The question demands much special
study and observation. Reverting to the case of flowers and their
secretion of honey, one is struck by the fact that in the _Viola_
family there exist flowers more or less conspicuous, and endowed
with scent and with honey-filled nectaries, which usually do not
play any part at all in fertilization. The process of fertilization
in _Viola_ is carried on by small flowers hidden under the leaves
which never open, and which fertilize themselves. Again, at the base
of the laurel leaf, on each side of the midrib, there are two small
glands filled with honey, and bees may be observed biting into these
in the early part of the year before flower-honey is plentiful.
Nägeli has an ingenious argument to show the existence, not exactly
of disinterested aid among species, but of something which would make
such aid look more possible than it does, of a mutual responsiveness,
namely, between the form of the honey-receptacles of certain flowers
and the probosces of the insects which frequent them. Taking a short
honey-tube as the normal and original condition among plants, and a
short proboscis among insects, he argues that the honey-tube could
not have lengthened without depriving the species in which it did so
of the chances of insect-fertilization unless the insect-proboscis
in certain species lengthened _simultaneously_.[108] Cases also have
been noticed of sea-anemones, which attach themselves to the shells
of hermit crabs and by their poisonous tentacles repel attacks on the
crab.[109] The crab is no doubt useful to its guest by providing it
with the means of locomotion. Still, the case of mutual help between
two such different orders of beings is remarkable. A very peculiar case
is that of the waterfern, _Azolla_, which has certain roomy cavities
on the underside of its leaves. These are always found to be occupied
by a small unicellular organism of the _Alga_ order (_Anabæna_). It
is of no apparent use to the _Azolla_, which provides it a home. The
arrangement must have been of immensely long standing, for it occurs in
all the four species of _Azolla_, one of which is found in America, two
distributed over Australia, Asia, and Africa, and one only in the Nile.
It must, therefore, have arisen before the original species split into
four.[110]

It would be rash to conclude from these and some similar curiosities
that we are really in the presence of the phenomenon of disinterested
aid given by one species to another. The question needs more
investigation. But an important general consideration arises in this
connexion. It is clear that there could be no advance in evolution if
nature consisted solely of a multitude of independent units of life,
fiercely competing against or warring with each other. It is equally
clear that no advance could take place if every organism found an
environment so perfectly adapted to it as to call for the very minimum
of effort and strain in the maintenance of life. Between the chaos of
the first supposition and the lubberland of the second there must be a
condition of nature in which synthetic organization is carried just to
the point at which life will have the maximum power to perfect and to
realize itself. Looking at the conditions of nature as we know them,
and at the majestic expression of material and spiritual life which
those conditions have permitted, we may well be content to believe
that both the synthetic process, as far as it goes, and its _apparent_
suspension at a certain point in the ascending scale, are the outcome
of one and the same motive and have one and the same significance—they
both alike mean and make for the conservation, the development, the
enrichment of life.


Against this view there is an argument which has hitherto only been
glanced at, but which must now be discussed in more detail. It is
represented in a recent work by Prof. Conrad Günther, one of the latest
champions of the theory of chance variations and natural selection
as the sole explanation of evolution, who has assembled a number of
instances to show that the “purposive force” which biologists are now
coming to believe in “often fails in living beings.” Such are, for
example, the fact that an _Amœba_ seeking nourishment will take in a
particle of stone or anything that comes in its way;[111] that the
mutual relations of flowers and insects are often unsuitable; that a
bee will sting a human being just as it will another insect, although
the sting, only meant for the latter kind of use, cannot be withdrawn
from the human skin; that embryos often go astray during development;
that a cricket which tries to escape in the open by burying itself
in the earth will act similarly if you set it on a glass plate; and
so forth. Nature, of course, teems with such cases—one might add the
singular degeneration of the slave-making ants already described in
some detail.[112] “If,” he concludes, “the purposive reaction in
the vital force of animals were independent of the external world,
they would be armed against all contingencies, and that is not the
case.”[113]

Thus, too, Prof. Eimer, who in dealing with cases where the alleged X
factor in Nature has gone wrong, writes:—

    “The zoologist can hardly accept the existence of such a
    dominant inner factor ever pushing toward advance, when he recalls
    the host of regressive structures which he has to see.”[114]


Now when the cause of physico-chemical _versus_ vital agencies comes to
be tried, not in the laboratory but in the study, not by science but
by philosophy, the first question that will be asked is, What, then,
is your distinction between ‘vital’ and ‘physico-chemical’ energies?
How are we to recognize when we are in presence of the one or of the
other? The usual answer to this searching question is that in vital
agency we find a directive, a purposeful, a psychic element, whereas
physico-chemical energies seem to be nothing but the play of a blind,
indifferent mechanism. But, it will be rejoined, how can any one affirm
that physico-chemical energies are not also vital, directive, psychic?
Is there not, in fact, something psychic in the very conception of
energy? To these questions there seems to me no conceivable reply. When
a ‘vital’ energy has been reduced to a ‘physico-chemical,’ we have
evidently explained nothing—we have only exchanged one mystery for
another.

Yet if there is no difference in essential nature between one kind
of energy and another, there does appear a marked difference when
we come to consider them in relation to particular results of their
operation. Let us take an example. We explain that classic instance of
gravitation, the fall of an apple, by reference to the law formulated
by Newton which extends to every particle of matter in the visible
universe. But we also find that the fall of the apple is, for apples,
a necessity of life; if the seed did not fall to the ground when
ripe there would be no more apple trees. Yet gravitation acts quite
indifferently to the life of the apple. Whether the branches overhang
a river, or a street, or a plot of fertile ground, the apple will fall
straight towards the centre of the earth. The fulfilment, therefore,
of the vital needs of the apple is plainly a by-product of the force
of gravitation. In this relation, gravity has no directive or psychic
element. Yet in larger relations, we have to take note of the fact
that if there were no such thing as gravity, there would be no apples
and no earth. Thus the law of gravitation is a condition of life as we
now know it. The fact that it acts mechanically, without selection or
purpose, in relation to particular occurrences is quite consistent with
the view that it, or the conditions of the ether from which it possibly
arises, may be directive and psychic in relation to life as a whole,
or rather to what we recognize as the manifestation of life in the
material universe.

We have now got hold of a valid distinction between mechanical and
directive agencies. We can distinguish them not by their nature but
in relation to the particular phenomenon we are considering. We call
them mechanical where that phenomenon is a by-product of the agency,
and directive where, if the agency were conscious, we should say that
this was its main intent. I can see no more fundamental distinction. It
follows from this that the same action can be at once both mechanical
(physico-chemical) and directive. The old distinction between vital and
mechanical energy disappears. The question resolves itself simply into
that of the number of distinct agencies which are deemed necessary to
account for the universe.

Now the true way of dealing with this problem of the unity or
multiplicity of agencies in nature is, I would suggest, to assume the
existence of a single power which is of course psychic and directive
but which can only be communicated to matter by degrees and under
certain conditions still very obscure. These conditions it itself both
creates and uses. Its development in Time and that of matter go on,
as it were, on parallel paths, eternally apart (to our limited view)
yet eternally inseparable. The key to the course of its development
in nature lies in the word Synthesis.[115] Here we seem to have the
explanation of the apparent difference between the so-called ‘vital’
and the physico-chemical forces. When matter has been so grouped as
to form not a mere aggregate of particles but a synthesis, then that
synthesis is enabled to make use of energy in a manner not open to
its parts. Synthesis is a condition of the discovery of liberation
of unsuspected forces. Thus a synthesis of molecules produces the
stage for Life, a synthesis of living particles produces the Cell,
a synthesis of cells produces an organism, a synthesis of organisms
is a species—for the evidence (most notably that derived from the
consideration of bee and ant communities) seems to show that material
discontinuity in the members does not preclude the existence of a true
synthetic union.[116] The characteristic power gained by a species
is that of evolutionary development working in the obscure region of
germinal combination and variation. Of course, I am aware that all this
is merely a way of representing facts so as to make them intelligible
to and manageable by the mind. If any one should object that we do not
know what kind of grouping a synthesis is, except precisely through
that very organic activity which I have described as its product or
accompaniment, I entirely agree. All these terms are intellectual
forms—like atoms, molecules, and other concepts of physics. They do
not reveal anything; they merely help us to comprehend. In the region
of the controversy of Vitalism _versus_ Mechanism, the conceptions
which I have been trying to explain enable us, without introducing
a multiplicity of different energies, to understand how an organism
synthetized by life may exhibit directive action which looks entirely
different from any action possible in dead matter. Yet it works under
laws of its own, and no doubt the particles of such an organism, if
they were conscious, would be unaware that any but physico-chemical
processes were in operation; in fact, I should have no hesitation in
agreeing with the statement with which the great physiologist, Verworn,
concludes an exhaustive analysis of this obscure subject: “The general
fact must be regarded as established, that all the work of the organism
is based finally upon chemical energy.”[117] But what directs the
chemical energy? Something which is not itself a chemical energy and
which is associated with the organic synthesis which that energy serves
to maintain. Verworn’s statement, it must be borne in mind, is as true
of the composition of the Iliad as it is of the digestive process of an
animalcule.

The explanations above suggested are purely tentative; but so, it must
be remembered, are the theories which they combat. No one pretends
that the mechanical explanation of the universe, including the
phenomena of organic life, is at present made out so as to cover the
known facts, or even that expert opinion is at all unanimous in the
belief that it can ever do so.

I know no single work in which the present position of the controversy
is so well set forth as in Professor V. L. Kellogg’s Darwinism
To-day.[118] A great array of scientific authorities will there be
found mustered, and the verdict of Professor Kellogg (reluctantly
given, for he clings to the mechanical explanation of the universe)
is that evolution is not explained by any mechanical force at
present known to science. “With Osborn,” he concludes, “let us join
the believers in the unknown factors in evolution.”[119] He does
not, however, contemplate their remaining unknown—we have to say
_Ignoramus_, not _Ignorabimus_; and by ‘known’ he means apparently,
reducible to a mechanical process. He will have nothing to say to
any internal force directing the energies of matter, such as the
_Vervollkomnungsbewegung_ of Nägeli.[120]

    “Such an assumption,” he writes, “of a mystic, essentially
    teleologic force, wholly independent of and dominating all the
    physico-chemical forces and influences that we do know, and the
    reactions and behaviour of living matter to their influences
    which we are beginning to recognize and understand with some
    clearness and fulness—such a surrender of all our hardly won actual
    scientific knowledge in favour of an unknown, unproved, mystic,
    vital force we are not prepared to make.”[121]

The above passage is very well fitted to be the pivot of the whole
controversy. We shall examine it therefore in some detail.

It is, in the first place, hardly correct to say that the _X_
factor in life and evolution is supposed by thinkers like Driesch,
Reinke, and Nägeli to be ‘wholly independent of’ and to ‘dominate’
all the physico-chemical forces that we do scientifically know.
Man, for example, cannot be said to be ‘wholly independent’ of the
physico-chemical energies of which he makes use for a multitude of
objects. He is very dependent, both on those outside him and those
in his own organism. He cannot _originate_ the smallest quantum of
physical energy. Yet he is unquestionably capable of directive action
upon matter.

In the second place it must be pointed out that the _X_ factor,
conceived as it is in this book, though Prof. Kellogg may call it
‘mystic’ if he likes, is certainly anything but ‘unknown.’ There is
nothing more mystic than the human spirit—does not mysticism mean the
attribution of spiritual significance to material things?—but there
is nothing more real and certain. The very act of knowing, however
material or mechanical may be the object of knowledge, is an act of the
spirit, and we know the spirit itself better than anything else. How
did this spirit come into active being? There are only two conceivable
ways. Either it was at a certain moment projected into the universe
from without by a Supreme Spirit, or it was, like everything else,
evolved. If we accept the former view we may say good-bye to science.
Miraculous interventions will explain anything, and if we admit them in
one case they may be valid everywhere. But if we take the second view,
as do practically all men of science, we are bound to admit that spirit
had from the beginning some constant and natural relation to matter,
for evolution does not work miracles—it cannot make something out of
nothing. If, then, we regard Man not as an outside observer of the
universe but as an organic part of it—and I believe no thinking about
nature can be of any value until we have grasped and fully realized
that position—then there can be nothing to surprise us if we find
traces of a directive control in the elementary processes of life and
development. It would be more surprising if we did not. If we reduce
the whole universe, apart from the human spirit, to physico-chemical
processes we are at once confronted with the problem of evolving the
human spirit out of such processes; and that, on the face of it, is a
sheer impossibility. All physical and all chemical phenomena as such
are reducible to the movements and groupings of atoms and molecules.
These movements and groupings can affect the spirit which finds itself
mysteriously implicated in their activity, and the spirit can affect
them. But that molecular movements can _create_ spirit is unthinkable
by any one who realizes what spirit is and what movement. Rather should
we say that in the power of movement, in action, change of any kind, we
are to see the evidences of spirit.

We are now in a position to discuss the difficulty raised by Eimer and
by Günther, when they point to instances where the supposed psychic
force in nature has failed to achieve its end. It fails because,
on its mechanical side, it sometimes encounters obstacles which on
the psychic side were not provided for. The law of gravitation is a
condition of life, but it will kill a man who falls over a precipice.
The adaptability of protoplasm is a necessary condition of evolution,
but circumstances will occur in which the adaptation means degeneracy
for the organism as a whole. Eimer’s argument is good, indeed,
against the mythological conception of a supreme Creator, perfect in
prescience and in power, who orders the goings-on of the universe
from his throne above and outside it. But we seek for no such being
in natural phenomena. Perfection is no attribute of anything that
operates in Time, and so far as we regard the divine life as working
in Time we must regard it as becoming, not as being, perfect. Again,
Eimer’s objection shows that he conceives the psychic force against
which he is arguing as in itself something mechanical, a mechanized
kind of vitality, which ought to achieve its end with a flawless
exactitude. Of this, also, nature knows nothing. The universe is what
it is precisely because the Power behind its phenomena is neither blind
Chance on the one hand nor rigid determination on the other—because it
is vital, progressive, and free. This power is certainly capable of
making imperfect adaptations and of diverging into false side-tracks
of development. That is a fact of much significance, but it is no
argument against the existence of such a power—it merely reveals its
character. A special study of regressive structures and of the laws and
principles which lead to them would have extreme interest, both for
biology and for philosophy. But it could not affect the significance of
the broad fact that, in a world where the highest living being was once
a particle of shapeless protoplasm, we have now Man, a being lamentably
unfit, indeed, to be the last birth of Time, but uniquely great by his
very consciousness of that unfitness.

In contemplating this wonderful ascending movement let us not forget
that the warrant for its continuance rests in ourselves. The false
tracks, the regressive forms, which meet us in nature prove at least
this: that the line of development which we observe on earth may
conceivably end in a disaster which would bear to the course of Life
in general just such a relation as the degeneration of the Amazon
ants does to life on this globe. We are by no means entitled to sit
still and expect that the current of evolution will bear mankind along
irresistibly to its goal. With the development of the conscious will
_we_ are made responsible for the advance of life in the only sphere
which we know and which our actions can affect. Man is, as it were,
the growing-point of that progressive life. If his strange passion
for the perfection which he has never seen should be smothered in the
struggle for mere existence, or corrupted by brutal luxury, then growth
will be at an end, atrophy or degeneration will set in. The vision of
a nobler, freer, more humane life than is anywhere widely possible on
earth at present cannot be realized without the strenuous help of men
and women who have learned to subdue the Ego with its fierce egotisms
into harmony with the purposes of the divine Whole. But this much we
may say—that they will not fight alone. No one ever pursued a high and
worthy aim without finding that he had drawn to himself those ‘great
allies’ of whom Wordsworth has written so greatly; powers implicit
in the nature of the world, and always waiting to be unlocked by the
heroic Will.


The Power, some of whose workings it has been attempted to trace in the
foregoing pages, is a controlling and directive force, making, through
countless varieties of being, for one clear and definable end—the
realization of life. It may be asked, Are we to regard this divine
Power as wholly immanent in matter or as partly transcending it and
governing it from without?

The nature of the divine principle, so far as we are able to discern
it, cannot be fully discussed until we come to consider it in the
highest sphere of manifestation yet known to us, that of the human
soul. But with the question which has just been raised we are now in
some measure able to deal, and the consideration of it may bring this
section of our study to a close.

In the world of inorganic matter, the tendency of units to form
themselves into groups having relation to other groups is already
visible. A force immanent in the atom clearly becomes transcendent _in
relation to the atom_ when atoms group themselves into molecules. And
when molecular affinities come into play, and obey definite laws of
form, as in the wonderful phenomena of crystallization, we see that
the force immanent in each molecule becomes transcendent, as regards
the molecules taken separately, when we look at them from the point
of view of the completed group. Crystallization is a process which
trembles on the very verge of vital action. And in vital action the
alternation of immanence and transcendence in an ever-ascending scale
becomes still clearer and more significant. Every cell is a collection
of forces controlled by a power which transcends each one of them, or
any number of them below the whole. Every cell colony, like the _Alga_
described in an earlier chapter,[122] has a life which is immanent in
the colony but transcendent as regards its component members. Definite
groups of cells make up the structure of the highly organized plant
or animal, and exhibit the same combination of forces immanent in the
parts and transcendent, as regards those parts, in the whole. Again,
each whole, each individual, is moved by life-impulses immanent in
itself but transcendent in so far as they represent the communal life
of the species to which it belongs. This communal life of the species
becomes immanent again when we regard it as embraced in the life of
the totality of beings on the globe. The thought must at once occur,
as the ascending series passes out of reach of man’s intelligence:
Whither, then, does it lead us in the end? Is there any end? And is our
knowledge of Being absolutely limited to those parts of it which lie
_beneath_ us?

We are, I think, able, without going beyond the limits of observation
and experience, to frame a synthesis of all physical nature, and to
express its character in terms of Life and Response. But at the next
step we have to embrace man with his moral nature, his intelligence,
his personal consciousness, and there may for aught we know be beings
far higher than man who must also be included. Now here we are not only
_in_ the synthesis and therefore unable to grasp and survey it, but we
are also quite unaware of its contents and limits. We ask, Is the All
of Things personal? is It conscious? has It a manlike intelligence? and
so forth, and I confess I see no way of answering these questions with
our present capacities. We can only say—but this is much—that as the
universe is one, the part of it which we do not see cannot stand in any
essential contradiction to that which we do.

Furthermore we must remember that since, in that aspect of us which
observes and studies, we are distinct personalities, we are obliged, in
so observing and studying, to regard things as outside of ourselves.
This is the core of the whole difficulty. At bottom, the relativity
of human knowledge does not depend on the fact that time, space, and
causality are, as Kant has taught us, modes of thought imposed upon
our ‘I,’ with nothing external answering to them; it goes deeper,
it depends on the ultimate fact that I _am_ an ‘I,’ and _therefore_
separate (as such) from what I observe, and _therefore_ only capable
of studying my own states as affected by external things, not the very
things themselves. Real knowledge, then, must consist in getting out
of this prison of ‘I’-hood and entering into actual union with what we
observe. Could we do that, we should at once live not in our ‘selves’
but in the Whole. The question then is, whether it is ever possible so
to escape, and how?

We must note, however, that no one who has done this could ever tell
us precisely what he has done. For the moment he begins to put his
experiences into an intellectual form, the laws of the mind reassert
themselves, things externalize themselves again, the ‘I’ reappears, the
gulf yawns again between subject and object.

And yet the instinctive language of man shows that he does regard
it as possible to _lose himself_ in the contemplation of something
transcending his powers of ordinary intellectual apprehension. Why
should he not? If a transcendent Reality exists, as it must, then the
faculty of entering into conscious relation with it is one which Time
would surely some day bring to birth.

And although no man, as I have said, can ever express to other minds in
terms of the intellect the reality he has thus witnessed, he has found
means to do better than this—he can help them to share his vision.
These means we call Poetry, Art, and Religion which is the poetry of
Ethics. Through these it is that man most truly lives, because united
in spirit with a larger life than his ‘self’ and his senses are aware
of. Through them it is that while the eye sees the sunrise, the spirit
sees the glory, that while the intellect apprehends Truth, the soul
is ready to die for it, that while self-interest bands men together
in communities for mutual service, Love prompts to the services that
will never be recompensed. We are not then, it seems, absolutely
imprisoned in our ‘I,’ strait as the bonds may seem. But this must be
added, that they will never seem so strait as when we fancy that we can
get out of them by any purely intellectual conception of the Ultimate
Reality. “God,” says Æschylus most nobly, “is the Air, God is the
Earth, God is the Heavens; yea, God is all things, and That which is
above them.”[123] There is always a ‘beyond’ for the explorations of
the intellect. The function of the intellect is to combine and reduce
to order the experiences of sense, thus guiding us with definite aim
through the bewildering wonders of life. But let us not dream that
it can ever guide us to any goal or terminus. The goal is at once
infinitely distant and nearer than our breath and blood. The search
for it will last as long as Time. It is of the essence of the view of
the universe here put forward that the intellect can never embrace it
in any closed system of thought. Turn as we may to one after another
of these closed systems as each grows out of harmony with advancing
knowledge and insight, the true conclusion, at least for readers who
have followed these pages with assent, will be to stand cheerfully
ready to renounce all systems, trusting in the last resort to no
formulas, but to the play of eternal Powers on the imagination, the
heart, the will:—

    “They bring none to his or her terminus or to be content and full,
    Whom they take they take into space to behold the birth of stars,
      to learn one of the meanings,
    To launch off with absolute faith, to sweep through the ceaseless
      rings and never be quiet again.”[124]




PART II: ETHICS




