PART II

THE HABITUATION OF PATRIOTISM




CHAPTER III

THE DELIBERATE HABITUATION


One way by which the impulses and dispositions of human character are
amalgamated in patriotism is by habituation. The habits of patriotism
are just as powerful and important as the impulses. The impulses,
in fact, are molded into habits, and are profoundly modified by the
environment and regimen to which they are subjected. The habits become
the masters of the impulses. Thought at this point enters into the
problem, but it is not the individual’s own thought; it is the thought
of the society which surrounds him. His articles of faith are habits
acquired from society. “... It is through habit that the influence
of intelligence has most control over the lives of the majority of
civilized men.”[29] On the part of the individual, the thought is
involuntary, or at least unvoluntary, and is accompanied by like
action. Most of man’s beliefs are nonrational, even though he supposes
that he has come to hold them by his own free and deliberate choice.
Society holds tremendous power over the building of character; in large
measure, it controls the material that the mind has to work on. And
this control is of primary importance. “... The essential fact which
has made the Great Society possible is the discovery, handed down by
tradition and instruction, that Thought can be fed by deliberately
collected material, and stimulated, sustained, and to a certain extent,
controlled by an effort of will.”[30]

Now, the patriotic spirit, along with other dispositions, may be
acquired as a habit, and the mold into which patriotism runs is
notoriously with most men a matter of circumstances and habituation.
Along this line, it is interesting to speculate as to what American
patriotism would be if this country had never separated from England,
if the thirteen colonies had not been able to form a federation, or
if the South had been successful in the Civil War. The loyalty of
Americans would have been totally different, but no doubt would be just
as devoted as it actually is. It is a historical fact that English
patriotism has modified itself to correspond to the expansion of the
empire. In view of all this, one can hardly resist the conclusion that
patriotism depends quite largely upon habituation and use and wont.
Patriotism is a national habit; and it is a habit which even were it
proved to be nothing but evil, would not be easily broken, since it is
acquired from life’s earliest years onward.

  “The superstitions of our early years,
  E’en when we know them to be nothing more,
  Lose not for that their hold upon our hearts;
  Not all are free who ridicule their chains.”[31]

There are two kinds of the habituation of patriotism, deliberate and
spontaneous, conscious and unconscious, direct and indirect. The more
obvious of the two is that of conscious and deliberate habituation.
There are agencies that are constantly being used with deliberate
purpose towards the regimentation of the populace in patriotism.
“Patriotism is systematically cultivated by anniversaries, pilgrimages,
symbols, songs, recitations, etc.”[32] There are numerous patriotic
societies, such as the Grand Army of the Republic, the Daughters of the
American Revolution, the Sons of Veterans, the Woman’s Relief Corps,
the Daughters of the Confederacy, and others.[33]

But there are other and more important forces back of the inculcation
of patriotism. In most countries the state with all its power is
vigilant lest patriotism be allowed to become otiose. And it has means
at its disposal that range from the selection and repression of news to
the active use of all sorts of influences which sway the mind of the
public. And these influences do not go unemployed. There are those in
the state who have a special interest in arousing a strong sentiment
of patriotism. Conspicuous among such are the professional soldiers.
They, of course, want a solidified population. Their training has
emphasized their appreciation of the value of obedience and uniformity.
These virtues are essentials in the discipline of an army, and in
terms of military logic they seem to be essentials in the organization
of a country. J. M. Robertson has a division of a book which he has
devoted to a discussion of the regimentation of militarism.[34] But
the guardianship of the patriotic fire within the state is not turned
over entirely into soldierly hands. Other interests, whose nature and
motives in contrast with the straightforward purposes of the country’s
guardians are such as to make it difficult to describe them in the
dispassionate spirit of scientific and philosophic discourse, are ready
with their assistance. And, of course, the ordinary civilian temper is
not averse to the rigorous regimentation of patriotic loyalty.

Hegel[35] thought that it was both right and necessary that the
state should control public opinion. He considered that the people
had no opinions of very great worth. “... The people, in so far as
this term signifies a special part of the citizens, does not know what
it wills. To know what we will, and further what the absolute will,
namely, reason, wills, is the fruit of deep knowledge and insight,
and is therefore not the property of the people.”[36] Public opinion
without the guidance of the state was unorganized and dangerous. “The
many as individuals, whom we are prone to call the people, are indeed
a collective whole, but merely as a multitude or formless mass, whose
movement and action would be elemental, void of reason, violent, and
terrible.”[36] Therefore it was necessary for the proper source of
authority to organize public opinion. And, of course, this work of
organization and direction was to be the task of the officials of the
state. “The highest state officials have necessarily deeper and more
comprehensive insight into the workings and needs of the state, and
also greater skill and wider practical experience.”[37] There are
others who do not hold Hegel’s philosophical system that yet agree with
him in upholding the high sovereignty and controlling supervision of
the state.

Ecclesiastical institutions often serve as habituators of nationalistic
spirit. The rise of nationalism in Spain affords an interesting
example, for religious motives were at the height of their strength
in those days. Ferdinand and Isabella got control of the hierarchical
religious organizations in their dominions by taking from the Pope and
to themselves the power to name the prelates of the Catholic church
in Spain. The Crusading Orders had great vogue in the country, and
Ferdinand got himself elected to the office of Grand Master in the most
important of them. These measures accomplished, they were made to tell
by the rulers of Spain in the process of furthering their dynastic and
nationalistic ambitions. In Japan, Bushido, a mixture of Confucian and
Shinto elements, is a spirit of patriotism which is at the disposal
of the state. In Germany, the pastors of the established churches are
state officials; they are state-appointed and state-paid, and they
reflect the state’s purposes. In all Christian countries, including
our own, the churches observe the national patriotic holidays both in
time of war and peace, and in time of war preach patriotism from the
pulpits, sometimes at the solicitation of the state, sometimes of their
own volition.

The newspapers are of cardinal importance as agencies of the
inculcation of patriotism. It is natural that the newspapers should be
insurgently patriotic. They are dependent upon the public for their
subsistence. And the mass of the public is conservative. Consequently,
the newspapers are as a rule conservative also. Now patriotism is a
venerable virtue easy for the public to believe in, and it is almost
inevitable that journalism should play up that virtue. It is also
almost as inevitable that the patriotism of the press should be of
the militant kind. To take that character is simply to follow the
line of least resistance. Public opinion reacts upon the press and
circumscribes its initiative. And when a people becomes inflamed
against another people, the newspapers as a rule (there are, of course,
some that are independent in their thought and leadership) have to fall
in line; the sheet that opposed the trend of public emotion would have
to pay for its folly. The newspapers, moreover, on the whole represent
the gentlemanly business class, and wars promise most to the interests
of that class. Conflict is quite apt to grow out of economic rivalry,
whence it naturally follows that those who are most nearly concerned in
that rivalry (and the newspapers are controlled by such as are of that
class) will be most interested in the prosecution of a war which bids
fair to enlarge the economic opportunities of their own country.

Along with the newspapers as habituators of patriotism go also less
ephemeral kinds of literature. “The Man Without a Country,”[38] for
instance, has a definite patriotic purpose. And patriotic orations,
songs, and poetry have the same purpose. Sometimes these compositions
are not jingoistic, but very often they are. Wordsworth’s poetry,
for instance, is of the nonjingoistic character; it is strongly
marked by love of the soil. But Wordsworth was of unusually broad
sympathies, and his is not the kind of poetry usually made use of in
teaching patriotism. J. M. Robertson has written an essay in which he
called attention to the proclivity of poets to write in a jingoistic
strain.[39] Virgil, himself a man of broad sympathies, wrote the Æneid
at the request of Augustus, whose empire-building purposes needed an
epic after the model of Homer about the founding of Rome.

An important habituator of patriotism in the training of the young is
the public school system. The public schools are almost always used
by those who have them in charge for the maintenance of the existing
order. But the “existing order” quite regularly means the political
one, and hence the road is opened for the teaching of patriotism.
Prussia seems to be an extreme case of the deliberate use of the
schools for pushing the pet programs of the politically favored
classes. “In Prussia the avowed use of the schools, not for the spread
of truth but for the ‘War against social-democracy’ may be in part
responsible for that absence of Love between members of different
classes, that class-war of which the growth of social-democracy is only
one symptom.”[40] Prussia also exhibits a peculiarly active brand
of patriotism. It has been commonly assumed in the United States
that education will make for democracy but it is not necessarily so.
Education, instead of being aimed at freeing and developing the mind,
may be aimed only at regimentation in a certain system of ideas. The
fact of the business is that as a rule it is so aimed, even where there
is no such clear and persistent purpose as there is in Prussia; it
is all too easy to fall into the rut of doing the same old things in
the same old way. It is simply easier to inculcate the same old ideas
than it is to teach the ever-varying young idea how to shoot. And what
education turns out under such methods is not free and independent
thinkers, but a habituated uniform product. “School education, unless
it is regulated by the best knowledge and good sense, will produce
men and women who are all of one pattern, as if turned in a lathe....
Any institution which runs for years in the same hands will produce
a type.... In the continental schools and barracks, in newspapers,
books, etc., what is developed by education is dynastic sentiment,
national sentiment, soldierly sentiment.”[41] And so the schools are
used for the maintenance of patriotism,--patriotism which only too
often is narrow and militaristic. An example of the better kind of
purpose to teach patriotism is that in view in Bosanquet’s lecture on
the subject.[42] An example of the kind which is likely not to be so
temperate and well-considered is that which grows out of the demand
for the teaching of patriotism which arises under the stimulus of war.
On May 17, 1917, there appeared in a small-town newspaper[43] an
article dated from New York City, and which was evidently furnished by
some news association. The headlines were as follows: “College Course
in Patriotism. Chicago’s Mayor Starts Chair in Lincoln University.
Students True Americans.” The opening paragraph ran thus: “For the
first time in the history of American education a chair has been
established for the teaching of American Patriotism. Inspired by the
work being done by the Lincoln Memorial University, William Hale
Thompson, Mayor of Chicago, will provide $25,000 for this purpose.” A
little further on occurred the sentence, “Plans have already been made
for the opening of the Patriotism Department.” These plans may not have
been actually carried out, and if they were, may have obtained solid
results, but the sound of the article was such as would lead one to
suspect that what was accomplished would rather prove to be superficial
and sensational. This whole attempt has been cited here not because it
is an isolated incident, but for the reason that it is an illustration,
extreme though it may be, of a tendency.

The public schools have textbooks for the purpose of training in
patriotic loyalty, books which tell of the duties of citizens, and are
replete with songs and poems to illustrate the points brought out.[44]
The schools of our land make it a part of their chief business to
teach loyalty to the country. For this business history is plastic
material. “History, in every country, is so taught as to magnify that
country: children learn to believe that their own country has always
been in the right and almost always victorious, that it has produced
almost all the great men, and that it is in all respects superior to
all other countries. Since these beliefs are flattering, they are
easily absorbed, and hardly ever dislodged from instinct by later
knowledge.”[45] The unpleasant facts are not brought out. Americans,
for example, do not usually have it called to their attention that in
the War of 1812, most of their vessels were tied up in port at the end
of the war, their national capital was captured by the enemy, they won
only one important land battle and that after the war was over, and
that their representatives in the peace negotiations had to surrender
the principle for which the war was fought. The war ended because both
sides were willing to return to the _status quo ante_. The patriotic
bias dominates even the historian himself. “No historian ever gets out
of the mores of his own society of origin.... Even if he rises above
the limitations of party, he does not get outside the patriotic and
ethical horizon in which he has been educated, especially when he deals
with the history of other countries and other times than his own. Each
historian regards his own nation as the torchbearer of civilization;
its mores give him his ethical standards by which he estimates whatever
he learns of other peoples.... In modern Russian literature may be
found passages about the ‘Civilizing mission’ of Russia which might
be translated, _mutatis mutandis_, from passages in English, French,
or German literature about the civilizing mission of England, France,
or Germany. Probably the same is true of Turkish, Hindoo, or Chinese
literature. The patriotism of the historian rules his judgment,
especially as to excuses and apologies for things done in the past, and
most of all as to the edifying omissions,--a very important part of the
task of the historian.... There is a compulsion on the historian to act
in this way, for if he wrote otherwise, his fellow-countrymen would
ignore his work.”[46]

The habituation of patriotism finds in _symbols_ an instrument
admirably suited to its purpose. The mind really reacts more strongly
to symbols than it does to the facts of sense-experience. The potency
of symbols does not suffer from the admixture of distractions by
which direct sense-experience is accompanied. Symbols are more purely
meaning, and they come with the momentum of their meaning. Now the
word “country,” embodying an abstract and fairly simple idea, serves
as a symbol and produces a pure emotion as in art. Other words and
phrases could be named that are similar in the responses that they
elicit. “The Monroe Doctrine” is one of the pet symbols of the United
States. In patriotic poetry and hymnology the flag is featured. It is
a symbol of the country. Children are taught to sing about the flag,
by means of which a symbol is implanted in their minds, the love of
music is appealed to, and patriotism is connected with their childhood
sentiments. The appeal of symbols comes home to one when he stands
at the dividing line between two countries, at Niagara Falls, let us
say, and gazes upon two flags, one of them his own and the other not.
At the present time Great Britain is our ally, but the emotion upon
beholding the British flag is nothing as compared with the feeling of
affection experienced upon beholding the American flag. The British
emblem, though respected, is strange; the American flag is one’s
own. Sumner discusses what he calls the tyranny of the apparatus of
suggestion, that is, symbols or tokens, and from him is worth quoting
the following pertinent passage: “The tyranny is greatest in regard to
‘American’ and ‘Americanism.’ Who dare say that he is not ‘American’?
Who dare repudiate what is declared to be ‘Americanism’? It follows
that if anything is base and bogus it is always labeled ‘American.’
If a thing is to be recommended which cannot be justified, it is put
under ‘Americanism.’ Who does not shudder at the fear of being called
‘unpatriotic’? And to repudiate what any one chooses to call ‘American’
is to be unpatriotic. If there is any document of Americanism, it is
the Declaration of Independence. Those who have Americanism especially
in charge have repudiated the doctrine that ‘governments derive their
just powers from the consent of the governed,’ because it stood in the
way of what they wanted to do. They denounce those who cling to the
doctrine as un-American. Then we see what Americanism and patriotism
are. They are the duty laid upon us all to applaud, follow, and obey
whatever a ruling clique of newspapers and politicians chooses to
say or wants to do. ‘England’ has always been, amongst us, a kind of
counter token, or token of things to be resisted and repudiated. The
‘symbols’ or ‘tokens’ always have this utility for suggestion. They
carry a coercion with them and overwhelm people who are not trained to
verify assertions and dissect fallacies.”[47] When one’s attention
is called to these things, it cannot help but impose upon him the
obligation of examining the bases and nature of his own patriotic
enthusiasm.

The deliberate habituation of patriotism has a bearing upon the problem
of peace. Knowledge of other peoples will not bring harmony and mutual
goodwill unless it is sympathetic knowledge, and, if it is to be
sympathetic, our mental prepossessions must be shaped so as to open our
minds to a just appreciation of unwelcome facts and ways at variance
with our own. And to accomplish this, the teaching of patriotism will
have to be directed towards the realizing of the devoutly to be wished
consummation.




