CHAPTER VI

THE ONENESS OF COUNTRY AND SELF


The patriot identifies himself with his country. He believes that he
and his country are one. This belief is the coming to consciousness of
the impulse to cling to one’s own. And this conviction becomes another
reason for patriotism. Patriotic loyalty of this kind is not a business
affair. It will not abandon the country even if the latter should prove
unsuccessful in providing protection, but will remain steadfast through
all the country’s vicissitudes. One’s country may fail to protect
him, but if it is still a recognizable expression of himself, he will
love it. The government or state may be faulty, and yet the patriot
will still be true. Veblen intimates that one might just as well have
foreign officials as home-grown capitalists administer one’s affairs of
government.[93] But the patriot is not likely to be persuaded to think
Veblen’s way, and the reason is that the home-grown capitalists somehow
seem closer than the foreign officials. It is quite true that there are
those who refuse to be patriotic because their country does not give
them what they believe to be justice. Anarchists are not patriotic.
Socialists sometimes are not patriotic. Some among the laboring classes
have come to wear their patriotic allegiance but lightly. But the issue
for them has ceased to be merely that of getting justice. It has come
to the point where the injustice of the industrial situation has gone
so far that the dissatisfied classes do not even recognize themselves
in the state that is supposed to represent them. And when that feeling
of strangeness creeps into a man’s heart, he is no longer likely to be
a patriot. Patriotism is rendered to a country that is one’s own. In
view of this, it seems rather significant that the rise of nationalism
has been cotemporal with the rise of democracy.

The country is a part of one’s objectified self. And one cannot be
a self without being objectified. He has to come to expression in
some way, and he has to have the means and material through which to
express himself. The individual would lose in individuality if his
group were broken up. He cannot be a normal human being independent
of the group; and the group for the civilized man includes “country.”
“In a profound sense, man is born under the relations of country and
of government. He can no more live a rational, civilized life without
a country, and apart from government, than without the family and
apart from the social order. Scarce human is the individual to whom
are applicable Homer’s contemptuous words,--‘No tribe, nor state, nor
home hath he.’”[94] The country pours itself into the individual.
Jacks says: “The distinction between our own thoughts and the nation’s
thoughts is being obliterated. Ask the first honest man you meet to
tell you what he is thinking, and if he answers faithfully, he will
tell you something of what the nation is thinking.”[95] The patriot
instinctively feels the oneness between his country and himself, and
often has a clear belief concerning it. Washington spoke of “that
country, in whose service I have spent the prime of my life; for whose
sake I have consumed so many anxious days and watchful nights, and
_whose happiness, being extremely dear to me, will always constitute
no inconsiderable part of my own_.”[96] Washington identified himself
with America, and so do all patriots identify themselves with their
country. If the patriot were asked why one should love his country, his
reply might very well be, “Why should one love himself?”

The identification of oneself with his country is greatly helped out
by the fact that the country is an outgrowth of the family. The idea
of kinship has been extended to the national group. The nation is
believed to be of one race. McDougall in speaking of the self-regarding
instinct calls attention to the fact that it is extended to others,
and says: “... This extension should not, and usually does not, stop
short at the family; in primitive societies the tribe and the clan,
which are the collective objects of the regards of other tribes and
clans, become also the objects of this sentiment; and among ourselves
the growing child is led on in the same way to identify himself with,
and to extend his self-regarding sentiment to his school, his college,
his town, his profession as a class or collective unit, and finally to
his country or nation as a whole.[97] The extension of the sentiment
culminates in its application to the country, and this application has
been historically possible because the country has been believed to be
the organization of a homogeneous race.

But the feeling of oneness with the country does not rest solely upon
the belief in blood kinship. Ethnologists are now pretty well agreed
that there are no pure races, and that nationality does not coincide
with race homogeneity. C. D. Burns points out that the Belgians, at
the time they were seeking nationality, were of different blood. “The
group had asserted their common ambition and their distinction from all
other groups. They were not all the same blood or language, but their
traditions and purposes were the same.”[98] It is not exclusively
a common ancestry, then, that provides the basis for one to feel at
one with his country. It is not so much a question of genesis as of
condition. One feels at home in a country which in general has the
same sort of character and life as his own. The largest factor is that
of a common consciousness, no matter how produced. What this means
may be understood from the words of Bosanquet: “Broadly speaking, the
limit of a country or nation is the limit of a common experience, such
that the people share the same mind and feelings, and can understand
each other’s ways of living and make allowance for each other so that
the same laws and institutions are acceptable and workable for all of
them.”[99] The patriot in a foreign land feels truly like an innocent
abroad, but his own country is home, sweet home to him.

The love of the country as one’s objectified self coincides with the
desire for attachment. Man, in other words, wants to objectify himself.
He is not satisfied with solipcism. He wants a world, and a world that
somehow represents himself. Without that he is a lost soul. “The man
without a country” is pathetic because he has no attachment, no fixed
world that he can call his own. The country provides a satisfying
object of attachment, in which the patriot’s soul can be at rest.

Patriotism is devotion to a cause, and the cause is one’s own. The
patriot has made it his by his own choice. It is a part of himself.
Royce in speaking of patriotic loyalty says: “This plan of the patriot
has two features: (1) It is through and through a social plan, obedient
to the general will of one’s country, submissive; (2) it is through
and through an exaltation of the self, of the inner man, who now feels
glorified through his sacrifice, dignified in his self-surrender, glad
to be his country’s servant and martyr,--yet sure that through this
very readiness for self-destruction he wins the rank of hero.”[100]
The call of _war_ is not only a call to sacrifice, but also a call to
self-expression. Royce continues: “This war-spirit, for the time at
least, makes self-sacrifice seem to be self-expression, makes obedience
to the country’s call seem to be the proudest sort of display of one’s
own powers. Honor now means submission, and to obey means to have one’s
way. Power and service are at one. Conformity is no longer opposed to
having one’s own will. One has no will but that of the country.”[101]
Patriotism in this character simplifies the problem of duty. It
provides a cause into which one can throw himself with all his heart,
avoid the conflict of a divided mind, and it is able to do all this
for a man for the reason that the cause is his own. It makes a joy out
of a duty. An expression of the joy that comes to one in the service
of his country’s cause is to be found in the words supposed to have
been uttered by Epaminondas when he was dying upon the battlefield.
Zimmermann cites the incident: “Epaminondas, the Theban, when lying
on the ground mortally wounded with a spear at the battle of Leuctra,
all that troubled him was the event of the battle, and what was to
become of his arms; but on his shield being held up to him, and with
assurances that the day had gone for the Theban side, he said to the
bystanders with a cheerful countenance, ‘Let not this day, friends, be
considered as the end of my life, but as the beginning of my happiness
and the consummation of my glory. I have the satisfaction of leaving
my country victorious, haughty Sparta humbled, and Greece freed.’
Then drawing the spear out of his breast, he expired.”[102] Even if
Epaminondas did not express any such dramatic sentiment, it was a
common enough experience among mankind to be the subject of a credible
bit of fiction. The joy was in the fact that the cause had triumphed, a
cause that he had made his own. The patriot identifies himself with his
country; in it he sees himself; and he shares its sorrows and successes.

The patriot is provincial. He begins his life of attachment by being
loyal to what is nearest the center of his own interests. And such
attachment is natural. We are not likely to be so vitally interested in
far-away things as in the things that are near. It is simply a case of
where the power of gravitation varies in inverse ratio to the distance
between the gravitating bodies. Now, the patriot’s own nation is nearer
to him than is any other, and consequently to it he renders his warmest
devotion. Even many who deplore the narrowness of nationalism and
themselves do not share that narrowness, do nevertheless have a warm
devotion for their own country. This devotion, strong in spite of a
consciousness of the country’s shortcomings, shows itself in Cowper’s
line:

  “England, with all thy faults, I love thee still.”[103]

The patriot believes that he is an unnatural son if he is not devoted
to his country. To turn against the country is comparable to turning
against his own mother. And of course no real man of flesh and blood
and the ordinary feelings of normal human beings, would do such a thing
as that. The traitor is abnormal, and is something amounting to almost
a monster. All normal men are believed to thrill to the sentiment,

  “This is my own, my native land!”[104]

The country is so close that it is felt to be inhuman baseness not to
be true to the ties that bind one to it.

Patriotism is, then, in part a clinging to the nation as an expression
of one’s own life. The patriot fiercely resents attacks upon the
nation, for they are attacks upon himself. They assail the periphery
of his personality. He wants his country to be free because in it he
finds himself expressed, and because he claims the right to continue
his self-expression through the country. Therefore he hates conquest by
an enemy. He would rather die fighting than be subjugated, because in
dying for his country he asserts himself in one last final defiant act.
It is a supreme act of self-assertion. The country is the patriot’s, it
is vital to him, and while life lasts he will not see it perish from
the earth.




