CHAPTER VII

THE INTRINSIC VALUE OF ONE’S COUNTRY


The patriot believes that his country is intrinsically a fundamental
value. It is a cause that is worthy. He sees various things in the
country that furnish the bases for this belief. Sometimes he beholds in
the state a sacred or semi-sacred institution. A philosophy which put
the theory of the state in such a way as to furnish a basis for this
belief was that of Hegel. For Hegel, the state was the development of
the absolute Idea in the world. The state did not arise in response to
the needs of men, as philosophers like Mill and Spencer[105] have held,
and as would probably be held by the patriot who looks upon the country
as protector or expression of himself. Hegel said, “It is a very
distorted account of the matter when the state, in demanding sacrifices
from the citizens, is taken to be simply the civic community, whose
object is merely the security of life and property. Security cannot
possibly be obtained by the sacrifice of what is to be secured.... The
nation as a state is the spirit substantively realized and directly
real. Hence, it is the absolute power on earth.”[106] Hegel felt that
way about the Prussian State. And others have felt almost the same way
about their state. The desire for a solid and immutable condition of
life that the view represents is a fundamental one. And when Hegel or
any one else takes that view of his state, he is at once likely to be a
devoted patriot.

The popular parallel to Hegel’s conclusion is the belief that the
country comes from God. Men seem to want to feel that their origins are
worthy of reverence, and that they are especially favored. In ancient
times most people traced their ancestry back to their God. The Japanese
do the same thing in modern times, and have a religion which is the
expression of that belief. The Shinto religion inculcates reverence for
the sovereign, ancestral memory, filial piety, nature worship, and the
belief that the imperial family, which is descended from their god,
is the fountain head of the whole nation. These elements have been
infused into Bushido, which Nitobe calls _The Soul of Japan_, and which
embodies and inculcates the Japanese national ideals. But the belief in
the semi-sacred character of the nation is common in all countries. How
often do we hear it said that America is God’s Modern Chosen People.
And at least one of the sovereigns of Europe does not cease to mention
the patriotism of his tutelary god not only in his prayers, but also in
his proclamations.

This belief in the sacredness of one’s country has in monarchies a
splendid symbol to which to attach itself in the person of the king or
emperor. The ruling classes encourage this attachment; they themselves
feel that they rule by divine right. They have inherited the belief
from the traditions of the Middle Ages and from such philosophical
theories as that of Hegel. And the people, also habituated to a certain
extent in those ideas, share the same belief. If they are thoroughly
loyal, they take an attitude towards their king similar to that assumed
by religious devotees towards their God. But emperor-worship is not
at all necessary to state-worship. Many who no longer believe in the
divine right of kings still believe in the divine right of states. The
state is still often looked upon as sacred and sovereign. The Greek
conception of the omnipotent polis is in the _hinterland_ of our minds.
There has come down from the Middle Ages a habit of sovereignty which
the world has not shaken off. And, moreover, men want a supreme power
which guarantees safety. Patriotism thrives in such soil. When people
are possessed of these beliefs, patriotism with them can become almost
a religion.

The belief that one has a glorious country is a form of the belief in
its value. This kind of patriotism is fed by contemplation of the great
names of the past and the deeds of conquering heroes. It can attach
itself to any characteristic in which the country excels. Some of the
reasons for patriotism advanced in a school textbook ran somewhat as
follows: Our country is a great nation. Our territory is big. We have
an immense population. Our wealth is surpassingly great. Our power is
tremendous. Our educational standards are high. And we are the great
exponent of a land of freedom.[107] The moral was that any American
boy or girl ought to recognize that he lived in a grand and glorious
country. One of the very common causes of pride is the extent of
commerce, and in this way the economic factor makes another connection
with patriotism. A few years ago, one of the potent reasons for the
proposal to subsidize an American merchant marine was that the country
did not like to feel that the flag was not floating over the sea as it
once had.

The consciousness of national glory grows on the pride of power. The
belief in the country’s greatness fuses with and derives dynamic from
the impulse to power. National power is precious to a certain type of
patriot. It is even more precious than peace. “The plain fact is that
people do not prize tranquillity above all other goods. They desire
influence and power, and are willing to accept the responsibilities
and the suffering that these entail.”[108] These facts throw light upon
the patriotism of aggressive nations. The patriots of those nations
glory in their country’s glory, and grow great in the consciousness of
its power. Imperialism grows out of this temper. And once a country is
embarked on a career of imperialism, it is hardly to be satisfied short
of dominion over the world. Even then it will sigh for new worlds to
conquer. And this characteristic of an insatiable lust for glory should
not be lost sight of when we are considering the taming of an enemy by
nonresistance.

The patriotism that feeds upon the country’s glory is jealous of the
national prestige. Prestige is glory. And a nation cannot continue
to glory either at home or abroad if it suffers its prestige to be
lowered. Consequently it must sometimes fight simply to protect that
prestige. Many of our citizens during the period of crisis with Mexico
over the exploits of Villa and also during the critical time in our
affairs with Germany before war was declared, believed that if we did
not fight, our prestige value would be lowered all over the world, and
that we should be deprived of the power of acting effectively in world
politics. The desire of a nation for revenge also is the desire, as
much as anything else, to restore her fallen prestige.

Solicitude for the country’s honor is another outgrowth of the
patriotism that delights in national glory. One kind of honor is that
of Belgium standing up in the face of aggression for its integrity and
for its loyalty to its international obligations. A weaker kind is very
much like the desire for prestige. It is a desire for the respect of
others. It appears in the reason that Nitobe gives for Japan’s opening
its doors to the western world. “The sense of honor which cannot bear
being looked down upon as an inferior power,--that was the strongest of
motives.”[109] This sense of honor will lead to high achievements, but
the tragedy is that it will so easily lead to war. C. D. Broad says,
“... It is chiefly when people can be persuaded that questions of honor
are involved that they can be got to fight.”[110] And when a war is
started, no country wants to accept defeat. Each one emblazons on its
sword the device which is said to have been on the sword of a faithful
knight of feudal times: “Never draw me without right; never sheathe me
without honor.”

The trouble which is implicit in the situation is that nations believe
that their glory and welfare are matters of competitive success. It
is all too commonly believed that the gain of one nation must mean
the loss of another. Consequently, the attitude that is taken on all
sides is simply that of intelligent self-interest. Jealousy arises
out of such a situation, and jealousy is one of the effective causes
of war. One of the most significant factors in the diplomatic history
preceding the present war was that of the rivalry of the great European
powers for strategic land areas, and for control of the important sea
routes of the world. There has been a problem of the Mediterranean, the
Adriatic, Constantinople, the North Sea, the Baltic, the China Sea, the
Persian Gulf, and so on. Germany, younger than the other nations, has
been making a desperate effort to catch up with them, and the present
war is in great part the outgrowth of the friction arising out of that
effort.[111]

But it is encouraging that the glory of nations does not consist
exclusively in competitive success, and that there are those who
realize it. There are those who see that the true good of all countries
may be worked out at the same time. J. S. Mill expressed a high ideal
of patriotism when he said: “I believe that the good of no country can
be obtained by any means but such as tend to that of all countries,
nor ought to be sought otherwise, even if attainable.”[112] This may
be matched by a passage from American patriotic eloquence uttered by
no less a patriot than Charles Sumner: “I hope to rescue those terms
[national glory], so powerful over the minds of men, from the mistaken
objects to which they are applied, from deeds of war and the extension
of empire, that henceforward they may be attached only to acts of
justice and humanity.”[113] The highest good of nations really lies in
the use of those things which do not perish in the using and of which
there is enough for all. They are the things of the mind and of the
spirit. The hope is that the rivalry of nations may be transferred from
destructive to constructive pursuits. Much better would be friendly
rivalry in the accomplishments of science, art, scholarship, social
welfare, and like things.

The belief in the value of one’s country sometimes expresses itself
in the conviction that the country embodies lofty ideals. Patriots
believe that their nation represents a great tradition, and stands for
ideals that are important to the human race. A country may be said to
be organized about these beliefs. A people is not really effectively
unified until it is held together by the power of a common ideal. And
that ideal is a source of strength to patriotism. This idealistic
character has impressed itself upon even the warlike temper of peoples.
They do not usually fight over causes that are avowedly materialistic
and predatory. It takes a big idea to appeal to the people. “...
Peoples in their larger corporate activities are not mercenary, but
idealist. They know that wars do not ‘pay’ in the low, material sense.
They are not seeking present ease and comfort, seldom a present good
of any kind, but the triumph of an ideal which they associate with
their national life. Their _method_ may be wrong, but their _purpose_
is essentially altruistic, perhaps the least selfish of any activity
we know.”[114] And the ideal that moves a people must be a morally high
ideal, or at least must seem to be so. A government could scarcely hope
to win a hard war without having first enlisted the community’s moral
convictions.

Ideals are in part inherited from the nation’s past. What has united
in the past has been these common ideals; and it is because there
were such that the memory of the past is so valuable. But for the
idealist the future is fully as important as the past. A people is
held together by what Green calls its “social expectation.”[115] What
binds us together in America is not so much the past as the future. Our
past is a vital factor in our unity. It is remarkable how the various
elements in our population can apparently so naturally appropriate
“the Puritan fathers” as their own. The Puritan fathers were only
one element in the founding of the United States, and at least
three-quarters of the present inhabitants of this land have no physical
inheritance from them, but a far greater proportion of the American
people count themselves as their spiritual progeny. Nevertheless, the
American people contains great heterogeneous groups and masses who
have never been assimilated to the Puritan ideals or traditions. There
is no common past for all our people. We root back into many lands
and many traditions. The tie that really binds is what we believe to
be our common destiny, the ideals that we believe ourselves to be
progressively realizing. The roots of our unity are in the sky.

The ideals which a nation believes that it exemplifies are various.
Sometimes it is that of good government. Virgil felt that Rome was
spreading peace and order throughout the world.[116] Sometimes it is
the ideal of justice. The patriot seems to feel that in his country’s
just cause eternal justice itself is being incarnated. “A patriot he
[Washington] was in the highest sense, not because he loved his country
with a selfish love, but because he loved justice on the broadest
scale, and believed that the cause of his country was that of eternal
justice.”[117] But the ideal which has been exploited perhaps more
than any other is that of freedom. Patriots thrill at the thought
that not only is their country the guardian of their freedom, but is
the champion of freedom throughout all the world. This ideal has the
honor of having most keenly aroused the consciences of states. “It is
a curious fact that practically every case in which altruistic action
has been professed by or recommended to a nation has been a case in
which the ‘liberty’ of some human beings was in question. Thus both the
antislavery and the Bulgarian agitations [in England] were questions
of liberty; and the whole Palmerstonian policy was directed against
tyranny. There is indeed some ground for believing that the positive
international moral sense has at present only developed with regard to
freedom. There are many people, especially in this country, who would
say that it is the duty of a state, regardless of its own interests, to
protect the freedom of another state, especially if the inhabitants of
the latter are of kindred race to themselves.”[118]

Patriotism often rests upon the belief in the value of the country’s
civilization. The civilization of a country is its art, culture,
customs, and in general its way of living. It is its _kultur_. Loisy
speaks for France, “... though we do not brag of our culture, we are
sure that the ruin of France would be no gain to civilization....
We are safeguarding a notable portion of our human inheritance from
the madness of the destroyer.”[119] Sometimes the element of the
civilization cherished most is that of religion. The Jewish patriotism
was an example of this. Sometimes there is a belief that one’s own
nation has a way of doing things better than others. Germany is an
example. At other times, pride is founded upon the greatness of one’s
institutions. The English and Americans feel such pride. Sometimes
patriotism waxes enthusiastic over economic accomplishment. The
following is an expression of patriotism which, while it will no doubt
be astonishing to most people, nevertheless seems to be sincere: “It
is an element of patriotism to reverence the successful business
man of America, and Our Nation must request and heed the advice and
admonitions of men experienced in affairs.”[120] The context shows that
the author likes the _status quo_ of industry and wealth, and wants
more of the same thing.

Each state group has its own history, and is convinced that it
makes its own contribution to the world’s civilization. The patriot
applies to his own country the spirit that was expressed by Mazzini:
“Every people has its special mission, which will coöperate towards
the fulfillment of the general mission of Humanity. That mission
constitutes its nationality. Nationality is sacred.”[121] The sense of
having a mission possessed Israel; it possesses Germany; it possesses
America. Longfellow wrote to America,

  “Humanity with all its fears,
  With all the hopes of future years,
  Is hanging breathless on thy fate.”[122]

In fact, the number of the civilizing missions that the world is
favored with is identically equal to the number of countries that have
each a national consciousness. The consciousness of being the anointed
one sometimes strikes the level of the ludicrous. The following is not
an example,--for the New Englander: “As from the first to this day, let
New England continue to be an example to the world of the blessings of
free government, and of the means and capacity of men to maintain it.
And in all times to come, as in all times past, may Boston be among the
foremost and boldest to exemplify and uphold whatever constitutes the
prosperity, the happiness, and the glory of New England.”[123]

The patriotism that justifies itself with the reason that the country
is an intrinsic value often expresses itself in a desire for a better
country. Patriotism is not exclusively love of country just as it is.
It is love of an ideal country. The actual country becomes a subject of
criticism. Literary men have often satirized their country at the same
time that they loved it. And the criticism may be all the more bitter
because the love is great. The country’s shortcomings are felt by those
who love it the most. The following lines inflict the faithful wound of
a true patriot:

  “The ever-lustrous name of patriot
  To no man may be denied because he saw
  Where in his country’s wholeness lay the flaw,
  Where, on her whiteness, the unseemly blot.
  England! thy loyal sons condemn thee.--What!
  Shall we be meek who from thine own breasts draw
  Our fierceness? Not ev’n _thou_ shalt overawe
  Us, thy proud children nowise basely got.
  Be this the measure of our loyalty--
  To feel thee noble and weep thy lapse the more.
  This truth by thy true servants is confess’d--
  Thy sins, who love thee most, do most deplore.
  Know thou thy faithful! Best they honour thee
  Who honour in thee only what is best.”[124]

Patriotism consequently does not mean blind devotion to country, right
or wrong. And the plain fact is that there actually are patriots who
do not conceive that devotion to country must be consistent even at
the expense of one’s moral convictions. Loyalty to country with them
does not set aside loyalty to the moral law. The following lines are
taken from an essay commendatory to patriotism: “Let patriotism wholly
conform itself to the moral law; let it judge all things, national as
well as individual, by the unalterable, supreme, standard of right
and wrong; let it sanction no blind following of the flag, nor any
unethical exalting of the country’s dominance above the country’s
righteousness; let it reject the notion that because war has been
declared, patriots must enlist; let it repudiate the idea that because
a war has been begun, it must be allowed to end only when victory has
been secured;--and there will not only be fewer wars, but also, on one
side at least, wars more in keeping with justice and truth.”[125] The
author is a patriot, but his patriotism is directed by a high ethical
ideal.

It follows that patriotism is not inextricably bound up with jingoism.
Patriotism is not exclusively a war-time virtue. In truth pacifists may
well assert, and do sometimes, that they are patriots, and differ from
other patriots only in the way in which they show their patriotism.
There are uses for the patriot in time of peace as well as in time
of war. A practical statesman in a patriotic address has said, “We
need men who will not only be ready to sacrifice for their country in
time of war, but who will not be a menace to it in time of peace! We
want patriots in finance. We want patriotism in the organization of
corporations. We want patriots in the conduct of public utilities. We
want patriots in rendering loyal obedience to the law.”[126] Washington,
who was a patriot in war, preferred peace, and was a patriot in peace
as well as in war. When he was about to resign his commission as
commander-in-chief of the army, he wrote his “Letter to the Governors”
in which he made suggestions for putting the Federal Government on
a right basis. His “Farewell Address” was characterized by paternal
solicitude for the future of his country. On both occasions Washington,
first in peace as well as in war, expressed what was a true spirit of
patriotism.

The patriotism that looks within the country demands public spirit.
It calls for unselfishness on the part of the individual and devotion
to the betterment of the country. J. S. Mill’s _Autobiography_ shows
in its pages that Mill was actuated in his work by an unselfish and
devoted public spirit. High-minded patriots demand everyday devotion
to the country. Bosanquet tells us what patriotism means to him. He
says: “In their patriotism, their feeling for the community, Hegel
tells us, people are apt to follow their custom of being generous
before they are just, and excuse themselves by a potential romantic
magnanimity for a lack of prosaic everyday loyalty to the commonwealth.
But it is this latter, the sense of daily duty, which is real
patriotism--the foundation and seed-plot of the former.”[127]

This public spirit means, for one thing, that the individual himself
be a good citizen. “... Patriotism demands that, in ourselves, we
be good and true. The country’s worthy citizen must be personally
worthy,--emulous of culture, devoted to virtue. No man personally
dishonorable, can be patriotic in the highest degree.”[128] It means,
for another thing, that a man shall be interested in the welfare of
the people of his country. Although an enthusiasm for the people
sometimes weakens nationalistic feeling, as in the case of Tolstoy,
nevertheless patriotism often derives great strength from humanitarian
sympathy. This sympathy shows itself nowadays in the desire for a
greater measure of justice in the relations between the classes. In a
patriotic address, John Grier Hibben says: “In the throes of its new
birth the world today needs a new industrial conscience, a new sense
of social responsibility, a new standard of national integrity. We
must realize that the strength of a nation lies ultimately not in its
natural resources, or in its method of efficiency, or in its numerical
superiority, or in its army, or navy, but in its moral and spiritual
vigor.”[129] Even J. M. Robertson, who on the whole thinks that
patriotism is a bad thing, has for the nation an ideal of “scientific
social development.”[130] It is easy to see in his book that he has
a large sympathy with “the people” not only of other countries, but
also of his own. That is his patriotism. The International Reform
Bureau published a book entitled “Patriotic Studies.” And it was not,
as one might suppose, a series of learned articles on the subject
of Patriotism. It was a compilation of Congressional documents of
the years 1888-1905 for the study of public questions. The questions
treated in this volume were the following: “1. Moral and Social
Functions of Education. 2. Municipal Reform. 3. Immigration. 4. The
Lord’s Day and the Rest Day. 5. The Labor Problem. 6. The Family. 7.
National Reforms. 8. Amusements, With Special Reference to Purity.
9. Gambling. 10. Prevention and Punishment of Crime. 11. The Liquor
Problem. 12. The New Charity.”[131] All this was considered by an
International Bureau of Reform to be “patriotic studies.” Patriotism
then, reveals itself in the doing of those things that aim at the
true welfare of mankind within a country. And such activities are
patriotism. “In the peace movement, the temperance reform, the
judicious and practicable schemes for the abolition of bondage, the
attempts to discover a more Christian organization of society;--in
every association and all efforts that seek the highest welfare of man,
and prepare the way for his free culture and rightful enjoyment, as a
creature of God, the American idea justifies itself and culminates;
and by strengthening this tendency, and only thus can Patriotism be
faithful to its law, and vindicate its nature.”[132]

It is quite consistent with patriotism that the country should be
cherished as the servant of humanity. The ideal of service sometimes
becomes a reason for patriotism. Mazzini’s[133] patriotism was of
this kind. His ideal was that a nation should claim not its own
aggrandizement, but its right to serve humanity as a distinct group.
This kind of patriotism is that which Royce would recommend as an
example of the best loyalty. “Enlightened loyalty takes no delight in
great armies or in great navies for their own sake. If it consents to
them, it views them merely as transiently necessary calamities. It has
no joy in national prowess, except in so far as that prowess means
a furtherance of universal loyalty.... We want loyalty to loyalty
taught by helping many people to be loyal to their own special causes,
and by showing them that loyalty is a precious common human good, and
that it can never be a good to harm any man’s loyalty except solely in
necessary defense of our own loyalty.... And so, a cause is good, not
only for me, but for mankind, in so far as it is essentially a _loyalty
to loyalty_, that is, is an aid and a furtherance of loyalty in my
fellows.”[134] And Royce, in his last book, made the application to
patriotism: “Let us, with all our might, with whatever moral influence
we possess, with our own honor, with our lives if necessary, be ready,
if ever and whenever the call comes to our people, to sacrifice for
mankind as Belgium has sacrificed; to hazard all, as Belgium has
hazarded all, _for the truer union of mankind and for the future of
human brotherhood_”.[135] The truest patriot, from this point of view,
will be the man whose insight will reveal to him what his nation can
most naturally and best do for humanity, and who uses his powers to win
the devotion of the nation to the ideal of performing that service.

What conclusions now are yielded by the bearings of the reasons of
patriotism? Is patriotism either justified or discredited by them?
Once more it is apparent that no ground has been reached upon which
alone to base a general judgment. To begin with, no reason simply as
such is either good or bad; some of the reasons of patriotism are good
and some are evil. Moreover, these beliefs are often based merely upon
impulse and regimentation. There is “instinctive inference as well
as ... instinctive impulse.”[136] One will hunt reasons for what he
believes; many of his reasons are simply after-thoughts. And sometimes
beliefs are not as accurate as instincts and habits. A man’s feelings
may often have more meaning than his beliefs. So the fact that a thing
appears to be reasoned does not necessarily make it reasonable.

The reasons found in patriotism are another element adding to its
complexity. And the complexity is all the more involved because
impulses and habits have remained in patriotism along with reasons.
Patriotism is composed of all three,--impulses, habits, and reasons.
The nature of patriotism will have to be found in a concept that
unifies all these elements, and its ethical value can be clearly
assessed only in the light of that concept. Therefore, the nature and
value of patriotism will be the objects of attention in the remaining
chapters.




