PART III

THE BELIEFS OF PATRIOTISM




CHAPTER V

THE COUNTRY AS PROTECTOR OF SELF


Patriotism has reasons upon which it rests; it is not a mere
instinctive reaction, nor yet simply a habit.[66] Thought exists, and
men think. Graham Wallas says that there is an impulse to think. “This
independent action of Intelligence is, I believe, in its simplest
forms as ‘natural’ to us, as much due to inherited disposition, as is
the working of anyone of the usual list of instincts.”[67] There is
a rationale of patriotism. Patriotism may be unreasoned, but is not
for that necessarily unreasonable. It may coincide with the passions
of the masses, but may nevertheless rest on logical grounds, and on
ideals. It may be the object of conscious choice. The treatment of the
immigrant shows that we have a belief that patriotism can be chosen by
the individual. We insist on the loyalty of the German-American, which
being interpreted means that we are demanding loyalty to a country
of choice rather than to the country of birth. And for those born
Americans, we adopt the injunction of Tennyson,

  “Love thou thy land, with love far-brought
  From out the storied Past, and used
  Within the Present, but transfused
  Thro’ future time by power of thought.”[68]

The fact that men do think and have ideals is one of the very reasons
why patriotism is now so strong.

What are the reasons urged why one should be patriotic? One belief is
that one owes his earthly salvation to his country. It is a belief
that expresses on the level of consciousness the impulse to seek
safety and help. Men believe that the country is the protector in this
present world of all the values of life. It is the feeling that Spencer
expressed when he apostrophized the state in the following language: “I
supposed you were to act the part of an Argus-eyed and Briareus-armed
guardian, ever watching over my interests, ever ready to step in and
defend them; so that whether sleeping or waking, absorbed in business
or immersed in pleasure, I might have the gratifying consciousness of
being carefully shielded from injury.”[69] Webster appealed to the same
feeling in his reply to Hayne: “It is to that Union we owe our safety
at home, and our consideration and dignity abroad.... It has been to us
all a copious fountain of national, social, personal happiness.”[70]
And the patriot feels that for the protection that he has received he
must show his gratitude. In return for the blessings of the country,
he will offer up the sacrifice of patriotism. If one asks the plain
man why he is patriotic, why he thinks, for instance, that he ought to
enlist, the answer that is often made is that, “The country has done a
lot for me, and now she needs me. I am going to do what I can for my
country.”

The country affords protection within the group that it organizes.
And for this reason, the citizens will support the state. They feel
that government is a good thing; it guarantees justice and fair play.
And patriotism with them will grow out of that feeling. It will, of
course, be a give and take affair. It will not be selfless, altruistic
devotion. Patriotism of this kind demands that justice be consistently
dispensed. Most men will not long serve a state that treats them
unfairly. No patriotism will survive flagrant and continued injustice.
And, in truth, why should it? Green states the answer: “If the
authority of any government--its claim on our obedience--is held to be
derived not from an original covenant, or from any covenant, but from
the function which it serves in maintaining those conditions of freedom
which are conditions of the moral life, then no act of the people in
revocation of a prior act need be reckoned necessary to justify its
dissolution. _If it ceases to serve this function, it loses its claim
on our obedience._”[71]

A country is a peace unit. And men will welcome it as such, for there
is in men an impulse to peace. The state in modern times arose in
part as a keeper of the peace. The church was once the power that
policed Europe, and when that was so, men gave the church their supreme
allegiance. But the time came when the fear of God was no longer a
sufficient power to keep men in order, so it became necessary for some
other agency than the church to take up the task. Semi-official bodies
arose whose business it was to preserve peace, but they passed away.
There was then no power to keep the lawless forces in check. The nobles
of feudalism fought with one another, and were petty and irresponsible
tyrants over their people. Their regime became unbearable. Consequently
the people united with the kings, and a central power was established
that stopped the wars of the nobles and cities, and gave peace.

The state within its boundaries is the preserver of law and order. And
the discharge of that function recommends the state to its citizens.
Hobbes[72] exalted the state because of his desire for order. The
England of his day was torn by civil war. Even J. S. Mill[73]
expressed some sympathy with speculative Toryism, as for instance it
appeared in Wordsworth, because what it meant in such a case, Mill
said, was the proposition that man ought to be governed. Patriotic
eloquence takes account of the benefit that the state affords as the
preserver of the peace. Josiah Quincy, Jr., called for patriotic
loyalty to country on the ground that in it “Each individual, of
whatever condition, has the consciousness of living under known laws,
which secure equal rights, and guarantee to each whatever portion of
the goods of life, be it great or small, chance or talent or industry
may have bestowed.”[74]

The civilized life itself at present depends upon the state. The word
civilization is derived from a stem meaning “state.” Civilization is
that which is possible to men in states, that is, where peace, law,
and order prevail. The state has been a tremendous gain because it
has been a larger integration of men, a larger unit of coöperation.
Just that is its primary function,--to make it possible for men to
live together. And without the exercise of that function by the state,
we should be likely to be plunged back again into the chaos of petty
warring factions. Now patriotism gets connected with this desire that
government be preserved. The patriot is very apt to feel that if _his_
country should be destroyed, it would be a blow at the very foundations
of all government and safety. He connects civilization with his own
state, and feels that, “... they who assail the idea, the ideal, of
the country itself, assail all civilized life and, so far forth, are
suicides as well as traitors.”[75]

But the state does not stop with the bare maintenance of law and order.
It does other things which are believed to be for the general welfare.
It looks out for education, transportation, sanitation, the care of
the infirm, and so forth; it works for better social, industrial, and
class conditions. The state, in other words, is felt to have a right
to do all those things which will promote the welfare of mankind.
Mill said, “... it is not admissible that the protection of persons
and that of property are the sole purposes of government. The ends of
government are as comprehensive as those of the social union.”[76]
And Aristotle[77] intimated that the state should not only make bare
existence possible, but should promote the good life.

The result has been that men have taken an attitude toward the state
very much like the attitude that they have taken toward God. To many
people the state has become God. They feel that all the values of life
depend upon it, as Plato[78] felt that all the values of life depended
upon the state that he described. That does not mean that they go
directly to the state for everything that they want; they do not do
that with God. They simply expect the state somehow to guarantee these
values, and to supply them only as a last resort. But they will go to
it for everything that they want and which they can secure in no other
way. In the following quotation, the state is described in terms that
might almost refer to Providence: “No American boy or girl ... lived
a day, even, at the beginning of his life, when he was not protected
by the law of the United-States. From that moment the United-States
watched over him in ways perhaps which he never thought of. Perhaps the
school in which these words are read would not have existed except for
the United-States laws with regard to education. Very likely the bread
and butter which the boy had for breakfast could never have existed but
that the country called the United-States had made laws and carried on
government in such ways that the grain could be raised, that the cattle
could be fed, and the butter made. It is in a thousand such ways as
this that the country in which we live takes care of us in every hour
of our lives.... The tie which binds you and me to the country which
takes care of us is a tie as real and it involves duties as distinct
as the ties which bind a boy to his mother to whom he owes his life
and who has always taken care of him.”[79] What happens when a country
towards which men have felt in this way, calls for the allegiance of
its citizens? Their loyalty will be accorded it in the same measure as
the completeness with which they have trusted to it.

The state is the only institution in a given area that embodies the
general will, and consequently it federates the largest number of
loyalties among the people who live there. A class organization could
not federate so many loyalties. It could not be done, for instance, by
syndicalistic organizations.[80] If a man were a member of all such
organizations that he was eligible to, his whole life would still lack
unity. There must, then, be something that will unify the life of the
individual, and unify the whole of society. The fact of the matter is
that the state at the present time is, and in the predictable future is
likely to be, the factor which does this. And it is therefore likely
also to continue to draw the supreme loyalty of men.

One kind of patriotism is, then, based upon the belief that the country
is the preserver of law and order. If necessary, the patriot will place
himself at the service of the state in order to help it discharge
its function as a police power. And he feels it to be necessary also
to show his patriotism in his own obedience to the laws. In the
Crito,[81] Socrates, who had shown his patriotism upon the battlefield,
showed it again by submitting himself to the laws of that country which
by its institutions had nourished and protected him. Bosanquet cites
this action of Socrates, and himself adds the comment: “That is one
thing; true patriotism is the law-abiding spirit.”[82]

The state also acts as a protector against aggressions from without,
and on this account men cling to it. The patriot _fears_ other
nations; he believes that they are actuated by sinister designs. The
foe in patriotic songs and poetry is always ‘haughty’ and ‘wicked.’
He believes also that if the opportunity is presented, they will
work those sinister designs against his country. Nor is the fear
altogether groundless. To say the least, most governments cannot be
trusted to look after the interests of their competitors as well
as they look after their own, and the way in which the world is at
present organized makes it seem necessary for each nation to look
out for itself. Even Russell says that “the fear by which the State
is strengthened is reasonable under present circumstances.”[83] Then
why should not the state protect its own interests and the interests
of its citizens? The citizen himself will not admit that the state’s
protection should simply be limited to the prevention of the harm that
his fellow-citizens might do. He will say: “When we agreed that it was
the essential function of the state to protect--to administer the law
of equal freedom--to maintain men’s rights--we virtually assigned to
it the duty, not only of shielding each citizen from the trespasses
of his neighbours, but of defending him, in common with the community
at large, against foreign aggression.”[84] The efforts to provide
protection has indeed proved to be too big a job for even the state,
acting alone, and has led to alliances between states. Such alliance is
deemed essential. Diplomatic isolation could not now be tolerated by
scarcely any government or population but the most primitive. Perhaps
in this very direction lies a way to world internationalism. But the
protection is still state protection; the alliances themselves are the
results of the activities of states.

The fear of other states sometimes gets expressed as the belief that
_existence_ itself, both national and personal, is threatened. Loisy
gives vent to this belief: “Are we then right to be patriotic, even
at the risk of being less or not at all Christian? Doubtless; because
our only chance of living is bound up with our patriotism.”[85] What
he seems to fear is French extermination. But more often the patriot
believes that by his loyalty, his own and his country’s freedom are
preserved. Patriotism is a demand for freedom. Zimmerman a long time
ago pointed out that nearly every people glories in its real or
supposed freedom. “Not a few nations,” he says, “are seen resembling
the primitive Greeks, in overvaluing themselves on their real liberty;
and others, like the degenerate Greeks, priding themselves only on
the shadow of an antiquated liberty.”[86] The United States came into
existence only after a severe fight for liberty, and consequently
American patriotism has had the ideal of freedom deeply impressed upon
it. The words of Patrick Henry come the nearest to being classical.
“Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be purchased at the price
of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course
others may take; but as for me, give me liberty or give me death!”[87]
The Constitution enumerates liberty next to the possession of life
among the inalienable rights of men. Lincoln expressed it again in his
Gettysburg address. “... We here highly resolve that these dead shall
not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new
birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people,
and for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”[88] The notes
of freedom and self-rule of the people are the dominant ones in the
passage with which Lincoln closed the speech. It has been the President
of the United States who has most clearly and consistently defined the
aim of the Allies in this present war as that of making the world safe
for democracy, _i. e._, for freedom. But the countries which are called
autocratic also insist that they are fighting for freedom, and they are
proclaiming to their peoples that they are fighting on the defensive,
and in the cause of liberty. The ideal of freedom is dear to all.

Along with the demand for freedom goes the insistence that _those
things which are of great value_ to one shall be held sacred. The
defense of homes is a cause that arouses masculine patriotism. There
is an old saying found in Bacon that “Love of his country begins in a
man’s own house.”[89] The patriot will sacrifice for his home; and he
will die that his posterity may enjoy the privileges of a free country.

The _pursuit of happiness_ is another of the privileges that men
deem inalienable. And the pursuit of happiness in grown-ups seems to
be mostly the pursuit of trade. Consequently they will prize what
protects, and hate what threatens business. One hates the invader of
his country because he does not want the means of his livelihood to
pass under the control of an unsympathetic power. The land is the form
of wealth that is inevitably seized by the invader. And patriotism,
because of this, gains another connection with the soil. “...
Patriotism envelops the real estate because the real estate nourishes
the lives and careers of the patriots.... The emotions of loyalty
and value congregate about the ‘vital interests’ of our lives.”[90]
The laying on of burdens of taxation too grievous to be borne is an
unwarrantable interference with the pursuit of happiness. And so
patriotism often starts over taxes. It was so in the formation of the
United States. The following extract from a speech by Samuel Adams
to the newly elected representatives to the Massachusetts colonial
legislature from Boston, will show what the drift then was: “... As
you represent a town which lives by its trade,” he said, “we expect
in a very particular manner, though you make it the object of your
attention to support our commerce in all its just rights, to vindicate
it from all unreasonable impositions and promote its prosperity.”[91]
The trader looks to his government for protection, and when he receives
it, he has a particular reason for desiring the continued good health
of his country. The same holds true of workingmen. John Dewey says:
“... The simple fact of the case is that at present workingmen have
more to gain from their own national state in the way of legislative
and administrative concessions than they have from some other state, or
from any international organization.”[92] And as long as this is true,
tradesmen, laborers, and all others who have anything to gain by it
will be patriots, and violent patriots.

What kind of patriotism is it that rests upon the belief in one’s
country as the protector of self? Is it patriotism at all? It is
not that disinterested love of country that the common man has been
formally taught to regard as patriotism. But it is loyalty to country,
and whatever answers to that description must be patriotism. It no
doubt makes the state a kind of business affair. The primary motive
is that of prudence. A man defends his country because he needs it.
But some men serve God in that way, and we call it religion. And so
this profit-and-loss attachment to country may come under the term
patriotism. One reason, therefore, for patriotism is that the country
is needful for the protection of life’s values. But, on the other
hand, the attachment to country is not patriotism, if the country is
looked at _merely_ as means. Patriotism views the country somehow as
end. If the real and only motive which is getting expressed is that of
self-interest, any show of patriotism is after all mere _camouflage_.
The point is that men will actually come to feel real gratitude and
love for the country which has protected them. It is a psychological
fact that affection attaches itself to what has been useful. In this
way and for this reason, affection attaches itself to country, and
becomes patriotism.




