
  A Critical Analysis of Patriotism
  As an Ethical Concept


  BY
  CLARENCE REIDENBACH


  A DISSERTATION
  PRESENTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE
  GRADUATE SCHOOL OF YALE UNIVERSITY
  IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF
  DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
  MAY 1, 1918




  TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                              Page

  PART I. THE IMPULSES OF PATRIOTISM

  Chapter I. The Impulses of Attachment                          9

  Chapter II. The Impulses of Antipathy                         16


  PART II. THE HABITUATION OF PATRIOTISM

  Chapter III. The Deliberate Habituation                       27

  Chapter IV. The Spontaneous Habituation                       35


  PART III. THE BELIEFS OF PATRIOTISM

  Chapter V. The Country as Protector of Self                   45

  Chapter VI. The Oneness of Country and Self                   52

  Chapter VII. The Intrinsic Value of One’s Country             57


  PART IV. THE NATURE AND VALUE OF PATRIOTISM

  Chapter VIII. The Will to National Individuality              71

  Chapter IX. The Nation as an Individual                       85

  Chapter X. The Ethical Value of Patriotism in the
  Concrete                                                      99


  NOTES


  BIBLIOGRAPHY




PREFACE


Patriotism is a live issue. It is almost impossible for any one to be
neutral about it. All men seem to feel that the issue involved is one
that touches the fundamental interests of their lives. Patriotism is an
important concept.

But not all men take the same stand regarding patriotism. There is hot
disagreement upon the question of its moral value. Some champion it
as one of the noblest of all virtues; others spurn it as one of the
basest. Therefore it is highly desirable to arrive at a fair judgment
of the ethical value of patriotism.

One of the chief reasons for the radical disagreement about the
morality of patriotism is that there are widely different assumptions
as to its nature. It is a sentiment of manifold varieties, and the word
patriotism may carry quite different implications to different minds.
The first necessary step, then, before one can pass an ethical judgment
upon it, is to find out what the core of patriotism is.

This dissertation begins, therefore, by undertaking to determine the
nature of patriotism, and with no more of a clue in hand than the one
that it is “the love of country” tries, by an inductive investigation
of what has actually been called patriotism, to bring together the
important facts in which patriotism is manifested. Hence, while the
main purpose of the essay is an ethical one, a large portion of it
is given to inductive analysis. The first three parts are mainly
analytical. The fourth part endeavors to unify in a central concept the
data gathered together in the preceding parts, and, in the light of
that concept and all the facts, to evaluate patriotism as an ethical
ideal. It may be noted here that the first three parts are printed
as they were in the typewritten form presented to Yale University as
a thesis, but that part four has undergone much rearrangement and
revision. Chapter eight has been largely rewritten; chapter nine is
entirely new; and what here appears as chapter ten has been somewhat
changed.

Acknowledgement is hereby made to the members of the faculty of
the department of philosophy in Yale University for many helpful
criticisms. Especially is a debt owed to Professor Charles A.
Bennett, who suggested the field of patriotism as a fruitful one for
investigation, under whose direction the work was done, and whose
criticisms and suggestions have made more definite than would otherwise
have been the case, the problems involved. Thanks are due to Professor
Luther A. Weigle, who read the manuscript, and helped to clarify and
make accurate the expression of the ideas. And my gratitude is given to
my wife, whose assistance in the final preparation of the manuscript
was invaluable, and who by her constant helpfulness and loyalty made it
possible for the whole work to be brought to completion.

Indianapolis, January, 1920.




  PART I

  THE IMPULSES OF PATRIOTISM




CHAPTER I

THE IMPULSES OF ATTACHMENT


When in 1914 the great war broke out, the world was astounded. There
were forces at work which men were confident would make another
war between first-class powers impossible. International relations
and groupings, such as those of commerce, labor, art, science, and
learning, had increased in strength and number. The terribleness and
waste of war were deemed to be so fully realized that modern nations
would have no taste for armed conflict. But the war came on, and
there must have been mighty causes to be able to produce so gigantic
a result. What were they? What could be the nature of such tremendous
causes, that yet remained concealed and in their issuance so took men
by surprise? The factors were various, and some, of course, had been
noted, but one factor which was unnoticed by the general public and yet
which is one of fundamental importance is the rôle taken in patriotism
by men’s unreasoned dispositions of character. If the phenomenon of
patriotism is to be fully understood, it must be analyzed with a
view of discovering what are these deeply ingrained sets of mind and
character which are its raw material and which make it so powerful.[1]

Patriotism is a complex sentiment. There is, in other words, no single
instinctive response in all human beings to the stimulus, country.
What, then, are some of the dispositions of which patriotism is
composed? There are impulses which make primarily for attachment,
and there are those that make primarily for antipathy. One of the
most important of the impulses of attachment is the disposition of
gregariousness. Hobbes, indeed, and others after him, built their
theories of the state upon the doctrine that man would have been able
to live alone had not the company of others been forced upon him, but
that there is an impulse of gregariousness seems indisputable. It is
simply an observable fact that there are species of animals that not
only live in herds, packs, or flocks, but which also show uneasiness
and distress at being separated from their fellows. James cites the
observation of Galton on the gregariousness of the South African
cattle.[2] If an individual of this species were separated from the
herd it would direct its whole activity towards getting back once
more, and when its object was attained, would plunge into the heart
of the herd as if to bathe its very body in contact with its fellows.
Now man, as well as other animals, lives a group life, and it seems
almost inevitable that he should develop an impulse parallel to the
outward facts of his existence, even were it not probable that he has
inherited gregariousness as a psychical disposition from his animal
ancestors. That the impulse is actually present in the human species
is shown by the fact that there is in man a strong abhorrence of
prolonged solitude. Professor James’ words on this point have come to
be almost classical: “To be alone is one of the greatest evils for him
[the normal man]. Solitary confinement is by many regarded as a mode of
torture too cruel and unnatural for civilized countries to adopt. To
one long pent up on a desert island the sight of a human footprint or
a human form in the distance would be the most tumultuously exciting
of experiences.”[3] But the impulse is also apparent in more normal
experiences. So much do men desire the company of others that it is not
only an element of recreation usually, but the more serious tasks of
life often derive their value not more because of the ostensible end
sought after than because of the human association which is involved.

Wilfred Trotter[4] has made gregariousness central in his study
of society. He begins by approving of the method of those who
have come at the study from the standpoint of the instincts, but
expresses dissatisfaction with the limits of their results, that
is, dissatisfaction with the kind of analysis that would explain
man by referring the whole of his conduct to the instincts of
self-preservation, nutrition, and sex. Such an explanation, he finds,
has been historically attempted, but after it has gone as far as it
could, there has always been left over an unexplained X. Trotter
accepts self-preservation, nutrition, and sex as fundamental instincts,
but completes the list by bringing forward the instinct of the herd
which he offers as the explanation of all human activity which was
left unexplained by the other three instincts mentioned above. To
Trotter there have been two great epoch-making forward steps in the
evolution of life. The first came with the change from unicellular
to multicellular organisms, the great advantage of which was to make
the _group_ of cells the unit of selection, thus to some extent
relieving the single cell of the burden of the struggle for existence,
and permitting it a greater chance for variability without running
a greater risk of extinction. This arrangement, says Trotter, had
important influences upon all the cells comprised in the organism. The
second great evolutionary advance came with the change from solitary to
gregarious animals, and was attended by modifications just as profound
as had accompanied the advance from unicellular to multicellular
organisms. Here again the power of natural evolution operated upon the
group as a unit, thus permitting once more greater variability on the
part of the individual. Association in the herd became increasingly
valuable in the struggle for existence, and tended to become more and
more strongly fixed as a disposition of animal nature, a fact which
had fundamental influence upon the mental characteristics of the
individual. There are psychological traits which would not exist but
for the fact of gregariousness. Shyness, embarrassment, fear, anger,
love, sympathy, sorrow, and gratitude would be devoid of meaning apart
from their connection with social relations.

The first important result of the instinct of gregariousness is that
it makes for homogeneity. That is, it is an impulse making primarily
for attachment. Each individual tends to become thoroughly assimilated
in the life of the group; the group’s ways have a vital meaning to
him. Sensitiveness to the behavior of his fellows is heightened, and
resistiveness to the suggestions of the herd is lowered. A suggestion
from outside is likely to be rejected, and direct experience tends to
have little meaning, if its teachings are at variance with the beliefs
of the group. Altruism arises; it is a natural product of the situation
where the conditions of life are such that each individual is of
necessity constantly in the habit of regarding the welfare of others
as well as that of himself. Danger from the outside stimulates each
individual, and spreads fear through the whole group. The herd huddles
together, and each shares in the panic of all. Loneliness at such a
time is unbearable.

Now man is a social creature, and has the characteristics that result
from herd instinct. He tends to become solidified with those of his
own kind, and feel uncomfortable when out of touch with them; to be
suggestible to the influences of his group, and resistive to the
influences of other groups; to feel altruism towards those of his own
herd and aversion towards those of other herds; to be aroused when the
nation is threatened, and huddle in the group in the face of danger.
All these characteristics under the proper stimuli are manifested
by patriotism. A definition of patriotism from the standpoint of
attachment to the group is that of Sumner: “Patriotism is loyalty to
the civic group to which one belongs by birth or other group bond. It
is a sentiment of fellowship and coöperation in all the hopes, work,
and sufferings of the group.[5]

The herd is not tolerant of the nonconformist. The nonconformist has
in a way become a stranger. He has put himself out of touch with the
group. The group knows him and his ways, but he has not permitted
himself to be thoroughly assimilated by it. And the very thing that
the herd desires and insists upon is homogeneity. In the words of one
writer, “The crowd not only needs to make adherents and thus maintain
its existence and increase in volume and power; it needs no less to
assimilate, to digest, the individuals which it swallows up.”[6] The
individual, then, cannot be too insistent upon the expression of his
own personality. His life, even his inner life, must conform to that of
the group. His emotions will not be a matter merely of his own concern.
“Herd-union does not intensify all emotions. It intensifies those
which are felt in common, but it actually deadens and shuts down those
which are only felt by the individual.”[7] And independent thought is
even more taboo. “Thought ... is markedly individual and personal....
Thought is critical, and the Herd wants unanimity, not criticism.
Consequently Herd-union deadens thought.”[8] Hence the nonconformist
gets himself disliked, and the outcome of the situation has usually
been to submerge the individual, and assimilate him to the group. The
moral of the tale is that patriotism acts in that way. “Patriotism,
which is the crowd-emotion of a Nation, makes at times supreme claims
on every citizen and enforces them by public opinion so powerful that
few can or desire to evade them.”[9]

These observations throw light upon the question whether patriotism
is a _political_ or _national_ emotion. Is patriotism attachment to
the government or state, or is it love of one’s national group? There
can be no doubt that it is the latter rather than the former. It is an
outgrowth of tribal feeling. Bertrand Russell is only overstating a
truth when he says that “Tribal feeling, which always underlay loyalty
to the sovereign, has remained as strong as it ever was, and is now the
chief support for the power of the State.”[10]

There is an egoistic element in the attachment of patriotism. It is an
adhesion to one’s own, and one’s own is but an extension of himself.
Patriotism is a personal matter. That is, it is based upon a personal
relationship. One cleaves to his group not on account of its intrinsic
worth simply but because of what it is worth _to him_. The majority
of men are most loyal to what is nearest themselves. Each one of them
seems to himself to be the center of his sphere, and things vary in
importance in direct ratio to their nearness to the center. This fact
gives the key to a very common kind of patriotism. It is simply the
loyalty that men feel to the extension of their own ego.

“One’s own” includes the people of his group, _i. e._, the people who
are most like himself. These people share many things in common with
himself. They have similar habits and customs, and all this conduces to
render them one’s own. “One’s own” also includes the soil. It is that
which is beneath one’s very feet; it sustains one; it nourishes one.
Furthermore, one knows it as he cannot know any strange land, and as no
stranger can know his land. He lives in it throughout the whole year,
and knows it intimately in all its peculiarities and changing moods.
Consequently, his patriotism has in it a love of the “land where his
fathers died.” Virgil understood the meaning of this love of the soil.
He himself felt it keenly, and because of it refused to accept the old
home estate of a Roman sent into exile. It was characteristic that he
made Æneas lament Troy even when he was going out to establish Rome
itself. It was because of this understanding, in part at least, that he
was led to urge the Romans to get back to the soil, realizing that from
a love of _the soil_ to a love of _our soil_ is but a step.[11]

However, what one has been used to should not be taken as the only
kind of the patriotism of attachment that there is. If adhesion to
one’s own could not be overcome, loyalty to one’s earliest home would
quite uniformly be stronger than patriotism. But sometimes one begins
to feel that his childhood was spent in cramped quarters, and that
his early opinions were inadequate. The emotion that he may be very
likely to feel under such conditions is not that of affection but
that of contempt and disgust. Quite often when there is a conflict
between loyalty to the nation and loyalty to the community, loyalty to
the nation proves the stronger. Another indication that men are not
inseparably bound to what they have been used to is that they change
their nation, adopt another country, and side with it even against
the country of their birth. Some time ago there appeared in one of
the large newspapers a letter from a naturalized German in which was
this sentence: “Perhaps you would appreciate your American citizenship
better if, like me, you had been born and brought up in Germany.”[12]

A reason for this attachment to one’s own is the impulse which impels
one to want to feel at home in his world. It is an impulse which craves
order; and it shows itself in a desire for a unified world. There
seems to be an esthetic element in it; the normal mind with a sense of
beauty cannot endure chaos. It represents a rational demand; it is, for
instance, a driving force in philosophy. It finds another root in the
desire for safety. One wants a friendly world in which he feels sure
of himself and where he can live freely without being troubled by the
strange or unknown. Now one’s country presents a world that he knows
and can find his way in; consequently, it satisfies this demand for a
unified world organized about one’s own life, and by virtue of this
character it is able to furnish an additional item in the stimuli to
patriotism.

Man is attached to his country very much as he is attached to himself;
he could not very well help the one any more than he could help the
other. But what is in one way a mere expression of egoism becomes also
an affection. Unless there is some special reason for the contrary,
one is likely to cherish a real affection for that with which he has
long been associated, and especially so, if it has been of use to him.
This fact gives justification for the popular definition of patriotism
as “the _love_ of country.” This affection even may be selfish, but
it may also take on a more altruistic character. Altruism naturally
and perforce develops in a gregarious society. And, moreover, the
parental instinct adds its strength. The protection of the home is a
strong sentiment in patriotism. And the tender emotion of the parental
instinct may be extended to others besides offspring. Patriotism
gets colored by it, and becomes very much like it. McDougall says
that, “Like the fully developed parental sentiment, the patriotism
of many men is a fusion of this quasi-altruistic extension of
the self-regarding sentiment with the truly altruistic sentiment
of love.”[13] Patriotism is, then, in part egoistic and in part
altruistic. In a nation beset with enemies it will indeed take the form
of animosity toward the enemy, but in a prosperous nation will direct
itself very frequently to internal improvement. And it may be said that
it retains something of altruism as well as egoism even in war. It is,
even while being combative towards the _out-group_, altruistic towards
the _in-group_.[14]

The spirit of attachment in patriotism may even go so far as to
become a worship. Religious impulse has frequently been an element
in patriotism. Religion and patriotism were almost the same thing
in Israel. But there are modern parallels. A clergyman not long ago
was reported to have said that the men who died upon the field of
battle (he was thinking of men of his own nation) would straightway
reach heaven, since they had died for their fellow men. It is evident
that being a patriot held something of a religious fervor for that
clergyman. Probably the Kaiser feels a religious exaltation which
sustains him in the belief that he is the instrument of God.

Alfred Loisy[15] opposes Christianity and patriotism to one another,
much to the credit of patriotism. According to Loisy, the teachings of
Christianity and patriotism are incompatible, and those of Christianity
are quite inadequate for the present crisis. Therefore patriotism is
much nobler and not only should but will supplant Christianity. The
only living faith, so he says, is that of devotion to one’s country.
For that men will sacrifice. “Certainly,” says Loisy, “it is an august
life for which a man will sacrifice his own without grudging it; but
it is not for a blessed immortality in the company of Christ and the
saints; it is for the life of the country.”[16] This account of what
Loisy says is set down here not so much because it gives an idea of
patriotism, but because through it Loisy passionately expresses his
own ideal. In his book there breathes a most intense love for France.
This love, he says, is the absorbing passion of the people of France,
and is what unites them. Again we quote his own words: “There are a
faith and love in which it [the army] is unanimous [as against the
lack of unanimity in Christianity]: the love of our country, and an
imperishable belief in her future; over these sentiments, all are in
communion, and the whole country agrees with the army. Here is our
common religion: one which has no unbelievers; in which those who are
faithful to the old creed may fraternize indiscriminately with the
adherents of the newer principles.... Differences [of religion] count
no longer in face of the absorbing interest, the burning passion, the
true religion, both of this and of every moment, namely devotion to the
immortality of France.”[17] “So long as we live, we are determined to
live in our own way; and that which gives us our vigour now against the
invader is neither a lust of conquest, nor the hate which an unjust,
cruel, and fanatical enemy deserves, but the love of our ancient
France, who is our all, whom we yearn to preserve, and whom we are
vowed to save.”[18] Here is a devotion which amounts to a religion,
and it furnishes an example of the working of the religious impulse in
patriotism.

It is not yet time to draw final conclusions, but it is not out of
place to note in passing that patriotism was not condemned by its
egoistic ingredients, and is not now justified by its elements of
altruism. Viewed as a religion, one may say that it is too likely
to become fanatical. The willingness to die upon the battlefield,
rather than goodness, becomes the final test of the desirable citizen.
Moreover, the injury worked upon others is apt to be overlooked.
As a religion, patriotism has the strength, but not the necessary
universality. What it does is wrongly to elevate _a good_ to the
standard of _the Good_.




