CHAPTER II

THE THREE ELEMENTS OF RELIGION


INTRODUCTORY.

We have found then that all life and all truth are, for all their
unity, deeply complex, for us men at all events; indeed that they
are both in exact proportion to their reality. In this, our second
chapter, I should like to show the complexity special to the deepest
kind of life, to Religion; and to attempt some description of the
working harmonization of this complexity. If Religion turned out to
be simple, in the sense of being a monotone, a mere oneness, a whole
without parts, it could not be true; and yet if Religion be left too
much a mere multiplicity, a mere congeries of parts without a whole, it
cannot be persuasive and fully operative. And the several constituents
are there, whether we harbour, recognize, and discipline them or not;
but these constituents will but hinder or supplant each other, in
proportion as they are not somehow each recognized in their proper
place and rank, and are not each allowed and required to supplement
and to stimulate the other. And though no amount of talk or theory
can, otherwise than harmfully, take the place of life, yet observation
and reflection can help us to see where and how life acts: what are
the causes, or at least the concomitants, of its inhibition and of
its stimulation and propagation, and can thus supply us with aids to
action, which action will then, in its turn, help to give experimental
fulness and precision to what otherwise remains a more or less vague
and empty scheme.


I. THE THREE ELEMENTS, AS THEY SUCCESSIVELY APPEAR IN THE CHILD, THE
YOUTH, AND THE ADULT MAN.

Now if we will but look back upon our own religious life, we shall
find that, in degrees and in part in an order of succession varying
indefinitely with each individual, three modalities, three modes of
apprehension and forms of appeal and of outlook, have been and are at
work within us and around.[34]


1. _Sense and Memory, the Child’s means of apprehending Religion._

In the doubtless overwhelming majority of cases, there came first,
as far as we can reconstruct the history of our consciousness, the
appeal to our infant senses of some external religious symbol or place,
some picture or statue, some cross or book, some movement of some
attendant’s hands and eyes. And this appeal would generally have been
externally interpreted to us by some particular men or women, a Mother,
Nurse, Father, Teacher, Cleric, who themselves would generally have
belonged to some more or less well-defined traditional, institutional
religion. And their appeal would be through my senses to my imaginative
faculty first, and then to my memory of that first appeal, and would
represent the principle of authority in its simplest form.

All here as yet works quasi-automatically. The little child gets
these impressions long before itself can choose between, or even is
distinctly conscious of them; it believes whatever it sees and is told,
equally, as so much fact, as something to build on. If you will, it
believes these things to be true, but not in the sense of contrasting
them with error; the very possibility of the latter has not yet come
into sight. And at this stage the External, Authoritative, Historical,
Traditional, Institutional side and function of Religion are everywhere
evident. Cases like that of John Stuart Mill, of being left outside of
all religious tradition, we may safely say, will ever remain exceptions
to help prove the rule. The five senses then, perhaps that of touch
first, and certainly that of sight most; the picturing and associative
powers of the imagination; and the retentiveness of the memory, are
the side of human nature specially called forth. And the external,
sensible, readily picturable facts and the picturing functions of
religion correspond to and feed this side, as readily as does the
mother’s milk correspond to and feed that same mother’s infant.
Religion is here, above all, a Fact and Thing.



2. _Question and Argument, the Youth’s mode of approaching Religion._

But soon there wakes up another activity and requirement of human
nature, and another side of religion comes forth to meet it. Direct
experience, for one thing, brings home to the child that these
sense-informations are not always trustworthy, or identical in its own
case and in that of others. And, again, the very impressiveness of this
external religion stimulates indeed the sense of awe and of wonder, but
it awakens curiosity as well. The time of trustful questioning, but
still of questioning, first others, then oneself, has come. The old
impressions get now more and more consciously sought out, and selected
from among other conflicting ones; the facts seem to clamour for
reasons to back them, against the other hostile facts and appearances,
or at least against those men in books, if not in life, who dare to
question or reject them. Affirmation is beginning to be consciously
exclusive of its contrary: I begin to feel that _I_ hold _this_, and
that _you_ hold _that_; and that I cannot do both; and that I do the
former, and exclude and refuse the latter.

Here it is the reasoning, argumentative, abstractive side of human
nature that begins to come into play. Facts have now in my mind to
be related, to be bound to other facts, and men to men; the facts
themselves begin to stand for ideas or to have the latter in them
or behind them. The measuring-rod seems to be over all things. And
religion answers this demand by clear and systematic arguments and
concatenations: this and this is now connected with that and that; this
is true or this need not be false, because of that and that. Religion
here becomes Thought, System, a Philosophy.


3. _Intuition, Feeling, and Volitional requirements and evidences, the
Mature Man’s special approaches to Faith._

But yet a final activity of human nature has to come to its fullest,
and to meet its response in a third side of Religion. For if in
Physiology and Psychology all action whatsoever is found to begin with
a sense-impression, to move through the central process of reflection,
and to end in the final discharge of will and of action, the same final
stage can be found in the religious life. Certain interior experiences,
certain deep-seated spiritual pleasures and pains, weaknesses and
powers, helps and hindrances, are increasingly known and felt in and
through interior and exterior action, and interior suffering, effort,
and growth. For man is necessarily a creature of action, even more
than of sensation and of reflection; and in this action of part of
himself against other parts, of himself with or against other men,
with or against this or that external fact or condition, he grows and
gradually comes to his real self, and gains certain experiences as to
the existence and nature and growth of this his own deeper personality.

Man’s emotional and volitional, his ethical and spiritual powers, are
now in ever fuller motion, and they are met and fed by the third side
of religion, the Experimental and Mystical. Here religion is rather
felt than seen or reasoned about, is loved and lived rather than
analyzed, is action and power, rather than either external fact or
intellectual verification.


II. EACH ELEMENT EVER ACCOMPANIED BY SOME AMOUNT OF THE OTHER TWO.
DIFFICULTY OF THE TRANSITIONS FROM ONE STAGE TO THE OTHER.

Now these three sides of the human character, and corresponding three
elements of Religion, are never, any one of them, without a trace
or rudiment of the other two; and this joint presence of three such
disparate elements ever involves tension, of a fruitful or dangerous
kind.[35]


1. _Utility of this joint presence._

In the living human being indeed there never exists a mere apprehension
of something external and sensible, without any interior elaboration,
any interpretation by the head and heart. We can hardly allow, we
can certainly in nowise picture to ourselves, even an infant of a
few hours old, as working, and being worked upon, by nothing beyond
these sense-perceptions alone. Already some mental, abstractive,
emotional-volitional reaction and interpretation is presumably at
work; and not many weeks or months pass before this is quite obviously
the case. And although, on the other hand, the impressions of the
senses, of the imagination and the memory are, normally, more numerous,
fresh, and lasting in early than in later years, yet up to the end
they continue to take in some new impressions, and keep up their most
necessary functions of supplying materials, stimulants, and tests to
the other powers of the soul.

Thus, too, Religion is at all times more or less both traditional
and individual; both external and internal; both institutional,
rational, and volitional. It always answers more or less to the needs
of authority and society; of reason and proof; of interior sustenance
and purification. I believe because I am told, because it is true,
because it answers to my deepest interior experiences and needs. And,
everything else being equal, my faith will be at its richest and
deepest and strongest, in so far as all these three motives are most
fully and characteristically operative within me, at one and the same
time, and towards one and the same ultimate result and end.



2. _The two crises of the soul, when it adds Speculation to
Institutionalism, and Mysticism to both._

Now all this is no fancy scheme, no petty or pretty artificial
arrangement: the danger and yet necessity of the presence of these
three forces, the conflicts and crises within and between them all,
in each human soul, and between various men and races that typify or
espouse one or the other force to the more or less complete exclusion
of the other, help to form the deepest history, the truest tragedy or
triumph of the secret life of every one of us.

The transition from the child’s religion, so simply naïve and
unselfconscious, so tied to time and place and particular persons and
things, so predominantly traditional and historical, institutional and
external, to the right and normal type of a young man’s religion, is
as necessary as it is perilous. The transition is necessary. For all
the rest of him is growing,--body and soul are growing in clamorous
complexity in every direction: how then can the deepest part of his
nature, his religion, not require to grow and develop also? And how can
it permeate and purify all the rest, how can it remain and increasingly
become “the secret source of all his seeing,” of his productiveness and
courage and unification, unless it continually equals and exceeds all
other interests within the living man, by its own persistent vitality,
its rich and infinite variety, its subtle, ever-fresh attraction and
inexhaustible resourcefulness and power? But the crisis is perilous.
For he will be greatly tempted either to cling exclusively to his
existing, all but simply institutional, external position, and to fight
or elude all approaches to its reasoned, intellectual apprehension
and systematization; and in this case his religion will tend to
contract and shrivel up, and to become a something simply alongside
of other things in his life. Or he will feel strongly pressed to let
the individually intellectual simply supplant the institutional, in
which case his religion will grow hard and shallow, and will tend to
disappear altogether. In the former case he will, at best, assimilate
his religion to external law and order, to Economics and Politics;
in the latter case he will, at best, assimilate it to Science and
Philosophy. In the first case, he will tend to superstition; in the
second, to rationalism and indifference.

But even if he passes well through this first crisis, and has thus
achieved the collaboration of these two religious forces, the external
and the intellectual, his religion will still be incomplete and
semi-operative, because still not reaching to what is deepest and
nearest to his will. A final transition, the addition of the third
force, that of the emotional-experimental life, must yet be safely
achieved. And this again is perilous: for the two other forces will,
even if single, still more if combined, tend to resist this third
force’s full share of influence to the uttermost. To the external
force this emotional power will tend to appear as akin to revolution;
to the intellectual side it will readily seem mere subjectivity and
sentimentality ever verging on delusion. And the emotional-experimental
force will, in its turn, be tempted to sweep aside both the external,
as so much oppressive ballast; and the intellectual, as so much
hair-splitting or rationalism. And if it succeeds, a shifting
subjectivity, and all but incurable tyranny of mood and fancy, will
result,--fanaticism is in full sight.


III. PARALLELS TO THIS TRIAD OF RELIGIOUS ELEMENTS.

If we would find, applied to other matters, the actual operation and
co-operation, at the earliest stage of man’s life, of the identical
powers under discussion, we can find them, by a careful analysis of our
means and processes of knowledge, or of the stages of all reflex action.


1. _The three constituents of Knowledge._

Even the most elementary acquisition, indeed the very possibility,
of any and all certitude and knowledge, is dependent for us upon the
due collaboration of the three elements or forces of our nature, the
sensational, the rational, the ethico-mystical.[36]

There is, first, in the order of our consciousness and in the degree of
its undeniableness, the element of our actual impressions, the flux of
our consciousness as it apprehends particular sights and sounds, smells
and tastes and touches; particular sensations of rest and movement,
pleasure and pain, memory, judgment, and volition, a flux, “changeless
in its ceaseless change.” We have so far found neither a true object
for thought, nor a subject which can think. And yet this element,
and this alone, is the simply, passively received, the absolutely
undeniable part of our experience,--we cannot deny it if we would. And
again, it is the absolutely necessary pre-requisite for our exercise or
acquisition, indeed for our very consciousness, of the other two means
or elements, without which there can be no real knowledge.

For there is, next in the logical order of the analysis of our
consciousness and in the degree of its undeniableness, the element
of the various forms of necessary thought, in as much as these are
experienced by us as necessary. We can, with Aristotle, simply call
them the ten categories; or we can, with greater precision and
extension, group them, so far with Kant, under the two main heads
of the two pure “aesthetic” Perceptions of time and space, on the
one hand; and of the various “analytic” Forms of judgment and of the
Categories of Unity, Reality, Substance, Possibility, etc., on the
other hand. Now it can be shown that it is only by means of this whole
second element, only through the co-operation of these “perceptions”
and forms of thought, that any kind even of dim feeling of ordered
succession or of system, of unity or meaning, is found by our mind in
that first element. Only these two elements, found and taken together,
present us, in their interaction, with even the impression and
possibility of something to reason _about_, and something _wherewith_
to reason.

The second element then differs from the first in this, that whereas
the first presents its contents simply as actual and undeniable, yet
without so far any necessity or significance: the second presents its
contents as both actual and necessary. By means of the first element
I see a red rose, but without any feeling of more than the fact that a
rose, or at least this one, _is_ red; it might quite as well be yellow
or blue. By means of the second element, I think of a body of any kind,
not only as actually occupying some particular space and time, but as
_necessarily_ doing so; I feel that I _must_ so think of it.

And yet there is a third and last element necessary to give real
value to the two previous ones. For only on the condition that I
am willing to trust these intimations of necessity, to believe
that these necessities of my subjective thought are objective as
well, and correspond to the necessities of Being, can I reach the
trans-subjective, can I have any real knowledge and experience of
anything whatsoever, either within me or without. The most elementary
experience, the humblest something to be granted as really existing
and as to be reasoned from, is thus invariably and inevitably composed
for me of three elements, of which only the first two are directly
experienced by me at all. And the third element, the ethico-mystical,
has to be there, I have to trust and endorse the intimations of
necessity furnished by the second element, if anything is to come of
the whole movement.

Thus, here also, at the very source of all our certainty, of the worth
attributable to the least or greatest of our thoughts and feelings
and acts, we already find the three elements: indubitable sensation,
clear thought, warm faith in and through action. And thus life here
already consists of multiplicity in unity; and what in it is absolutely
indubitable, is of value only because it constitutes the indispensable
starting-point and stimulation for the apprehension and affirmation
of realities not directly experienced, not absolutely undeniable, but
which alone bear with them all the meaning, all the richness, all the
reality and worth of life.



2. _The three links in the chain of Reflex Action._

We can also find this same triad, perhaps more simply, if we look
to Psychology, and that most assured and most far-reaching of all
its results, the fact and analysis of Reflex Action. For we find
here that all the activities of specifically human life begin with a
sense-impression, as the first, the one simply _given_ element; that
they move into and through a central process of mental abstraction and
reflection, as the second element, contributed by the mind itself; and
that they end, as the third element, in the discharge of will and of
action, in an act of free affirmation, expansion, and love.

In this endless chain composed of these groups of three links each,
the first link and the last link are obscure and mysterious: the
first, as coming from without us, and as still below our own thought;
the third, as going out from us, and seen by us only in its external
results, never in its actual operation, nor in its effect upon our
own central selves. Only the middle link is clear to us. And yet the
most mysterious part of the whole process, the effect of it all upon
the central self, is also the most certain and the most important
result of the whole movement, a movement which ever culminates in a
modification of the personality and which prepares this personality for
the next round of sense-perception, intellectual abstraction, ethical
affirmation and volitional self-determination,--acts in which light and
love, fixed and free, hard and cold and warm, are so mysteriously, so
universally, and yet so variously linked.


IV. DISTRIBUTION OF THE THREE ELEMENTS AMONGST MANKIND AND THROUGHOUT
HUMAN HISTORY.

Let us now watch and see where and how the three elements of Religion
appear among the periods of man’s life, the human professions, and
the races of mankind; then how they succeed each other in history
generally; and finally how they exist among the chief types and phases
of the Oriental, Classical Graeco-Roman, and Judaeo-Christian religions.


1. _The Elements: their distribution among man’s various ages, sexes,
professions, and races._

We have already noticed how children incline to the memory-side, to
the external, social type; and it is well they should do so, and
they should be wisely helped therein. Those passing through the
storm-and-stress period insist more upon the reason, the internal,
intellectual type; and mature souls lay stress upon the feelings
and the will, the internal, ethical type. So again, women generally
tend either to an excess of the external, to superstition; or of the
emotional, to fanaticism. Men, on the contrary, appear generally
to incline to an excess of the intellectual, to rationalism and
indifference.

Professions, too, both by the temperaments which they presuppose, and
the habits of mind which they foster, have various affinities. The
fighting, administrative, legal and political sciences and services,
readily incline to the external and institutional; the medical,
mathematical, natural science studies, to the internal-intellectual;
the poetical, artistic, humanitarian activities, to the
internal-emotional.

And whole races have tended and will tend, upon the whole, to one or
other of these three excesses: _e.g._ the Latin races, to Externalism
and Superstition; the Teutonic races, to the two Interiorisms,
Rationalism and Fanaticism.



2. _Co-existence and succession of the Three Elements in history
generally._

The human race at large has evidently been passing, upon the whole,
from the exterior to the interior, but with a constant tendency to
drop one function for another, instead of supplementing, stimulating,
purifying each by means of the other two.

If we go back as far as any analyzable records will carry us, we
find that, in proportion as religion emerges from pure fetichism,
it has ever combined with the apprehension of a Power conceived, at
last and at best, as of a Father in heaven, that of a Bond with its
brethren upon earth. Never has the sacrifice, the so-to-speak vertical
relation between the individual man and God, between the worshipper
and the object of his worship, been without the sacrificial meal, the
communion, the so-to-speak lateral, horizontal relations between man
and his fellow-man, between the worshippers one and all. Never has
religion been purely and entirely individual; always has it been,
as truly and necessarily, social and institutional, traditional and
historical. And this traditional element, not all the religious genius
in the world can ever escape or replace: it was there, surrounding
and moulding the very pre-natal existence of each one of us; it will
be there, long after we have left the scene. We live and die its wise
servants and stewards, or its blind slaves, or in futile, impoverishing
revolt against it: we never, for good or for evil, really get beyond
its reach.

And yet all this stream and environment of the traditional and social
could make no impression upon me whatsoever unless it were met by
certain secret sympathies, by certain imperious wants and energies
within myself. If the contribution of tradition is _quantitatively_
by far the most important, and might be compared to the contribution
furnished by the Vocabulary to the constitution of a definite,
particular language,--the contribution of the individual is,
_qualitatively_ and for that individual, more important still,
and might be compared to the contribution of the Grammar to the
constitution of that same language: for it is the Grammar which,
though incomparably less in amount than the Vocabulary, yet definitely
constitutes any and every language.

And there is here no necessary conflict with the claim of Tradition.
It is true that all real, actual Religion is ever an act of submission
to some fact or truth conceived as not only true but as obligatory, as
coming from God, and hence as beyond and above our purely subjective
fancies, opinings, and wishes. But it is also true that, if I could
not mentally hear or see, I should be incapable of hearing or
seeing anything of this kind or of any other; and that without some
already existing interior affinity with and mysterious capacity for
discriminating between such intimations--as either corresponding to
or as traversing my existing imperious needs and instincts--I could
not apprehend the former as coming from God. Without, then, such
non-fanciful, non-wilful, subjective capacities and dispositions,
there is for us not even the apprehension of the existence of such
objective realities: such capacities and dispositions are as necessary
pre-requisites to every act of faith, as sight is the absolute
pre-requisite for my discrimination between black and white. Hence as
far back as we can go, the traditional and social, the institutional
side of religion was accompanied, in varying, and at first small or
less perceptible degrees and forms, by intellectual and experimental
interpretation and response.


3. _The Three Elements in the great Religions._

Even the Greek religion, so largely naturalistic up to the very end,
appears, in the centuries of its relative interiorization, as a
triad composed of a most ancient traditional cultus, a philosophy of
religion, and an experimental-ethical life; the latter element being
readily exemplified by the Demon of Socrates, and by the Eleusinian and
Orphic Mysteries.

In India and Tibet, again, Brahmanism and Buddhism may be said to have
divided these three elements between them, the former representing as
great an excess of the external as Buddhism does of abstruse reasoning
and pessimistic emotion. Mahometanism, while combining, in very
imperfect proportions, all three elements within itself, lays special
stress upon the first, the external element; and though harbouring, for
centuries now and more or less everywhere, the third, the mystical
element, looks, in its strictly orthodox representatives, with
suspicion upon this mysticism.

Judaism was slow in developing the second, the intellectual element;
and the third, the mystical, is all but wholly absent till the Exilic
period, and does not become a marked feature till still later on, and
in writers under Hellenistic influence. It is in the Book of Wisdom,
still more in Philo, that we find all three sides almost equally
developed. And from the Hasmonean period onwards till the destruction
of Jerusalem by Titus, we find a severe and ardent external,
traditional, authoritative school in the Pharisees; an accommodating
and rationalizing school in the Sadducees; and, apart from both, more a
sect than a school, the experimental, ascetical, and mystical body of
the Essenes.

But it is in Christianity, and throughout its various vicissitudes and
schools, that we can most fully observe the presence, characteristics,
and interaction of these three modalities. We have already seen how
the New Testament writings can be grouped, with little or no violence,
according to the predominance of one of these three moods, under the
heads of the traditional, historic, external, the “Petrine” school; the
reasoning, speculative-internal, the Pauline; and the experimental,
mystical-internal, the Joannine school. And in the East, up to Clement
of Alexandria, in the West up to St. Augustine, we find the prevalence
of the first type. And next, in the East, in Clement and Origen, in
St. Gregory of Nyssa, in the Alexandrian and the Antiochene school
generally, and in the West, in St. Augustine, we find predominantly a
combination of the second and third types. The Areopagitic writings of
the end of the fifth century still further emphasize and systematize
this Neo-Platonic form of mystical speculation, and become indeed
the great treasure-house from which above all the Mystics, but also
largely the Scholastics, throughout the Middle Ages, drew much of their
literary material.

And those six or seven centuries of the Middle Ages are full of the
contrasts and conflicts between varying forms of Institutionalism,
Intellectualism, and Mysticism. Especially clearly marked is the
parallelism, interaction, and apparent indestructibleness of the
Scholastic and Mystical currents. Abelard and St. Bernard, St. Thomas
of Aquin and the great Franciscan Doctors, above all the often
largely latent, yet really ceaseless conflict between Realism and
Nominalism, all can be rightly taken as caused by various combinations
and degrees, insufficiencies or abnormalities in the action of the
three great powers of the human soul, and of the three corresponding
root-forms and functions of religion. And whereas, during the
prevalence of Realism, affective, mystical religion is the concomitant
and double of intellectual religion; during the later prevalence of
Nominalism, Mysticism becomes the ever-increasing supplement, and at
last, ever more largely, the substitute, for the methods of reasoning.
“Do penance and believe in the Gospel” becomes now the favourite text,
even in the mouth of Gerson (who died in 1429), the great Nominalist
Doctor, the Chancellor of the then greatest intellectual centre
upon earth, the University of Paris. A constant depreciation of all
dialectics, indeed largely of human knowledge generally, appears even
more markedly in the pages of the gentle and otherwise moderate Thomas
of Kempen (who died in 1471).

Although the Humanist Renaissance was not long in carrying away many
minds and hearts from all deeper consciousness and effort of a moral
and religious sort, yet in so far as men retained and but further
deepened and enriched their religious outlook and life, the three
old forms and modalities reappear, during the earlier stages of the
movement, in fresh forms and combinations. Perhaps the most truly
comprehensive and Christian representative of the new at its best, is
Cardinal Nicolas of Coes, the precursor of modern philosophy. For he
combines the fullest adhesion to, and life-long labour for, External
Institutional authority, with the keenest Intellectual, Speculative
life, and with the constant temper and practice of experimental and
Mystical piety. And a similar combination we find in Blessed Sir Thomas
More in England, who lays down his life in defence of Institutional
Religion and of the authority of the visible Church and its earthly
head; who is a devoted lover of the New Learning, both Critical and
Philosophical; and who continuously cultivates the Interior Life. A
little later on, we find the same combination in Cardinal Ximenes in
Spain.

But it is under the stress and strain of the Reformation and
Counter-Reformation movements that the depth and vitality of the three
currents gets specially revealed. For in Germany, and in Continental
Protestantism generally, we see (immediately after the very short
first “fluid” stage of Luther’s and Zwingli’s attitude consequent upon
their breach with Rome) the three currents in a largely separate
condition, and hence with startling distinctness. Luther, Calvin,
Zwingli, different as are their temperaments and both their earlier
and their later Protestant attitudes and doctrines, all three soon
fall back upon some form and fragmentary continuation, or even in
its way intensification, of Institutional Religion,--driven to such
conservatism by the iron necessity of real life and the irrepressible
requirements of human nature. They thus formed that heavy untransparent
thing, orthodox Continental Protestantism. Laelius and Faustus Socinus
attempt the construction of a purely Rationalistic Religion, and
capture and intensify the current of a clear, cold Deism, in which the
critical mind is to be supreme. And the Anabaptist and other scattered
sects and individuals (the latter represented at their best by
Sebastian Frank) attempt, in their turn, to hold and develop a purely
interior, experimental, emotional-intuitive, ecstatic Religion, which
is warm, indeed feverish and impulsive, and distrusts both the visible
and institutional, and the rational and critical.

In England the same phenomenon recurs in a modified form. For in
Anglicanism, the most characteristic of its parties, the High Church
school, represents predominantly the Historical, Institutional
principle. The Latitudinarian school fights for the Rational, Critical,
and Speculative element. The Evangelical school stands in close
spiritual affinity to all but the Unitarian Nonconformists in England,
and represents the Experimental, Mystical element. We readily think
of Laud and Andrewes, Pusey and Keble as representatives of the first
class; of Arnold, Stanley, and Jowett as figures of the second class;
of Thomas Scott, John Newton, and Charles Simeon as types of the third
class. _The Tracts for the Times_, _Essays and Reviews_, and (further
back) Bunyan’s Works, would roughly correspond to them in literature.

And this trinity of tendency can also be traced in Catholicism. Whole
Religious Orders and Congregations can be seen or felt to tend,
upon the whole, to one or the other type. The Jesuits can be taken
as predominantly making for the first type, for fact, authority,
submission, obedience; the Dominicans for the second type, for thought,
a philosophico-speculative, intellectual religion; the Benedictines,
in their noble Congregation of St. Maur, for a historico-critical
intellectual type; the French Oratory, for a combination of both the
speculative (Malebranche) and the critical (Simon, Thomassin); and
the Franciscans, for the third, for action and experimental, affective
spirituality.

And yet none of these Orders but has had its individuals, and even
whole secondary periods, schools, and traditions, markedly typical of
some current other than that specially characteristic of the Order
as a whole. There are the great Critics and Historians of the Jesuit
Order: the Spanish Maldonatus, the New Testament Scholar, admirable for
his time, and helpful and unexhausted still; the French Denys Petau,
the great historian of Christian Doctrine and of its development;
the Flemish Bollandists, with their unbroken tradition of thorough
critical method and incorruptible accuracy and impartiality. There are
the great Jesuit Mystics: the Spanish Venerable Balthazar Alvarez,
declared by St. Teresa to be the holiest mystical soul she had ever
known; and the Frenchmen, Louis Lallemant and Jean Joseph Surin. There
are those most attractive figures, combining the Scholar and the
Mystic: Blessed Edmund Campion, the Oxford Scholar and Elizabethan
Martyr; and Jean Nicolas Grou, the French translator of Plato, who
died in exile in England in 1800. The Dominicans have, from the
first, been really representative of external authority as well of
the speculative rational bent; and the mystical side has never been
wanting to them, so amongst the early German Dominicans, Tauler and
Suso, and many a Dominican female Saint. The Benedictines from the
first produced great rulers; such striking types of external authority
as the Pope-Saints, Gregory the Great and Gregory VII (Hildebrand), and
the great Benedictine Abbots and Bishops throughout the Middle Ages
are rightly felt to represent one whole side of this great Order. And
again such great mystical figures as St. Hildegard of Bingen and the
two Saints Gertrude are fully at home in that hospitable Family. And
the Franciscans have, in the Conventuals, developed representatives of
the external authority type; and in such great philosopher-theologians
as Duns Scotus and Occam, a combination which has more of the
intellectual, both speculative and critical, than of the simply
ascetical or even mystical type.

And if we look for individual contrasts, we can often find them in
close temporal and local juxtaposition, as in France, in the time of
Louis XIV, in the persons of Bossuet, Richard Simon, and Fénelon, so
strikingly typical of the special strengths and limitations of the
institutional, rational, experimental types respectively. And yet the
most largely varied influence will necessarily proceed from characters
which combine not only two of the types, as in our times Frederick
Faber combined the external and experimental; but which hold them all
three, as with John Henry Newman in England or Antonio Rosmini in Italy.


V. CAUSES OPERATIVE IN ALL RELIGION TOWARDS MINIMIZING OR SUPPRESSING
ONE OR OTHER ELEMENT, OR TOWARDS DENYING THE NEED OF ANY MULTIPLICITY.

Let us end this chapter with some consideration of the causes and
reasons that are ever tending to produce and to excuse the quiet
elimination or forcible suppression of one or other of the elements
that constitute the full organism of religion, and even to minimize or
to deny altogether the necessity of any such multiplicity.


1. _The religious temper longs for simplification._

To take the last point first. How obvious and irresistible seems
always, to the specifically religious temper, the appeal to boundless
simplification. “Can there be anything more sublimely, utterly simple
than religion?” we all say and feel. In these regions, if anywhere, we
long and thirst to see and feel all things in one, to become ourselves
one, to find the One Thing necessary, the One God, and to be one
with Him for ever. Where is there room here, we feel even angrily,
for all these distinctions, all this balancing of divers faculties
and parts? Is not all this but so much Aestheticism, some kind of
subtle Naturalism, a presumptuous attempting to build up bit by bit
in practice, and to analyze part from part in theory, what can only
come straight from God Himself, and, coming from Him the One, cannot
but bear the impress of His own indistinguishable Unity? And can there
be anything more unforcedly, unanalyzably simple than all actual
religion,--and this in exact proportion to its greatness? Look at St.
Francis of Assisi, or St. John Baptist; look above all at the Christ,
supremely, uniquely great, just because of His sublime simplicity!
Look at, feel, the presence and character of those countless souls
that bear, unknown even to themselves, some portion of this His
impress within themselves, forming thus a kind of indefinitely rich
extension of His reign, of the kingdom of His childlikeness. Away then
with everything that at all threatens to break up a corresponding
simplicity in ourselves! Poverty of spirit, emptiness of heart, a
constant turning away from all distraction, from all multiplicity both
of thought and of feeling, of action and of being; this, surely, is
the one and only necessity for the soul, at least in proportion to the
height of her spiritual call.



2. _Yet every truly living Unity is constituted in Multiplicity._

Now in all this there is a most subtle mixture of truth and of error.
It is profoundly true that all that _is_ at all, still more all
personality, and hence above all God, the Spirit of spirits is, just
in that proportion, profoundly mysteriously One, with a Unity which
all our best thinking can only distantly and analogously represent.
And all religion will ever, in proportion as it is vigorous and pure,
thirst after an ever-increasing Unification, will long to be one and
to give itself to the One,--to follow naked the naked Jesus. Yet all
the history of human thought and all the actual experience of each
one of us prove that this Unity can be apprehended and developed, by
and within our poor human selves, only in proportion as we carefully
persist in stopping at the point where it can most thoroughly organize
and harmonize the largest possible multiplicity of various facts and
forces.

No doubt the living soul is not a whole made up of separate parts;
still less is God made up of parts. Yet we cannot apprehend this Unity
of God except in multiplicity of some sort; nor can we ourselves become
rightly one, except through being in a true sense many, and very many,
as well. Indeed the Christian Faith insists that there is something
most real actually corresponding to this our conception of multiplicity
even and especially in God Himself. For it as emphatically bids us
think of Him as in one sense a Trinity as in another a Unity. And it
is one of the oldest and most universal of Christian approaches to
this mystery, to conceive it under the analogy of the three powers of
the soul. God the Father and Creator is conceived as corresponding to
the sense-perception and Imagination, to Memory-power; God the Son and
Redeemer, as the Logos, to our reason; and God the Holy Spirit, as
corresponding to the effective-volitional force within us; and then we
are bidden to remember that, as in ourselves these three powers are
all united in One personality, so in God the three Persons are united
in One substance and nature. Even the supremely and ineffably simple
Godhead is not, then, a mere, undifferentiated One.

And if we take the case of Our Lord, even when He is apprehended in the
most abstract of orthodox ways: we get either the duality of natures,
God and Man; or a trinity of offices, the Kingly, the Prophetic,
and the Priestly,--these latter again corresponding roughly to the
External, the Intellectual, and the Mystical element of the human soul.
And even if we restrict ourselves to His Humanity, and as pictured in
any one Gospel, nay in the earliest, simplest, and shortest, St. Mark,
we shall still come continually upon a rich multiplicity, variety, and
play of different exterior and interior apprehensions and activities,
emotions and sufferings, all profoundly permeated by one great end and
aim, yet each differing from the other, and contributing a different
share to the one great result. The astonishment at the disciples’
slowness of comprehension, the flash of anger at Peter, the sad
reproachfulness towards Judas, the love of the children, the sympathy
with women, the pity towards the fallen, the indignation against the
Pharisees, the rejoicing in the Father’s revelation, the agony in the
Garden, the desolation on the Cross, are all _different_ emotions. The
perception of the beauty of the flowers of the field, of the habits
of plants and of birds, of the varieties of the day’s early and late
cloud and sunshine, of the effects of storm and rain; and again of
the psychology of various classes of character, age, temperament,
and avocation; and indeed of so much more, are all _different_
observations. The lonely recollection in the desert, the nights spent
in prayer upon the mountains, the preaching from boats and on the
lake-side, the long foot-journeyings, the many flights, the reading and
expounding in the Synagogues, the curing the sick and restoring them to
their right mind, the driving the sellers from the Temple-court, and so
much else, are all _different_ activities.

And if we take what is or should be simplest in the spiritual life
of the Christian, his intention and motive; and if we conceive this
according to the evidence of the practice of such Saints as have
themselves revealed to us the actual working of their souls, and of
the long and most valuable series of controversies and ecclesiastical
decisions in this delicate matter, we shall again find the greatest
possible Multiplicity in the deepest possible Unity. For even in such
a Saint as St. John of the Cross, whose own analysis and theory of
the interior life would often seem all but directly and completely to
exclude the element of multiplicity, it is necessary ever to interpret
and supplement one part of his teaching by another, and to understand
the whole in the light of his actual, deliberate, habitual practice.
This latter will necessarily ever exceed his explicit teaching, both in
its completeness and in its authority. Now if in his formal teaching
he never wearies of insisting upon detachment from all things, and
upon the utmost simplification of the intentions of the soul, yet he
occasionally fully states what is ever completing this doctrine in his
own mind,--that this applies only to the means and not to the end, and
to false and not to true multiplicity. “The spiritual man,” he writes
in one place, “has greater joy and comfort in creatures, if he detaches
himself from them; and he can have no joy in them, if he considers them
as his own.” “He,” as distinct from the unspiritual man, “rejoices in
their truth,” “in their best conditions,” “in their substantial worth.”
He “has joy in all things.”[37] A real multiplicity then exists in
things, and in our most purified apprehension of them; varied, rich
joys related to this multiplicity are facts in the life of the Saints;
and these varied joys may legitimately be dwelt on as incentives to
holiness for oneself and others. “All that is wanting now,” he writes
to Donna Juana de Pedraça, his penitent, “is that I should forget
you. But consider how that is to be forgotten which is ever present
to the soul.”[38] An affection then, as pure as it was particular,
was ever in his heart, and fully accepted and willed and acknowledged
to its immediate object, as entirely conformable to his own teaching.
St. Teresa, on the other hand, is a character of much greater natural
variety, and yet it is she who has left us that most instructive record
of her temporary erroneous ideal of a false simplicity, in turning
away, for a number of years, from the consideration of the Humanity of
Christ. And a constant, keen interest in the actual larger happenings
of her time, in the vicissitudes of the Church in her day, was stamped
upon all her teaching, and remained with her up to the very end.

Perhaps the most classic expression of the true Unity is that implied
by St. Ignatius of Loyola, when he tells us that “Peace is the
simplicity of order.” For order as necessarily implies a multiplicity
of things ordered as the unity of the supreme ordering principle.
Fénelon, doubtless, at times, especially in parts of his condemned
_Explication des Maximes des Saints_, too much excludes, or seems to
exclude, the element of multiplicity in the soul’s intention. Yet,
both before and after this book, some of the clearest and completest
statements in existence, as to the true unity and diversity to be
found in the most perfect life, are to be found among his writings. In
his Latin Epistle to Pope Clement XI he insists upon the irreducible
element of multiplicity in the motives of the very highest sanctity.

For he maintains first that, though “in the specific act of Love, the
chief of the theological virtues, it is possible to love the absolute
perfection of God considered in Himself, without the addition of any
motive of the promised beatitude,” yet that “this specific act of love,
of its own nature, never excludes, and indeed most frequently includes,
this same motive of beatitude.” He asserts next that though, “in the
highest grade of perfection amongst souls here below, deliberate
acts of simply natural love of ourselves, and even supernatural acts
of hope which are not commanded by love mostly cease,” yet that in
this “habitual State of any and every most perfect soul upon earth,
the promised beatitude is desired, and there is no diminution of the
exercise of the virtue of hope, indeed day by day there is an increase
in this desire, from the specific motive of hope of this great good,
which God Himself bids us all, without exception, to hope for.” And he
declares finally that “there is no state of perfection in which souls
enjoy an uninterrupted contemplation, or in which the powers of the
soul are bound by an absolute incapacity for eliciting the discursive
acts of Christian piety; nor is there a state in which they are
exempted from following the laws of the Church, and executing all the
orders of superiors.”[39]

All the variety, then, of the interested and of the disinterested; of
hope and fear and sorrow; of gratitude and adoration and love; of the
Intuitive and Discursive; of Recollection and external Action, is to be
found, in a deeper, richer, more multiple and varied and at the same
time a more unified unity, in the most perfect life; and all this in
proportion to its approach to its own ideal and normality.

Indeed the same multiplicity in unity is finely traced by St. Bernard,
the great contemplative, in every human act that partakes of grace
at all. “That which was begun by Grace, gets accomplished alike by
both Grace and Free Will, so that they operate mixedly not separately,
simultaneously not successively, in each and all of their processes.
The acts are not in part Grace, in part Free Will; but the whole of
each act is effected by both in an undivided operation.”[40]


VI. THE SPECIAL MOTIVES OPERATING IN EACH ELEMENT TOWARDS THE
SUPPRESSION OF THE OTHER ELEMENTS.

Now the elements of Multiplicity and Friction and of Unity and
Harmonization, absolutely essential to all life, everywhere and always
cost us much to keep and gain. But there are also, very special reasons
why the three great constituents of religion should, each in its own
way, tend continually to tempt the soul to retain only _it_, and hence
to an impoverishing simplification. Let us try and see this tendency
at work in the two chief constituents, as against each other, and in
combination against the third.


1. _In the Historical and Institutional Element, as against all else._

We have seen how all religiousness is ever called into life by some
already existing religion. And this religion will consist in the
continuous commemoration of some great religious facts of the past.
It will teach and represent some divine revelation as having been
made, in and through such and such a particular person, in such and
such a particular place, at such and such a particular time; and
such a revelation will claim acceptance and submission as divine
and redemptive in and through the very form and manner in which it
was originally made. The very peculiarity, which will render the
teaching distinctively religious, will hence be a certain real, or
at least an at first apparent, externality to the mind and life of
the recipient, and a sense of even painful obligation answered by a
willing endorsement. All higher religion ever is thus personal and
revelational; and all such personal and revelational religion was
necessarily first manifested in unique conditions of space and time;
and yet it claims, in as much as divine, to embrace all the endless
conditions of other spaces and other times.

And this combination of a clearly contingent constituent and of an
imperiously absolute claim is not less, but more visible, as we rise
in the scale of religions. The figure of Our Lord is far more clear
and definite and richly individual than are the figures of the Buddha
or of Mahomet. And at the same time Christianity has ever claimed for
Him far more than Buddhism or Mahometanism have claimed for their
respective, somewhat shadowy founders. For the Buddha was conceived
as but one amongst a whole series of similar revealers that were to
come; and Mahomet was but the final prophet of the one God. But Christ
is offered to us as the unique Saviour, as the unique revelation of
God Himself. You are thus to take Him or leave Him. To distinguish and
interpret, analyze or theorize Him, to accept Him provisionally or
on conditions,--nothing of all this is distinctively religious. For,
here as everywhere else, the distinctive religious act is, as such, an
unconditional surrender. Nowhere in life can we both give and keep at
the same time; and least of all here, at life’s deepest sources.

With this acceptance then, in exact proportion as it is religious,
a double exclusiveness will apparently be set up. I have here found
my true life:--I will turn away then from all else, and will either
directly fight, or will at least starve and stunt, all other competing
interests and activities--I will have here a (so to speak) _spacial_,
a _simultaneous_ exclusiveness. Religion will thus be conceived
as a thing amongst other things, or as a force struggling amongst
other forces; we have given our undivided heart to _it_,--hence the
other things must go, as so many actual supernumeraries and possible
supplanters. Science and Literature, Art and Politics must all be
starved or cramped. Religion can safely reign, apparently, in a desert
alone.

But again, Religion will be conceived, at the same time, as a thing
fixed in itself, as given once for all, and to be defended against all
change and interpretation, against all novelty and discrimination.
We get thus a second, a (so to speak) _temporal_, _successive_
exclusiveness. Religion will here be conceived as a thing to be kept
literally and materially identical with itself and hence as requiring
to be defended against any kind of modification. Conceive it as a
paste, and all yeast must be kept out; or as wine, and fermentation
must be carefully excluded. And indeed Religion here would thus become
a stone, even though a stone fallen from heaven, like one of those
meteorites worshipped in Pagan antiquity. And the two exclusivenesses,
joined together, would give us a religion reduced to such a stone
worshipped in a desert.

Now the point to notice here is, that all this seems not to be an
abuse, but to spring from the very essence of religion,--from two of
its specific inalienable characteristics--those of externality and
authority. And although the extreme just described has never been
completely realized in history, yet we can see various approximations
to it in Mahometan Egypt, in Puritan Scotland, in Piagnone Florence, in
Spain of the Inquisition. Religion would thus appear fated, by its very
nature, to starve out all else, and its own self into the bargain.

What will be the answer to, the escape from, all this, provided
by religion itself? The answer and escape will be provided by the
intrinsic nature of the human soul, and of the religious appeal
made to it. For if this appeal must be conceived by the soul, in
exact proportion to the religiousness of both, as incomprehensible
by it, as exceeding its present, and even its potential, powers of
comprehension; if again this appeal must demand a sacrifice of various
inclinations felt at the time to be wrong or inferior; if it must come
home to the soul with a sense of constraining obligation, as an act
of submission and of sacrifice which it ought and must make: yet it
will as necessarily be conceived, at the same time, and again in exact
proportion to the religiousness both of the soul and of the appeal,
as the expression of Mind, of Spirit, and the impression of another
mind and spirit; as the manifestation of an infinite Personality,
responded and assented to by a personality, finite indeed yet capable
of indefinite growth. And hence the fixity of the revelation and of the
soul’s assent to it, will be as the fixity of a fountain-head, or as
the fixity of river-banks; or again as the fixity of a plant’s growth,
or of the gradual leavening of bread, or as that of the successive
evolution and identity of the human body. The fixity, in a word, will
be conceived and found to be a fixity of orientation, a definiteness of
affinities and of assimilative capacity.

Only full trust, only unconditional surrender suffice for religion. But
then religion excites and commands this in a person towards a Person;
a surrender to be achieved not in some thing, but in some one,--a some
one who _is_ at all, only in as much as he is living, loving, growing;
and to be performed, not towards some thing, but towards Some One,
Whose right, indeed Whose very power to claim me, consists precisely
in that He is Himself absolutely, infinitely and actually, what I am
but derivatively, finitely and potentially.

Thus the very same act and reasons which completely bind me, do so only
to true growth and to indefinite expansion. I shall, it is true, ever
go back and cling to the definite spacial and temporal manifestations
of this infinite Spirit’s personality, but I shall, by this same act,
proclaim His eternal presentness and inexhaustible self-interpreting
illumination. By the same act by which I believe in the revelation of
the workshop of Nazareth, of the Lake of Galilee, of Gethsemane and
Calvary, I believe that this revelation is inexhaustible, and that its
gradual analysis and theory, and above all its successive practical
application, experimentation, acceptance or rejection, and unfolding,
confer and call forth poignant dramatic freshness and inexhaustible
uniqueness upon and within every human life, unto the end of time.

All this takes place through the present, the _hic et nunc_,
co-operation of the living God and the living soul. And this
ever-to-be reconquered, ever-costing and chequered, ever-“deepenable”
interpretation, is as truly fresh as if it were a fresh revelation.
For all that comes from the living God, and is worked out by living
souls, is ever living and enlivening: there is no such thing as mere
repetition, or differentiation by mere number, place, and time, in this
Kingdom of Life, either as to God’s action or the soul’s. Infinite
Spirit Himself, He creates an indefinite number of, at first largely
but potential, persons, no one of which is identical with any other,
and provokes and supports an indefinite number of ever different
successive acts on the part of each and all of them, that so, through
the sum-total of such sources and streams of difference, the nearest
creaturely approach may be achieved to the ocean of His own infinite
richness.



2. _In the Emotional and Volitional Element, as against the Historical
and Institutional Element._

Now the tendency of a soul, when once awake to this necessary freshness
and interiority of feeling with regard to God’s and her own action,
will again be towards an impoverishing oneness. It will now tend to
shrink away from the External, Institutional altogether. For though it
cannot but have experienced the fact that it was by contact with this
External that, like unto Antaeus at his contact with Mother Earth, it
gained its experience of the Internal, yet each such experience tends
to obliterate the traces of its own occasion. Indeed the interior
feeling thus achieved tends, in the long run, to make the return to the
contact with the fact that occasioned, and to the act that produced
it, a matter of effort and repugnance. It seems a case of “a man’s
returning to his mother’s womb”; and is indeed a new birth to a fuller
life, and hence humiliating, obscure, concentrated, effortful, a matter
of trust and labour and pain and faith and love,--a true death of
and adieu to the self of this moment, however advanced this self may
seem,--a fully willed purifying pang. Only through such dark and narrow
Thermopylae passes can we issue on to the wide, sunlit plains. And both
plain and sunshine can never last long at a time; and they will cease
altogether, if they are not interrupted by this apparent shadow of the
valley of death, this concrete action, which invariably modifies not
only the soul’s environment, but above all the soul itself.

Thus does a simply mental prayer readily feel, to the soul that
possesses the habit of it, a complete substitute for all vocal prayer;
and a generally prayerful habit of mind readily appears an improvement
upon all conscious acts of prayer. Thus does a general, indeterminate
consciousness of Christ’s spirit and presence, easily feel larger and
wider, to him who has it, than the apparent contraction of mind and
heart involved in devotion to Him pictured in the definite Gospel
scenes or localized in His Eucharistic presence. Thus again does a
general disposition of regret for sin and of determination to do better
readily feel nobler, to him who has it, than the apparent materiality
and peddling casuistry, the attempting the impossible, of fixing for
oneself the kind and degree of one’s actual sins, and of determining
upon definite, detailed reforms.

Yet, in all these cases, this feeling will rapidly lead the soul on
to become unconsciously weak or feverish, unless the latter manfully
escapes from this feeling’s tyranny, and nobly bends under the yoke and
cramps itself within the narrow limits of the life-giving concrete act.
The Church’s insistence upon _some_ vocal prayer, upon _some_ definite,
differentiated, specific acts of the various moral and theological
virtues, upon Sacramental practice throughout all the states and stages
of the Christian life, is but a living commentary upon the difficulty
and importance of the point under discussion. And History, as we have
seen, confirms all this.


3. _In the Emotional and Volitional, singly or in combination with the
Historical and Institutional, as against the Analytic and Speculative
Element._

But just as the Institutional easily tends to a weakening both of
the Intellectual and of the Emotional, so does the Emotional readily
turn against not only the Institutional but against the Intellectual
as well. This latter hostility will take two forms. Inasmuch as the
feeling clings to historical facts and persons, it will instinctively
elude or attempt to suppress all critical examination and analysis
of these its supports. Inasmuch as it feeds upon its own emotion,
which (as so much pure emotion) is, at any one of its stages, ever
intensely one and intensely exclusive, it will instinctively fret under
and oppose all that slow discrimination and mere approximation, that
collection of a few certainties, many probabilities, and innumerable
possibilities, all that pother over a very little, which seem to make
up the sum of all human knowledge. Such Emotion will thus tend to be
hostile to Historical Criticism, and to all the Critical, Analytic
stages and forms of Philosophy. It turns away instinctively from the
cold manifold of thinking; and it shrinks spontaneously from the hard
opaque of action and of the external. All this will again be found to
be borne out by history.

A combination of Institutionalism and Experimentalism against
Intellectualism, is another not infrequent abuse, and one which is
not hard to explain. For if external, definite facts and acts are
found to lead to certain internal, deep, all-embracing emotions and
experiences, the soul can to a certain extent live and thrive in and
by a constant moving backwards and forwards between the Institution
and the Emotion alone, and can thus constitute an ever-tightening bond
and dialogue, increasingly exclusive of all else. For although the
Institution will, taken in itself, retain for the Emotion a certain
dryness and hardness, yet the Emotion can and often will associate
with this Institution whatever that contact with it has been found to
bring and to produce. And if the Institution feels hard and obscure,
it is not, like the Thinking, cold and transparent. Just because the
Institution appears to the emotional nature as though further from its
feeling, and yet is experienced as a mysterious cause or occasion of
this feeling, the emotional nature is fairly, often passionately, ready
to welcome what it can thus rest on and lean on, as something having a
comfortable fixity both of relation and of resistance. But with regard
to Thinking, all this is different. For thought is sufficiently near
to Feeling, necessarily to produce friction and competition of some
sort, and seems, with its keen edge and endless mobility, to be the
born implacable foe of the dull, dead givenness of the Institutional,
and of the equal givenness of any one Emotional mood. One of the
spontaneous activities of the human soul, the Analytic and Speculative
faculty, seems habitually, instinctively to labour at depersonalizing
all it touches, and thus continually both to undermine and discrown the
deeply personal work and world of the experimental forces of the soul.
Indeed the thinking seems to be doing this necessarily, since by its
very essence it begins and ends with laws, qualities, functions, and
parts,--with abstractions, which, at best, can be but skeletons and
empty forms of the real and actual, and which, of themselves, ever tend
to represent all Reality as something static, not dynamic, as a thing,
not as a person or Spirit.

Here again the true solution will be found in an ever fuller
conception of Personality, and of its primary place in the
religious life. For even the bare possibility of the truth of all
religion, especially of any one of the characteristic doctrines of
Christianity, involves a group of personalist convictions. Here the
human person begins more as a possibility than a reality. Here the
moral and spiritual character has to be built up slowly, painfully,
laboriously, throughout all the various stages and circumstances of
life, with their endless combinations of pleasure and pain, trouble
and temptation, inner and outer help and hindrance, success and
failure. Here the simply Individual is transformed into the truly
Personal only by the successive sacrifice of the lower, of the merely
animal and impoverishingly selfish self, with the help of God’s
constant prevenient, concomitant, and subsequent grace. And here this
constantly renewed dropping and opposing of the various lower selves,
in proportion as they appear and become lower, to the soul’s deepest
insight, in the growing light of its conscience and the increasing
elevation of the moral personality, involves that constant death to
self, that perpetual conversion, that unification and peace in and
through a continuous inner self-estrangement and conflict, which is the
very breath and joy of the religious life.

Only if all this be so, to a quite unpicturable extent, can even the
most elementary Christianity be more than an amiable intruder, or a
morbid surplusage in the world. And at same time, if all this be so,
then all within us is in need of successive, never-ending purification
and elaboration; and the God who has made man with a view to his
gradually achieving, and conquering his real self, must have stored
means and instruments, for the attainment of this man’s true end,
constant readiness, within himself. Now our whole Intellectual nature
is a great storehouse of one special class of such instruments. For it
is clear that the moral and spiritual side of our nature will, more
than any other, constantly require three things: Rest, Expression,
and Purification. And the intellectual activities will, if only they
be kept sufficiently vigorous and independent, alone be in a position
sufficiently to supply some forms of these three needs. For they can
rest the moral-spiritual activities, since they, the intellectual
ones, primarily neglect emotion, action, and persons, and are directly
occupied with abstractions and with things. They can and should express
the results of those moral, spiritual activities, because the religious
facts and experiences require, like all other facts, to be constantly
stated and re-stated by the intellect in terms fairly understandable by
the civilization and culture of the successive ages of the world. Above
all, they can help to purify those moral-spiritual activities, owing
to their interposing, by their very nature, a zone of abstraction,
of cool, clear thinking, of seemingly adequate and exhaustive, but
actually impoverishing and artificial concepts, and of apparently
ultimate, though really only phenomenal determinism, between the direct
informations of the senses, to which the Individual clings, and the
inspirations of the moral and spiritual nature, which constitute the
Person. Thus this intellectual abstractive element is, if neither
minimized in the life of the soul, nor allowed to be its sole element
or its last, a sobering, purifying, mortifying, vivifying bath and fire.


VII. THREE FINAL OBJECTIONS TO SUCH A CONCEPTION OF RELIGION, AND THEIR
ANSWERS.

Now there are three obvious objections to such a conception: with their
consideration, this Introduction shall conclude.


1. _This conception not excessively intellectual._

Does not, in the first place, such a view of life appear
preposterously intellectual? What of the uneducated, of the toiling
millions? What of most women and of all children? Are then all
these, the overwhelming majority of mankind, the objects of Christ’s
predilection, the very types chosen by Himself of His spirit and
of God’s ideal for man, precluded from an essential element of
religion? Or are we, at the least, to hold that an ethical and
spiritual advantage is necessarily attached, and this too for but
a small minority of mankind, to a simply intellectual function and
activity? If there was a thing specially antagonistic to Christ and
condemned by Him, it was the arrogance of the Schools of His day; if
there is a thing apparently absent from Christ’s own life it is all
philosophizing: even to suggest its presence seems at once to disfigure
and to lower Him. Is then Reasoning, the School, to be declared not
only necessary for some and for mankind at large, but necessary, in a
sense, for all men and for the religious life itself?

The answer to all this appears not far to seek. The element which we
have named the intellectual, is but one of the faculties of every
living soul; and hence, in some degree and form, it is present and
operative in every one of us. And there is probably no greater
difference between these degrees and forms, with regard to this
element, than there is between the degrees and forms found in the other
two elements of religion. For this intellectual, determinist element
would be truly represented by every however simple mental attention to
_things_ and their mechanism, their necessary laws and requirements.
Hence, the Venerable Anna Maria Taigi, the Roman working-man’s wife,
attending to the requirements and rules of good washing and of darning
of clothes; St. Jean Batiste de la Salle, the Breton gentleman,
studying the psychology of school-children’s minds, and adapting
his school system to it; St. Jerome labouring at his minute textual
criticism of manuscripts of all kinds; St. Anselm and St. Thomas
toiling at the construction of their dialectic systems,--all these,
amongst endless other cases, are but illustrations of the omnipresence
and endless variety of this element, which is busy with the rules and
processes that govern things.

And it is impossible to see why, simply because of their superior
intellectual gifts and development, men like Clement of Alexandria and
Origen, Cassian and Duns Scotus, Nicolas of Coes and Pascal, Rosmini
and Newman, should count as necessarily less near to God and Christ,
than others with fewer of such gifts and opportunities. For it is
not as though such gifts were considered as ever _of themselves_
constituting any moral or spiritual worth. Nothing can be more certain
than that great mental powers can be accompanied by emptiness or
depravity of heart. The identical standard is to be applied to these
as to all other gifts: they are not to be considered as substitutes,
but only as additional material and means for the moral and spiritual
life; and it is only inasmuch as they are actually so used, that they
can effectively help on sanctity itself. It is only contended here that
such gifts do furnish additional means and materials for the devoted
will- and grace-moved soul, towards the richest and deepest spiritual
life. For the intellectual virtues are no mere empty name: candour,
moral courage, intellectual honesty, scrupulous accuracy, chivalrous
fairness, endless docility to facts, disinterested collaboration,
unconquerable hopefulness and perseverance, manly renunciation of
popularity and easy honours, love of bracing labour and strengthening
solitude: these and many other cognate qualities bear upon them the
impress of God and of His Christ. And yet they all as surely find but a
scanty field of development outside of the intellectual life, as they
are not the only virtues or class of virtues, and as the other two
elements each produce a quite unique group of virtues of their own and
require other means and materials for their exercise.



2. _Such a conception not Pelagian._

But, in the second place, is not such a view of life Pelagian at
bottom? Have we not argued throughout, as if the religious life were to
be begun, and carried on, and achieved simply by a constant succession
of efforts of our own; and as though it could be built up by us,
like to some work of art, by a careful, conscious balancing of part
against part? Is not all this pure Naturalism? Is not religion a life,
and hence an indivisible whole? And is not this life simply the gift
of God, capable of being received, but not produced by us; of being
dimly apprehended as present, but not of being clearly analyzed in its
process of formation?

Here again there is a true answer, I think. Simply all and every
one of our acts, our very physical existence and persistence, is
dependent, at every moment and in every direction, upon the prevenient,
accompanying and subsequent power and help of God; and still more is
every religious, every truly spiritual and supernatural act of the soul
impossible without the constant action of God’s grace. Yet not only
does all this not prevent the soul from consciously acting on her own
part, and according to the laws of her own being; but God’s grace acts
in and through the medium of her acts, inasmuch as these are good: so
that the very same action which, seen as it were from without, is the
effect of our own volition, is, seen as it were from within, the effect
of God’s grace. The more costly is our act of love or of sacrifice, the
more ethical and spiritual, and the more truly it is our own deepest
self-expression, so much the more, at the same time, is this action a
thing received as well as given, and that we have it to give, and that
we can and do give it, is itself a pure gift of God.

What then is wanted, if we would really cover the facts of the case, is
evidently not a conception which would minimize the human action, and
would represent the latter as shrinking, in proportion as God’s action
increases; but one which, on the contrary, fully faces, and keeps a
firm hold of, the mysterious paradox which pervades all true life, and
which shows us the human soul as self-active in proportion to God’s
action within it, according to St. Bernard’s doctrine already quoted.
Grace and the Will thus rise and fall, in their degree of action,
together; and man will never be so fully active, so truly and intensely
himself, as when he is most possessed by God.

And since man’s action is thus in actual fact mysteriously double, it
should ever be so considered by him; and he should, as St. Ignatius
of Loyola says, “pray as if all depended on his prayer, and act as if
all depended on his action.” Hence all man’s action, though really
incapable of existing for an instant without the aid of God, and though
never exclusively his own, can be studied throughout, preliminarily as
though it were his exclusive production on its analyzable, human side.
And man not only can, he ought to be as thoughtful and careful, as
reasonably analytic and systematic about this study of his action as he
was careful and consistent in its production,--in both cases, whilst
praying and believing as though it were all from God, he can and should
behave also as though this action were exclusively his own. As St.
Thomas admirably says: “We attribute one and the same effect both to
a natural cause and to a divine force, not in the sense of that effect
proceeding in part from God, and in part from the human agent. But the
effect proceeds entire from both, according to a different mode: just
as, in music, the whole effect is attributed to the instrument, and the
same entire effect is referred to man as the principal agent.”[41]


3. _Such a conception not Epicurean._

But, in the last place, is not such a view of life Epicurean? Where
is the Cross and Self-Renunciation? Is it not Christ Himself Who has
bidden us cut off our right hand and pluck out our right eye, if they
offend; Who has declared that he who hateth not his own father and
mother for His sake is not worthy of Him; Who has asked, “What doth
it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of
his own soul?” and Who has pronounced a special woe upon the rich,
and a special blessing upon the poor in spirit? Does not our view, on
the contrary, bid a man attend to his hands and eyes, rather than to
their possible or even actual offending, euphemistically described
here as “friction”; bid him love his father and mother, even though
this introduce a conflict into his affections; bid him take care to
gain, as far as may be, the whole of his own possible interior and
exterior world, as though this would of itself be equivalent to his
saving his soul; and thus bid him become rich and full and complex,
an aesthete rather than a man of God? In a word, is not our position
a masked Paganism, a new Renaissance rather than the nobly stern old
Christianity?

Now here again a true answer is found in a clear intelligence of the
actual implications of the position. For if the Intellectual action
were here taken as capable of alone, or in any degree directly, forming
the foundation of all our other life, so that on a mathematically
clear and complete system, appealing to and requiring the abstractive
powers alone, would, later on, be built, according to our own further
determination, the Institutional and Experimental, or both or neither;
then such a position, if possible and actualized, would indeed save us
the simultaneous energizing of our whole complex nature, and would, so
far, well deserve the accusation of unduly facilitating life; it might
be taken as, at least, not beginning with the Cross. But here this is
not so. For from the first the External and the Mystical elements are
held to be at least as necessary and operative as the Intellectual
element; and it is impossible to see how the elimination of this
latter, and of the ever-expensive keeping it and its rivals each at
their own work, could deepen the truly moral sufferings and sacrifices
of the soul’s life.

If again the Intellectual action were taken, as by Gnosticism of
all sorts, as the eventual goal of the whole, so that the External
and Mystical would end by being absorbed into the Intellectual, our
Knowledge becoming coextensive with Reality itself, then we might
again, and with still deeper truth, be accused of eliminating the
element of effort and of sacrifice,--the Cross. But here, on the
contrary, not only the Intellectual alone does not begin the soul’s
life or build up its conditions, but the Intellectual alone does not
conclude and crown it. Eternally will different soul-functions conjoin
in a common work, eternally will God and the souls of our fellows be
for us realities in diverse degrees outside and beyond of our own
apprehension of them, and eternally shall we apprehend them differently
and to a different degree by our intelligence, by our affection, and by
our volition. Hence, even in eternity itself we can, without exceeding
the limits of sober thinking and of psychological probability, find
a field for the exercise by our souls of something corresponding to
the joy and greatness of noble self-sacrifice here below. The loving
soul will there, in the very home of love, give itself wholly to and
be fulfilled by God, and yet the soul will possess an indefinitely
heightened apprehension of the immense excess of this its love and act
above its knowledge, and of God Himself above both. And here again it
is impossible to see how the elimination of the intellectual element,
which becomes thus the very measure of the soul’s own limitations, and
of the exceeding greatness of its love and of its Lover, would make the
conception more efficaciously humbling and Christian.

Both at the beginning, then, and throughout, and even at the end of
the soul’s life, the intellectual element is necessary, and this above
all for the planting fully and finally, in the very depths of the
personality, the Cross, the sole means to the soul’s true Incoronation.




