Chapter XXIV runs: “How she comported herself towards her husband, who
was very contrary to her temperament; and concerning her indefatigable
patience in bearing with him, and even with the beatings which he gave
her”;[368]--where the end marked off by me is no doubt the Observant’s
own addition,--possibly, as we shall see, on the authority of Argentina
del Sale.--Or these additions are introduced to minimize or ward off
scandal. So when, after expanding the parallel between the conversions
of St. Paul and Catherine, he adds: ‘“For He spoke, and they were
(re-)made’ (Ps. xxxii, 9). But we must not curiously seek for the
reason of this action”; and then proves his point by three further
Biblical texts. So too when, after giving an abbreviated account of
the contrast between Thommasina’s and Catherine’s rate of spiritual
advancement, he again adds some Bible text and some moralizing of
his own. And so again where, after reproducing the passage as to her
being linked to God with a thread of gold, he expatiates, once more
in Scriptural words, on the presence of filial fear and the absence
of all servile fear within her. And so where, after following his
Prototype (as still preserved in the Printed _Life_), and declaring
his belief that it is reasonable and licit to believe her soul to have
entered Heaven immediately after death, he continues: “Hence he who
does believe this, does not lose in merit” (_non demerita_; an obvious
litotes for “merits”), “and he who believes it not, does not offend.”
In all these cases the Biblical texts appear in the Vulgate Latin.[369]

There can be no doubt that it is this slight recasting of the language,
and this insertion of trite and timid moralizing of his own, which,
together with the careful engrossing of his copy throughout, and its
occasional pretty decoration and illumination, permitted the Observant
to talk (although, even thus, in a manner most misleading for our
present habits of language) of having “written this Book.”

(iii) _Two genuine dates and accounts._

Yet, even amongst the passages which appear in his MS. as additional
to the later texts, are two evidently genuine and suggestive dates and
accounts. There is a description of Catherine’s great attack of “fire
at her heart,” more full and primitive, and more definitely dated than
any one of its many variants and echoes to be found in the Printed
_Life_: the slip in the date (he writes November 11, 1506, when his
own age-indications, and the position of the anecdote, clearly require
1509) will have had something to do with the strangely uncertain
position of this episode in the Printed _Life_.[370]--And further
back, in opening out the beautiful story of Marco and Argentina, he
writes: “There being in the quarter of the Quay (_contrada del Molo_)
one Marco del Sale, suffering from a cancer in the nose, who, fourteen
months before his infirmity, had taken to wife a virtuous young woman
named Argentina, spiritual daughter of Madonna Catherinetta, as is said
above.”[371] This very precise distance of time, between that humble
wedding and the poor navvy’s illness, will have been derived by the
Observant from Argentina herself, probably still living at the time of
his writing, even now hardly sixty years old.--Hence his long-winded
addition, as to the mediation of the “spiritual daughter” (certainly
Argentina), in the matter of our knowledge of Catherine’s prayer for
the dying Giuliano,[372] may also have been derived from that gossipy
little woman.

(iv) _Divisions and transpositions._

As to the divisions and transpositions, the chief of these consist in
the first six chapters of the Printed _Vita_ appearing here broken up
into (the first) ten chapters; in the MS. Chapters XI to XVI being
gradually caught up by the Printed series,--indeed the MS. Chapter XVI
corresponds to Chapters XVI to XVIII of the published book; in the
Chapters XVII to XIX of the MS. corresponding to Chapters XX and XXI
of the Print; and Chapters XX, XXI, and XXII of the MS., corresponding
respectively to Chapters XXIV, XXV, and XXVII of the Print. Then for
three Chapters follows considerable variation: the MS. Chapters XXIII,
XXIV, and XXV hold the positions respectively of the Printed Chapters
XXXVII, XLV and XLVI there. And then again there is likeness for three
Chapters--MS. Chapters XXVI to XXVIII corresponding to Printed Chapters
XXVIII and XXIX there. And once more three MS. Chapters (XXIX to
XXXI), quite different in sequence to anything there, are followed by
two Chapters (XXXII and XXXIII) corresponding to the Printed Chapters
XXIX and XXX. Four more MS. Chapters (XXXIV to XXXVII), without any
match, as to order, in the Printed book, are followed by two Chapters
(XXXVIII and XXXIX), corresponding, respectively, to the beginning
and end of Chapter XXXI there; and by Chapter XL, identical with the
opening of Chapter XL and with Chapter XLI there. And, above all,
Chapter XLI here, corresponds to the _Dicchiarazione_ (_Trattato_)
there; and is followed here by a final Chapter (XLII), made up of a
bewilderingly different succession of paragraphs,--paragraphs which, in
the Printed _Life_, stand in Chapters XLIX; XVII; and XLVIII to LII.
And, whereas the first forty Chapters of this MS. average six or seven
pages in length, Chapters XLI and XLII are respectively forty-five and
forty-eight pages long.

(v) _Lacunae._

These transpositions would alone suffice to show how complicated is the
textual history of the _Vita_: we may have to consider some of them
later on. But it is the _lacunae_ which are especially interesting.
One of these is quite certainly right, as against the printed text.
Paragraphs 23 to 25 of Chapter L of the Print are wanting here. Those
pages give an entirely fantastic, and formally vague, account of a
supposed interior stigmatization of Catherine, and of a preposterous
elongation of one of her arms,--both “facts” based explicitly upon
the authority of Argentina.[373] And the circumstance of the scribe
being a disciple of the stigmatized St. Francis, and the probability
that Argentina was still accessible, conjoin to render the absence of
these paragraphs from this MS. simply decisive against their historical
character.--The longest of all the omissions, that of the _Dialogo_,
must, even more, be explained on the ground of its non-existence at
this time, or, at least, of its not being known to the Scribe, or
again, of its having as yet no kind of authority. For not only does he
make no use of, or allusion to this, very long, and (were it primitive)
simply supreme document, but, as we shall find, quite a number of his
facts contradict the _Dialogo’s_ version of them; and we shall soon see
that, had he known and esteemed the document, he would not have allowed
such a defiance of it to remain without correction.

Over against these two non-appearances of spurious or secondary matter,
we have to set three omissions of highly valuable material. The two
interconnected, obviously entirely historical, paragraphs concerning
Maestro Boerio,--his attempt to cure Catherine, and the excessive
impression made upon her by his scarlet robes,[374]--are both wanting
here. But we shall see that they were probably not incorporated in any
_Vita_, till the preparation of the Printed _Life_ of 1551.--Matters
stand differently with respect to the third omission,--the
beautifully vivid, inimitably daring and characteristic, Chapter
XIX, containing Catherine’s dialogue with the Friar, who, according
to the well-informed Parpera, was a Franciscan Observant.[375] It is
impossible to hold that this, most historical and well-preserved,
story did not stand in the Observant’s Prototype, or that it was
otherwise unknown to him; its omission is doubtless deliberate and
“prudential.”--An interesting instance of demonstrable omission on his
part, is indeed furnished also by his version of the beautiful story
of Suor Tommasa’s life: his abbreviation of it is so obvious and yet
so unintelligent, that only a reference to the full account, which lay
certainly before him and is still preserved in the Printed _Life_,
makes any satisfactory sense of what he has retained.[376]


3. _Modification from a tripartite scheme to a quatripartite one._

But the most interesting of all the differences between this MS. A of
1547 and the Printed _Life_ of 1551 is another group of omissions,
connected, as these are, with the one single modification introduced
into his own text by the Scribe himself. The whole of the matter
corresponding to the Printed _Life’s_ Chapter XLIV (all but the first
seven lines) and that corresponding to the first three paragraphs of
its Chapter XLIX, which treat consecutively, and with an inimitable
vividness and a daring, unreflective truthfulness, of her most
unusual self-revelations to her Confessor Don Marabotto,[377] is
omitted--possibly, again, in part at least, from fear of scandal; but
more probably because, even at this time, this (the most private and
consecutive) contribution to the _Life_, still existed separately,
perhaps from all, and presumably from most, copies of the _Vita_
then in circulation. And such a copy will have been the Observant’s
Prototype.--Only when he had finished copying out his manuscript, will
he have discovered that, if he would take any, even though silent,
account of that contribution, which, by now, will have become known to
him, he must, at all costs, break up and seriously modify one of his
chapters. We have already studied the treble, most solemn affirmation,
by Catherine and her Confessor themselves, in that Printed Chapter
XLIV, as to her twenty-five years of spiritual loneliness and guidance
by God alone;[378] and we have seen that (since we cannot place her
Conversion before 1474, nor the beginning of her later practice of
Confession after 1499) we are forced (if we take her words in their
obvious sense, as applying to Confession as well as to Direction, and
assume her First Convert-Period, the penitential time, to have been
accompanied throughout by repeated Confessions) to make this first
Period very short.

Now the volume of 1547, 1548, consists throughout of paper, all but
the first three leaves and the tenth leaf, which are of parchment.
The first leaf remains blank; the second contains the Observant’s
Preface on its obverse; the third holds, on its two sides, the first
two pages of the _Vita_. That Preface was certainly written before all
the rest, or at least certainly during the lifetime of Donna Orientina
Centurione, _i.e._ before February 4, 1548; nor does anything in those
first two (parchment and paper) pages of text suggest that they are an
insertion subsequent to the following (paper) pages. At first, then,
the copy will have consisted of three parchment leaves, and then of
nothing but paper leaves; and the Observant will have made the last of
these parchment leaves the sole and opening parchment leaf of the text
of the Book.

But matters stand differently with the tenth leaf, pp. 19, 20 of
the MS., which begins with the words “bisogna, sono apparecchiata
a confessar”--“(if) necessary, I am prepared to confess my sins in
public” (Catherine’s words, on occasion of her Conversion); and ends
with “(abru) savano insino al core. Poi fù tirata al Petto”--“Love,
with those penetrating rays of its own, which burnt her, even to the
heart. She was then drawn to the Breast” (narrative words which, in the
scheme of her _Life_ that follows upon the Conversion-story, mark the
transition from one of this scheme’s stages to another).

Now here we have clear indications that these two parchment pages
hold a modified text. For that last parchment-leaf word “Petto” is
picked up, on the paper continuation, by “Pecto,” the ordinary form of
the Observant’s Prototype: see his page 81. And the whole book (all
but this parchment leaf and its highly restricted effects), still
attributes _four years_ to her First Convert-Period, her Penitential,
Purgative Stage.

Indeed, this solitary parchment leaf itself still allows us to trace,
(as though the leaf were a Palimpsest), both this, the original,
length of that Period, and the fact of that Period having then been
the first of three, and not, as now, of four such periods.--For this
leaf, in finishing up the manuscript’s fourth chapter, the history
of her Conversion,[379]--declares that “this sight (of her sins) and
this contrition (for them) lasted _fourteen months_, during which she
went on confessing herself, continually increasing her self-accusation
(_aggravando la colpa_); after the passing of which months, all sadness
was lifted from her, nor did she have any memory of her sins,--as
though she had cast them into the depths of the sea.” And then, in
the opening of the fifth chapter,[380] the scheme and conspectus of
her Convert Life runs as follows. She is first “drawn to the feet
of Christ” and abides there “_one year_ until she had satisfied her
conscience by Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.”--“She next
felt herself drawn, with St. John, to repose on the Breast of her
Loving Lord.… _The sight of the sins committed by her against God would
come to her_, so that she would be, as it were, wild (_arrabbiava_)
with grief, and would lick the ground with her tongue; and in this wise
she appeared to derive relief for her tempestuous feelings (_affannato
cuore_). And she abode thus for _three years_, during which she was,
as it were, wild with grief and love, with those penetrating rays of
its own, which burned her to the very heart.[381] She was then drawn
to the Breast”--which last parchment-leaf word is taken up by the
next, ordinary paper-leaf: “Breast; and here she was shown the Heart
of Christ.… And she abode _many years_ with this impression of His
burning Heart.--And then she was drawn (still) further up, that is, to
the Mouth; and there she was found worthy of being kissed by the true
Solomon.… And she no more (directly) recognized her human acts, whether
they had been done well or evilly; but she saw all in God.”[382]

We see here how the original four years of her First Period, which are
still retained elsewhere by the Printed _Vita_,[383] have been broken
up by the scribe of this Manuscript into two shorter (first and second)
Periods, of fourteen months (one year), and three years respectively;
how the copyist, both in his first apportionment of length to his new
First Period, “fourteen months,” and in his second assignment, now
of one year (since he has to divide up the original Four years so as
to get them again by addition, “_one_ year” and “_three_ years”),
leaves us two curious echoes of the “Four” of his Prototype; how his
amended description of his new second Period is still largely the old
Penitential description, for she still sees her sins (a sight which
is here an anachronism), and she is still prostrate on the ground (a
prostration which exactly suits the Feet, but in no way the Breast of
Christ); how the Observant has been half-hearted and clumsy, for he has
now left two successive Breast-Periods, hardly differentiated from each
other; and how he was able to shift (though not to change) the original
single Breast-Period (now his second Breast-Period), because of its
conveniently vague time-note of “many years.” All this laborious, yet
timid, incomplete and ineffectual change, thus forced upon an evidently
long-established, toughly resisting composition, can only have taken
place under some severe pressure of evidence; and the root-causes of
the change are somehow connected with the question as to the duration,
in her life, of the perception and Confession of her sins. For the
Confession of her sins, which (in the old scheme) extended over four
years, is now restricted to fourteen months or one year; and if
contemplative and restful love are now anticipated (from the original
second Period) in the new second Period of three years, yet an intense
sight of her particular sins, piercing contrition for them, and a
complete prostration on the ground, are all indeed retained, from the
original Feet-Period, for this new second Period, but Confession has
disappeared from these three years.

Now we have precisely such absolutely constraining evidence in
Marabotto’s treble chronicle of Catherine’s own words, with regard to
the twenty-five years during which she was led by God’s spirit alone.
It is clear then that the most important of Marabotto’s notes did not
exist incorporated with, or at least had not originally formed part of,
and did not dominate, the scheme of the _Vita_ which the Observant had
before him; and that, upon his later knowledge of, or pondering over
them, he understood Catherine’s words to have applied, not simply to
Direction but to (at least at all habitual) Confession as well.


2. MANUSCRIPT B.


1. _Its very primitive heading._

Manuscript B starts indeed with a heading demonstrably older than that
of MS. A. For its “De la Mirabile Conversione et Vita de la q(uondam)
donna Catherinetta Adorna” is more primitive, because of its “the
late,” which indicates a time of writing not yet far removed from the
date of her death; its “Donna,” less honorific than the “Madonna” of
the other MSS.; and, above all, its giving “Conversione” before “Vita,”
instead of “Conversatione” after “Vita,” since thus we are assured of
“Conversione” being no slip of the pen for “Conversatione,”--Conversion
coming necessarily before, and holy Conversation coming after, in
consequence of, an admirable life.--And this title will originally have
headed a booklet containing simply the story of her Conversion and
early Convert life, say, up to the end of Chapter VI of the Printed
_Vita_, p. 17_b_; or, since even the “et Vita” of this title reads like
a later addition, only up to the end of the present printed Chapter
II, p. 6_c_. I think there is no doubt that we have here the original
heading of a tract put together on occasion of the first public Cultus,
in the summer of 1512.


2. _Body of MS. B dependent upon MS. A._

But the body of MS. B is demonstrably later than, indeed dependent
upon, MS. A; for here the scribe silently adopts the modification,
effected by the writer of MS. A in his own text, with regard to
doubling the Breast-Period; and yet, even here, we have still the
Observant’s “Petto” for the first period, and the “Pecto” of the
Observant’s Prototype for the second period.[384] “Come” now appears
throughout, in lieu of MS. A’s “Como.” And Giuliano’s name is omitted
(all but once, in Catherine’s mouth) in the Husband-Chapter.[385]


3. _Order, division, numeration of the Chapters._

The order, division, and numeration of the Chapters is identical with
those of MS. A, all but that Chapter XXXIX of MS. A (equivalent to the
unimportant pp. 82_b_-83_a_ of Chapter XXXI in the Printed _Life_)
is here omitted. No Chapter numbered XXXIX appears here, but, after a
small break behind Chapter XXXVIII, the _Trattato_ follows, as Chapter
XL.


4. _Laceration at end of Manuscript._

And this Chapter XL is abruptly broken off in the midst of a
penultimate paragraph: “et per gratia li sono monstrati et” are the
last words. The authentication of the MS., appended immediately after
this rough ending, shows this laceration to be at least as old as 1672.
Nor is it a case of some complete set or sets of leaves being lost,
since one leaf has had to be torn off, from the still remaining other
half-sheet.[386] The last part, no doubt, contained the end of the
_Trattato_ and the Passion-Chapter; and will, like its Prototype, MS.
A, have been without a trace of the _Dialogo_. Indeed I suspect that it
was the latter circumstance which, when once this elaborate composition
had come to be prized, gave rise to the, surely deliberate, destruction
of the evidence for its absence here. MS. A will, in that case, have
been saved from a similar fate, by its special appropriation to a
powerful family; by its superior, uncial kind of script; and, above
all, by its important contemporary date and dedication at the end.


V. FIFTH STAGE: MANUSCRIPT C.

Our next, deeply interesting stage, is represented by one single MS.
in the University Library, Genoa,--catalogued as B. VII 17. It is a
careful copy, made throughout by the Protonotary Angelo Luigi Giovo,
and subscribed by himself on April 20, 1671, of, as he there says,
“Another ancient MS. received from the Signora ----, Matron of the
Great Hospital, who declared that she had herself received it from
the Nuns of the Madonna delle Grazie; and which is believed, with
great probability, to be the MS. copied by Ettore Vernazza and sent to
the Venerable Donna Battista, his daughter. The book, in view of the
antiquity of the paper, of the character of the binding of the copy,
and of the other peculiarities, has been judged by experts to belong
to the above-mentioned Period.” The reader will soon see why I place
(not necessarily the execution, but the text of) the MS. thus copied
by Giovo, before the printing of the _Vita_ in 1551, and will thus be
helped to a decision as to the “greatly probable” attribution to Ettore
Vernazza.


1. _Differences in text of MS. C from MSS. A and B._

Giovo’s Copy (my MS. C) follows, up to the end of its Chapter XLI
(the _Trattato_), the division, number, and sequence of the chapters,
and the peculiarities of the text, of MS. A, with an all but unbroken
closeness: even the slip, of 1506 (for 1509), in the date of the
great attack of “fire at heart,” reappears here as it stands there
(fol. 33_v_ of MS. C, compared with p. 193 of MS. A). But the “Petto”
and “Pecto,” of respectively the first and second Breast-Periods
in MSS. A and B, read here, in both cases, as simply “Petto” (MS.
C, fol. 3).--There is but one at all remarkable addition in this,
the _Vita_-part of the MS. In the account of the refusal to accept
Catherine on the part of the Nuns of the very Convent where, as we
shall see, the Prototype copied by Giovo was no doubt written, there
occur the new words: “Although her Confessor was instant with them
(to take her), knowing her, as he did, better than the Nuns knew her”
(MS. C, fol. 1_v_).--And, in concluding further on (on its fol. 71_v
seq._) with the Passion-Chapter, as this stands in MS. A (Chapter
XLII), a Chapter which here (for a reason to be given in a minute)
is not numbered, the MS. still follows closely (although now with a
few generally unimportant additions, omissions, and transpositions of
paragraphs), the matter, order, and literary form of MS. A.--Only one,
formally slight, but materially significant, difference exists here
between Giovo’s text and the Printed _Life_. The Printed _Life_, p.
142_b_, reads: “After this, she felt a hard nail at heart”; to this MS.
C adds (fol. 72_r_) “so that she seemed nailed to the Cross.” Neither
set of words occurs in MSS. A and B. MS. C here gives us something
unlike Catherine’s, but very like Battista’s, special spirit.


2. _The great addition: the “Dialogo,” Part First._

(1) _The “Dialogo” originally no longer._

But it is in the pages intermediate between the _Trattato_ and the
Passion (foll. 53_v_ to 71_v_), that lies the interest of this MS. For
here we get, for the first time, the _Dialogo_, although, as yet, only
its eventual First Part (pp. 185-225 in the Printed _Life_). Chapter
XLI (the _Trattato_) has just finished, by only six lines short of its
printed form, with the words “because that occupation with Himself
which God gives to the soul, slight though it be, keeps the soul so
occupied, that it exceeds everything, nor can the soul esteem anything
else.” And immediately next there come (53_v_) the title-words: “Here
follows a certain beautiful Allegory (_Figura_) which this holy soul
institutes (_fà_) concerning the Soul and the Body.”--The eventual
division into (17) chapters is still absent, and the work seems, at
this time, to have been planned to be no longer than it is here. For
it concludes with the emphatic climax: “Now the Spirit, having come
to hold this creature in this manner, declared: ‘I am determined
henceforth no more to call her a human creature, because I see her
(to be) all in God, without any (mere) humanity.’” For these words
simply re-cast the last words of the scheme of her entire life, given
by the _Vita_: “She said: ‘I live no more, but Christ lives in me.’
Hence she could no more recognize the quality of her human acts, in
themselves--whether they were good or evil; but she saw all in God”
(Pr. L., p. 6_c_).

(2) _The “Dialogo’s” two stages, each comprising two steps, and their
suggestions in the “Vita.”_

Now the _Dialogo_, as here given, consists of two chief stages, and
each stage contains two steps.

Chapters I to VI give the first stage--the history of a soul in a state
of moral and spiritual decline and contraction: all this, in the form
of a Dialogue between the Soul, the Body, and Self-Love.--Throughout
this first stage Self-Love holds dominion. But, during the first step,
the Soul (although it already distinguishes, with regard to what it
intends to practise, between simply avoiding grave sin and striving
after perfection) still continues fairly determined not to commit sin,
and still leads the Body. During the second step, on the contrary, even
this simple avoidance of grave sin has ceased, for now the Body leads
the Soul. Thus first the Soul, and then the Body, each leads the other
during one step, for “one week.”--These two steps or weeks stand for
the two lustres of Catherine’s pre-Conversion-Period, for the lukewarm,
and then the positively dissipated, lustre respectively. Chapters I
to III give the first week, equivalent to the first five years of her
married life, 1463 to 1468; and Chapters IV to VI give the second week,
and correspond to the second five years, 1468 to 1473.[387]

Chapters VII to XXI describe the second stage, that of Conversion and
Transformation, which (notwithstanding its appearance of instantaneous
and complete attainment of its end) is here presented as, in reality,
by far the longer and the more difficult, although the alone fruitful
and happy one. Chapters VII to XIII describe the first step. Chapters
VII to IX give us the Soul’s longing for Light; the spark of Pure Love
shown to it, on its conversion-day; and a long address by the Soul to
the Body and Self-Love, and the answers of these two.[388] In this
address the Soul for the first time speaks of “_the Spirit_.”[389]
