letter into three sections, omitting only two, relatively commonplace,
passages in the middle and at the end; and shall again point out
certain parallels and peculiarities at the end of each section.

(1) _Opening of the letter._

“Most Honoured Madam in the Crucified,

“‘I have come to place (cast) fire upon the earth, and what will I
but that it be enkindled’ (Luke xii, 49). By these most divine words
we can understand, in part, to what a supreme degree such a most happy
fire is of importance, since the Eternal Word came down from Heaven to
kindle it in His so dearly-loved rational earth. And this great effect
could not but follow, since the Paternal goodness willed to communicate
to our misery the ardour which He possesses eternally in His Heart.
And what else is this communication to us of His infinite love than
the planting within our minds of His own intrinsic, incomprehensible
delights? His Majesty, in His infinite courtesy, takes His delights
in abiding with the children of men (Prov. viii, 31). But He desires
that these delights should proceed from both sides, so that, as He
takes these delights in us, by His own intrinsic natural goodness, He
similarly wills that we, by means of that same goodness which is poured
into us by that fire which Christ places upon our earth,--as Paul
demonstrates when he says (Rom. v, 5), ‘The charity of God is poured
forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost who is given to us,’--He wills, I
say, that, set in motion by the immense potency of this infused fire,
we should place, in return, all our delights in His Majesty; and then,
to speak according to our human fashion, His unmeasured love attains
to its intent. In this correspondence lie hidden away delights beyond
all comprehension, considering that it is His own goodness that comes
down (into us), as He demonstrates when he says, ‘We will come to him,
and will make our abode with him’ (John xiv, 23); and that He raises us
up beyond all measure in suchwise that, of the Increate Heart and of
the created one, there is made, by the operation of Him who says, ‘The
Father who is in Me, worketh’ (John x, 38; v, 17), a single most secret
and inestimable union.”

Here, again, we find close parallels to Catherine in “His own
intrinsic incomprehensible delights,” “His infinite courtesy,” “the
immense virtue of this infused fire,” and “to speak according to
our human fashion.” And the whole general conception of a mutual
and corresponding action and circle between God and the soul, the
whole movement beginning in and by God, and leading back and ending
in Him, is here, once more, the common property of Battista and her
God-mother.[353] Yet “The Crucified,” with which the whole letter
opens, and “His Heart,” the “Increate Heart,” applied directly to God
Himself, are expressions we should seek in vain in Catherine. The
historical Christ, and a most legitimate anthropomorphism, find here
a place, indeed a prominence, which they have not there. And note the
sobriety with which Battista insists on the analogical character of
all this speculation, for she “speaks” only “according to our human
fashion”; and the allegorizing involved in the “His dearly-loved
rational earth,” the earth that souls dwell on having here become
simply identical with those souls themselves. And especially remark the
mystically characteristic doubleness of meaning, and the conception of
the substantiality of the divine indwelling, involved in the phrase,
“His own intrinsic, incomprehensible delights.” For this phrase means
both “the delight which, for our minds, is intrinsically bound up with
the thought of God,” and the “delight which He himself takes in His
indwelling whilst abiding within us”; and the latter idea involves
a belief in the soul’s delight in Him being but a sympathetic echo
and answer to His delight in this His own indwelling, a delight thus
actually in operation within the human soul.

Mark, too, how her opening her letter with a formally announced text
is but an instance of her life-long literary form of composition--the
homily; how saturated is the whole with (evidently first-hand)
scriptural meditation; and how wise and like her own father is her
treatment of this soul, so near to delusion in the very intemperance of
her search after perfection. A warning note of a claim about to be made
upon her correspondent’s effective self-immolation has been struck,
from the first, by the words, “the Crucified”; and yet this note is
first followed by a paragraph sufficiently soaring to satisfy even the
most lofty moods of the Signora Andronica.

(2) _Central part of the letter._

“I have taken up my pen from a desire that you may be wholly and
entirely devoted to the Lord, with a whole-hearted abandonment. I do
not mean that you should abandon the care of your children: on the
contrary, I wish that you may give the greatest care to them, both
within and without. For the within, by desiring heart-wholly that
they may be joined (cleave) to God, with all they are; and for the
without, by helping them studiously to avoid everything that leads
to sin.” She then gives the examples of SS. Felicitas and Monica,
and of St. Louis of France, and proceeds: “Now note, dear Madam, how
great is the fruit of good government on the part of parents. Indeed,
according to the little light which God deigns to give me, this alone
appears to me necessary--that your Ladyship should observe the counsel
of St. Paul, where he says (Eph. iv, 1) ‘that we should walk worthily
in the vocation in which we are called.’ Now _you_ are called to the
government of your children. Hence I pray you to study how to act,
that you may be able to render a good account of it to God. You will
remember how our Christ, on the point of going to His death, renders
an account to His eternal Father concerning those whom His Father had
given into His charge, saying, ‘of them whom Thou hast given Me (in
charge), I have not lost one’ (John xviii, 9).

“Consider, my very dear Friend, how that our great God, being
infinitely perfect, or, in better terms, perfection itself, we cannot
either add to or detract from His glory even the slightest point, as
the Prophet saw who said (Ps. ci, 13), ‘Thou, O Lord, art ever the
same’ (endurest for ever), ‘unchangeable and invariable.’ All that we
can do for Him, is to come in aid to His dear images, to His beloved
children, as the Lord shows in Matt, xxv, 40, ‘that which ye shall do
unto one of these My least, ye shall have done it unto Me.’--I know
well that you desire to withdraw yourself from all the cares of the
world, in order to be able to occupy yourself entirely with God. But
do you not know that ‘Charity seeketh not the things that are her own’
(1 Cor. xiii, 5), that is, her own utility? That desire which your
Ladyship has for herself, let her have it equally for her children.
Are we not obliged to love our neighbours as ourselves? (Matt. xix,
19). And hence, how much more our children! That step in perfection,
of entirely abandoning all things, your Ladyship cannot take, without
great damage to your neighbour,--damage, I mean, to souls. Remember how
full of perils is the period of youth; I beg of you, with all possible
insistence, for God’s sake, to have a greater care of these young souls
than of yourself, since the necessity is greater.”

Here, again, there are parallels to the God-mother: in the love of
that intensely unifying term, “si accostino,” “cleave to,” “be joined
to,” of St. Paul, so dear to Catherine also; in the love of all souls,
as God’s dear images, but specially of those bound to us by blood, so
marked in Catherine’s testamentary dispositions, as distinct from the
descriptions, possibly even from the surface-appearances, of her last
nine years; and in the greater care to be given to others than to our
own selves, when their necessity is greater than ours, so heroically
practised by Catherine in the case of the Plague.[354] The chief
difference, here again, is the prominence given by Battista to the
Historic Christ, by her quotation of the words of St. Matthew,--words
which, though so obviously applicable to Catherine’s work and
duties, nowhere occur throughout Catherine’s own contemplations or
discourses.--Note again the ambiguity of the “within and without” in
connection with the care to be bestowed, since the words are intended
to cover respectively both Donna Anguisola’s intention and exterior
action, and her children’s interior dispositions and visible acts.

(3) _Conclusion of the letter._

“But pray indeed to His Majesty that He may give you grace so great
as to enable you to abandon all things interiorly. Here is the point
in which all perfection consists. And I will pray to Him for this, in
union with yourself. I most certainly desire, for my part, that your
generous heart may have no other delight but God. And do you convert
that human consolation which men are wont to take in their children,
into a great desire that they may cleave to God; that they may not
offend Him, and that they may bear His Majesty in their hearts. And
when those things have been actually effected, do you then take the
greatest delight in them, whilst mortifying that merely human pleasure
which men take in the mutable prosperity of their children, in the most
pleasing consolation which arises from their company, and in such-like
things. And, from such a course of action, various advantages will
follow. First, you will, I think, be thus doing what is most pleasing
to God; next, you will be most useful to your neighbour; and lastly,
your Ladyship will have carried off a great victory over your own self.”

Here we can trace two close parallels to special points of Catherine’s
practice and teaching. In the doctrine that the point of all perfection
consists in the interior abandonment of all things, we get but a
re-statement of Catherine’s teaching as to God’s love being practicable
everywhere; and in the advice to practise interior mortification in
the matter of resting in the consolation of her children’s company, we
have not only a parallel to Catherine’s early and transitory convert
practice, but also an application to human intercourse of Catherine’s,
and indeed also Battista’s, continuous and ever-growing practice of
detachment from sensible consolations in the soul’s intercourse with
God.[355]

We can hardly doubt that this letter was as effectual in keeping
Donna Anguisola within the limits of family duties, as the letter of
forty-six years before had been in bringing back Dottore Moro to the
world-wide spiritual family of the Ancient Church.


2. _Letter to Padre Collino, 1576._

And we have next a letter, written in 1576, when she was seventy-nine,
to that Father Serafino Collino at Cremona, to whom, five years later,
she was to write the truly classical account of her father, which has
been the main source of our study of that heroic figure.

And indeed already in this letter she preludes, as it were, to that
outburst of filial praise, by first dwelling here upon the effects
of her father’s life as they were maturing visibly around her. “A
very spiritual, wise, and noble person,” writes Battista, “has been
visiting me; and in the course of talk she asked me, ‘Well, and what
did you think of the great miracles that God has been working during
these times of acute conflict, in this our city--miracles such as no
one ever heard of throughout the course of ancient Roman history or
in connection with any other warfare?’ And I, knowing well that this
person has three Doctors of Theology living continuously in her house,
guessed that these men must have carefully scrutinized and examined
the whole matter. So I simply asked, ‘What miracles do you mean?’ And
she answered me, ‘The city has been for so long a time in arms, a prey
to the good and to the wicked, to the wise and to the mad, and has
been affording the greatest possible opportunity for acts contrary to
justice. And yet, throughout the city within the walls, no one has ever
been offended,--no man, in his person; no woman, in her honour; and no
man or woman, in their possessions.’”

And then Battista comments on her visitor’s declaration. “As to their
persons, all men went about in the city with swords drawn and erect,
and spoke injurious words to those of the opposite party. And it really
seems as though their hands were tied, for they used their tongues
indeed but not their hands; not one drop of blood has been spilt.
Within the city two homicides were, no doubt, committed during this
time, because of a difference on a point of honour; but none on account
of party spirit. Similarly outside of Genoa the son of Signer Antonio
d’Oria was killed--not by the opposite party, but by another nobleman
like himself,--they had come to words. As to female honour, the women
went and came to visit each other, and frequented Mass, whether they
belonged to one party or to the other; and the greater number of
gentlewomen went out of Genoa, accompanied by their daughters, passing
through the very midst of the city, and going down the wharf to get on
board their boats; and yet never was any discourtesy shown to any one
of them. Similarly, with regard to possessions: quantities of these
were sent out of Genoa; great masses of them were deposited in the
Monasteries--and yet never even a trifle was ever taken. On this latter
point we of this Convent can bear direct witness. For although so much
property and money was brought to the Monastery delle Grazie, that
it became difficult to move about the house because of the quantity
of cases and stray boxes deposited there, nevertheless not even to
the poor carriers who brought them was the slightest violence done,
although they had to pass through all those drawn and raised swords;
nor was a single word said to us Nuns, who appeared in the gateway to
receive the goods.”[356]

Now the well-informed lawyer, Professore Morro, thinks that all this
was the direct result of Ettore Vernazza’s far-sighted and devoted
philanthropy. And he is no doubt right. For we still possess the
entries, in the Cartulary of St. George, of the great works carried
out by that powerful Banking Body, in conformity with and by means of
Ettore’s directions and moneys, amongst Genoa’s teeming poor and sick
and ignorant, in the years 1531 and 1553.[357] Indeed even the printed
documents bring the administration of this great, ever-growing fund
down to the year 1708.

And the points that here concern the character of Battista are this
her omnipresent and yet bashful pride in her large-hearted father; her
virile joy in the public good; her immensely sane and direct tastes
as to the city’s improvement; and her glad finding of a miracle in
things thus readily verifiable, universal, interior, and yet profoundly
operative in the visible work-a-day life of man. There is something
strikingly modern in this severely social, and already more or less
statistical, way of testing improvement, an improvement which is found
here, not in any vaguely assumed increase of impulsive or perfunctory
almsgiving in the one class, or of dependence and passivity in the
other, but in the closely scrutinized proofs of a remarkable growth in
general self-respect, self-maintenance, public spirit and sense of
social interdependence, on the part of all parties and classes.

And in the daughter’s judgment concerning all this it is again easy
to trace a likeness to her father, with his careful regulations for a
great Register of the Poor, and his provisions for harbour-works and
the embellishment of the city. But Catherine’s spirit is also present,
with its emphatic insistence upon God’s love as practicable everywhere,
and upon truth as, of its very nature, public-spirited and meant for
all.[358]


3. _Second letter to Padre Collino, 1581._

And five years later still (she was now eighty-four) Battista writes
her long account of her father’s life, which we studied in connection
with him, but which would well deserve a detailed analysis from the
standpoint of the daughter’s dispositions, so keen and large, so
tender, true and immensely operative, long after most men have died, or
are living on in a selfish second childhood.


V. BATTISTA’S DEATH, 1587.

And then at last, six years afterwards, at four o’clock in the
afternoon of May 9, 1587, Pope Sixtus V being Pope and Mary Stuart
having but six months still to live, Battista died in her Convent,
fully three generations old. During her last years she had been
allowed to communicate daily, and had thus, at the end, added one more
trait of resemblance to her God-mother, who, as we know, had, for
some thirty-five years of her life, found her greatest strength and
consolation in this the simplest, most central and deepest of all the
Christian devotions and means of Grace.[359]

One hundred and forty years had now passed since the birth of
Catherine, and seventy-seven since her death. It is indeed time that we
should, having accumulated so much material, proceed in the next volume
to an examination and exposition of the underlying spiritual facts and
laws specially brought home to us by the group of lives we have been
studying, and of which the central figure was that, for us, largely
elusive but immensely suggestive, many-sided and yet rarely beautiful,
soul and influence, which the Church venerates as St. Catherine of
Genoa.




CONCLUSION

WHEREIN LIES THE SECRET OF SPIRITUAL PERSUASIVENESS


But let us first conclude this volume by attempting an answer, however
preliminary and general, to the definite question with which it opened
out.


I. THE QUESTION.

We asked there, how any deeper, will-moving intercommunication can even
be possible amongst men? For the mere possession of, and appeal to,
the elementary forms of abstract thinking, which seem to be our only
certain common material, instrument and measure of persuasion, appear
never, of themselves, to move the will, or indeed the feelings; whereas
all that is endowed with such directly will-moving power appears, not
only as specifically concrete and as hopelessly boxed up within the
four corners of our mutually exclusive individualities, but also as
vitiated, even for each several owner, by an essentially fitful and
fanciful subjectivity.


II. THE ANSWER.

Now I think that even the survey of the three great lives, and of those
four minor ones, which has been just attempted, forcibly suggests, both
positively and negatively, at least the general outlines of the true
answer to this pressing question.


1. Only a life sufficiently large and alive to take up and retain,
within its own experimental range, at least some of the poignant
question and conflict, as well as of the peace-bringing solution and
calm: hence a life dramatic with a humble and homely heroism which, in
rightful contact with and in rightful renunciation of the Particular
and Fleeting, ever seeks and finds the Omnipresent and Eternal;
and which again deepens and incarnates (for its own experience and
apprehension and for the stimulation of other souls) this Transcendence
in its own thus gradually purified Particular: only such a life can be
largely persuasive, at least for us Westerns and in our times.

We would thus have an attempt, ever renewed, ever widening, ever
deepening, at the formation of, as it were, a concrete, living,
breathing image of the Abiding and the One; of Law, Love, and Duty;
of God: an image formed out of the seemingly shifting, shrinking
flux, and the apparently shapeless mass of our actual, bewildering
human manyfold; our flesh and sweat, and tears and blood, our joy
and laughter, our passions and petty revolts, our weariness and
isolations. Attend primarily to minimizing or eliminating all such
friction and pain; to being clear, materially simple and static, a
fixed Thing, rather than vivid, formally unified, and dynamic, a
growing Personality: or again, let the friction be so great, or the
courage and fidelity so small, as to lead to the break-up of all
genuine recollection and harmonization; and, in the former case,
such a character or outlook may be considered “safe” or “correct” or
“sensible”; and, in the latter, the character and outlook will not be
consolidated at all, or will be breaking up: but in neither case will
the life be persuasive. For to be truly winning, the soul’s life must
become and must keep itself full and true.


2. Now it is simply false that man can, even for his own self alone,
hold spiritual reality, even from the first, in a simply passive,
purely dependent, entirely automatic and painless fashion; or that he
can, even at the last, possess it in a full, continuous and effortless
harmony and simultaneousness.

God no doubt holds all Truth and Reality as one great Here and Now, or
rather He possesses them entirely outside of space and time; nor can we
attribute to Him directly any interior conflict, effort, or suffering.
And, again, we ourselves too possess within our minds an element
and an apprehension of the Abiding and the Simultaneous; and their
rudiments operate within us, if all-diffusively yet most powerfully,
from the very first. Indeed the continuous increase in definiteness
and influence of that element and of its apprehension here, and the
indefinite expansion and continuously conscious possession of this
same element hereafter, are respectively the highest aim and fullest
achievement of our spiritual life. And finally, the further the soul
advances, the more it sees and realizes the profound truth, that all it
does and is, is somehow given to it; and hence that, inasmuch as it is
permanent at all, it is grounded upon, environed, supported, penetrated
and nourished by Him who is its origin and its end. Here all the soul’s
actions tend to coalesce to simply being, and this being, in so far as
there and then acceptable to the conscience, comes more and more to be
felt and considered as the simple effect of the one direct action of
God alone.

And yet as to God, some kind and degree of Incarnational doctrine is
necessary, and is indeed (in varyingly perfect or imperfect forms) the
common property of all higher religion; and Christians have learnt
to think the profound thought, of God Himself being in a mysterious
closeness to even our most secret perplexities and inarticulate
pain.--And by ourselves, poor weaklings, that vast, continuous
Simultaneity and Harmony of God can only be more and more nearly
approached, if, upon our mostly shadowy, and (when at all clear) our
short-lived consciousness of an inchoate simultaneity and harmony of
our own, we work an orderly successiveness, and attempt a Melody: an
humble, creaturely imitation of the Eternal, Spaceless Creator, under
the deliberately accepted conditions and doubly refracting media
of time and space. Real temptation, true piercing conflict, heavy
darkness, and bewildering perplexity; the constant encountering (as
a necessary condition and occasion of all growth) of numberless and
multiform remoter risks of failing and of falling: all this forms an
essential part of this painful-joyous probation and virile, because
necessarily costing and largely gradual, self-constitution of man’s
free-willing spirit.

And the place and function, in all this spiritual growth-in-conflict,
of Science, both in its most determinist and apparently
most anti-spiritual mood, and in its subtler though no less
destructive-seeming attitudes, will turn out, we shall find,--now
that our generation is getting to know Science’s special scope and
implications,--to be of simply irreplaceable value and potency.

And though, in the other life, our earthly pain and temptation
are to be no more, we may be sure that, even there, the essential
characteristics of our nature will not be reversed. Hence we may
be able, later on in this book, to hazard some not all-ungrounded
conjecture as to the possible substitute and form in Heaven for
what is essentially noble and creaturely in our sufferings and
self-renunciations here on earth.

And lastly, though God’s action in all things in general, and in
our individual soul in particular, be more and more recognized as
all-pervasive in proportion as the soul advances: yet this action will
have to be conceived as operating in and through and with our own; as
in each case finding, in one sense, its very matter, in another, its
very form, in our own free-willings. For Spirit and spirit, God and the
creature, are not two material bodies, of which one can only be where
the other is not: but, on the contrary, as regards our own spirit,
God’s Spirit ever works in closest penetration and stimulation of our
own; just as, in return, we cannot find God’s Spirit simply separate
from our own spirit within ourselves. Our spirit clothes and expresses
His; His Spirit first creates and then sustains and stimulates our own.
The two, as regards the inner life of the human soul, rise and sink
together. But more as to this too hereafter.


3. We shall indeed, throughout the next volume, have ample
opportunities for noting how numerous, definite, far-reaching and at
all times operative, even though still but partially unfolded, are
the evidences for, and the consequences and applications of, such a
fundamental conception, as they are furnished and required by all
deeper human life; hence, above all, by Religion; and in Religion,
again, specially by its ever largely elusive, yet ever profoundly
important, constituent, the Mystical Element.




APPENDIX TO PART II

CHRONOLOGICAL ACCOUNT AND CRITICAL ANALYSIS OF THE MATERIALS FOR THE
RE-CONSTITUTION OF SAINT CATHERINE’S LIFE AND TEACHING.


INTRODUCTION.

The following laborious study of the growth and upbuilding of the Life
and Legend of St. Catherine is a study worth the making. For this study
will bring out fully the test and reasons which have guided the process
of documentary selection and estimation adopted throughout the second
part of this book, indicating thus the precise degree of reliability
pertaining to my narrative. But especially will it furnish a detailed,
and peculiarly instructive, example of what, with numberless
differences in degree, kind, and importance, can be traced throughout
the history of the transmission of the image and influence of great
religious personalities and teachers. These continuously recurring
phenomena can be taken as, together, constituting the general forms and
laws which regulate the growth of all religious devotional biography.

I.

These general laws appear to be as follows.


1. _Three Laws._

There is the law of _contemporary, simultaneous, spontaneous variation
of apprehension_. Vernazza and Marabotto, writing down, at the time of
their occurrence or communication, certain facts and sayings with an
equal self-oblivion, sincerity, and truthfulness, give us apprehensions
which, in great part objectively valuable, are, nevertheless, more
or less differing pictures of one and the same fact or saying, or
different selections from amongst the moods and manifestations of one
living personality observed by them.--There is the law of _posterior,
successive, reflective variation of elaboration_. The Dominican
Censor and Battista Vernazza, re-thinking Catherine and her teaching,
in other times and away from her direct influence, necessarily see
her differently again: they are, as it were, spiritual grandchildren,
who rather themselves absorb her and re-state her to their generation
than they are themselves absorbed by her.--And there is the law of
_conservation_, _juxtaposition_, and _identification_. First the
Redactor of the Book of 1528-1530, and lastly the Redactor of that
of 1551--probably, both times, Battista--with, in between, in 1547,
the Redactor who attempted a quadripartite reschematizing of the
_Life_--could not but try and soften the variations produced by the two
other laws.


2. _The third law tends to confuse the operation of the other two._

And note how it is precisely this third law and stage which largely
tends to make the effects of the two other laws into causes of
vagueness, confusion, and scepticism. For instead of conceiving
the unity and identity of the subject-matter (a deep spiritual
personality) as essentially inexhaustible, and as requiring, for its
least inadequate apprehension, precisely both those simultaneous and
spontaneous, and those successive and reflective experiences and
reproductions of it, as furnished by the two other laws, this stage
tends to confuse the identity of the apprehended subject-matter with
a sameness in the apprehension of it; and, whilst thus robbing that
subject-matter of its richness and movement, to introduce an element of
arrangement and timidity into the originally quite _naïf_, and hence
directly impressive, evidences of the observers. Yet the instinct
and object of this third law is as legitimate and elementary as are
those of the other two, since a real unity and utilization of all the
preceding variety is as necessary as the variety to be thus integrated,
and since the other two laws show a similar variety of actuation
throughout religious literature.


3. _Examples._

We find (to move in Church History back from St. Catherine) these three
tendencies at work in the constitution of the Life and Legend of St.
Francis of Assisi, A.D. 1181(?)-1226, traced for us now, with so much
sympathy and acumen by M. Paul Sabatier and the Bollandists. We get
them again in the case of St. Thomas of Canterbury, A.D. 1118-1171,
especially in that of his Death and Miracles, so carefully studied in
Dr. Edwin Abbot’s remarkable book (1898). And, once more, in those
Merovingian Saints, the great Martin of Tours in their midst, at the
end of the fourth century, whose Lives have been so interestingly
described by Bernouilli (1900). And we find them, with especial
clearness, in the growth of the Life of St. Anthony, about A.D.
250-356, as contained in Palladius’s _Historia Monachorum_, now that
Abbot Cuthbert Butler has given us his admirable analysis and edition
of that deeply instructive compiler (1898, 1904).

If we take the Bible, we find (on moving here in a contrary direction)
these laws again at work in the elucidation and elaboration of the
great figure of Moses and of his world-historic life-work. For if
here we get but little that can claim to be by his pen, or even,
as literature, to be contemporaneous with him (since the earliest
Corpus of Laws, the Book of the Covenant, reaches probably only in
its substance back to him), yet here, too, the earliest consecutive
descriptions of his life, by the Jahvist and Elohist writers, give
us two different, though probably more or less simultaneous, largely
_naïve_, accounts and impressions of his life and work. And these
simultaneous variations are followed, later on, by the successive,
increasingly reflective variations and developments of Deuteronomy
and of the Priestly Code. And lastly, these documents get constituted
(in probably two great stages), by Redactional work, into the great
composite History and Legislation of our present last four Books
of Moses.--So again with David. We have the David of some few of
the Psalms; the David of the Books of Samuel, in a double series of
most vivid and spontaneous, more or less simultaneous but somewhat
differing, accounts; the David of the greater part of the Psalter,
the result of a long process of devout successive reflection and
re-interpretation; and the David of the Books of Chronicles, where
pragmatic systematization reaches its height.--And so too with the
Maccabean Heroes, whose history appears, apprehended with varying
degrees of contemporary, simultaneous, spontaneous vividness, and of
subsequent, successive, reflective pragmatism, in the documents and
redactional settings of the First and Second Books of Maccabees.--And
the growth indicated in these three cases covered respectively some
eight hundred, seven hundred, and one hundred years.

But it is, of course, in the New Testament that the interest and
importance of these laws reaches its height. If here we once more
move backwards, the case of St. Paul (martyred A.D. 64) furnishes us
with parallel contemporary accounts of the spontaneous type, in his
own Epistles and in the six “We”-passages by the eyewitness St. Luke
in the Acts of the Apostles; whilst the remaining account in the Acts
is doubtless by a later, more reflective and pragmatic, writer.--And
in the apprehension and interpretation of Our Lord’s inexhaustible
life, character, teaching, and work, we find very plainly the three
tendencies and stages. We get the contemporary, simultaneous,
spontaneous stage, in the cases of the Aramaic annotations of
the Apostle Levi-Matthew, which we still possess, translated and
incorporated both in the larger and later book, our canonical Greek St.
Matthew, and in the corresponding parts of our St. Luke; and in the
reminiscences of another eyewitness, presumably St. Peter, given us by
a disciple in what is still the substance of our Canonical St. Mark. We
get the posterior, successive, increasingly reflective or contemplative
stage, chiefly in the two great types furnished, first by the Pauline,
and then by the Joannine writings. And we get the juxtaposing,
unifying, largely identifying stage and law operating above all in
the, partly successive, Canonization of the New Testament _Corpus_.
And these three stages can be taken as having their downward limits in
about A.D. 30, 100, 200; so that here we cover a period of some hundred
and seventy years.


4. _Three different attitudes possible._

And, in all these and countless other cases, we can take up three
different attitudes: the impoverishing, sectarian, “purity” attitude;
the destructive, sceptical, “identity” attitude; or the fruitful, truly
Catholic “approximation” and “development” attitude. The first attitude
assumes (ever in part unconsciously) the possibility and necessity of
a purely objective apprehension of Personality, of such a Personality
being a static entity, both in itself and in its effects upon, and
its apprehendedness by, other souls, and of the earliest among the
observations concerning such a Personality ever giving us such a
purely objective, exhaustive picture and experience, or at least the
nearest approach (in all respects) to such an exhaustive objectivity.
The third attitude would so understand the admitted identity of the
Personality observed as practically to identify also the simultaneous
and successive observers and observations, and to eliminate all variety
and growth in that spirit’s own inner life and in its apprehension
by other minds. Only the second attitude would, by recognizing both
the constant, necessary presence of a subjective element in all these
simultaneous and successive apprehensions, and the indefinite richness
and many-sided apprehensibleness of all great spiritual Personalities,
welcome and draw out all the difference in unity of these many
“reactions,” as so many means, for a growing soul, towards a growing
knowledge of that life and character, whose very greatness is, in part,
measurable by the depth, variety, and persistence of these several
effects, pictures, and embodiments of itself in different races, times,
and souls.

Let us, then, betake ourselves to a systematic examination of one
example of these world-wide three laws: the trouble taken will be well
spent.

II.

Had I found room to print my notes in justification of the text
adopted by me, the reader would have gained some idea of the exceeding
complexity of the materials furnished by the printed _Vita e Dottrina_.
Indeed the original Preface to that book (1551) finds it necessary to
conclude with the words “we therefore” (because of the book’s utility,
indeed necessity, “in these turbulent times”) “beg the devout reader
not to be disturbed” (_stomacharsi_ now changed to _meravigliarsi_)
“if he finds here matters which appear to be out of their proper
order” (_non ben ordinate_), “and which are sometimes repeated; since
attention has been given, neither to much precision” (_distinzione_),
“nor to the order of events, nor to elegance of form, but only to that
truth and simplicity with which its facts and discourses were gathered
by devout spiritual persons” (“her Confessor and a Spiritual Son of
hers”) “from the very lips of that Seraphic Woman.” Both the praise
and the blame of this pregnant sentence will appear to be most fully
deserved.

In our Second Part we have, in imitation of all experience in life
itself, been thrown _in medias res_, and have thus gained some general
idea and curiosity as to the sources of our knowledge; in this Appendix
we will now, without repeating details already given, take this
evidence, as much as possible, in its chronological order. And at each
stage I shall attempt so to analyze the evidence of that stage, as
to be able to use it as a check and test of the evidence of the next
stage.--We shall, however, have to bear in mind that this method has
necessarily, at each earlier stage, somewhat to beg the question; for,
in order to make its meaning everywhere sufficiently clear, it has from
the first to assume a confidence of tone, which can be justified only
by the whole argument, and which therefore has its logical place only
at the very end.

This Appendix shall consist of two Divisions, of seven stages and eight
sections respectively. The first Division gives the dated Documents,
or such as can readily be restricted to within certain years; and the
second Division analyses the remaining, undated Corpus and attempts to
fix its origin and value.


FIRST DIVISION: ACCOUNT AND ANALYSIS OF THE DOCUMENTS PREVIOUS,
AND IMMEDIATELY SUBSEQUENT TO, THE “VITA E DOTTRINA” WITH THE
“DICCHIARAZIONE.”


I. FIRST STAGE, 1456 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 1510, ALL LEGAL.

The documents of the first stage are all legal papers, and entirely
contemporary and authentic. They have to furnish the skeleton which
receives its clothing of flesh from the other documents. I shall here
describe only those not described in Part II, and shall refer back to
that Part for those already described there.


1. _Deed of 1456._

There is, first, a deed of August 27, 1456. From amongst the shares
belonging to Pomera (formerly) wife to (the late) Bartolommeo de Auria
(Doria), but now (Sister) Isabella, in the convent of St. David; at the
instance of Andrea de Auria, her only son, her heir, and of Francesca,
the mother of Catherine, daughter of Jacobo de Fiesco: two shares of
the Bank of St. George (£200) are set apart, for the benefit of the
said Catherine, for her marriage, if she marries according to her
Mother’s advice.[360] Note how early (Catherine is not yet nine years
old) her mother, Francischetta (so a note to the copy of this document,
no doubt correctly, calls her, and suspects Pomera to have been
her sister), is thinking of Catherine’s marriage; and how, although
Catherine’s father is still alive, nothing is said as to his consent,
perhaps simply because, this money coming from a maternal aunt and
cousin, only the mother’s wishes are considered to be important here.


2. _Catherine’s Marriage Settlement, January 1463._

There is, next, Catherine’s marriage settlement, made “at Genoa, in
the quarter of St. Laurence, to wit in the sitting-room (_caminata_)
of the residence of Francisca, formerly wife to the late Don Jacobo
de Fiescho,” “with the public street in front, the house of Urbano de
Negro at its right, and that of Sebastiano de Negro at its left and
back”; “in the evening of Thursday, January 13, 1463”; between Giuliano
Adorno, son of the late Don Jacobo, on the one hand, and Francisca,
mother of Caterinetta and Jacobo and Giovanni de Fiesco, brothers of
the same. Giuliano thereby pledges himself to give Catherine on their
marriage, £1,000, and he “mortgages to her,” up to this amount, “a
certain house of his own, situate in Genoa in the quarter of St. Agnes,
with the public street in front, the house of Baldassare Adorno at the
right hand” (it belonged before this to Don Georgio Adorno), “and on
the other hand the public street.” And Francesca, Jacobo, and Giovanni
promise to pay Giuliano, in bare money and in wedding outfit for
Catherine, £400 on completion of the marriage, and another £400 in the
course of the following two years; and they mortgage to him, up to this
amount, the house in which the settlement is being made. Giuliano is to
be free to live with his wife and her family in this same house, for
these first two years after his marriage, without any payment.

At this date, then, Giuliano is already fatherless, and Catherine’s
brother Lorenzo is still too young to have any legal voice in the
matter. Although Catherine is, after the first two years, not
guaranteed anything beyond £1,000 capital, or say £40 a year income,
her outfit is a handsome one.


3. _Catherine’s first Will, June 1484._

Then there is Catherine’s first Will, June 23, 1484, after twenty-one
years of marriage. She is “lying” although “fully herself in mind,
intellect, and memory,” yet “languid in body and weighted down by
bodily infirmity, in the room, her residence, in the women’s quarters
of the Hospital of the Pammatone,” which “she has inhabited for a
considerable time (_jamdiu_).” “And knowing herself to be without
children, and without hope of future offspring,” she leaves the
life-interest in her marriage-dowry of £1,000 to her husband, Giuliano;
bids divide up, at his death, the bulk of this capital between the
Hospital and her eldest brother Jacobo (£300 to each), and her two
younger brothers Giovanni and Lorenzo (£150 to each); and orders her
body to be buried in the Hospital Church.[361]

Ten years, then, after her Conversion, Catherine had already been
living for a considerable time within the Hospital. They do not as
yet occupy a separate building, or even a set of rooms within the
Hospital; and, though both live within it, they evidently occupy
separate rooms in different parts of the great complex of buildings;
for the room here mentioned is simply Catherine’s (_camera residentiae
testatricis_, where _residentiae_ must be a descriptive and not a
partitive genitive), and forms part and parcel of the women’s wards
(_in domibus mulierum_). Her absence of hope as to offspring evidently
arises primarily from the life of continence she is leading. Yet this
latter determination is clearly not caused by any specific knowledge
of her husband’s past infidelity: for Thobia must have been now some
ten years old, yet there is no kind of mention of her; whilst, later
on, Catherine never fails to remember her, with one exception to
be presently explained. There is no mention of nephews and nieces,
doubtless because her brothers were, as yet, either unmarried or
childless, or, at least, daughterless. She is fairly well off, for
besides this possession of £1,000 she gets her room and board free,
and Giuliano has still some property of his own more considerable than
hers. And the share left by her to relations is large--£600--as over
against £300 to a public charity (the Hospital), and £100, presumably,
for the funeral, minor charities, and Masses. If she says nothing, as
yet, as to burial in the same grave with her husband, this is doubtless
because she herself appears now to be the one likely to die first.


4. _Giuliano’s Will, October 1494._

There is, fourthly, the first and last Will, October 20, 1494, of
“the Reverend Sir, Brother Giuliano Adorno, professing the Third
Order of St. Francis, under the care of the Friars Minor Observants,”
already described on pages 151, 152. The will is drawn up in the
“sitting-room” (_caminata_) of the “habitation” of the Testator. Now
the Notary, Battista Strata, in a foot-note to a first draft of an
(unfinished) Will of Catherine, writes: “On the day on which I drew up
Don Giuliano’s”; which words (owing to a multiplicity of converging
indications) can only refer to this Will of October 2, 1494. And
in this draft Catherine leaves legacies to the servants Benedetta
(Lombarda) and Mariola Bastarda, as “abiding with, and dwelling in the
house with, Testatrix.” It is clear then that, by now, Catherine and
Giuliano are living under the same roof, in a distinct house within the
hospital precincts, with two personal attendants for their common use.
They will have moved, out of their separate single rooms, into this
house, upon Catherine becoming Matron, in 1490. In this draft there
appear also, for the first time, her brother Jacobo’s two daughters
(£100 each); and her sister, the Augustinianess Limbania (£10).


5. _Four minor documents, 1496-1497._

There are, next, certain minor documents of 1496-1497, which modify
points of previous Wills and clear up details of her life. Thus,
on June 17, 1496 Catherine signs a deed of consent to the sale of
the Palace in the S. Agnese (Adorni) quarter.--On January 10, 1496,
Giuliano, “sane in mind although languid in body,” orders, in a
Codicil, that Catherine shall carry out, according to the directions
of a certain Friar Minor, a vow made by himself to St. Anthony of
Padua; notes that the Palace has been sold; and declares that she is
to be free to annul, amend or diminish, according to her own judgment,
his legacy of £500 to the Hospital.[362] And, in the Cartulary of the
Bank of St. George, Catherine’s name appears as an Investor: on July
14, 1497 as “wife of Giuliano Adorno”; but on October 6 as “wife and
testamentary heiress of the late Giuliano Adorno.”[363] These entries
were considered on page 149 note. On the second occasion she orders
that the Bank shall, after her death, annually pay over the interest
of the fourteen shares (£1,400), now bought by her, to the Hospital of
the Pammatone, in return for “the enjoyment and usufruct of a house and
a greenhouse (_viridario_) of (within) the said Hospital,” which had
been conceded to her for her lifetime. The sum (about £56 a year) thus
ceded by her is a handsome one, as she had, by now, well earned the use
of this house by her constant labours for the Hospital, including her
matronship from 1490 to 1496. I take it that she was again thinking of
Thobia; so that this relatively large sum would cover at least part of
the Hospital’s expenses incurred for this poor girl.


6. _Catherine’s second Will, May 1498._

This has been studied on pages 152-154.


7. _Deed of Cession, September 18, 1499; and Codicil of January 1503._

These have been studied on pages 155, and 168, 169.


8. _Third Will, May 21, 1506; and Codicil of November 1508._

These have been described on pages 172-174; and 175, 176.


9. _Fourth and last Will, March 18, 1509; and two last Codicils, August
3 and September 12, 1510._

These have been described on pages 185-187; 202, 203; and 212-214,
respectively.

We have thus described all the fifteen documents which alone still
bear dates within the range of Catherine’s lifetime, and whose
contemporaneousness is above all challenge. They all have the pedantic,
at first sight unmoving, indeed repulsive, form of legal documents.
Yet the substance of quite ten of them undoubtedly proceeds from
Catherine; and they all give us a most precious, precise certainty
with regard to many cardinal points of locality, date, sequence, and
self-determination in her life. True, neither the day, nor even the
month, of her Birth or Baptism; nor the year of her Conversion; nor
the date of the beginning of her Daily Communions; nor the facts
as to the rarity or frequency of her Confessions; nor the day or
month of Giuliano’s death, have been recoverable by any contemporary
attestations. But on other points we thus possess a series of
absolutely reliable documents, ranging from 1456 to 1510, whose
testimony nothing can be allowed to shake.


II. SECOND STAGE: FIVE FURTHER OFFICIAL AND LEGAL DOCUMENTS, 1511-1526;
AND FOUR MORTUARY DATES, 1524-1587.

And this first stage of the evidence is followed by a second, as dry
and legal, and as absolutely reliable, as the other; yet which still
does not refer to any chronicle or notes of her life, (as either
already extant or as in process of registration or radaction), but only
to the fate of her remains and to certain turning-points in the lives
of her disciples and eyewitnesses. I note here only those documents
which fix for us the dates of the beginning of her Cultus, and which
give us the latest contemporary proof for those persons being still
alive.


1. We get thus the Hospital Account for the Moneys spent on the
Religious Clothing of the Maid-Servant Mariola Bastarda, July 7, 1511;
the entry in the Hospital Cartulary of the expenses incurred for the
transport of stone and for a picture, in connection with the first
opening of Catherine’s Deposito, July 10, 1512; the account, in the
same book, concerning the funeral of Don Jacobo Carenzio, who had died
occupying Catherine’s little house within the Hospital precincts, on
January 7, 1513; a Will of the little widow-attendant Argentina del
Sale, of January 15, 1522; and the Will of Don Cattaneo Marabotto,
still “in good bodily and mental health,” May 11, 1526,--a document
drawn up in his dwelling-place, the house belonging to his friends, the
Salvagii.[364]


2. And to this group we can add four further dates, the first and
last two of which are completely certain. Ettore Vernazza died on
June 26 or 27, 1524; the year is fixed by the great plague epidemic
which carried him off, and the month and day, by his daughter’s
letter. Cattaneo Marabotto died, there is no reason to doubt, in 1528.
Catherine’s Dominican cousin and close friend, Suor Tommasa Fiesca,
died, eighty-six years of age, in 1534. And Battista Vernazza died,
aged ninety, on May 9, 1587.[365]

Hence, up to eighteen years after her death, the two closest of
Catherine’s confidants were alive; whilst one who had known her, and
had been thirteen at the time of Catherine’s death, was still alive
seventy-seven years after that event.


III. THIRD STAGE: BISHOP GIUSTINIANO’S ACCOUNT OF CATHERINE’S LIFE,
REMAINS, AND BIOGRAPHY, 1537.

Our third stage is in strikingly manifold contrast to the other two.
It is represented by but one single, largely vague and rhetorical, but
human and directly psychological, document; and is the first that tells
us of a Life.


1. _The text._

Monsignore Agostino Giustiniano, Bishop of Nibio, published his
_Castigatissimi Annali … della Republica di Genova_, in Genoa, in
1537. There, on p. 223, he tells us that he was born (of socially
distinguished parents) in that city in 1470. And under the date of 1510
(p. 266) he writes: “And in the month of September, it pleased God to
draw to Himself Madonna Catarinetta Adorna, who was daughter of Giacobo
di Flisco, Vice-Roy of Naples for King René, and wife to Giuliano
Adorno, with whom she lived many years in marital chastity. And her
life, after the Divine goodness had touched her heart in the years
of her youth, was all charity, love, meekness, benignity, patience,
incredible abstinence, and a mirror of every virtue, so that she can be
compared to St. Catherine of Siena. And all the city has participated
in, and has perceived, the odour of the virtues of this holy matron,
who, when rapt in the spirit, spoke, amongst other matters, of the
state of the souls that are in Purgatory, things excellent and rare
and worthy of being attended to by such persons as have a taste for
the religious and spiritual life. Her body is deposited in the Oratory
of the larger Hospital, and offers a spectacle no less admirable than
venerable, appearing (_come che sia_) all entire with its flesh, so
that she looks alive,--as though she had been placed there to-day; and
yet full twenty-five years have passed since she began to lie there
dead. The great consciousness of God, the special virtues, the saintly
deeds, accompanied by an immense love, which were manifested by this
venerable matron, would furnish matter well worthy of being recorded
here. Yet we shall pass them over, for the sake of brevity; especially
since a book worthy of respect (_un digno libro_) has been composed,
concerning these things exclusively, by persons worthy of confidence
(_digne di fede_).”


2. _Its testimony._

Now this is a statement which we have every reason to trust. For Bishop
Giustiniano, himself a native of Genoa, forty years of age at the
time of Catherine’s death, was a man of education, of solid character,
and of social position; who, throughout his long book, is uniformly
truthful and generally accurate; and who had here no conceivable reason
for inventing or seriously misstating the few facts alleged by him.
These facts, as regards the matter in hand, are three: that she spoke
of various (evidently various spiritual) matters, and, amongst these,
of the state of the souls in Purgatory; that a Book was extant at the
end of 1535, which concerned itself exclusively with Catherine; and
that persons worthy of trust had produced this Book.

(1) Giustiniano knows of no writings of hers: she had not written, but
had only “spoken excellent and rare things,” and she had done so “when
rapt in the spirit.” The exaggeration here (for when in ecstasy, she
spoke nothing, or but a few broken words at most) is interesting, since
it probably grew up as an explanation of, and consolation for, her not
having herself written anything; since during the ecstasy she would be
incapable of anything but speech, and out of the ecstasy she would not
remember the sights and sounds perceived during the trance. And yet,
thus, what had to be written down by others, whilst she was in ecstasy,
would be more precious, because more immediately “inspired,” than what
she herself could have thought, remembered, and written down, in her
ordinary psycho-physical condition.

(2) The Book, in existence at the end of 1535, not only contained
sayings concerning the state of the souls in Purgatory, but must have
contained these sayings already collected together in a separate
chapter or division. For her sayings concerning this matter by no
means form the larger, or the most immediately striking, part of her
authentic teaching, taken as a whole; and only if already collected
into a more or less separate _corpus_ would they have been singled
out in this manner.--But, if this reasoning is sound and proves
the existence of the _Trattato_, already more or less separate as
at present, similar reasoning will prove the non-existence of the
_Dialogo_. For the _Trattato_, even in its present length, fills but
fifteen large-print octavo pages; while the _Dialogo_ fills ninety. It
is practically inconceivable that the latter document, which can never
have existed otherwise than more or less separately, should have been
overlooked here, where another, so much shorter, and at first sight
less authoritative, is dwelt on with emphasis.

(3) More than one hand had participated in the production of the Book.
It is characteristic of the rhetorically loose phraseology of the times
that the word “composto” is so used as to leave it quite uncertain
whether several original contributors of materials and but one Redactor
who constituted these materials into a Book are meant, or whether a
succession of Redactors is already implied.


3. _Surviving eyewitnesses._

Certainly by this time the three chief eyewitnesses of her later
earthly existence, Carenzio, Vernazza, and Marabotto were all dead,
since respectively twenty-two, eleven, and seven years. Tommasa Fiesca
had died in the previous year. Only Mariola Bastarda and Argentina del
Sale, her old maid-servants, were probably still alive, from among
the circle of Catherine’s constant companions; and Battista Vernazza,
who was but thirteen when her God-mother died, had still fifty-two
years to live. Yet we have to come still later down amongst extant
documents before we can get any further evidence, whether external
or internal, as to which of these persons, or who else (probably or
certainly) wrote down the original contemporary notes; and as to who
constituted these notes, (on one or on successive occasions) into this
“Giustiniano-book,” as I shall call the manuscript “Vita e Dottrina,”
extant in 1535.


IV. FOURTH STAGE: THE TWO OLDEST EXTANT MANUSCRIPTS OF THE “VITA E
DOTTRINA” WITH THE “DICCHIARAZIONE.”

The fourth stage of evidence is, as to its contents, the most
important of all: but it is, as we shall see, twelve years younger: it
belongs to the years 1547, 1548. It consists of two Manuscripts, the
duodecimo-volume B. 1. 29 of the University Library; and the square
octavo-volume of the Archives of the Cathedral Chapter, both in Genoa.
Here, at last, we are face to face with an actual _Life_ of our Saint.
I have carefully collated them both upon the ninth Genoese Edition of
the _Vita ed Opere_, Genova, Sordi Muti: the first MS., throughout, and
the second one, sufficiently to make sure of its entire dependence upon
the first. I have named them MS. A and MS. B respectively.


1. MANUSCRIPT A.


1. _Its date and scribe._

Manuscript A is very interesting. It opens out as follows: “Jesus. Here
beginneth the book in which is contained the admirable life and holy
conversation of Madonna Catherinetta Adorna.… This book was begun and
written at the request of her Magnificent Ladyship, the Lady Orientina,
Consort to the most magnificent and generous, illustrious Lord Adam
Centurione, when she was being vexed by a grave and well-nigh incurable
infirmity, during now already thirteen months, by a Religious of the
Observance … on the 7th of October of the year fifteen hundred and
forty-seven.”--And Catherine’s Life concludes with the words: “_Laus
Deo semper._ This book was written at the request of the Consort, of
happy memory, of the … Lord Adam Centurione, who lay vexed by a most
grave infirmity, during now two years. Many a time she would sit and
find consolation, in her most painful torments, by reading of the
burnings (_incendii_) which were suffered, for so long a time, by this
holy woman.… At the thirteenth hour of the fourth of February God took
her to Himself. She, a few days before she passed away, begged me with
tears, in the presence of the Magnificent Lady, the Lady Ginetta, her
most beloved daughter, to finish that which I had undertaken to produce
for her own self. And so it will be of use to the latter, and will help
her to bear her pains and travails, which may the Lord alleviate, by
giving her good patience.”--After this follow thirty pages; containing
an Italian version of St. Bernard’s Sermon on the death of his Brother
Gerard, (Chapter XXVI of his _Sermons on the Canticle of Canticles_).
And the whole concludes with the words: “Finished in the year Fifteen
hundred and forty-eight, on the thirteenth of February.”

We have here, then, very precise dates: this _Life_ was written between
October 7, 1547, and February 4-13, 1548, by a Franciscan Observant,
first for the wife, and then for the daughter, of a Doge of Genoa.


2. _Comparison with the Printed “Life.”_

Now the whole forty-two chapters of this _Life_, together with the
Sermon, are engrossed throughout, in a careful and upright uncial
script. On close comparison with the Printed _Life_ the differences
turn out to consist, either of vocabulary and dialect, of a simply
formal kind; or of additions and variations in the subject-matter,
of an exceedingly trite and would-be edifying character; or of a
very few additional passages of genuine importance; or of divisions,
transpositions, and _lacunae_--the latter mostly of a significant and
primitive kind; or, finally, of one highly interesting change, effected
in his own copy, by the copyist himself.

(i) _Vocabulary._

The Observant’s vocabulary is a curious mixture of downright (late)
Latin, old French, and modern Italian. So “pagura” (_paura_); “in
si” (_se_, Fr. _soi_); “despecto” (_dispetto_); “alchuna,” “anchora”
(_alcuna_, _ancora_); “lingeriare” (_ligare_, Fr. _lier_); “summissa”
(_sommessa_, Fr. _soumise_); “una fiata” (_una volta_, Fr. _une fois_);
“dido” (_digito_, o. Fr. _doight_).[366] Some of these and such-like
forms no doubt stood in his Prototype. Thus, whilst he simply copies,
he writes--“pecto” and “licet”; when he makes up sentences of his
own, he writes “petto” and “abenchè.” And his single Chapter XIII
has, on two pages, “per il che”; but, on its last two pages, it has
the elsewhere universal “perochè” (_perchè_).--Yet his language is,
upon the whole, so uniform, whilst his sources (as we shall see) are
so varied; and again his uniform language is in such marked contrast
to Giustiniano’s educated Genoese Italian of 1535, and to that of the
Printed _Vita_ of 1551: that much of it, even where he is copying the
substance of his Prototype, must be his own.

(ii) _Worthless additions and variations, of two kinds._

The additions and variations are mostly of two kinds. They are either
of a directly edificatory character. So the three pages descriptive of
the devotion of the crowd, on occasion of the opening of the coffin,
in the spring of 1512; the very general statement as to the miracles
that occurred on that occasion; and, further back, the expansion (by
this Franciscan scribe) of Catherine’s comments on (the Franciscan)
Jacopone da Todi’s “la superbia in cielo c’è.”[367] And in one place,
to produce edification by a sense of contrast, he adopts a touch of
(doubtless legendary) gossip against Giuliano, for the heading of his
