CHAPTER VIII

BATTISTA VERNAZZA’S LIFE


INTRODUCTORY.

We have, in the characters described in the previous Chapter, dwelt
upon figures remarkably unlike Catherine, on her psycho-physical side.
Yet it would be only too easy for us now-a-days, by dwelling too much
upon the foregoing contrast, to grow actually unfair to Catherine’s
kind of temperament and health, and to her mode of apprehending
truth and of attaining sanctity. We might thus come to overlook or
to underestimate the important fact that certain psycho-physical,
neural peculiarities or states most certainly constitute the general
antecedents, concomitants or consequences (probably, indeed, one of the
necessary though secondary conditions), not indeed of sanctity, but of
at least some forms of the contemplative gift, habit, and attainment.
We might, too, forget that neither this contemplative gift itself, nor
even those neural peculiarities, are at all incompatible with great
practical shrewdness and an unusually large external activity; indeed
that such rare and costly contemplative picturings and symbolizations
of the Unseen are, when true and deep, means and helps for the
contemplative, in his own life and often still more in his influence
upon others, towards a great recollection and concentration, which
would not only turn the soul away from the dispersion and feverishness
that sets in towards the close of external action, but would also bring
it back renewed to such outward-moving, joyful-humble creativeness, as
wholesome recollection itself requires. For without such contact with
the material and the opposition of external action, recollection grows
gradually empty; and without recollection, external action rapidly
becomes soul-dispersive. Hence it is plain, that the true significance
and living system of any such deep soul may be on too large a scale not
to require, for its due exhibition, that we survey it in connection
with some other supplementary life,--like unto some Gobelin design or
cloth-pattern, so large as to require two contiguous walls or two human
figures to show its totality by means of their combination.

Now Vernazza the father, who throughout his life possessed the
most robust and normal health, can fairly be taken as Catherine’s
supplementary figure, for the years when ill-health was limiting her
normal range of energies, on their operatively outgoing, philanthropic
side; and is thus a living protest against isolating Saints’ lives from
their complementary extensions and effects. But Battista, his daughter,
gives us, in her own person and up to the end of her life, an example
of the combination and stimulating interaction of the Contemplative
and the Practical, the Transcendent and the Immanental, the heroically
normal and Universal and the tenderly Personal, indeed the more or less
psycho-physically peculiar. Catherine was the greater, more original,
and more winning Contemplative, and Ettore was more massively Practical
than was Battista. Yet Battista possessed both gifts, from early
times up to the end, apparently unclouded and unbroken by any kind of
incapacitation.


I. BATTISTA’S LIFE, FROM APRIL 1497 TO JUNE 1510.

We have already seen how Ettore’s eldest child was born on April 15,
1497, and was held at the font by Catherine, receiving, however,
the name of Tommasa, after the God-father, the celebrated Doctor of
Law, Tommaso Moro. Giuliano was still alive, but already gravely
ill. Nothing could well prove more clearly Vernazza’s closeness of
friendship for the Adorna and for Moro than his making them thus his
first-born’s God-parents. And Moro’s subsequent history makes this, his
intimate collocation and spiritual affinity with Catherine a matter
suggestive of much reflection.

With her beautiful young mother still alive and living at home with
her, Tommasa, a child of precocious intelligence, took to writing
verse of various kinds, as early as at ten years of age. Vallebona
quotes, from Semeria’s _Secoli Christiani della Liguria_, ten short
lines written by her at that age, and which he apparently holds to have
been addressed to her God-mother. They are, however, too vague and
hyperbolical for one to be sure as to whom they are dedicated; her own
mother or the Blessed Virgin would, I think, fit the case respectively
as well as, or better than, Catherine. The “short days” prophesied
for herself by the little girl, were destined to amount to ninety
years![333]

On her mother dying, some time in 1508 or 1509,--Bartolommea can
hardly have been more than thirty-two years of age, and Ettore some
six years older,--Vernazza decided, as we know, against continuing an
establishment of his own and keeping his three daughters with him. It
is certain from his Wills that he had no near female relative whom he
could have asked to come and help, or to take, the children; and clear
that he was determined not to marry again, so as to remain completely
free for his philanthropic work. And hence he was driven to the
alternative of boarding the girls in the two convents that we know.

And already on June 24, 1510, on the feast of her father’s favourite
Saint and prison-work Patron, Tommasa received the habit of an
Augustinian Canoness of the Lateran, and changed her name to Battista.
Catherine had still not quite twelve weeks to live, and may well have
been deeply interested in her God-daughter’s taking of the veil in
that very Convent and at the very age where and when she herself had,
half-a-century before, desired to receive it.[334] We cannot but feel
that the Superiors were wise who, at that earlier date, had found
thirteen too young an age for even an Italian, so early physically
mature, and a Catherine, so little suited for marriage, to take even
this first and revocable step in the Religious life; and we would
doubtless have experienced some uneasiness at the time when Tommasa
was somehow allowed to take this identical step at the very same age.
Yet we have, as we shall see, full and absolutely conclusive, because
first-hand, evidence, that every one concerned in the case acted with
true insight. Rarely indeed can a woman have been more emphatically in
her right place, than Battista during her seventy-seven years at Santa
Maria delle Grazie. And this complete and comfortable appropriateness
of vocation no doubt helped her large, balanced, virile mind to feel,
with the Church, that such a vocation is but one amongst the numberless
forms of even heroic devotedness, a devotedness of which the essence is
interior and is capable of being exercised, and which requires to be
represented in every honest circumstance and calling of God’s great,
many-coloured world.

Of Catetta’s further history, beyond her reception of the veil in the
same Convent, under the name of Daniela, some time before November
1517, and of Ginevrina’s later lot, beyond her becoming a Cistercian
Nun, under the name of Maria Archangela, at Sant’ Andrea, some time
between 1517 and 1524, I have been unable to discover anything. But
as to Battista, I wish to dwell upon three characteristic episodes of
her long life; they all three throw much light both upon Catherine and
(still more) upon the whole question of Mysticism.


II. BATTISTA AND HER GOD-FATHER, TOMMASO MORO.

The first episode illustrates the rigoristic side of the
pre-Reformation Catholic temper and teaching, and the terrible
complications, perplexities and pitfalls of those strenuous, confusing
times. For we must now move on fifteen further years from that
interview with her father, a few days before his death, in June 1524,
to reach this event, the first fresh one in Battista’s life of which we
have a record.


1. _The early stages of Lutheranism and Calvinism._

The Religious Revolution had now well nigh reached its culmination.
Battista’s father had only lived to see what may rightly be termed
the first step in the Teutonic stage and element of the movement, a
stage which, in spite of its political and social, indeed religious,
violences and fanaticisms,--and even these came mostly after Vernazza’s
death,--retained, if in large part illogically yet with great practical
advantage, a considerable portion of the old Catholic convictions
and spiritual attitude. Luther had indeed, as we saw, published his
Theses in 1517, and Pope Leo X had condemned nearly one-half of them
in 1520 in his Bull of Excommunication. And Melanchthon, the mild and
deeply learned, had also broken with the Old Church, and had begun, in
1521, the publication of his _Loci_. But an earnest Catholic (in this
case a Teutonic) Reformer had become Pope, in the person of Adrian
Dedel of Utrecht (Hadrian VI), in 1522, 1523. And in the very year of
Ettore’s heroic death, Erasmus, proving, under the stress of the times,
substantially true to the Old Faith, was writing against Luther; whilst
in Italy, Vernazza’s old patron, Cardinal Caraffa, was helping to found
the Theatine Order.

But within the next fifteen years matters move on and further. For
first the Teutonic stage of the Revolution takes its second step, and
hardens, and formally and permanently organizes itself; whilst its
socially anarchical effects reach their zenith. For there are the
Peasants’ War and Luther’s marriage in 1525; and the capture and the
sack of Rome by the Imperial (largely Lutheran) troops in 1527; and the
Revolutionists’ assumption of the name of “Protestants,” at the Diet
of Speyer, in 1529. And, on the Roman Church’s part, the Capuchins are
founded in 1525, and the Barnabites in 1530. And this whole Teutonic
stage of the Revolution can be taken as closed, for the time, by the
terrible Saturnalia of the Anabaptists at Münster, 1533-1535; the
executions of the Catholic Humanists, Bishop Fisher and Chancellor
More, in England, 1535; and Erasmus’s death in 1536.

And the second element and stage, the Romanic Revolution, was now fully
and independently at work, with its indefinitely greater coldness and
logical completeness, and its systematic antagonism to the Old Faith.
And if the Saxon Mystical-minded Peasant-monk, Luther, stood at the
head and in the centre of the first movement, the Picardese bourgeois
lawyer and Humanist, Calvin, stands now at the head of this second
movement. Born in 1509, he flees, now an avowed Protestant, in 1535 to
Basle; and in the spring of 1536 publishes his _Institutio Religionis
Christianae_, which was destined to remain his chief work.

Now it was in the summer of that year that Calvin went to stay at the
Court of Renée de Valois, daughter of the French King Louis XII, and
Duchess of Ferrara, who had already been gained over to the cause of
the Lutheran Reformers; and who was now influenced, by her grim,
relentless guest, to move still further away from the Old Church. And
though the Roman Inquisition succeeded in forcing Calvin to leave
Italy, after not many weeks’ stay: yet the cases of Vittoria Colonna,
Bernardino Occhino, and of our Tommaso Moro, show us all plainly,
though each differently, how complex and difficult, how obscure and
full of pitfalls, was the situation for even permanently loyal and
indeed saintly, and still more for simply earnest and eager, souls.
For Vittoria Colonna, that truly saint-like daughter of the Church,
not only stays, during the following year, with the Duchess Renée at
Ferrara, and indeed stands God-mother to her daughter Eleonora (born
June 19, 1537), the child that, later on, became the friend of the poet
Tasso: but Vittoria is the close friend and confidante of that most
zealous preacher, that restless, ardent, absolute-minded Bernardino
Occhino, who, born in Siena in 1487, had joined the Franciscan
Reform, the later Capuchins, in 1534, and indeed, in 1539, became
their General. It is to Vittoria indeed that, on his deciding not to
obey the summons to Rome, there to defend himself against the (no
doubt, in part, unfair) attacks upon his teaching, he, in the night
of August 22, 1542, before his flight and abandonment of his Order
and of the Church, writes his still extant sad and saddening letter
of self-exculpation.[335] But this latter catastrophe was not to take
place till three years after the date at which I would now linger.


2. _Moro becomes a Calvinist: probable causes of this step._

It must, I think, have been through some influence emanating from the
not very far away Ferrara, that the Genoese Tommaso Moro was, just
about this time, carried away into Calvinism. We must not forget that,
deplorable as was such an aberration, there were two excuses for him,
which would apply no doubt, in varying degrees, to many others even of
those who were, at this time, permanently lost to the Church.

For one thing the views held, and allowably held, during two or three
generations, on points of Grace and Free-will, of Predestination and
the corruption of the natural man, by even those whom the Church
eventually raised to her Altars, were, as a matter of fact, less
removed from the Protestant Reformers’ positions, than were probably
any views (with the exception of the extreme Jansenist position) which
have prevailed in the Catholic Church since the Protestant Reformation.
St. Catherine, Moro’s fellow God-parent, had expressed herself, in
certain moods, in so rigoristic a sense on these deep matters, as to
invite the comment of the Bollandist Sticker that these passages are
_caute legenda_.[336] Yet Catherine, in speaking thus, simply resembled
probably all her really earnest contemporaries--witness the great Paris
Chancellor Jean Gerson, some time before, and the devoted Cardinals
Contarini and Morone and Vittoria Colonna, a little after Catherine’s
own zenith.[337]

Again, the practical, moral abuses were most real and often very
pressing; and whilst the numerous attempts at Reform extending now
over a century (the Council of Constance had assembled in 1414) had
emphasized this fact, they had also plainly shown, by their practical
abortiveness, how very difficult the attainment of such a universally
desired Reform persisted in appearing, if there was to be no final
breach with Rome.

And the fullest consequences of such a breach could not be present
to the experience, or even to the imagination, of the first who made
it, as they are to us, or even as they were after the second step of
the Romanic Revolution had been taken by Lelio Socino, the Sienese
and his nephew Fausto Socino, the founders of Socinianism, who died
respectively in 1562 and 1604,--the former shortly after Occhino had
died, in 1560, miserably alone and out of the Catholic Roman Church.


3. _Battista’s letter to Moro, September 1537; its effect._

Now it was on September 10, 1537, that his Augustinian God-daughter
wrote, to her now Calvinist God-father, a letter which occupies five
pages of print in the fifth, a handsome octavo, edition of her works
published in Genoa in 1755. Though the earliest of all her extant,
or at least of her printed, letters, it is evidently an answer to a
communication of his, in which he had urged certain objections against
the Roman Church. And that communication must have been provoked by
a first letter from herself--a letter which, though probably less
theologically interesting and learned, will have been more uniformly
touching than the one preserved. Yet if that first note had clearly
succeeded in getting him to state his case, this second letter also,
we shall see, completely attained its still more important object.

Moro had insisted that the Roman Church followed merely human
inventions in the matter of (1) Fasting; (2) Confession; (3) the Real
Presence; (4) Public Prayer and Psalmody; (5) Vows; and (6) Extreme
Unction.--The order is curious, but is evidently not hers but his.
Extreme Unction stands in the obvious position--at the end. The vows
of Religion immediately precede it, probably because, at this time,
they typified something not only irrevocable but sepulchral to this
ardent Calvinist. Public Prayer and Psalmody would naturally precede
these vows, as an appropriate link between the life of the cloister,
so largely given to the Divine Office, and the Real Presence, its
celebration being and requiring the most marked of all the exhibitions
of Public Prayer. Confession would stand before the Real Presence,
as being actually practised before the reception of Communion.
And Fasting, finally, would precede Confession, and would, most
characteristically, head the whole list, because the completest and
most universally binding of all Fasts is that which is antecedent to
Holy Communion; and because, in beginning thus, Moro can start his
attack on the Church by the criticism of something that is obviously
and avowedly external.

The tone of Battista’s answer is interesting throughout, for a double
reason. There is in it a successful, very difficult combination of
filial respect and of lofty reproof; and there runs through all the
argumentation a sort of legal hard-headedness, entirely in its place
on the lips of the lawyer’s daughter in dealing with her lawyer
correspondent. I give her answers to his second and fifth objections,
since the former is interesting as touching on the point of the
obligation and frequency of Sacramental Confession, which has occupied
us much in her God-mother’s life; and the latter gives a vivid insight
into Battista’s own deeply genuine and happy vocation.

As to Confession, she writes: “You hold one opinion, and the Church
holds another; and to this Church it has not appeared good to constrain
us to confess ourselves in public, nor always to manifest our whole
interior to any and every man who may reprehend us. In this latter case
we should have been left without any protection. You grudge obeying her
once a year; how then would you carry out the other plan? Certainly
the said Church would have but little authority if she could not lay
down ordinances, according to her own judgment, concerning the mode (of
administration and reception) of the Sacraments already ordained by
Christ.”

As to Vows, she finishes up by declaring: “According to my humble
judgment, that thing cannot be called slavery which a soul elects for
itself, by an act of free choice alone, and with a supreme desire. And
in this matter you really can trust me, since here I am, living under
the very test of experience, and yet I have no consciousness of being
bound to any obligation: so little indeed that, if I had full licence
from God to do all those things of which I have deprived myself by my
vows, I would do neither more nor less than what I now am actually
doing; indeed no taste for anything beyond these latter things arises
within me. How then do you come to give the name of servitude to that
which gets embraced thus with supreme delight? Perchance you will say
‘not every one is thus disposed.’ My dear Sir: he who does not find
this inclination within him, let him not execute it. Neither Christ nor
His Church constrain any one in this matter.”[338]

The effect of this homely and sensible, straightforward and firm,
first-hand witness to a strong soul’s full daily life of faith and
self-expansion in and for Christ in His extension, the Old Church, was
evidently decisive, perhaps immediate. It is at least certain that
Tommaso Moro came back to the Roman obedience; that he became and died
a Priest and Religious; and that his return is universally attributed
to the instrumentality of this letter.[339]


III. BATTISTA’S _COLLOQUIES_, NOVEMBER 1554 TO ASCENSION-DAY 1555.

Yet her letters form but a small part of the literary output of this
many-sided woman. Her printed writings fill six stout volumes, in
all some 2,400 octavo pages, and fall into four chief divisions. The
independent verses consist only of four “Canticles of Divine Love,”
twelve “Spiritual Canticles,” and five “Sonnets.” Yet even the second
division, which alone fills quite five out of the six volumes, and
consists of Spiritual Discourses or Dissertations, contains much
verse, since the Discourse (which invariably takes its title and
starting-point from some, originally or interpretatively, Mystical
Biblical text) usually finishes up with a chapter of eight verses,
in which she sums up metrically the doctrine which she has just
expounded in finely balanced and stately prose. Mostly proceeding
from some Pauline, or, more often still, some Joannine text, these
writings evince throughout a fine Christian-Platonist breadth of
outlook and concentration and expansion of devotional feeling, and
have much of that unfading freshness which appertains to the universal
experiences of religion, wherever these are experienced deeply and
anew and are communicated largely in the form and tone of their actual
experimentation. These Discourses would also, of course, furnish all
but endless parallels and illustrations to Catherine’s teachings.

Yet it is the last two divisions of Battista’s writings which are
the most entirely characteristic and suggestive--her _Colloquies_
and her _Letters_. As to the seventy-five pages of letters, I have
already given extracts from two, of the years 1581 and 1589, and shall
presently give portions of two others, of the years 1575 and 1576. But
in this section I want to translate and comment upon a considerable
portion of her _Colloquies_, so interesting for various reasons, all
directly connected with the subject of this book. These contemporary
annotations occupy only eleven pages of print, but they constitute, I
think, one of the most instructive first-hand documents of mystical and
religious psychology in existence, and have nowhere, as yet, received
any of the comparative and analytic study they so richly deserve.

It is but right to remember throughout, that even all her other
writings (including the Discourses which are so general and, in a
manner, quite public in their tone) were, with the sole exception of
her Sonnets, none of them printed with her knowledge and consent. A
certain Secular Priest, Gaspare Scotto, did indeed print some at least
of the Discourses, without her knowledge, during her long lifetime; but
the _Colloquies_ were certainly never meant for any eyes other than her
own, and were doubtless not printed, or indeed known, until after her
death. I suppose them to have first appeared in the collected edition
of her works, published in 1602, fifteen years after her demise.

Now these _Colloquies_ belong to three periods. The first set is timed
vaguely _una volta_; and the third is also but approximately fixed;
but the second, by far the longest and most important series, is, at
its main turning-points, dated with absolute precision. And since its
authenticity, the identity of the chronicler with the experiencing
person, and the complete contemporaneousness of the record, are all
beyond cavil or question (the majority of the entries were evidently
put down by her on the very day, often probably within the hour, of the
cessation of the experience thus chronicled)--the document can serve as
a simply first-hand illustration of, and commentary on, the analogous
experiences of Battista’s God-mother, experiences which, in the latter
case, were nowhere recorded by their subject, nor indeed by others till
probably, in some cases, a considerable time after their occurrence.
And if here again there can be no difficulty, for any sincere and
consistent believer, in holding that we have to do with enlightenments
of the mind and stimulations of the affections and will, proceeding
as truly from God as they led back to Him: we cannot but, here again,
find plentiful indications of the antecedent material, and of the
co-operation, response, and special colour furnished throughout by the
human subject’s special sex and age, race and period, temperament,
training, and reading. Not all the latter conditions put together would
explain even half of the total experience; yet had these conditions
been different, the total experience would have differed, not indeed in
its fundamental contents, yet in its special forms and applications. As
matters stand, these latter are often strikingly like those manifested
in the teaching of Catherine, Battista’s fellow-Genoese. I will now
take the nine most interesting days of this series,[340] stopping after
certain of them to point out parallels and peculiarities.


1. _Experience of November 17, 1554._

“On (Saturday) November 17, 1554” (Battista was now fifty-seven and a
half years old), “having, before Holy Communion, a great desire to
die to all things, I prayed with all my heart that God, in the most
perfect manner possible, would slay me and unite me with Himself.
And in so doing I renounced into His hands all myself and everything
existing under heaven, whilst electing God anew as my only Love, my
only Solace, my only Comfort, and my All. And I refused to accept
every consolation arising from such interiorness, however holy the
latter might be, except inasmuch as the consolation arises whilst the
interior is distinctly occupied with God, and does not turn its gaze
upon itself or upon any (other) belovèd object. Even if I could enjoy
all this, quite justly, till the day of judgment, I renounce it all.
Nothing pleases me, except my God. And if I were assured, which God
forbid, of going (to abide) under Lucifer, still would I will, neither
more nor less than my God alone. And it would be grievous to me to
embrace, even for one single hour, anything else but Him.--After this
Communion I remained with a most intense impression of renouncing,
with regard to all things and to all moments, all myself and every
other thing that is lower than Thee; and with a determination to keep
Forty Days of silence, depriving myself during them, as far as my
own will and inclination went, even of such reasoning as turned on
religious subjects.--And acting thus, by means of Thy grace alone, I
arrived, in my inner heart, at having no other actions left, except
those of adoring Thee and praying for all men. Whence it happened that
I experienced the most quiet and consoling week that, possibly, I have
ever had, up to this hour, in all my life.”

It is clear that even the first part of this week’s experience was
not written down later than at the end of that week; indeed it reads
more as if written down on at least two, and perhaps three, occasions.
We have here many close parallels to Catherine: to her exclamation
of “God is my Being … my Delight”; to the Divine Voice heard by her,
“I do not wish thee henceforth to turn thine eyes to right or left”;
to the question asked, and the interior answer heard, by her, as to
“love and union not being able to exist without a great contentment
of soul”; to her assertions that “the attribution to her own separate
self of even one single meritorious act, would be to her as though a
Hell,” and that “she would rather remain in eternal condemnation than
be saved by such an act of the separate self”; to her Love saying
within her, “that He wanted her to keep the Forty Days in His Company
in the Desert”; and to her declaration that she could not pray for
Vernazza and his fellow-disciples separately, but could only “present
them” collectively “in His presence.” And in Battista’s phrase of
“going under Lucifer,” we have again, if we take it together with the
renunciation of “all things lower than God,” an illustration of those
sayings of Catherine which I have grouped under the special category of
“up” and “above.”[341]

And note, in Battista’s record, how the contradiction, which appears
between her affirmation of having love for God alone, and the admission
that she loved herself and other things (since she is determined not
to let her mental gaze rest upon these latter beloved objects), is
more apparent than real. For the former love is the direct and central
object of her fully deliberate and free endeavours; the latter is
instinctive, continuous, inevitable, but, inasmuch as it now still
remains actively willed at all, it is but the consequential and
peripheral object of that willing. As in all deep religion there is
here an heroic willing at work to effect a genuine displacement of the
centre and object of interest; the system from being instinctively
man-centred, becomes a freely willed God-centredness.


2. _Experience of November 25, 1554._

“On Sunday” (November 25), “the Feast of St. Catherine” (Virgin Martyr
of Alexandria) “was being celebrated. And I communicated with new
emotion. And when I received the Host, I willed Thee, my God, alone;
renouncing all the rest into Thy hands: I but desired to die and unite
myself with Thee. And I felt within me those colloquies of Thine own
extreme love; and Thou didst say unto me, O my Joy, ‘The thing that
thou seekest is (already) produced eternally in My Divine Mind. Thou
desirest to feed on mutability, and I desire to feed thee on eternity.’
And I do not remember in what connection Thou didst say,‘ Ego ero
merces tua magna nimis’ (Gen. xv, 1).”

Here, on her God-mother’s Saint’s day, we find that act of pure love
at the moment of Holy Communion so dear to Catherine also; and we get
here, as in the previous group (but here, even on occasion of the Holy
Eucharist), prayer and aspiration directed to God pure and simple, or
to God conceived as Love and Joy, precisely as in the Fiesca’s ordinary
practice.[342] And the inner voice, if it says deeply mystical things,
also directly quotes Scripture in Latin, whilst the scrupulous care of
Battista, in registering her oblivion of the precise context in which
this quotation appeared, is interestingly characteristic of her nature
and experience.


3. _Experience of December (9?), 1554._

“On Sunday” (December 9?) “I communicated; and I experienced within
myself the most tender colloquies of Thy Majesty, which said to me,
‘The time will come when thou must be so occupied with Me--with My
Divinity, My Infinity, My Glory--that, even if thou shouldst so wish,
thou wouldest be unable to break off this preoccupation. I have elected
thee from amongst thousands. I want to make thee My very Self.’ … Then
Thou saidst unto me, ‘I do not want thee to merit, but to return the
love which I ever bear thee.’”[343]

Here we have parallels to Catherine’s practice and declarations in
Battista’s ever-growing occupation with God; in her, at first sight,
strongly pantheistic, because apparently substantial, identification
of her true self with God; and in her doctrine that God desires not
that we should merit, but that we should, by purely loving, make Him a
return of His own pure love. And, as but an apparent contrast, note how
here it is God Who chooses out Battista’s soul from amongst thousands;
whilst, with Catherine, we have herself instinctively choosing out
God, even were He, _per impossible_, like to one of the whole Court of
Heaven (the angels, “whose number is thousands of thousands,” Apoc. v,
11). For the difference consists, at bottom, only in the fact that each
dwells, in these special instances, upon the other half of the complete
mystic circle of the divine and human intercourse. The same complete
scheme is, in reality, experienced and proclaimed both by the widow
and the nun,--indeed God’s prevenient election of the soul, and His
special attention to it, is even more strongly emphasized by the older
woman: “It appears to me, indeed, that God has no other business than
myself.”[344]

Remark, too, how here again an unmistakable text of Scripture appears
as part of the words heard by Battista. But since it is a composite
quotation--“I have elected thee,” coming from Isa. xliii, 10; xliv, 1;
xlviii, 10; and “elected among thousands,” coming from Cant. v, 10,
where the elect is (as with Catherine) the Bridegroom, and not (as with
Battista) the Bride,--therefore, no doubt, it does not appear in Latin
or with any reference.


4. _Experience of December 16, 1554._

“The following Sunday” (December 16) “I communicated with a
greater desire for Union than usual, and with a more detailed sight
concerning it. And after this communion I prayed in such a state of
Union,--without any means either of thoughts or of anything else that
could be made to intervene, remaining naked in Thy bosom as I have
been from eternity. And whilst praying thus, I felt that certain words
were being spoken within me, the gist of which (_la sentenza_) seems
to me to have been, that my prayer did not reach to the reality of
Union itself. So that there then came to my mind that which Paul says,
Rom. viii (26), that ‘we do not know how to pray _sicut oportet_.’ And
Thou saidst to me that, above all understanding of mine, Thou wouldest
produce the effect; indeed the thing is already effected continuously
in Thy divine mind. And Thou saidst to me, my only Love, that Thou
didst will to make me Thyself; and that Thou wast all mine, with all
that Thou hadst and with all Paradise; and that I was all Thine. That I
should leave all, or rather the nothing; and that (then) Thou wouldst
give me the all. And that Thou hadst given me this name--at which words
I heard within me ‘dedi te in lucem gentium’--not without good reason.
And it seemed then, as though I had an inclination for nothing except
the purest Union, without any means, in accordance with that detailed
sight which Thou hadst given me. So then I said to Thee: ‘These other
things, give them to whom Thou wilt; give me but this most pure Union
with Thee, free from every means.’”

Here we again have numerous parallels. Battista’s state of Union,
without any means that could be made to intervene, compares readily
with Catherine’s declaration: “I cannot abide to see that word ‘for’
(God) and ‘in’ (God), since they denote to my mind something that can
stand between God and myself.” Battista’s description, “remaining naked
in Thy bosom, as I have been from eternity,” resembles Catherine’s
sayings: “True love wills to stand naked. This naked love sees the
truth”; “the soul in that state of cleanness in which it was created”;
“the angels and man, when disobedient, were clothed in sin”; and the
words heard by her: “I want thee naked, naked.” The answer granted to
Battista, that “possessing her Lord, her only Love, she possessed at
the same time all Paradise,” recalls Catherine’s declaration that “if
of what her heart felt but one drop were to fall into Hell, Hell itself
would become Eternal Life.” And Battista’s prayer, “these other things,
give them to whom Thou wilt; give me but this most pure Union with
Thee,” is substantially like Catherine’s answer to the Friar, “that
you should merit more than myself--I leave that in your hands; but that
I cannot love Him as much as you, is a thing that you will never by any
means get me to understand.”[345]

And we get here two further interesting particularities as to such
“locutions.” In this case Battista only “feels,” at the time of their
occurrence, that certain words are being spoken within her (once before
she has used that remarkably general term, instead of the more obvious
and specific “hear”); and she possesses, on coming (evidently soon
after) to write them down, a but approximate remembrance of them, and
a certainty as to their substance alone. And then we find here the
interesting case of two different simultaneous locutions: one voice
referring to the name which our Lord had given her, and another, at
this point, quoting the text, “dedi te in lucem gentium.” The text,
in this full form, occurs in Isaiah xlix, 6, and is there spoken by
God to His servant Israel, v. 3; but part of it, expanded to “a light
to the revelation of the Gentiles,” is, in Luke ii, 32, quoted by
Simeon of Christ. We thus, in this place, get three different, yet
simultaneous, levels of consciousness within Battista’s soul: her own
(more or less ordinary) consciousness and “voice” recognized by her own
self, as such; another, deeper, extraordinary consciousness and “voice”
proceeding, according to her apprehension, from our Lord’s presence
and action within her; and finally a third, deepest consciousness and
“voice” taken, I presume, to be directly communicated by God Himself.
It is to be noted that, though interior “locutions” seem to have been
fairly frequent with Catherine, there is no case on record in her life
of more than two levels of consciousness, two “voices,” at one and the
same moment, her own and Love’s.


5. _Experience of December 23, 24, 1554._

“The following night” (December 23 to 24), “I woke up and found
impressed upon my mind (the words): ‘comedite bonum,’ Isaiah lv
(2). And this impression remained with me (throughout the day),--an
impression of eating God, and of inviting all others to the same
Divine food.--In the evening,--it was the Vigil of the Nativity,--I
had a sight of how, God Himself having taken our nature, and having
done so as the Infinite one, the very greatest virtue must be diffused
throughout this same (human) nature: a truth which he knew who says:
‘Plena est omnis terra gloria eius,’ Isaiah vi (3). If by one man sin
entered into all, by a God-man how much good has not entered into us
all? Romans v, 15-19. If God has made Himself Flesh, what virtue is
there which He has denied to this same flesh?--And in the night of
the Nativity, after Matins, I had a sight of that extreme, eternal
and incomprehensible Love, which, unable to abide within Itself, had
become ecstatic into the thing It loved, and had indeed, by means of
Its Almighty power, become that very thing. Whence it is that, seeing
Thy Majesty gone forth out of Thyself and become me, I was determined,
in virtue of that self-same love, to go forth from myself and, in every
manner, make myself into Thy very Self. And Thou, my God, didst say
that Thou hadst descended to the same degree as that to which Thou
wantedst man to ascend.”

Here Battista’s “impression of eating God, and of inviting all
others to the same Divine food” is substantially identical with
Catherine’s doctrine as to the “One Bread, God,” and “all creatures
hungering for this One Bread.” Battista’s sight of “God being diffused
throughout human nature,” is analogous to Catherine’s teaching as to
no creature existing that does not, in some measure, participate in
His goodness,--although, with characteristic difference, Battista
dwells on the ennoblement of that nature through the Incarnation of
God, and Catherine insists upon the nobility contemporaneous with, and
intrinsic to, Man’s original Creation. And Battista’s determination to
go forth from herself is identical, in substance, with all the sayings
of Catherine which I have grouped under the “outside” “outwards”
category.[346]

And note how, in this group, Battista mentally sees, instead of
interiorly hearing, the truth of the Incarnation of the Infinite, and
of the consequent ennobling of our whole nature; how this sight then
suggests to her mind a definite text (recognized by herself as such),
and then an amplification of another text (not perhaps identified by
her as such at all): and how the transition from that sight to these
texts is so smooth and rapid that it is practically impossible to mark
off precisely where she held the simply given experience to end, and
her own action and comment to begin. The fact of the matter no doubt is
that, in both cases, though very possibly in different degrees, there
was divine and human action indistinguishably co-operant throughout.

And mark again how her “vista”--“of that extreme, eternal, and
incomprehensible Love which had become ‘ecstatic’ into the Thing it
loves”; her consequent determination to “go forth from herself,”
and the voice which told her that He wanted her “to ascend in the
same degree as He had descended”: all goes back, for its literary
suggestion, to the Dionysian “Divine Names”: “Divine Love is ecstatic,
not permitting any to be lovers of themselves but of those beloved. The
very Author of all things, through an overflow of His loving goodness,
becomes ‘out of Himself,’ and is led down from the eminence above
all, to being in all.” “He is at once moving and conducting Power to
Himself, as it were a sort of everlasting circle.” “Let us restore all
loves back to the one and enfolded Love and Father of them all.”[347]
Not the less truly did Battista’s mental lights and voluntary
determinations come from God, because they consisted, for the most
part, in a vivid realization and acceptation, in and for her particular
case, on this Christmas night in 1554, of spiritual facts and truths
which had been slowly and successively revealed, experienced, and
formulated as far back as the Hebrew Prophets and the Greek Plato, and
above all by our Lord, and in St. Paul’s writings and the Gospel of
St. John. These truths were none the less hers, because they had been
successively experienced and proclaimed, so long ago by others; and
their suggestion and realization to and in her, were as truly the work
of God in her own case as they were in that of those others.


6. _Experience of December 27, 1554._

“This morning” (December 27), “which is the Feast of the Evangelist
John, when I awoke, I suddenly heard the words being spoken within my
mind: ‘To-day I am determined to divide thy soul from thy spirit’--and
later on, when the Host was being elevated at Mass and I was praying
about this matter, I had a sight or Thou didst say unto me--I cannot
remember precisely which it was,--enough, it appeared to me that
as, when the soul is divided from the body, the soul, in so far as
immortal, flies to its destined place, and the entire body remains
dead: so also, when the almighty hand of God makes a similar division
of the soul from the spirit, the former, the animal part (of man),
remains dead, but the spirit, (truly) free (at last), flies to its
natural place, which is God, the Living Fountain.”

Here we are at once reminded of Catherine’s experience of “Love
once speaking within her mind”; of her sayings which dwell on the
separation of the soul from the body, and on the flight of the spirit
to its natural place, God; and of her sight of “the living Fountain”
of Goodness.[348] But Battista’s psychology is entirely clear and
self-consistent, as to the precise extension of, and the precise
distinction between, the terms “spirito” and “anima”; whereas, in the
authentic sayings of Catherine, “anima” is used sometimes as inclusive
of, and sometimes in contradistinction to, “spirito.” We shall see how
it is only the later systematizing _Dialogo_-writer who brings perfect
consistency, and a scheme identical with Battista’s, into Catherine’s
terminology. Yet in Catherine’s image of the assimilation of bread by
man, in illustration of the assimilation of man’s nature by God, we
find Battista’s two stages of the divisional process. For there the
body is first purified up to the actual level of the soul, and then the
soul itself is purified perfectly, its animal part being eliminated or
dominated by the spiritual part.[349]

It is interesting, too, to note how Battista cannot decide here whether
this interpretation of the short sentence she had heard was mentally
seen or interiorly heard by her; indeed, she is sure only that, whilst
she was praying to understand the meaning of that sentence, the meaning
thus sought appeared to her, by some means or other, to be so and so.
It is then abundantly clear from this, that the difference between an
interior sight and an interior voice, and again between either of these
and the admittedly normal workings of her own mind, was, at times, so
delicate, as either not to be clear to her own consciousness, even at
the very time of the experience; or, at least, to fade away from her
memory before she came to chronicle the experience.


7. _Experience of January 6, 1555._

“On the Feast of the Epiphany” (January 6, 1555), “before Communion,
I felt ineffable and most tender colloquies, and greatly I rejoiced
because of them. For I had caused Masses to be said and prayers to be
prayed, by various persons during many days, with the intention that,
if these colloquies were not from Thee, I might no more experience
them; but that, if they were Thine, they might be produced within me
more clearly and more efficaciously. And seeing that I now felt them
more than usual, and in a more admirable manner, I had and have a firm
hope that they were Thine. Whence it happened that (having, on that
same blessed day, to go up to receive Thee in the Sacrament), I felt
Thy Majesty more than once calling me within me, ‘Come, since I want
to devour thee entirely.’ … It seems to me that ‘entirely’ was one of
the words, but I have no firm remembrance of this. But I know well that
Thou saidst several times, ‘Come, since I want to devour thee.’ … To
me it seemed that I merited rather to go under Lucifer, than into the
Infinite Light (_Luce_).”

We get here a number of interesting parallels and contrasts to
Catherine’s teaching and practice. God’s devouring of the soul; God
pictured as Light; souls conceived as higher up or lower down in
space, according to their degree of goodness or of badness; even the
pleasure in a play upon words: all this finds its close counterpart
in Catherine.[350] But far more important is the difference in the
subject-matter of their scruples and in their respective attitudes
towards psychically unusual experiences. In Catherine’s case there
is no record of anxieties concerning other things than her degree
of detachment and her administrative responsibilities; indeed her
whole practice and teaching, continuously bent as they were upon the
ethico-spiritual truth and upon the practical application of her
unusual experiences, make it morally certain that her anxieties never
turned upon these forms and means themselves. She was, as it were,
too much occupied with the content of the cup, ever to be actively
perplexed as to the cup itself. Battista, on the contrary, seems to
have been quite free from scruples of Catherine’s melancholic type;
but did not, evidently, always soar as highly as her God-mother above
all anxious occupation with the form of her experiences. And, indeed,
if, in this instance, it was evidently the form of her experiences
which perplexed her, it was also the renewed and heightened experience
of this peculiar form which reassured her.--Yet the very fact of
such a perplexity, and again the moderation with which, even at the
end of it all, she but “hopes that it all comes from God,” shows a
healthy reluctance to trust too readily or too much to such tests and
indications. It would probably not be unfair to put her attitude
towards such things midway between Don Marabotto’s readiness of belief
and Catherine’s soaring ethico-spiritual transcendence.

It is noticeable too that, if the inner voice is more distinct than
before, Battista’s anxious care for accuracy is also, if possible, more
on the alert than ever: witness her remarks as to the word “all.”


8. _Experience of the Second Sunday in Lent, 1555._

“On the second Sunday (in Lent), having communicated, I felt Thine
ineffable reasonings; but, since I did not write them down at once, I
do not any more venture to write them down, having in great part lost
the memory of them. But this I remember, that the words were like those
which the Bridegroom says to the Bride in the Canticle (of Canticles).”

Here the difference between this form of apprehension and that of
ordinary vivid thinking is so faintly distinct, that she can only
declare that she “felt” (without deciding between hearing, seeing, or
any other of the more definite senses) “reasonings” (without being
sure of their “explicitation” in words or images); and she herself
recognized at the time, and later on remembers that contemporary
recognition of, their likeness to the texts of the Canticle of
Canticles. It is evidently the profound reluctance, cultivated by her
for half a century or more, to treat the deepest acts of the soul as
other than directly and exclusively the acts of God in that soul, which
makes her not see and admit here the large co-operation of her own mind.

Remark also a characteristic difference from Catherine, in that the
latter’s teaching is, we have already seen, entirely free from any
influences characteristic of the Song of Songs.


9. _Experience of Ascension Day, 1555._

“On the Lord’s Ascension Day Thou didst say to me, O my Love, that, up
to this point, I had walked by Faith, but that now Thou wast determined
to give me direct assurance (_certezza_); and that there was no
occasion for me to go on writing down Thy words, since I should read
them in my own experience. And on my asking what Thou wouldst operate
within me, Thou didst affirm to me that I should ever possess Thee in
my heart.”--“Another time I felt that I was being told: ‘I generate My
Son, having an infinite Cognition of Myself; similarly I generate thee,
by infusing into thee that same cognition. But (this) My Cognition is
without measure; and thine shall be according to that measure which
I shall, by My goodness, be impelled to give thee, in suchwise that
of this cognition and of thine intellect there shall be effected one
identical thing; so that I shall place My Word, My Concept, which I
possess within Myself, in thee, according to the capacity for it which
I shall deign to give thee; and so that, again, thy spirit shall be a
son within My Son, or rather one only son with Him: and thus will I
have generated thee.’ Hence, O Lord, according to this Thy showing,
those are generated by Thee, who, united by grace to Thy Majesty,
repose in Thy Paternal Bosom, together with Thine only Begotten. But
He is by nature one sole substance with Thee--He whom Thou art ever
ineffably generating; and we are united with Thee, through reposing in
Thy bosom by simple grace and by a singular privilege of Thy love; and
in so far as we thus abide there in Thee, Thou generatest us in more
and more light and ardour. Hence then Thou generatest him who abides in
Thee.”

We have here, in the last locution of this series, the most complicated
and seemingly original of them all. Yet here we can still find
parallels to Catherine: in the addressing of God as “my Love”; in
the fact that the locution proceeds from, and its interpretation is
submitted, not to our Lord, but to God, to Him who indeed generates His
Son without measure and directly, yet all other souls also, though in
measure and by and through His Son; and in the declaration that now she
should have a kind of direct assurance in lieu of Faith.[351]

And here especially we can trace the large Neo-Platonist (Dionysian)
element in Battista’s Mysticism. There is the first, perfect circle,
God’s perfect cognition of Himself, a cognition which produces a
fresh (though co-eternal) centre of cognition, which latter in return
perfectly cognizes Him who perfectly cognized it. And then there is
a derivative imperfect circle--since that perfect cognizedness and
cognizing, which is God’s Son, can only be imperfectly imparted to the
souls of creatures: yet again we have a circle for the very thing which
is cognized by God is, in this instance also, the same which cognizes
Him. And lastly, this distance between the perfect and imperfect
circles is, as far as possible, overcome by an attempted and momentary
identification of the perfectly cognized and cognizing circle, Christ,
with the perfectly cognized but imperfectly cognizing one, every human
soul in its potentiality and divinely intended end.

And this large Platonist scheme of a progression of Ideas appears
here coloured and Christianized, by means of four scriptural texts in
particular: Ps. cix, 31, “in the brightness (splendours) of the saints,
from the womb, before the day star (Lucifer) I begot thee”; John i,
18, “the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father”; xiii,
23, “there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of His disciples whom Jesus
loved”; and Luke xvi, 23, “the rich man beheld Abraham from afar, and
Lazarus in his bosom.” The first two passages give her the eternal and
continuous generation and abiding of the Son by and in the Father;
and the last two suggest a similar abiding and (interpretatively)
generation, together with that Son, of the faithful soul, in and by
God, continuously and for ever.

Note, too, the double meaning, so characteristic of mystical
utterances, contained in the sentence, “I generate My Son, having
an infinite Cognition of Myself”; which indicates both the mode of
generation (“by means of an infinite cognition”), and the nature of the
generated one (“who has an infinite cognition”). And by this literary
device, the intense close-knitness of the perfect circle is strikingly
adumbrated.

And remark how Battista finishes up this soaring flight by an
interpretation of a perfect sobriety. Indeed it is this moderation and
good sense along with so immense an Idealism and intense Interiority
which, together, constitute her noblest characteristic and should make
us overlook the comparative absence of spontaneous charm and tender
freshness, which cannot but strike us if we allow ourselves to contrast
the piety of Battista with that of Catherine.


IV. SOME FURTHER LETTERS OF BATTISTA, 1575 TO 1581.

Before the experiences and confidences of an almost painful privacy
and emotional intensity, which require, in part, a considerable amount
of patient interpretation from us, if they are to move and touch
us, we found and dwelt upon a moral attitude and a document full of
immediately understandable heroism and virile common-sense: the scene
with her father before his death-ride, and the letter to Dottore Moro.
And, somewhat similarly, three further documents succeed to these
intermediate confidences, documents full of love and esteem for the
externally ordinary vocation of the vast majority of us all, of a large
undaunted outlook, and of a shrewd and persevering public spirit.
The apparent mental contraction and subjectivity we have just passed
through with her is but the recollective movement, the, as it were,
drawing itself together for the spring of action on the part of an
already large and expansive soul, and leads on and out to fresh and
still larger horizons, and, indeed, effects them.


1. _Letter to Donna Anguisola, 1575._

We have first a letter of June 10, 1575 (Battista was now seventy-eight
years of age, and had been a Religious for sixty-five years) addressed
to a widowed noblewoman with young children--the Illustrious Lady
Andronica Anguisola.[352] The reader will note the transition,
evidently quite natural and spontaneous in the writer, from a soaring
Mysticism, full of Pauline, Joannine, and Dionysian forms, and of deep,
personally experimental content, to the most practical and shrewd,
wisely unflinching, homely heroism. There are few documents, I think,
which show with an equal impressiveness how startlingly direct and
immediate can be and is the application of such, apparently, purely
transcendental, serene contemplations and affections to the struggling,
clamorous world of our human passions, circumstances, difficulties, and
duties: and how only that transcendence and this immanence, taken and
working thus together, give to the soul a height without inflation, and
a concrete particularity without pettiness. I shall break up the long
