Chapter X makes the Soul for the first time address “_the Lord_,” “O
Signore,” on the one hand: and her “_Humanity_” “O Umanità,” on the
other.[390] In Chapters XI and XII the Soul stands alone, face to face
with the Lord, who appears to it in two successive visions,--first as
Christ alive and walking along all stained with blood from head to
foot; and, on a later occasion, as Christ evidently motionless and
presumably dead, with His five fountain-wounds, which are sending drops
of burning blood towards mankind. And these two visions, so carefully
kept apart, doubtless typify the two periods of Catherine’s Convert
life,--the two steps of her second stage: the moving, scourged and
cross-bearing Christ stands for the active penance of the first four
years or fourteen months; and the motionless, crucified Christ stands
for the passive purification of the rest of her life.[391] Chapter XIII
has no dialogue, but describes her active penances and good works, and
mentions the Soul, Humanity, and the Spirit.[392]

And then, up to the end, in Chapters XIV to XXI, which give us
the second step, the dialogue reappears, but now no more between
the three _Dramatis Personae_ (Soul, Body, and Self-Love) of the
pre-Conversion-Period; but between the two interlocutors of the
post-conversion time (the Spirit and Humanity).[393] And there is here
but one sporadic mention, an invocation, of “the Lord” (p. 214_c_).

Thus only after its Conversion does the Soul itself become aware of,
or does it name, either the Spirit or its “Humanity”; and only after
the two successive Christ-Visions do these two new experiences and
conceptions entirely replace the three old ones of Soul, Body, and
Self-Love. In a word, we have here, carefully carried through, the
scheme, so clearly enunciated by Battista Vernazza in 1554, of the two
successive divisions effected by God in Man, during the process of
Man’s purification: first, the separation (division) of the Soul from
the Body; and then the separation (division) of the Spirit from the
Soul.[394] And, in strict accordance with this scheme, the Soul here
becomes conscious of being, in its upper reaches, Spirit, only on the
day that it has broken away from the domination of the downward-tending
Body, and of Self-Love. And once the Soul has thus affirmed the
Spirit and denied the Body, the “Body” and the “Soul” cease to be
directly mentioned; the one term “Humanity” now takes the Soul’s and
the Body’s place. For now the Soul, in so far as it has still not
completely identified itself with the Spirit, does not any more attach
itself directly to the Body and the Body’s pleasures,--to, as it
were, the upper fringe of the Body,--but to the sensible-spiritual
consolations which are the necessary concomitants and consequences of
the Soul’s affirmation and acceptance of the Spirit,--hence, as it
were, to the lower fringe of the Spirit. “I would have thee know,” the
Spirit now says to Catherine, “that I fear much more an attachment
to the spiritual than to the bodily taste and feeling. Man goes his
way ‘feeding’ his spiritual sensuality upon the things which proceed
from God, and yet these things are a very poison for the Pure Love of
God.”[395]


3. _The “Dialogo” intensifies or softens certain narratives and sayings
given by the “Vita.”_

Now these interesting forty pages of the first _Dialogo_ derive (with
the sole exception of three little touches) their entire historical
materials from the _Vita e Dottrina_, and, indeed, from but those
parts of this _corpus_ which already appear in MSS. A and B, and in
the previous pages of MS. C itself. But all these materials have been
re-thought, re-pictured, re-arranged throughout, by a new, powerful,
and experienced mind, a mind dominated by certain very definite,
schematic conceptions as to the constitution of the human personality,
the nature of holiness, and the laws of its growth, and which is
determined to find or form concrete examples of these conceptions, in
and from the life of Catherine.

(1) _Cases of intensifying._

There are, first, five cases of the intensifying of authentic
_Vita_-accounts, intensifications necessary, or at least ancillary, to
the scheme underlying the whole _Dialogo_-composition.

As to the pre-conversion sinfulness, during her second “week,”
Catherine’s soul is made to say: “In a short time I was enveloped in
sin; and, abiding in that snare, I lost the grace (of God) and remained
blind and heavy, and from spiritual I became all earthly.”[396] Yet
there is no evidence that Catherine, even at that time, ever committed
grave sin; nor does there exist an authentic saying of hers which,
however intense its expressions of contrition, conveys an impression
really equivalent to this passage.--As to the form of her contrition,
“so greatly was this soul alienated (from her own self) and submerged
in the sight of the offence of God, that she no longer seemed a
rational creature, but a terrified animal.”[397] Yet the earlier
accounts, which certainly do not minimize here, keep well within
the limits of normal, though intense, human feeling and expression
of feeling.--As to the forcible means taken by her to overcome her
fastidiousness in the matter of cleanliness and in the sense of taste,
“she would put the impurities into her mouth, as though they had been
precious pearls.”[398] Yet the original versions, drastic enough in
all conscience, nowhere imply that there was any such relish, even
of a merely apparent kind.--As to her post-conversion poverty, the
Spirit says to her: “Thou shalt work to provide for thy living,” and
the narrative declares: “The Spirit made her so poor, that she would
have been unable to live, had not God provided for her by the means
of alms.”[399] Yet we know from her wills that (though the Hospital
authorities gave her free lodging, and perhaps, at first, free board as
well) she retained, up to the last, an appreciable little income, and
herself conferred many an alms out of these her own means.

Nevertheless, in each of these cases, the _Dialogo_ exaggeration is
suggested by some phrase or word in the _Vita_ which has been taken
up into the new context and medium of this other mind, and has come
to mean something curiously (though often in form but slightly)
different from that older account.--Thus, in this fourth instance,
the _Vita_-accounts had said: “nel _principio_ di sua conversione,
molto si _esercitò_.” “Viveva ancora molto _sottomessa ad ogni
creatura_.” “Quantunque ella fosse in tutto dedicata ed occupata
negli _esercizii_ di esso Spedale, nondimeno mai volle godere ne
usare una minima cosa di quello per _viver suo_; ma, per quel poco
che abbisognava, si serviva della _povera_ sostanza sua: onde ben si
scorgeva che il suo dolce Amore era quello il quale operava in lei
ogni cosa per vera unione.” “Si _esercitò_ nelle opere pie, cercando i
_poveri_, essendo condotta delle Donne della Misericordia, e le davano
danari ed altre _provvisioni_.”[400] The _Dialogo_-writer has worked
all this up as follows: “Io (lo Spirito) ti avviso _primieramente_
voler io che tu pruovi che cosa sia esser ubbidiente, acciò tu
divenghi umile e _soggetta ad ogni creatura_; ed acciochè ti possi
_esercitare_, lavorerai per provedere al _viver tuo_.” “Primieramente
la fece tanto _povera_, che non avrebbe potuto vivere, se Dio non
l’avvesse _provveduta_ per via di limosine. Poi quando le Signore della
Misericordia l’addimandavano per andare a’poveri … ella sempre con loro
andava.”[401] I have italicized the words taken over by the _Dialogo_.
Thus her own poor substance (_i.e._ her own modest income), and the
money given to her by the _Misericordia_-ladies for distribution among
the poor, becomes a substance, alms and money, given to herself as to a
poor person.

The fifth case concerns the affections. In the _Vita_-proper nothing
is more characteristic of Catherine, up to the spring of 1509, than
her swift and deep affective sympathy, and the fearless forms of its
manifestation. True, Catherine “would” (certainly up to 1490, perhaps
more or less up to 1496) “abide at times,” up to six hours on end,
“as though dead.” But, “on hearing herself called, she would suddenly
arise and betake herself, in answer, to whatever was required of her,
however small a service this might be.” And indeed “she served the
sick with most fervent affection:” thus she attended throughout a week
upon a poor pestiferous woman; and at the end, “unable further to
contain herself, kissed” the dying woman “upon the mouth with great
affection of heart, and so caught the pestilential fever, and well-nigh
died of it.”[402]--Then, too, there is the _Vita’s_ quite general,
indeterminate remark, “she (Catherine) felt no pain at the deaths of
her (two elder) brothers and of her sisters” (the latter should be
“sister,” unless, perhaps, a sister-in-law is included) in 1502.[403]
But her extant wills have shown us how actively thoughtful she
remained, even in 1506 and 1509, for her brother, nephews and nieces,
and humble retainers; and the deeply affectionate scenes with Marco
and Argentina occurred between 1503 and 1506. Marco, the poor navvy,
was dying “of a cancer in the face,” and Catherine, at Argentina’s
asking, “as though with prompt obedience, betook herself to him”; and
he “threw his arms round Catherine’s neck, and, pressing her with sobs,
seemed unable to have done with weeping.[404] And then, still weeping,
with great tenderness he besought Catherine to adopt his wife as her
spiritual daughter,” and Catherine did so, and “loved this spiritual
daughter much.”[405]--Only in the very late actions, the change as to
her burial-place (Will of March 1509), and the exclusion of all her
attendants on January 10, and of most of them on and after August 27,
1510,[406] are there indications of any absence or renunciation of
tender and spontaneous human affection.

But here again the _Dialogo_ both closely presses and profoundly
changes the original accounts. For here the Spirit declares to her: “in
these exercises” of work among the poor, “I shall keep thee … as though
thou wast dead. I will not allow thee to make friends with any one,
nor that thou shouldst have any particular affection for any relative;
but I want thee to love all men, and this without affection, both poor
and rich, both friends and relatives. I do not want thee, in thine
interior, to know one person from the other, nor would I have thee go
to any one from motives of friendship; it will suffice to go when thou
art called.” And thus “she went, when the _Misericordia_-ladies asked
her to go into dwellings that would have frightened away all ordinary
mortals. But she, on the contrary, deliberately touched these sick
(_voleva toccarli_), for the purpose of giving them some refreshment
to soul and body.”[407]--Note how skilfully the call, and the going
at the call, the affection and its spontaneous manifestations in the
original accounts, have been altered and crossed by the _Dialogue’s_
re-statement.--Here again we are strongly reminded of Battista, in
her letter to the Signora Andronica in 1575, encouraging her to
“abandon all things,” her children included, “interiorly,” and “to
mortify the most pleasing consolation which arises from the children’s
company.” Indeed, already in 1554, Battista has, in one of her own
_Colloquies_, refused to accept every avoidable consolation arising
from her pure election by God.[408] Only by such a reference of these
_Dialogo_-passages to Battista, the many-sided, the ever-affectionate
daughter and public-spirited woman, can we come to see them in a wider
context; indeed only thus can they cease to be profoundly repulsive.

(2) _Cases of softening._

There are two instances of the softening of (doubtless authentic)
doctrinal sayings given by the _Vita_-proper. Her evidently impulsive
exclamation: “I would not have grace or mercy, but justice and
vengeance exercised against the malefactor,”--has here become: “She did
not attach any importance to her sins, on the ground of the punishment
awaiting them, but solely because they had been enacted against the
infinite goodness of God.”--And her bold declaration: “If any creature
could be found which did not participate in the divine goodness, that
creature would be as malignant as God is good,” here reads: “The soul
bereft of the Divine love becomes _well-nigh_ as malignant as the
Divine love is good and delightful. I say ‘well-nigh,’ for God shows
it a little mercy.”[409] The proclamation of some moral good even in
lost souls, is thus weakened to an admission of some consolation in the
latter.


4. _Re-statement of the Conversion-experiences of March 1474._

But it is in the matters of Catherine’s Conversion in the
Convent-Chapel, on March 22, 1474, and of the Vision of the Bleeding
Christ in the Palazzo Adorno, soon after, that the _Dialogo’s_
transformation of the _Vita_-accounts reaches its highest interest.
I give it here as the chief of many such re-statements which I have
carefully analyzed.

  _Vita_-proper,                          _Vita_ (_Dialogo_), pp. 199_c_,
  pp. 4_a_-5_b_.                          200_c_, 202_c_, 208_c_, 209_a_,
                                          _b_. 209_c_, 210_a_, 211_a_, _b_.

  Subitocchè se gli fù inginocchiata      Quando Iddio vuole purgare
  innanzi, receve una                     un anima … le manda il
  ferita al cuore d’immenso               suo divino lume, facendola
  amore di Dio, con una vista             vedere una scintilla di quel
  così chiara delle sue miserie           puro amore con quale ci ama
  e diffetti, e della bontà di Dio        … essendo noi nemici per
  che ne fù per cascare in terra.         molte offese che gli abbiamo
  Onde … restò quasi fuor di              fatte.… E le fà vedere quel
  sè: e perciò internamente               affocato amore.… Tutto
  gridava con ardente amore:              questo fù dimostrato da Dio
  “Non più mondo, non più peccati.”       in un instante, coll’ operazione
  Ed in quel punto.…                      sua purissima.… Questo
  … Per la viva fiamma d’infocato         raggio d’amore fù quello che
  amore il dolce Iddio                    ferì quell’ anima in un istante
  impresse in quell’ anima …              … che la fece restare in
  tutta la perfezione.…                   quel punto quasi fuori di sè.…

  Vedeva ancora le offese che             Le fù ancora mostrato … quanti
  gli aveva fatte; e perciò gridava:      erano tutti i suoi diffetti
  “O amore mai più, mai                   … in modo che sommerse
  più, peccati.” Se le accese poi         sè stessa con tal
  un odio di sè medesima, che             dispregio che avrebbe detto
  non si poteva sopportare, e             i suoi peccati pubbliccamente
  diceva: “O amore, se bisogna,           per tutta la città, nè altro
  sono apparecchiata di confessare        poteva dire se non: “O Signore
  i miei peccati in pubblico.”            mai più mondo, nè peccati.”

  Ma volendo il Signore accendere         Stando l’anima in questa
  intrinsecamente più                     quasi disperazione di sè
  l’amor suo in quest’ anima, ed          medesima … vedendosi un
  insieme il dolore dei suoi              carico da disperato alle spalle,
  peccati, se le mostrò in ispirito       … era come una cosa insensata
  colla Croce in spalla, piovendo         ed attonita fuori di sè.…
  tutto sangue, per modo che la           Essendo un giorno in casa,
  casa le pareva tutta piena di           le apparve in vista interiore
  rivoli di quel sangue, il quale         il Signor Nostro Gesù
  vedeva essere tutto sparso per          Christo, tutto insanguinato
  amore: il che le accese nel             da capo a’ piedi, in modo che
  cuore tanto fuoco, che ne               pareva che da quel corpo
  usciva fuor di sè, e pareva             piovesse sangue per tutta la
  una cosa insensata per tanto            terra dove andava; e le fù
  amore e dolore che ne sentiva.          detta in occulto questa parola:
                                          “vedi tu questo sangue? tutto
                                          è sparso per amor tuo, e per
                                          soddisfazione de’ tuoi peccati.”
                                          In queste parole le fù data
                                          una gran ferita d’amore verso
                                          esso Signor nostro Gesù
                                          Christo, con una confidenza
                                          tale, che disparve quella prima
                                          vista tanto disperata e si
                                          rallegrò un poco in esso
                                          Signore.…

  Questa vista le fù tanto                Le fù mostrata un altra
  penetrativa che                         vista maggior di quella, e
                                          tanto più grande che con
                                          lingua non si potrebbe dire
                                          … le fù infuso un raggio
                                          d’amore nel cuore.… Gridava
                                          e sospirava molto più e
  le pareva sempre vedere (e              senza comparazione che della
  cogli occhi corporali)                  prima vista, la quale fù dell’
                                          esser maligno di sè stessa.
                                          Questo raggio d’amore le fù
  il suo Amore tutto insanguinato         lasciato impresso con quelle
  e confitto in Croce.                    cinque fontane di Christo, le
                                          quali mandavano goccie
                                          d’affuoccato sangue di acceso
                                          amore verso dell’ uomo.

Hence _D._ gives but one exclamation as to “world” and “sins,” and
constructs this out of the two (mutually differing) exclamations of the
same kind given by _V._, the second of which now stands in _V._ after
the Bleeding-Christ episode. Whilst spacing all out, _D._ keeps to the
order and context of _V.’s_ paragraphs. And _D._ utilizes the curious,
silent change from the moving Christ to the affixed Christ in _V.’s_
account of the single vision in the Palace, so as to constitute two
perfectly distinct visions. The Cross of both these doublets of _V._,
(the “Croce” which, in the first part of _V.’s_ single account, is
“in spalla,” on His shoulder; and the Cross which, in the second part
of the same account, He is nailed to), has, in _D._, disappeared from
both separate visions. And yet the Cross hovers about the first vision,
here transformed into a “carico alle spalle,” a load upon Catherine’s
shoulders,--an oppression on her mind; and is presupposed in the second
vision, since those “five fountains sending forth burning blood” are,
of course, the wounds of Christ, whilst He hangs affixed to the Cross
as described in _V.’s_ second part. And the “Signore piovendo tutto
sangue,” and the “rivoli di sangue, sparso per amore, il che accese
nel cuore tanto fuoco,” of _V._, have, in _D._, become “quelle cinque
fontane di Christo, le quali mandavano goccie d’affuocato sangue e
di acceso amore.”--This fountain-imagery is derived from numerous
authentic sayings and “viste” of Catherine as to the “living Fount
(_fonte_) of the divine goodness,” or “of infinite love,” and “the
clear waters coming from the divine fount.” The very word “fountain”
(_fontana_) occurs in one of _V.’s_ descriptive passages; and the idea
appears in Catherine’s address to Our Lord at the well (_pozzo_) of
Samaria, and in her thereupon receiving refreshment of soul, by the
gift of “a little drop (_gocciola_)” of that divine water.[410] And the
fountains are here made to proceed from a ray of love; and this again
comes from numerous authentic sayings of hers: in one case the “raggio
d’amore” appears split up into several rays: “raggi … affocati di
divino amore.”[411]


5. _Three new authentic details._

And yet these remarkable forty pages furnish us with three fresh
statements or implications of detail, respectively too precise, vivid
and verisimilar and too little obvious, to be easily attributable to
any but a new and authentic source of information. There is the vividly
precise information that, during Catherine’s actively penitential
period, “the love of God, wishing that she should lose all relish in
what she ate, made her always carry some epatic aloes and pounded
agaric about with her; and whenever she suspected that one kind of
her food was about to give her more pleasure than another, she would
furtively put a little of that most bitter compound upon it, before
eating it.” There is the formal declaration that “she also went to the
poor of San Lazaro.” And there is the statement, already noticed, that,
after her conversion, she had “to work to provide for her living,” and
“that she would have been unable to live, unless God had provided for
her by way of alms.”[412]

Now the first statement should be compared with Battista Vernazza’s,
similarly precise, pharmaceutical detail as to the cassia used by her
father in doctoring the poor in 1493, recorded by Battista, nearly
ninety years later, in 1581:[413] Battista would, then, have been
quite capable of remembering and recording that aloes-and-agaric
detail some seventy years after the event. As to the second statement,
I have already given the various solid reasons which point to
Catherine’s co-operation with Battista’s father in his work amongst
the Pestiferous, as far back as the year 1493.[414] And as to the
third statement (in apparently direct conflict with the declaration
in the _Vita_-proper, that, although entirely devoted to the service
of the Hospital, she never would enjoy or use the slightest thing
belonging to it for her own living[415]) the Wills prove to us that,
however exaggerated be the language of _D._, it, and not _V._, is here
substantially in the right. For, though she could have afforded to
live in modest style, on her own little income, she did, as a matter
of fact, hold her little house rent-free from the Hospital, in return
for her services to it. Here also Battista would have known the precise
facts from her father, who had himself drawn up or witnessed three
documents referring to these matters.


6. _Battista Vernazza, the author of this first “Dialogo.”_

The reader will by now be concluding with me, that all these
peculiarities of the _Dialogo_ point to one person as its author:
Battista Vernazza. And all its other circumstances and characteristics
make for the same conclusion.

(1) _Particular circumstances._

There is the place. For the original of MS. C., in which appear the
first traces, (this whole first part), of _D._, came from Battista’s
own Convent; and thus a document which, in its later narrative part,
contained, as we shall find, so much primary matter due to Vernazza
the father, and so much secondary composition and arrangement due to
Vernazza the daughter; and which, in its dialogue part, gave much
original literary work due to a Vernazza: would easily (no doubt soon
after Battista’s death), come to be considered as the work and the
copying of Ettore Vernazza alone. And there is the date. For if this
first part was written in 1548, 1549, Battista would have been fifty
or fifty-two years old. And we have already considered writings of
hers, written, with equal subtlety of psychological distinctions and
even greater vigour of style, in 1554, 1555, and even in 1575, at
seventy-eight and eighty-four years of age.[416]

There is, too, the form, so curiously schematic and abstract, and,
in part, far-fetched, yet based upon a minute, most ingenious use
of scriptural texts. Thus those two “weeks,” (symbols for the two,
respectively lukewarm and sinful, lustres), are no doubt suggested
by the “seventy weeks” which “the man Gabriel” declares to Daniel
“shall be shortened upon the Jewish people, that transgression may
be finished, and everlasting justice may be brought and vision may
be fulfilled”;[417] and by Jacob’s twice seven years of servitude
under Laban, and by Laban’s words “make up the week of days of this
match.”[418] We thus get Catherine’s two weeks (of years) of servitude
to sin, and her two successive “matches” or alliances, entered into
between her soul and body under the influence of self-love. We found a
similar minute ingenuity in Battista’s use of Scripture in 1554.[419]

And there is a complex, abstract, astonishingly self-consistent
psychology running through the whole, and one simply identical with the
psychology treated by Battista as more or less a point of revelation to
herself in 1554. And, partly as effect or as cause of that psychology,
the _Dialogo_ has a painfully great, at times downrightly repulsive,
insistence upon detachment from emotional feeling, both in intercourse
with fellow-creatures, and in spiritual commerce with God, that is
simply identical, in its parallelism, range, depth, and doctrinal
setting, with the position which Battista takes up in her _Colloquii_
of 1554.[420]

Again we get here a prominent and persistent occupation with the
historic Christ and His passion, that are as unlike Catherine’s as
they are identical with Battista’s spiritual trend. For, during her
Conversion-Vision, Catherine here sees that “burning love which Our
Lord Jesus Christ manifested when upon earth, from His Incarnation up
to His Ascension”; and this corresponds precisely with Battista’s sight
(_vista_), in 1554, of “the Infinite Love manifested unto men, in
and by the life of Christ, at the Nativity and at the Ascension.” And
the Christ-Vision here becomes two separate apparitions; that of the
Crucified Christ is declared “greater than” that of the Walking Christ;
and there is an insistence upon “those five Fountains,” an image
derived indeed from Catherine’s “living fountain of Goodness, which
participated with the creature,” but which, in Catherine, is conceived
in connection with God and metaphysically, and here is transferred to
the historic and crucified Christ, in close keeping with Battista’s
whole emphatic Christo-centrism.[421]

And, finally, we find here certain daring anthropomorphisms without
any full parallel in Catherine’s sayings, but entirely matched by
expressions of Battista. God is here not as, in Catherine’s manner,
Himself an irradiating Love, but is “ever standing with burning rays
of love in His hand, to inflame and penetrate the hearts of men,” a
combination of the Thing-imagery dear to Catherine (for Love is here
still a luminous, burning substance), and of the human, Personal
picturing prominent with Battista (for God here has a hand, in which
He holds that substance). This latter picturing (probably in 1550) is
not unlike the more spiritual anthropomorphism of “the Increate Heart”
of God, used by Battista in 1575 a passage already exceeded here, in
the _Dialogo_, by the words, “God showed her the love with which He had
suffered”--words which, if pressed, would introduce suffering into the
divine nature Itself.[422]

(2) _General considerations._

All these cumulative reasons of detail will be indefinitely fortified
by what I shall have to say as to the character of the subsequent
parts of the _Dialogo_, and in proof of these parts and the first
instalment being by one and the same author. But, meanwhile, we can
press this further general consideration, that only a person with
considerable traditional authority in matters concerning Catherine, and
yet a person, not a direct eyewitness or full contemporary, hence an
individual without any additional information, and unhampered by the
(otherwise necessary) regard for the sensitiveness of still living
contributors to the original biography, can possibly have written such
a document. For this production, when it first appears complete, in
the first Printed _Vita_ of 1551, will there occupy quite one third
of the whole book; and yet, whilst incorporating practically all,
and only all, the material of those other two-thirds (the _Trattato_
alone excepted), it gives to everything a fresh grouping and setting,
colour and atmosphere, drift and character. Only a remarkable, powerful
mind; a writer skilled in mystical subjects; one with leisure for
such a careful composition; one, too, sufficiently in sympathy with
Catherine to be attracted to, and helped through, the difficult task;
a person living now, thirty-eight years after Catherine’s death, in
an environment of a kind to preserve her memory green: all these
conditions must, more or less, have met and been realized in the
writer of this curious, forcible book.--And Battista, the God-daughter
of the heroine of the work, and the eldest, devoted daughter of the
chief contributor to the already extant biography; a Contemplative
with a deep interest in, and much practical experience of, the kind of
spirituality to be portrayed and the sort of literature required; a
Nun, during thirty-eight years, in the very Convent where Catherine’s
sister (one of its foundresses) had lived and died, and where Catherine
herself had desired to live and where her Conversion had taken place;
a woman who was but thirteen at the time when Catherine died, after
nine years of much suffering and seclusion, and who, even now but
fifty-one years of age, had outlived all the close friends and original
chief biographers of Catherine by thirty-five, twenty-four, and twenty
years: Battista, and Battista alone, united in her own person all these
necessary conditions. And it will have been the sensitively original
and strongly synthetic cast of Battista’s mind which made the strangely
fragmentary, repetitive, contradictory, static, and yet abrupt and
unharmonized multiplicity of the _Vita_ both irritating as it stood,
and yet (with its considerable elements of unmistakably first-hand
portraiture of a rarely large and lofty mind and character) profoundly
stimulative to a re-thinking, re-feeling, re-stating of the whole,--at
least, up to the zenith of that Soul’s perfection.

But our next stage will make all this clearer still.


VI. SIXTH STAGE: FIRST PRINTED EDITION OF THE
“VITA-DOTTRINA-DICCHIARAZIONE,” 1551; EXAMINATION OF ALL IT POSSESSES
IN ADDITION TO MSS. A, B AND C, APART FROM THE “DIALOGO.”

At last we reach the publication of the _Life_, in Genoa, in
1551.[423] A printing-press had not been established in Genoa till
1536 (by Bellone); hence the _Life_ appeared only fifteen years
after the earliest date possible for its publication,--other cities
not being, as yet, sufficiently interested in Catherine to think of
such an undertaking.--Only further on shall I attempt some analysis,
estimation, and attribution of that _corpus_ of earlier and earliest
constituents of the Book, which, although frequently referred to at our
last two stages, had there to remain unanalyzed. In these remaining two
stages I intend to treat only, first of the Introductory parts of the
Book, special to its printed form, and then of the Second “Chapter” of
the _Dialogo_ (its present Second and Third Parts).

Here then we have to deal with the matter which, amongst our extant
documents, appears for the first time in the Printed _Vita_ of
1551, and first with that part of it which is there devoted to the
publication of the Book. This part of the matter consists, in the
order of its place in the Book, of the Title with its Picture; the
Approbation; the Preface; and the Subscription.


1. _Title-page._

The Title-page has: “Book of the Admirable Life and Holy Doctrine of
the Blessed Catarinetta of Genoa, in which is contained a Useful and
Catholic Demonstration and Declaration of Purgatory.” And underneath
appears a picture of Our Lord Crucified, and Blessed Catherine on her
knees before Him, and crowned with a Diadem; with the text: “I confess
to Thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that Thou hast hid these
things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto little
ones” (Matt. xi).

Note here, in the Title, the correct and most attractive baptismal
form of her Christian name, Catarinetta, which appears here for the
last time, either in the Title, the Heading, or the Subscription of
her _Life_; and the disappearance, which is final, of her family name
Adorna, which had figured in the titles of all the MSS. Thus “La
miranda vita e sancta conversation di Madonna Catherinetta Adorna,” the
older heading of MS. A, which will have been that of the Giustiniano
book (a heading which itself had succeeded to “De la Miranda
Conversione di quondam Donna Catherinetta Adorna” of the booklet of
1512, still preserved in MS. B), has here become “La vita mirabile e
dottrina santa de la Beata Catarinetta da Genoa.”--And note how, for
the first time, mention is made in the title of what has hitherto been
but a long Chapter of the _Vita_; and how what in the MSS. had, in that
Chapter’s heading, claimed but to be a matter of devotional experience
(“How, by comparison of the divine fire, which she felt in her heart
and which purified her soul, she saw interiorly and understood how
the Souls abide in Purgatory”), has here been given, some thirty
years after the Papal condemnation of Luther’s theses on Purgatory, a
controversial point,--it is now “a Useful and Catholic Demonstration
and Declaration of Purgatory.” We have here an attitude of mind
inevitably different from Catherine’s pure positiveness.--And remark,
too, the continued non-indication of the _Dialogo_, although this is
now present, like the “Dimostrazione,” as a distinct document in the
Book: the Dialogue is evidently still too new to be able to modify the
old title-page, and to appear there alongside of a composition which,
though but one-sixth of its own length, is now some thirty and more
years old.

In the Picture Catherine wears a diadem, a compromise between an
indication of her noble birth and a hint of the nimbus which they
shrink from giving to her unequivocally. And she is kneeling before the
Christ Crucified,--evidently an attitude chosen as specially typical
of her whole life and doctrine, because of the passages in the _Vita_:
“She ever seemed to see her Love affixed to the Cross”; “she was next
drawn to the side of the Crucified”; “she appeared in very truth as a
body affixed to a Cross,” with the dependent account of her “interior
stigmatization,”--“she received a new wound at her heart, so that she
might feel within herself the wound in the side of her tender Love”;
and the amplifications of some of these passages in the _Dialogo_.[424]
Yet only the first three passages occur in the MSS.; and the first
two are carefully restricted there to her first Conversion-Period
(of four years at most), whilst the third passage refers to a (quite
unusual) bodily posture, assumed by her on one single occasion during
her last illness, an attitude which remained uninterpreted by herself.
The fact is that the precise contrary of what this picture suggests is
one of the chief characteristics of Catherine, for she is habitually
absorbed in contemplations remarkably lacking in historical imagery and
setting. And the _Dialogo_ parallels and variants which, as we have
seen, so largely increase this historical element, and especially this
occupation with Christ Crucified, are characteristic, not of Catherine
but of Battista. The picture is, no doubt, the consequence of this
increasing emphasis laid, in her successive _Vitae_, upon a side of
religion all but entirely absent from the middle and last periods of
Catherine’s actual life; and fully expresses Battista’s feeling, who,
just as she addressed her whole long letter of 1575 in Donna Anguisola,
“in the Crucified,” will have seen to it that the whole book concerning
her own God-mother was placed at the feet of the Crucifix.


2. _The Approbation._

The Latin Approbation runs: “I, Fra Geronimo of Genoa of the Order of
Preachers, Apostolic Inquisitor into Heretical Pravity throughout the
whole Dominion of Genoa, assent to this Book being committed to print,
for the consolation and instruction of spiritual persons. Witness
this my autograph.” The points of interest in connection with this
Approbation will appear, as we proceed, to consist in the reasons why
such theological “corrections” as were actually introduced into the
doctrinal parts of the _Vitae_ had all been made long before this date,
probably none of them later than 1530; and why they were, throughout,
practically restricted to her very sober and correct Purgatorial
teaching, and left her other, far more daring, sayings more or less
untouched. I can find no traces of any theological changes introduced,
for this edition of 1551, into the _Vita-Dicchiarazione_ sections;
but we shall see how three points and tendencies of the _Vita_-proper
have been indirectly criticised and “corrected” by means of their
re-statement in the _Dialogo_, which was certainly finished, and
possibly begun, with a view to its appearance in the company of the
_Vita_ and the _Dicchiarazione_.


3. _The Preface._

The Preface consists of seven full and balanced, dignified and
self-restrained, thoroughly well-informed and yet, in part,
deliberately obscure and illusive, sentences. It still excludes the
idea of any literary authorship on the part of Catherine: “Madonna
Caterinetta, of whose admirable Conversion, Life, and Doctrine,
together with her many privileges and particular graces, we shall
write.… Here, in her Life and Holy Doctrine is to be found.…” Not
Catherine writes, but “we,” _i.e._ the final Redactor, or all the
Contributors together with him; and not her Writings are to be found
here, but her “Doctrine” only. Indeed, it all “has been collected with
truth and simplicity by two devout spiritual persons, from the very
lips of the Seraphic Woman herself.” More would quite evidently have
been claimed, if more had been true.

And it contains two or three evident additions to its original text,
made for this publication in view of the entire _Dialogo’s_ first
appearance here; additions which contain an expression which may well
have occasioned or helped on the legend of “Catherine, an Author,”
a legend which was sure to spring up at the first opportunity and
provocation. The fifth sentence reads at present as follows: “Sono in
questo libro [dignissimi suoi trattati dell’ amor di Dio e dell’ amor
proprio] una bellisima e chiarissima dimostrazione del Purgatorio, e
in che modo vi stiano dentro le anime contentissime, [e un bel dialogo
dell’ Anima con il Corpo e Amor poprio, dal quale ne seguita un amoroso
colloquio dell’ Anima con il suo Signore] ed altre dignissime cose da
sapere, veramente tutte di eccellentissima speculazione ed utilità [e
massime in questi turbolenti tempi necessarie].”[425]

Now even the last set of bracketed words seems an addition, and points
to the existence of the body of this Preface at a period prior to
“questi turbolenti tempi,” times that I take to be 1536-1537, when
Battista’s God-father Moro lapsed into Calvinism. Ever since 1520,
when Luther’s Purgatory doctrines were condemned, these writings
would have been held, if not “necessary,” at least “of most excellent
utility.”--There is, any way, no doubt as to the two previous sets
being insertions. For note, if they be retained, the slovenly
repetition, by the first set, of “dignissimi” in the midst of a most
finished composition; the extraordinary use of the word “Trattati,”
to signify either Chapter XXV (which bears the title “Dell’ Amor
Proprio e del Divino Amore,” and is a collection of sayings pronounced
on at least three different occasions), or Chapters XXV and XXVI,--in
either case, Chapters which are no more significant or authentic than
any other of the doctrinal chapters. And remark, in the second set,
the curiously mild praise for the _Dialogo_ contained in the one
positive “un bel,” wedged in between the two superlatives lavished on
the “Dimostrazione” and the two superlatives given to the remaining
doctrinal parts of the Book. The object of that first “Trattati”
insertion is evidently to pick out some one or other of the already
ancient Chapters of the _Vita_, which have some special likeness to the
subject-matter and title of the _Dialogo_, so as to prevent the latter
from looking too suspiciously different from the rest of the doctrine
traditionally ascribed to Catherine.

I take this Preface to have existed, without these additions, in the
“worthy book” described by Giustiniano in 1536. But as that careful
writer insists upon the precise length of time, because it had been
considerable, during which Catherine’s body had lain incorrupt, and
says nothing about the antiquity of the book, a point he would hardly
have failed to urge had he been able to do so, I hesitate to push this
Book, and this its Preface, further back than 1530, a very probable
date for the first (at least complete) fusion of Vernazza’s and
Marabotto’s separate contributions, since these two chief disciples
would then have been dead six and two years respectively, and the
culmination of Protestant “turbulence” in Calvin’s open revolt and
Moro’s defection would not be taking place for another five and
six years respectively.--Catherine indeed appears here no more as
the “quondam Donna Catarinetta” of MS. B, but still as “Madonna
Catherinetta, figliuola di M. Giacomo della nobilissima casa Fiesca,
maritata a M. Giuliano Adorno,” a designation distinctly earlier
than the “Beata Catarinetta di Genoa” of the Title. And the Book,
its substance, is declared to have been “collected by two spiritual
persons (_Religiosi_), her devotees, from the very lips of the Seraphic
Woman herself.” This passage, it is true, now reads “Raccolto dai
divoti religiosi (suo Confessore e un figliuolo suo spirituale).” But,
where the Preface is above the suspicion of having been touched up, a
“cioê” introduces such a bracket; the rhythm of this sentence, in the
midst of this otherwise exquisite Preface, is woefully imperfect; and
the evidently deliberate ambiguity of “divoti religiosi” is rendered
all but nugatory by the considerable clearness of the bracketed
information. The clause will originally have read, “Da due religiosi
sui divoti,” for this obviates all three objections. But, in this
deliberately mysterious form, it must have been written when both were
dead, and yet when the death of the last was still recent; and this
again brings us to a date soon after Marabotto’s death in 1528.

Who wrote this Preface? Much in it points to Battista. So the use
of “cioè,” so characteristic of her _Colloquies_ and _Letters_ and
also of the _Dialogo_; and the phrase “divote persone,” recurring
in the _Dialogo_;[426] and the doctrinal tone of “l’amoroso Signor
Nostro, sitibondo della salute delle sue razionali creature,” “il suo
consolatorio spirito,” “la perfetta e consummata unione possibile ai
viatori,” and “quasi non più fide, ma già certezza,” all closely like
passages in her _Colloquies_ and in her Letter to Donna Anguisola.
The mysteriousness and equality of designation, applied to both
Ettore and Don Cattaneo, would come with a special naturalness from
Battista, spontaneously anxious to place her heroic father’s sanctity
and intimacy with Catherine on a level with those of Catherine’s
priest-friend and Confessor Marabotto. And, if written in 1530,
Battista would at the time have been a formed writer,--a woman of
thirty-three years of age.--There are, no doubt, certain differences.
The _Dialogo_ nowhere has such an “ancorchè … niente (non) dimeno”
clause. “Un Serafino,” “essa Serafica Donna” of this Preface, are,
in strictness, unmatched in Battista’s, otherwise even intenser,
writings. “La perfetta e consummata unione possibile ai viatori” is
a more ordinary and technical phrase than I can find elsewhere in
Battista’s writings. Above all, the general style and rhythm is here,
somehow, a little different from that of those other writings.--Still,
these differences are explicable by the writer of the Preface finding
himself largely bound by the existing _Vita_-materials, and by their
very niceties of expression. The Author of the Preface is certainly
identical with the Redactor of the first (tripartite) _Vita e
Dottrina_; and this Redactor, we shall find, must be Battista. The
insertions in the Preface, containing the praise of the _Dialogo_,
are certainly the work of another hand.--Upon the whole, then, we
can safely attribute the Preface, in its original form, to Battista
Vernazza.


4. _The Subscription._

The subscription to the _Vita_-proper, in this first Edition, runs:
“Here ends the life of the noble Matron, Catarinetta Adorna”; which
thus still retains (like the Preface, but against the Title) the warmly
human and precise, domestic and familiar designation of the first
heading of MS. A.


VII. SEVENTH STAGE: THE SECOND “CHAPTER” OF THE “DIALOGO,” WHICH
APPEARS FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE PRINTED “VITA,” 1551.


1. _Three remarks concerning the two Parts of this “Chapter.”_

(1) The additions to the _Dialogo_ which appear here for the first
time, and which amount to its present Parts Second and Third, are given
in this First Edition as one single, the Second, “Chapter,” following
upon the older part here designated “Chapter First.” In the Fourth
Edition, 1601, this division of the _Dialogo_ is formally announced on
the Title-page: “With a Dialogue, divided into two Chapters, between
the Soul, the Body, and Self Love; and (the Soul and) the Lord.” I
do not know precisely when those two “Chapters” were replaced by the
present Three Parts, and when these Parts were divided up into the
present Chapters; it was, in any case, after the sixth edition (1645).

(2) These last two Parts seem to have been written, from the first,
with a view to eventual division into two. For though the whole of this
Second Chapter is not much longer than the First Chapter (forty-seven
and a half pages, against forty), it yet divides up very well at about
half-way, since the first half here ends with a piece of moralizing
narrative, applied to the whole earthly existence: “The more valiant
a man is at the beginning, the greater martyrdom should he expect at
the end … nor does God cease to make provision … up to that Man’s
death.”[427]

(3) This whole “Chapter” Second is by the same author as “Chapter”
First; in this Second, even more than in that First “Chapter,” there
are no historical materials other than those still present, more or
less untouched, in the _Vita_-proper; and yet these materials have
again been modified, in their sequence and setting, their tone and
pitch, their drift and meaning, and all this throughout by the same
powerful and experienced, often deep and touching, but also, in great
part, painfully abstract and straining, absolute-minded and excessive
writer.


2. _General indications of identity of authorship for “Chapters” First
and Second._

(1) “Chapter” First had, we know, concluded with a paraphrase of the
last stage in the scheme of Catherine’s spiritual growth as given
in the _Vita_-proper, and had thus reached the _ne plus ultra_ of
perfection for any creature, either here or in the world to come.
“And now the Spirit said: ‘I am determined no further to call her
a human creature, since I now see her (to be) all in God, without
any Humanity’”: a statement which may well (like the corresponding
Spiritual-Kiss stage in the _Vita’s_ scheme)[428] have been intended,
at the time of its composition, both to describe directly her great
middle years, 1474-1499, and to sum up generally her later life,
1499-1510.--But no such hyperbolic language, when thus applied to man
as we know him, or as we can even conceive him here below, can, of
course, be kept up. And thus here in the _Dialogo_ (as previously in
the corresponding place in the _Vita_-proper), what had originally been
the conclusion of a self-contained account of her Conversion, became,
owing to the desire of utilizing much extant material which directly
described her years of physical break-up, but one chapter in the story
of her total life. Hence we now find, both in the _Vita_-proper and the
_Dialogo_, an instructive anti-climax, in an attempted description (the
_Dialogo_ gives this in its “Chapter” Second) of her successive states
from 1497 to her death in 1510, states and changes which, were we to
take the concluding words of the _Vita_-scheme and of the _Dialogo’s_
“Chapter” First at all strictly, would, in great part, be impossible.

(2) In the _Dialogo’s_ First “Chapter” we found a remarkably free,
deliberately pragmatic handling of the _Vita_-materials, in the making
two different visions on two separate occasions (the Vision of the
blood-stained Moving Christ, and the Vision of the blood-pouring
Fixed Christ) out of the one, curiously composite, Moving-Fixed
Christ-Vision of the _Vita_; and this doubling introduced, into that
First Part, a special kind of obscurity, a sort of eddying, circular,
repetitive movement and practical fixedness. Similarly we find here,
in the Second “Chapter,” the one description of her resumption of
Confession, given by the _Vita_-proper, is made into two accounts,
accounts still further separated from each other here than the two
visions were separated from each other there. For the first ten and a
half Chapters, pages 226_b_ to 242_b_, give us her history from 1497
to 1501. And, amongst these, Chapter First to Third cover the years
1497 to 1499; and at the end of Chapter Third, page 232_b_, we get
an account of how “she began to confess her sins” (necessarily, at
this period, to Marabotto) “with such Contrition, that it appeared a
marvellous thing”--a description which has been taken from the story
of her First Conversion-Period, but which is made to do duty here, at
the date of her beginning to confess, in a very different manner, to
Don Marabotto, twenty-five years after those Conversion-Confessions.
Yet only at the beginning of the second half of Chapter Tenth (p.
242_c_) do we hear, (wedged in between two passages, pp. 242_b_,
243_b_, which are re-castings of descriptions of a scene which occurred
on January 10, 1510, _Vita_, pp. 139_a_-140_c_) of God giving her
the help of a “Religioso,” “suo Confessore,” _i.e._ Marabotto (p.
242_c_). This is followed, not two pages later on (p. 244_b_), by a
description of the experience of the “Scintilla” on August 11, 1510
(_Vita_, p. 148_b_), and by an allusion to her death on September 15,
1510 (p. 245_c_).--This doubling was no doubt effected for the purpose
of introducing as much variety as possible into what is, anyhow, a
monotonous narrative; of being thus able to produce a more ordinary
and “correct” account of her dispositions and acts, on occasion of
the resumption of her Confessions in 1499, than could be given by the
direct utilization of Marabotto’s description of them; and of thus,
by these two narratives in lieu of that single one, giving greater
place and prominence to the practice of Confession than this practice
actually occupied in her real life.


3. _Closer examination of the earlier portion of “Chapter” Second._

A closer examination of the whole Second “Chapter” of the _Dialogo_
fully substantiates this conclusion, and brings out other interesting
points. Let us take the eleven Chapters of the present Part Second.

(1) The first two Chapters describe her condition when “the Soul
could no more correspond to the sensations of the Body,--the Body
remained, as it were, without its natural being, and dwelt confused and
stunned, without knowing where it was or what it should do or say” (pp.
226_c_, 227_a_). And then the Soul begins to address “the Lord” (p.
229_a_). And on p. 230_b_ we hear, for the first time, of its “sweet
and cruel Purgatory.” And Chapter Third tells of the Soul’s painful
prison-life, and of vomitings, emaciation, and occasional inability
to move (pp. 230_b_-232_a_).--Now Purgatory, prison-house and these
psycho-physical conditions do not appear, in the _Vita_-proper, till
“nine years before her death,” and, indeed, in great part only within
the last year of her life.[429] Indeed it is only the characteristic
intensity with which the _Dialogo_ here describes the fresh access of
Contrition, and the resumption of frequent Confession for evidently new
offences (a description entirely inappropriate to this late stage of
her life), that makes it difficult to realize that these three Chapters
are dealing with 1497 to 1499. And the exaggeration here exactly
corresponds to the exaggeration, in Part (“Chapter”) First, of her
earlier sinfulness, and her first Conversion and Contrition.

(2) Chapter Fourth then gives a short description of another “ray of
love”; and then apostrophizes, in seven “oh” and “che” sentences,
such a state of soul (pp. 232_c_-233_c_). Chapter Fifth contains one
question and answer exchanged between the Soul and the Lord, and then
three narrative-exclamatory paragraphs (pp. 233_c_-235_a_). Chapter
Sixth gives two explanations by the Lord of the Soul’s sufferings,
interrupted by the Soul’s thanks and acceptance (pp. 235_b_-237_a_).
And then Chapter Seventh describes a lull in the Soul’s battles and
trials (pp. 237_a_-238_a_). And this lull is followed, in Chapter
Eighth, by a declaration from the Lord that she has now been led up to
the door of Love but has not yet entered in (pp. 238_a_-239_a_); and,
in Chapter Ninth, by a dialogue (for the first time in the entire work)
between the Spirit and the Soul, the former being now determined to
separate itself from the latter; and, at the end of this same Chapter,
by a description of this, now more or less achieved, separation (pp.
239_a_-241_a_; 241_b_).--These conflicts and dialogues between the
Spirit and the Soul, are closely like the conflicts and dialogues
between the Spirit and “Humanity” in Part First.[430] Yet there, the
historical materials are derived chiefly from the _Vita_-proper, pp.
20_a_-21_b_, 96_b_-97_c_ (which give an account of her work from 1473
to 1497); whilst here they come exclusively from pp. 133_b_-138_b_ of
the _Vita_-proper (which tell her experiences from November 11 to the
end of December 1509).

(3) And the last two Chapters, Tenth and Eleventh, are particularly
difficult and self-destructive, obscure and disappointing. The Tenth
(to be fully analyzed presently), is difficult, because it starts
with fragments of _Vita_-information which, in the _Vita_, rightly
refer, in large part, to the beginning of the last ten years of her
life, and even to 1499 in particular,--hence to a period long anterior
to all that has been described in the _Dialogo_ ever since Chapter
Third of this Part. And these fragments are here made to lead up
to a re-statement of the scene of January 10, 1510, when she shut
herself off from every one, but when Marabotto managed to overhear her
soliloquy (pp. 241_c_-244_a_ compared with pp. 139_b_, 113_c_.) And the
Eleventh Chapter is obscure and disappointing, because, after giving
the “scintilla”-incident of August 11, 1510, and a final short dialogue
between the “Lord” and her “Humanity” (again a combination of _Dramatis
Personae_ which has occurred nowhere else), it finishes, not with any
description or even affirmation of her earthly end, but simply with an
account as to the necessity of Purgation, and, in particular, with the
words “a martyrdom which never ceases until death” (pp. 244_a_-245_c_).


4. _Closer examination of later portion of “Chapter” Second._

Part Third, on the contrary, is peculiar in this, that its Dialogue
passes exclusively between but two interlocutors, the Soul and the
Lord: it thus brings back the whole composition to its opening form of
strict duologue,--although there the speakers had been the (unpurified)
Soul and the Body. The present thirteen Chapters constitute, in
substance, a single, all but unbroken, disquisition on God’s love for
the Soul, and on the Soul’s growth in the love of God; although the
form alternates between Chapters of questions and answers, and Chapters
of rapturous descriptions and apostrophizings of Love.

(1) Chapters First and Second consist of such questions and answers,
and conclude with an, abruptly introduced, account of her former
spiritual conversations with her friends, which (though based upon the
beautiful document in the _Vita_-proper, pp. 94_b_-95_c_, and upon
the fragment there, p. 97_b_, and though the narrative here has a
certain noble warmth of its own) is given here merely as a something
to be transcended, and which, by now, had been actually left far
behind. Thus, as in Parts First and Second the _Dialogo_ had given a
characteristically rigoristic, indeed exaggerating, account of her
Conversation and her later Purification respectively, so here again
this curious book is more severe than are the authentic accounts on
which it otherwise relies.

(2) Chapter Third gives a question and answer as to the
comprehensibility of this love. The answer incorporates Catherine’s
description of her soul as, so to speak, under water in an ocean of
peace; and interestingly turns the “scintilla,” the “spark of love,”
into a “stilla,” a “drop,” suggested, no doubt, by the “goccia,” “the
drop of love,” which figured so prominently in Catherine’s great
conversation with her spiritual children.[431]--Chapters Fourth to
Sixth open out with a page where the Lord declares how the pure and
love-absorbed Soul alone holds Love (p. 253); and consist, for the
rest, of exclamatory descriptions of this love, the soul proffering
first ten “O Amore” apostrophes (pp. 253_c_-258_b_), then one “O Amore
puro” address (pp. 259_c_, 260_a_). And the tenth of those apostrophes
introduces a characteristic sentence from the _Vita_-proper: “the
Soul,--if bereft of charity,--when it is separated from the Body,
would, rather than present itself thus before that (Divine) cleanness
and simplicity, cast itself into Hell.”[432]--And Chapter Seventh then
makes the Lord ask the Soul to tell him some of the words which it
addresses to Love; the Soul does so, and the Lord approves of them (pp.
260_b_-261_b_).

(3) And then Chapter Eighth begins a narrative piece (pp.
261_c_-263_c_); but which, after a transitional, exclamatory paragraph
(p. 263_c_), arrives at three short questions and answers. The first
two questions and answers are by the Soul and the Lord respectively;
the third question and answer are respectively by the Lord and the Soul
(pp. 264_a_, _b_). We shall presently see that, in this set of short
sentences, we have reached the culmination of the whole _Dialogo_, and
that, in astonishingly explicit daring, they exceed any and all of
Catherine’s authentic sayings.

(4) Chapter Ninth then gives a narrative description of the apparently
empty and abandoned condition of the advanced Soul, and, for this
purpose carefully utilizes (whilst completely altering the meaning and
context of) Marabotto’s description of Catherine’s first Confession to
him. And in its last paragraph it again (but here with less change)
incorporates other passages of that descriptive Chapter.[433] Then
comes Chapter Tenth, with a short question and answer between the
Lord and the Soul, the latter partly in verse (p. 267_a_). And this
is followed by two descriptive paragraphs, how that this soul “seemed
to mount above Paradise itself”; “this heart is transformed into a
tabernacle of God”; and “such souls, were they but known, would be
adored upon earth” (pp. 267_b_, _c_; 268_a_).

(5) This description is followed by a long rapturous suspension of the
dialogue form, since here the Writer himself addresses successively,
in three “O” paragraphs, the “soul, heart, and mind”; “Love”; and “the
Spirit naked and invisible.” And, after a little exclamation as to
the inadequacy of all words (this also is introduced by an “O”), he
similarly invokes (in three other “O” paragraphs), “my tender Lord”;
the “infinite Good”; and “the Lord” (pp. 268_b_-269_c_).--The present,
most unskilful, division makes Chapter Eleventh begin with these last
three of the seven “O’s.” And after the seventh “O” paragraph and a
descriptive passage, still addressed to “the Lord,” composed of five
“Thou” sentences, follows another short interruption,--apologizing
for the delay in the narrative and the inadequacy of the words used.
And then two “Oimè,” and one “O terra, terra” paragraph finish up
the Writer’s exclamations, and bring us back to the interrupted
dialogue-form (pp. 269_c_-271_b_). Here again a violent division has
been effected in the text by Chapter Twelfth being made to exclude the
first, but to include, the second “Oimè” (p. 271_a_). And this Chapter,
after finishing the “Terra-terra” paragraph, and, with it, the whole
digression, re-opens the dialogue with a curious, serpentine, all
but unbroken series of seven questions of the Soul and answers of the
Lord, in which each successive question picks up the previous answer
and point reached, and tries to reach a deeper one. “What is Thine
Operation within man? A Moving of the heart of man. And this Movement?
A Grace. And this Grace? A Ray of Love. And this Ray of Love? An Arrow.
And this Arrow? A Glimpse (Scintilla) of love. And this Glimpse? An
Inspiration.” And at this point, description is declared to be unable
to proceed further (pp. 271_b_-272_c_.)

(6) And then Chapter Thirteenth finishes up the whole by two questions
and descriptive answers. The first question and answer passes between
the Writer’s own mind and his heart, and thus again constitutes a break
in the dialogue; and the second question and answer occurs between the
Lord and the Soul. The first answer dwells upon personal experience,
as the sole means of some real apprehension of Love; and the second
answer concludes the whole book with a majestic paraphrase of
Catherine’s doctrine as to the immanental, inevitable, self-determined,
and self-endorsed character of the Soul’s joys and sufferings, here
and hereafter, on Earth, in Purgatory, indeed in Hell itself (pp.
273_a_-275_a_). Such passages as these make up for much of the often
painfully intense, abstract, schematic, rigoristic, and too exclusively
transcendental character of this remarkable book, and explain its
fascination for a mind of such rare experience and breadth as was that
of Friedrich Schlegel. I shall presently group together the finest
sayings peculiar to the work.


VIII. SEVENTH STAGE CONTINUED: MINUTE ANALYSIS OF ONE PASSAGE FROM THE
SECOND “CHAPTER.”

But I must still give for this last “Chapter,” as I did for the First
“Chapter,” a synoptic demonstration, by means of one example among
many, of the strange manner in which the _Dialogo_-writer combines the
most detailed dependence on the materials of the _Vita_-proper with the
most sovereign independence concerning the chronology, context, and
drift of those same materials.--And again I choose an originally unique
occurrence and description, so as to eliminate all possibility of an
explanation by an original multiplicity of facts and accounts.

_Catherine as “Garzonzello” or “Figliuolino.”_

  _Dialogo_ (_Vita_), p.                  _Vita_-proper, pp.--
  266_a_, _b_, _c_.

  Il corpo, essendo costretto             117_b_. Non potendosi
  seguire l’anima, resta per quel         sopportare, per non aver più
  tempo quasi senz’ anima,                operazione nè sentimenti dell’
  senza umano conforto,                   anima, col corpo tutto debole.…

  … e non si sà nè si può                 117_c_. “Io non so dove mi
  aiutare.                                sia.”

  Però è di bisogno che dagli             127_a_. Quali la servivano
  altri sia aiutato, ovvero               restavano stupefatti, non sapendo
  occultamente da Dio gli sia             che farle.
  provveduto, altrimenti restarebbe       120_a_. … provveduto tal
  quella creatura abbandonata             bisogno, a lui non restava di
                                          essa provisione memoria
                                          alcuna.

                                          121_a_. Perseverò molti anni
                                          con bisogno che il Confessore
                                          le stasse d’ appresso, per
                                          sostentare l’umanità.

                                          117_c_. Dei peccati che diceva
                                          non le erano lasciato vedere
                                          come peccati che avesse …
  come un figliuolino, il quale,          fatti, ma come d’un garzonzello,
  non avendo i suoi bisogni,              il quale da giovinetto fà
  altro riparo non ha se non di           qualche cosa di cui è ignorante,
  piangere tanto che gli sieno            il quale, essendogli
  dati.                                   detto “tu hai fatto male” per
                                          questa parola muta subito di
                                          colore e diventa rosso, ma non
                                          già perchè conosce il male.

  Non è dunque meraviglia,                119_c_. “Non posso più sopportare
  se a simili creature Iddio              tanti assedi esteriori
  provvede di particolari persone         ed interiori; per questo mi
  che le aiutino, e per                   ha Iddio provveduto del
  mezzo loro sia alle necessità           vostro mezzo … quando da
  dell’ anima e del’ corpo sovvenuto,     mè siete partito, vò lamentadomi
  altrimenti non potriano                 per la casa.”
  vivere.

                                          120_a_. era di bisogno che il
                                          Confessore non si partisse da
                                          lei.… Dio, sempre glieli
  Vedi come il nostro Signor              dava … tutti i sussidi all
  Gesù Christo lasciò _a_ San             anima e al corpo … per
  Giovanni [al]la sua diletta             mezzo di lui, al quale in quell’
  Madre in particolar cura; e             instante provedeva di lume
  così fece ai suoi discepoli e fà        e di parole convenienti alla di
  sempre all’ altre sue divote            lei necessità.
  persone; di modo che l’uno              121_b_. Questa tutto divina
  soccorre l’altro, così all’anima        … operazione. Il Confessore
  come al corpo, con quella               era legato col vincolo del
  unione divina.                          divino amore.

  E perchè in generale le                 117_b_. Dio gli diede lume e
  persone non conoscono queste            grazia di consoscere quell’
  operazioni, nè hanno insieme            operazione.
  quella unione, perciò a simili          120_b_. E perchè quella continua
  cure bisognano particolari persone,     conversazione e stretta
  colle quali Iddio operi                 famigliarità facevano alcuni
  colla sua grazia e lume.                mormorare, non intendendo
                                          l’opera e la necessità.…

  Chi vide queste creature e              117_b_. … col corpo tutto
  non le intende, gli sono più            senza vigore, quasi derelitto
  presto d’ ammirazione che               in se medesimo.
  di edificazione, dunque non
  giudicare, se non vuoi errare
  … resta l’umanità senza
  vigore ed abandonata quasi
  come morta.

The _Dialogo_-writer having, as we saw, combined, for the purpose
of describing Catherine’s latter-day habits, _V.’s_ account of her
unusually peaceful dispositions of soul, obtaining in 1499, with
_V.’s_ account of her Penance and Confessions in 1473: now utilizes
here Marabotto’s account of her Confessions to him from 1499 onwards
(an account which the writer had rejected there), for an entirely
different purpose and context than those developed by the Confessor
himself. For, in the _Vita_-proper account, it is in connection with
the Confession of her sins that we get the highly original and curious
“garzonzello” parallel; and Catherine’s lamentations do not there occur
in any relation to this parallel, but they arise only when Marabotto is
not at hand to comfort her. In the _Dialogo_-version it is simply in
relation to this requirement of his presence and to its postponement,
that Catherine behaves like a “figliuolino,” and cries till she gets
what she wants. And yet there is not the slightest doubt that it is
really the “Garzonzello” Confession-passage which (left unutilized by
the writer in his account of the Contrition and Confessions of her
last period, _Dialogo_, pp. 231_c_-232_b_, no doubt because of the
difficulty and apparent temerity of the facts and doctrines implied),
has here been used after all, but with all its originality and daring
carefully eliminated from it. For nowhere else, in the _Vita_-proper,
does a “Garzonzello”-passage or language, or anything like them, occur;
nowhere else again, in the _Dialogo_ does a “figliuolino”-passage or
wording, or anything really resembling them, appear; and these two,
respectively unique and very peculiar, passages, both occur at one and
the same stage of her life, and in connection with one and the same
couple of persons.


IX. SEVENTH STAGE CONCLUDED: CHARACTER AND AUTHORSHIP OF THIS SECOND
“CHAPTER.”

Let us take these two points simultaneously, and move, from the more
formal and literary qualities, through indications of the more or less
external life-circumstances of the author, on to the writer’s special
views and aims in psychology and spirituality.


1. _The writer’s power._

The following passages, all more or less peculiar to the _Dialogo_,
suffice, I think, to prove his power.

At the beginning of these, her last nine years, the Lord explains to
Catherine the means by which Love may be known: “My love can be better
known by means of interior experience than in any other way; if man
is to acquire it, Love must snatch man from man himself, since it is
man himself who is his own chief impediment,”[434]--a passage that
recalls Thackeray’s _Arthur Pendennis, his Friends and his Greatest
Enemy_--namely, his own self.

These years are, a little later, described in language no doubt
suggested, probably through some Patristic passage, by Plato, the
harmonious. “This soul now abode like a musical instrument which, as
long as it remains furnished with chords, gives forth sweet sounds;
but which, bereft of them, is silent. Thus she too, in the past, by
means of the sentiments of soul and body, was wont to render so sweet a
harmony, that every one who heard it rejoiced in it; but now, alienated
from those sentiments, as it were without” psychic “chords, she
remained entirely bare and mute.”[435]

And we are told of “words which the heart alone speaks to the soul
alone”[436]--a passage which recalls Pascal’s saying, “The heart has
reasons which Reason does not know.”

Amongst the rapturous addresses we find, “O Spirit naked and invisible!
No man can hold thee (here below), because of thy very nakedness! Thy
dwelling-place is in Heaven, even whilst, joined to the body, thou
happenest still to tarry upon earth! Thou dost not know thine own self,
nor art thou known by others in this world. All thy friends and (true)
relatives are in Heaven, recognized by thee alone, through an interior
instinct infused by the Spirit of God.”[437] An apostrophe which, in
part, strongly recalls Henry Vaughan’s poem, “They are all gone into a
world of light, and I alone am lingering here.”

The final address in this series of apostrophes to Love, God, contains
the sentences: “O Lord, how great is Thy loving care, both by day and
by night, for man who knows not even his own self, and far less Thee,
O Lord. Thou art that great and high God, of whom we cannot speak or
think, because of the ineffable super-eminence of Thy Greatness, Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness infinite. Thou labourest in man and for man with
Thy Love, and in return Thou willest that the whole man should act for
Love, and this because, without Love, nothing good can be produced.
Thou workest solely for man’s true utility; and Thou willest that man
should operate solely for Thine honour, and not for his own (separate)
utility.”[438] A passage strongly coloured by Dionysian ideas.

And yet the writer continues to think and to write, but says: “These
words of mine are like ink: for ink is black and of an evil odour; and
yet, by its means, many ideas are apprehended, which otherwise would be
ignored altogether.”[439] Here we have an image, based as it is upon a
vivid sensible perception of a chemical compound, which reminds one of
the epatic-agaric passage in “Chapter” First of the _Dialogo_, and of
the reference to cassia in Battista’s letter of 1581.[440]

And the whole Book finishes up with two impressive passages. The
first, as to the means of knowing Love, is as Pauline as is most of
the remaining doctrine of the _Dialogo_: “Not by means of external
signs, nor even by martyrdoms, can this love be comprehended. Only he
who actually experiences it can understand something of it.”[441] And
the second concludes all with a forcible and comprehensive paraphrase
of Catherine’s central doctrine,--as to the Soul’s condition and
action, revealed at the moment of death: “Every man bears within his
own self the sentence of his own judgment, pronounced indeed by God,
yet each man himself ratifies it, in and for his own case and self.
There is no place totally bereft of God’s mercy. The very souls in Hell
itself would suffer a greater Hell outside of it than they do within
it.”[442]--We have had repeated proofs of how great were Battista’s
gifts and experience in such-like eloquent writing, from the earlier
_Dialogo_-Chapter, and from her _Colloquies_ and _Letters_.


2. _Indications of special knowledge._

I am compelled to pass over the emotional rhythm, and the mystical
ambiguity and paradox, that appear, in identical forms, in Battista’s
avowed writings and here. But we must briefly dwell upon some special
sources of interest in Catherine, and of certain knowledge of a
peculiar kind, traceable in the writer of this second “Chapter”; both
sets of passages clearly point to Battista as their author.

(1) There is the deeply-felt description of Catherine’s conversation
with her disciples: “This soul would many times abide with her
spiritual friends, discoursing of the Divine Love, in suchwise that
it appeared to them all as though they were in Paradise. And indeed,
what delightful colloquies took place! Both he who spoke and he who
listened, one and all would get nourished by spiritual food, of a
sweet and delectable kind. And, because the time sped so quickly,
they could not attain to satiety; but they would abide so enkindled
and inflamed, that they knew not what more to say. And yet they could
not depart, and would seem as though in an ecstasy. Oh! what loving
repasts, what delightful food, what sweet viands, what a gracious
union, what a divine companionship!”[443]--Now it is true that the
writer has here certainly utilized four pregnantly descriptive lines in
the _Vita_-proper, and the fine account there, undoubtedly by Ettore
Vernazza, as regards these conversations.[444] Yet one readily feels,
at the moved and moving tone of the re-telling here, that the writer
was specially impelled to dwell with a tender, living sympathy upon
those meetings of forty years ago. Now Battista must, of course, again
and again, have heard from her Father’s own lips, during those fourteen
years that he lived on after Catherine’s great soul had gone to God, of
these unforgettable talks, in which he himself had played so large a
part, as questioner, interpreter, and chronicler.

(2) And the other set of passages points, even more definitely, to the
same daughter and father. Catherine’s “humanity,” being threatened by
the Spirit with various future sufferings, asks to be told the precise
offence, charge (_la causa_), which will bring so great a martyrdom
with it, without hope of any help. But “she was answered that this
grace,” of knowing exactly what and why she should suffer, “would be
accorded to her in due time, as happens with men condemned to death,
who, by hearing read aloud to them the precise sentence pronounced
upon their specific misdeeds, support with a greater peace of mind
their ignominious death.”--And: “Since I am forsaken on all sides,”
Catherine says to God, “give me at least, O Lord, some person that
may be able to understand and comfort me, amidst the torments that I
see coming upon me--as men are wont to do for those who are condemned
to death, so that the latter may not despair.”--And the natural man
in such advanced souls is described as suspended in mid-air, “like
unto one who is hung, and who touches not the ground with his feet,
but abides in the air, attached to the cord which has caused his
death.”[445] Ettore’s life-long, detailed interest in, and experience
of, prisoners and condemned men, whom he, the Founder of the Society
of the Beheading of St. John the Baptist, so loved to attend and help
throughout their last night and at the scaffold, speak here through
the devoted daughter who, countless times, must have listened to that
father’s prison-experiences, which we found her describing, still
most vividly, in 1581, thirty years after the publication of these
_Dialogo_-passages.[446]


3. _Schematic, intensely abstract psychology._

At this spiritual stage “there was, as it were, a chain. God, Spirit,
draws to Himself the Spirit of man, and there this Spirit abides
completely occupied. The Soul, which cannot abide without the Spirit,
follows the Spirit, and is there kept occupied. And the Body, which
is subject to the Soul, thus prevented from possessing its natural
sensations and its natural sustenance, remains, as it were, forsaken
and outside of its natural being.”--“God at times allowed the Spirit
to correspond with the Soul, and the Soul with the Body.… But when God
withdrew that Spirit into Himself, all the rest (the Soul) followed
after it; and hence the Body remained like dead.” The two dividings,
first of the Soul from the Body, and then of the Soul from the Spirit,
so much emphasized in those other documents,[447] is thus carried
through in this “Chapter” also.


4. _Rigorism._

We find here the same exaggeration as to Catherine’s faults and
contrition, and the same rigoristic doctrine as in “Chapter” First,
although, here also, counterbalanced by a noble tenderness of heart.
Thus her but semi-conscious attachment to, and self-attribution of,
spiritual consolations, is here magnified into a grave sin. “How can I
act, so as to make satisfaction for this sin, which is so great and so
subtle?” her soul asks God, concerning but semi-conscious attachment
to spiritual consolations. And of her social affections, as manifested
in her great colloquies with her friends, Catherine now says, “All
other loves” than the direct love of God “now appear to me as worse
than sheer self-loves.”--“She began to confess her sins with so great
a contrition that it appeared a wonderful thing,” we are told of
Catherine, in 1499-1510; yet we know, from the unimpeachable testimony
of Don Marabotto himself, that “the wonderful thing” about these latter
Confessions was precisely the absence of that former keen sense of, and
sorrow for, specific sins.[448]


5. _Pronounced Christo-centrism and daring Anthropomorphism._

We get, again, the predominance of the Personal conceptions and
imagery over those of Thing or Law, and the same greater attention
to the historical element of religion, that characterize Battista’s
writings and “Chapter First” of the _Dialogo_, as against Catherine’s
authentic sayings.

Catherine’s energetic repudiation of “the corrupt expression, ‘You have
offended God,’” is replaced by God saying to Catherine, “Know that I
cannot be offended by man, except when he raises an obstacle to the
work which I have ordained for his good.”[449] Catherine has angrily
declared that the term could never be correctly used; the _Dialogo_
explains how special and metaphorical is its correct use.

The Lord declares here: “I descend with a fine thread of gold, which is
My secret love, and to this thread is bound a hook, which seizes the
heart of men. I hold this thread in My hand and ever draw it towards
Myself.” The hook and hand are additions to her authentic declaration,
“She seemed to herself to have in her heart a continuous ray of Love
… a thread of gold, as to which she had no fear that it would ever
break.”[450]--We get here the Wedding-feast imagery that is entirely
wanting in Catherine’s authentic sayings. “There is no shorter way
to salvation than (the owning of) this delightful wedding-garment
of charity”[451] A garment, generally in a bad sense, is quite
Catherinian; a wedding-garment is exclusively Battistan.--And the
parallel between St. John’s care of the Blessed Virgin, and Marabotto’s
attendance upon Catherine[452] is quite foreign to Catherine’s mind.

And the whole _Dialogo_ culminates in a double, daring yet graduated,
anthropomorphic picturing of the deification of the perfect soul,
interestingly different from Catherine’s favourite Ocean and Fire
similes, and from her description of the Soul as respectively submerged
in, and transformed by, this infinite and all-penetrating living
Ocean-Fire, God. The Soul asks what is the name which the Lord gives to
perfect souls; and the Lord answers (in Latin, as ever with Battista)
with the text of Ps. lxxxi, 6: “I have said, ye are Gods, and all of
you sons of the Most High”; a text which still leaves us with separate
human personalities face to face with the distinct Spirit-Person, God.
And then, to the Lord’s question, as to what the Soul declares its
heart to be, the Soul answers (this climax has been carefully led up
to all along): “I say that it is my God, wounded by love,--in Whom
I live joyful and contented.”--For, as in Battista’s own _Colloquy_
of December 10, 1554, we get three simultaneous “voices” at different
depths of her consciousness, so here, in this composition of 1550,
Catherine hears simultaneously within herself three voices--of the
Lord, of her own soul, and of her own heart. And Catherine can here
declare that now her heart is God, and God wounded by Love; for
Battista can write in 1576 that, in the perfect state, “of the Increate
Heart and of the created heart there is made a single, most secret
and inestimable union,”[453] and that Increate Heart appears here as
wounded, because God is ever, in Battista’s mind, explicitly identified
with Christ, and Christ’s Passion is ever in her thoughts. Catherine
identifies her true self with God, and God with Love; and conceives
her own heart as filled with love and inflamed and pierced by it; but
nowhere figures God with a Heart, or that Heart as wounded, for she has
little or nothing of Battista’s anthropomorphic tendency in regard to
God, or of her historical picturings with regard to Christ.

The entire _Dialogo_ then is the work of Battista Vernazza; and we
have to eliminate it, all but completely, from the means and materials
directly available for the constitution of Catherine’s life and
doctrine. The next Division will now attempt to deal finally with
the chief of these means--the _Dimostrazione_ (_Trattato_) and the
_Vita_-proper.


SECOND DIVISION: ANALYSIS, ASSIGNATION, AND APPRAISEMENT OF THE
“VITA-DOTTRINA-DICCHIARAZIONE” CORPUS, IN EIGHT SECTIONS.

We now find ourselves in face of the most difficult, and the alone
directly important, _corpus_ of documents concerning Catherine’s inner
life: the _Vita e Dottrina_, together with the _Dicchiarazione_ or
_Trattato_. It will be best to begin with this _Trattato_, and only
after a careful study of this little book, which, as we know, contains
the most original and valuable part of Catherine’s teaching, to finish
up with an examination of the, now separate, Life and (other) Doctrine.


I. THE “DICCHIARAZIONE”: THE TWO STAGES OF ITS EXISTENCE.


1. _The “Dicchiarazione,” from the first a booklet by itself._

All the Manuscripts give the _Dicchiarazione_ (_Trattato_)
substantially as we have it at present, although ever as but a Chapter
of the _Vita e Dottrina_, and not, as yet, itself divided up in any
way. Even the last Editions of the Printed _Vita_ still retain a
reference to this old arrangement: “The soul purifies itself, as do the
souls in Purgatory, according to the process described in the Chapter
appropriated to this matter.”[454]

Yet the very length of this “Chapter,” then as now, and the solemn
introductory paragraph, both point to its having, at first, formed a
booklet by itself. Thus the longest of the other doctrinal Chapters of
MS. A (Chapters XV, XVI, XX, and XL) are respectively 29, 22, 19, and
17½ pages long; whilst the _Trattato_-Chapter XLII runs to 46 pages.
Only the Narrative-Chapter XLI, the Passion, is of an exactly equal
length; but we shall find that this Chapter also existed, originally,
in part at least, as a separate document. And the introduction to
