CHAPTER IV

CATHERINE’S LIFE FROM 1473 TO 1506 AND ITS MAIN CHANGES AND GROWTH


Let us now attempt, as far as the often scanty and obscure evidence
permits, to give, in the following two chapters, some general account
of the changes and growth observable in her external surroundings,
her human intercourse and social occupation, her physical health and
psychical mood, and above all of those inner experiences and spiritual
apprehensions of hers which dominated all the rest, during each of the
three main periods of her convert life. This general account will,
I trust, suggest the main points for our later investigations, and
will show at once how largely artificial, though necessary, all such
dividing into periods must be, in the case of so deeply unified and
diversified an inner life as Catherine’s.


I. FIRST PERIOD OF CATHERINE’S CONVERT LIFE: GIULIANO’S BANKRUPTCY AND
CONVERSION; THEIR WORK AMONG THE POOR, MARCH 1473 TO MAY 1477.


1. _Giuliano’s affairs. Catherine’s attitude._

The first six months of her first period (this latter we take to have
extended from March 1473 to May 1477) were still spent in Giuliano’s
Palace of the Via Agnese and in his country mansion at Prà.[79] But
all was now swiftly changing, or already greatly changed, both around
her and within. Anxiety, hope, grief, consolation--inasmuch as such
feelings could still for her cluster around events external to her
deepest spiritual life, and could make themselves at all separately
felt during this period of profound absorption in her new large life of
love and penance--must all have centred in her husband. For Giuliano
had by now got his affairs into such disorder as to be unable to keep
up his great social position; and by the autumn of 1473 he had sold his
mansion at Prà, and had vacated and let his palace in Genoa itself.[80]
He was also by now a very sincere convert, in his own manner and
degree; and it was no doubt now that he told Catherine, although
she can hardly have failed to know already, of the existence of a
poor little girl whom, with an apparently ominous indication of weak
indulgence on the part of his widowed mother, he had called Tobia.

We shall be able to prove Catherine’s grand magnanimity and true,
cordial forgiveness--directly, no doubt only for and at a later
period; but the documents will show that she knew all the decisive
circumstances long before, and there is no room for doubt that her
dispositions had changed or grown as little as had her knowledge.


2. _Life in the little house outside the Hospital._

Catherine and Giuliano had now, in the autumn of 1473, moved into a
humble little house, in the midst of artisans, mostly dyers, and of the
poor of various sorts, close to the Hospital of the Pammatone, even
then already a vast Institution. This dwelling is probably identical,
as to the site, with the house still standing at the junction of the
Via S. Giuseppe with the Via Balilla, and which bears on its front
a picture of Saints Catherine Adorna and Camillus of Lellis[81] at
the feet of the Madonna. Since the income remaining to them still
amounted, up to Giuliano’s death in 1497, to the equivalent of some
£1,200 a year,[82] this self-abnegation and humble identification
with the lives of the toiling, nameless poor, must have been an act of
deliberate choice, and not one of any degree of necessity. It was never
suspended or revoked by either of them.

They now agreed together to a life of perpetual continence; and
Giuliano became a Tertiary of the Order of St. Francis,[83] amongst
those attached to the Hospital-Church of the Santissima Annunciata in
Portoria, itself served by Observant Franciscans. Their only little
servant-maid, Benedetta Lombarda, was also a Franciscan Tertiary.
But Catherine herself now shows, in this matter of the Religious
State, an interesting clearing-up of her own special way and form of
sanctity. We saw how much the fervent but inexperienced girl of sixteen
had been moved and had longed to be an Augustinian nun; and now the
sadly experienced wife of twenty-six, even in the midst of her first
convert days, and though surrounded at home, in Church, and in the
Hospital, by Religious of the popular and expansive type presented
by the Franciscans, (a type which her own deep sympathy with, indeed
penetration by, the teaching of the great Franciscan Mystic Jacopone
da Todi, will show to have been closely akin to her own,) manifests no
thought of becoming a Religious, even in the slight degree represented
by the Third Order. And up to her death, thirty-seven years later,
she never wavers on this point. A highly characteristic scene and
declaration illustrative of this attitude of hers will be given further
on.

The Hospital of Pammatone had been founded by Bartolommeo Bosco, one of
those large-hearted merchant princes of whom Genoa has had not a few,
in 1424, in the street of that name; and only quite recently, in 1472,
the Friars of the adjoining Church of the Annunciata had agreed to the
incorporation of their own infirmary for sick poor with Bosco’s larger
institution. Hence Catherine and Giuliano found 130 sick-beds always
occupied by patients, and over 100 foundling girls, who were being
trained as silk-workers, all ready to their hands and service.[84]
Catherine was besides gradually introduced to the poor of the district,
by the _Donne della Misericordia_--ladies devoted to such works of
mercy--and betook herself to her tasks with characteristic directness
and thoroughness.[85] She must first, and once for all, completely
master all squeamishness in this her lowly work. So she betook herself
to cleansing their houses from the most disgusting filth; and she
would take home with her the garments of the poor, covered with dirt
and vermin, and, having cleansed them thoroughly, would herself return
them to their owners. And yet nothing unclean was ever found upon
herself. She also tended the sick in the Hospital and in their homes,
with the most fervent affection, speaking to them of spiritual things
and ministering to their bodily wants, and never avoiding any form of
disease, however terrible.[86]


II. CATHERINE AND TOMMASA FIESCA: THEIR DIFFERENCE OF CHARACTER AND
_ATTRAIT_. PECULIARITY OF CATHERINE’S PENITENCE AND HEALTH DURING THIS
TIME.


1. _Catherine’s penances._

And throughout this first period of four years, her penances were
great. She wore a hair-shirt; she never touched either flesh-meat or
fruit, whether fresh or dried; she lay at night on thorns. And by
nature courteous and affable, she would do great violence to herself by
conversing as little as possible with her relations when they visited
her, and, as to anything further, paying heed neither to herself nor to
them; and she acted thus for the purpose of self-conquest; and if any
one was surprised at it, she took no notice.[87]


2. _Catherine and Tommasina._

But one visitor must, even during this period, have been treated by her
with much of her natural spontaneity and ardent expansiveness. She was
a cousin of her own age, a Fiesca and a married woman like herself;
like herself, too, in the wish, just now awakened, to belong entirely
to God, and in her ultimate complete conversion and ardent love of God.
We can attempt to describe her here, as throwing further light upon
Catherine’s idiosyncrasies, at this period in particular.

Tommasina was different from Catherine in the slow, tentative character
of her first turning to God; and different, too, in the eventual form
of her life; for, when later on a widow, she became first, in 1490,
an Augustinian Canoness at Santa Maria delle Grazie; and then, in
1497, a Dominican Nun at the Monastero Nuovo di San Domenico. This
latter convent she had been given to reform and became its Prioress.
In both houses she was known as Suor Tommasina (Fieschi).[88] She
was different again in that she there spent some of her time in
painting many a religious picture, chiefly of the Pietà, and a highly
symbolical composition, illustrative of the moment of Consecration at
Mass.[89] She executed also in exquisitely fine needlework a piece
which represented, above, God the Father surrounded by many Angels,
and, below, Christ with other figures of Saints. Finally she occupied
herself in writing and produced in original composition a treatise on
the Apocalypse, and another on Denys the Areopagite.

And the future Suor Tommasa showed now some of that precious gift of
humour, denied to her otherwise greater cousin. For, no doubt with a
bright twinkle in her eyes at the sight of Catherine’s characteristic
vehemence of onslaught, Tommasa would declare that Catherine was
pushing her and giving her no quarter; and that it would be a great
humiliation for herself if, after all said and done, she were to turn
back. But any such feeling of even the possibility of such a relapse,
was amazing to Catherine, and she said: “If I were to turn back, I
would wish that my eyes might be put out, and that I should be treated
with every other kind of indignity.”[90]


3. _Peculiarity of Catherine’s penitence._

But such intercourse as this must, during this first period, have been
the exception. For her dominant, closely interrelated characteristics
were now a continuous striving to do things contrary to her natural
bias and an alert looking to do the will of others rather than her
own. She moved about with her eyes bent upon the ground. Six hours a
day were spent in prayer, and this although--perhaps just now in part
because--the body greatly felt the strain: the strongly willing spirit
had dominated the weak flesh. Indeed, during this time she was so full
of interior feeling and so occupied within herself, that she was unable
to speak, except in a tone so low as to be barely audible; she seemed
dead to all exterior things.[91]

And these external circumstances and practices are all only the
setting, material, occasion and expression of this her first period’s
actively penitential spirit, when she was persistently pursued by the
detailed sight of her own particular inclinations, her own particular
sins against God, and God’s particular graces towards her own self.
Her very acts of charity and of friendliness, her very prayers, get
all restricted or prolonged, willed or suffered, as, at least in
part, but so many occasions for a love-impelled, yet still reflective
self-mastery and mortification. And it was no doubt during this time
that, when present one day at a sermon in which the conversion of the
Magdalen was recounted, her heart seemed to whisper to her: “Indeed I
understand,” so similar did her own conversion appear to her to that of
the Magdalen.[92]


4. _Her physical health._

As to her physical health, the fire which she felt in her heart seemed
to dry up and burn her interiorly. And so great a physical hunger would
possess her, that she appeared insatiable; and so quickly did she
digest her food, that it looked as if she could have consumed iron. Yet
she had no inclination to other than ordinary food, and did not fail to
keep all the ordinary fasts and abstinences.[93]


III. CHANGE IN THE TEMPER OF CATHERINE’S PENITENCE, FROM MAY 1474
ONWARDS.

Time wears on, and Catherine is still in the same house, and with the
same health, and with the same companions and occupations, penances
and prayers. But the interior dispositions and emotional promptings,
and the mental apprehension of them all, are gradually changing and
are growing wider and freer and less particularized. “She now began
to experience a more affective way, so that she was often as though
beside herself; and” though still “moved by a great interior thirst
after self-hatred, and by a penetrating contrition, she would often lie
prostrate on the ground”; she would do so, “hardly knowing what she was
doing, yet somehow gaining thus some relief for her heart,” overflowing
as it was with a boundless, profound, but now more and more general,
sorrow and tender love.[94] The note of a spontaneous, expansive,
instinctive love is now growing in predominance in her prayer and human
intercourse; and her very penances, though still performed, are now
often practised from a general unreflective instinct of love-impelled
self-hatred, without any conscious application to any particular
inclinations or sins.

For as to her intercourse with others, she will probably already now
have practised many an act of that beautiful and characteristic,
impulsive, expansive tenderness, of which we shall have a good many
examples from the end of her second period. And as to the character
of her mortifications, we hear the following: “Whilst engaged on such
great and numerous mortifications of all her senses, she was sometimes
asked, ‘Why are you doing this (particular) thing?’ And she would
answer, ‘I do not know, except that I feel myself interiorly drawn
to do so, without any opposition from within. And I think that this
is the will of God; but it is not His will, that I should propose to
myself any (particular) object in so doing.’”[95] I take it that, with
this growing intermittence in the sight of her particular sins, her
Confessions, though still practised, will have become less frequent,
and her Holy Communions more so.


IV. CATHERINE’S GREAT FASTS.


1. _The assertions of the “Vita.”_

And a little later on, again on the Feast of the Annunciation (March
25, 1476),[96] another change took place, a change primarily concerned
with her health, but one which brought out also the deep spirituality
of her religion. On this day she experienced one of those interior
locutions, which are so well authenticated in the lives of so many
interior souls; and “her Love said that He wanted her to keep the Forty
Days, in His company in the Desert. And then she began to be unable
to eat till Easter; on the three Easter Days she was able to eat; and
after these she again did not eat, till she had fulfilled as many days
as are to be found in Lent.”[97] Similarly with regard to Advent. “Up
to Martinmas” (November 12) “she would eat like all the world; and then
her fast would begin, and would continue up to Christmas-Day.” Her
subsequent Lenten fasts are described as beginning with Quinquagesima
Monday and ending on Easter Sunday morning.[98]


2. _Substantial accuracy of these accounts. Three facts to be
remembered._

I take it that there can be no reasonable doubt as to the substantial
accuracy of this account. But the following three facts must be borne
in mind as regards the physical aspect of the matter.

The fast, for one thing, is not an absolute one. The account itself
declares that she now and then drank a tumblerful of water, vinegar,
and pounded rock-salt.[99] And to this must be added both the daily
reception of wine--I suppose as much as a wineglassful--which was,
according to a Genoese custom of that time, received by her, as a kind
of ablution, immediately after her Communion;[100] and such slight
amount of solid food as, when in company, she would force herself to
take and would sometimes, though rarely, manage to retain.[101]

Again, the fast varies partly, in different years, in the date of its
inception; and partly it does not synchronize with the beginning of
the ecclesiastical fast. In the first year her Lenten fast begins on
Lady-Day, in the following years on Quinquagesima Sunday; her Advent
fast begins throughout on Martinmas, November 12.

And finally, the number of such fasts cannot be more than twenty-three
Lents and twenty-two Advents. The MS. of 1547 has preserved the
right tradition of a difference in the numbers of the Lenten and
Advent fasts, but has raised the number of the former to a round,
symmetrical one. It gives twenty-five Lents and twenty-two Advents.
The printed _Vita_ of 1551 levels the numbers respectively down and
up to twenty-three Lents and as many Advents.[102] Some further minor
physical points will be considered in a later chapter.


3. _Effect of these Fasts, and her attitude towards them._

But two other matters are here of direct spiritual interest: the
effect of these fasts on her spiritual efficiency, and her own
two-fold attitude towards them. For we are told, again I think quite
authentically, that during these fasts she was more active in good
works, and felt more bright and strong in health, than usual;[103]
answering thus to one of the tests put forward by Pope Benedict XIV,
for discriminating supernatural, spiritually valuable fasts from
simply natural ones. But with him we can find our surest tests in
what is altogether beyond the range of the physical and psychical:
in her own moral estimate of all these matters. For one thing, there
appears here again that noble shrinking from any singularity of this
kind within herself, and from all notice on the part of others. “This
inability to eat gave her many a scruple at first, ignorant as she
was as to its cause, and ever suspecting some delusion; and she would
force herself to eat, considering that nature required it. And though
this invariably produced vomiting, yet she would make the attempt
again and again.” “She would go to table with the others, and would
force herself to eat and drink a little, so as to escape notice and
esteem as much as possible.”[104] And again here, as in all matters
visible and tangible, she shows an impressive loneliness in the midst
of her more carnal-minded disciples. “She would say within herself,
in astonishment” at their stopping to wonder at things so much on the
surface: “If you but knew another thing, which I feel within myself!”
And she would declare: “If we would rightly estimate the operations
of God, we should wonder more at interior than at exterior things.
This incapacity to eat is indeed an operation of God, but one in
which my will has no part; hence I cannot glory in it. Nor is there
cause for our wondering at it, since for God this is as though a mere
nothing.”[105]


4. _The fasts form no part of her penitence._

These fasts, although beginning within her first period are not
characteristic of it; and her biographers rightly put them into a
chapter distinct from her penances, properly speaking. These penances
will have continued alongside of, and in between, these fasts for about
a year after the beginning of the latter. And then at last, at the
end of this first period of four years, “all thought of such (active)
mortifications was, in an instant, taken from her mind in such guise
that, even had she wished to carry out such mortifications, she would
have been unable.” For “the sight of her sins was now taken from her
mind, so that she henceforth did not catch a glimpse of them,--as
though they had all been cast into the depths of the sea.”[106]


V. SECOND, CENTRAL PERIOD OF CATHERINE’S CONVERT LIFE, 1477-1499: ITS
SPECIAL SPIRITUAL FEATURES.

We now come to the second, longest, and central period of her life,
1477-1499. But though at first sight Chapters VI to XLII, and XLV
of the _Vita_ would seem exclusively to treat of these twenty-two
years, examination proves this to be far from the case. If little or
nothing from the first period is to be found there, very much from the
third is embedded in those pages. And this scantiness of information
springs from the simple fact that, during these twenty-two years,
her inner life is led by herself alone, without any direct human aid
of companionship; and her sufficient health, and the correspondingly
large amount of external activity among the sick and poor, leave her
but little or no time for those conferences and discourses amongst
friends, of which her last period is full. This dearth of evidence is
all the more to be regretted, since these central years represent the
culmination of her balance and many-sided power.


1. _Interior change._

For the first two years of this time she and Giuliano continued to
live in their small house of the Portoria quarter, very busy, both of
them, amongst the sick and poor, as well in the houses round about as
in the Hospital. Indeed, externally, little or no change can have been
apparent. It was the interior change, the moving away from the actively
and directly penitential state into one of expansive love and joy,
which alone, as yet, marked a new period.


2. _The Three Rules of Love. The Divine method of the soul’s
purification._

Some time during these new beginnings it must have been that “her Love
once said within her mind: ‘Observe, little daughter, these three
rules. Never say “I will,” or “I will not.” Never say “mine,” but ever
say “our.” Never excuse thyself, but be ever ready to accuse thyself.’”
And another time He said: “When thou sayest the ‘Our Father,’ take for
thy foundation ‘Thy Will be done.’ In the Hail Mary, take ‘Jesus.’ In
Holy Scripture take ‘Love,’ with which thou wilt ever go straightly,
exactly, lightly, attentively, swiftly, enlightenedly, without error,
without guide, and without the means of other creatures, since Love
suffices unto itself to do all things without fear or weariness, so
that martyrdom itself appears unto it a joy.”[107]

But this her love, just because it is so real and from God, appears
indeed to fill her at any given moment, yet it grows and shows
her, at each fresh stage, both its own incompleteness and her own
imperfection, in her and its former stages. “At any one moment the love
of that moment seemed to me to have attained to its greatest possible
perfection. But then, in the course of time, my spiritual sight having
become clearer, I saw that it had had many imperfections.” “Day by day
I perceive that motes have been removed, which this Pure Love casts
out and eliminates. This work is done by God, and man is not aware of
it at the time, and cannot then see these imperfections; indeed God
continuously allows man to see his (momentary) operation as though it
were without imperfection, whilst all the time He, before Whom the
heavens are not pure, is not ceasing from removing imperfections from
his soul.”[108]

As ever throughout her life so now also, consolations are not the aim
and end, but only the actual effects of her devotedness, and the ever
fresh incentives to increased disinterestedness and self-surrender.
And, with regard to these consolations, she again strove to escape all
notice. “She would at times have her mind so full of divine love, as to
be all but incapable of speaking; and would be in so great a transport
of feeling as to be obliged to hide herself so as not to be seen.
She would lose the use of her senses and remain like one dead; and,
to escape the occurrence of such things, she would force herself to
remain in company as much as possible. And she would say to her Lord:
‘I do not want that which proceedeth from Thee, but I want Thee alone,
O tender Love.’ But just because her love was so sincere and she fled
from consolations, her Lord gave her of them all the more.”[109]


3. _Her Ecstasies._

If on one of the many occasions when she had hidden herself away in
some secret spot, she was ever discovered by any one, they would find
her walking up and down, and seeming as though she would wish to do
so without end; or they would come upon her with her face in her
hands, prostrate on the ground, entranced, and with feelings beyond
description or conception. “These ecstasies would almost always last
three or four hours; and if, on coming to herself, she spoke of the
wonders she had seen, there was no one to understand her, and so she
kept silence.” “And if called during one of these trances, she would
not hear, even though they did so loudly.”[110]

This inattention would, however, occur only in case the call was simply
one of curiosity. For on other occasions “she would remain as though
dead for six hours; but on being called to the doing of any duty,
however trifling it might seem, she would instantly arise and respond
and go about the doing of this her obligation. And she would thus leave
all, without any kind of trouble, according to her wont of flying from
self-will as though it were the devil. And coming thus forth from her
hiding-place she would have her face flushed, so as to look like a
cherub, and to seem to have upon her lips the ‘who then shall separate
me from the love of Christ?’ of the glorious Apostle.” And “on thus
arising from those trances, she seemed to feel stronger both in body
and in soul,”[111] as in the case of the fasting.

Even in the midst of her work absorptions would occur like unto these
in all but their length of duration: “At times her hands would sink,
unable to go on, and weeping she would say, ‘O my Love, I can no more’;
and would thus sit for a while with her senses alienated, as though
she had been dead. And this would occur oftener at one time than at
another, according to the varying fulness of experience present in that
purified mind.”[112]


4. _Pure Love, independent of any particular state or form of life._

And she was full of the conviction, and cared much for the formal
acknowledgment on the part of others, that the possession and the
increase of the most perfect love is independent of any particular
state or form of life, and is directly dependent upon two things
only, the grace of God and the generosity of the human will. “One
day a Friar and Preacher,[113] perhaps to test her or because of some
mistaken notion, told her that he himself was better fitted for loving
than she, because he having entered Religion and renounced all things
both within and without, and she being married to the world as he was
to Religion, he found himself more free to love God, and more acted
upon by Him. And the Friar went on, and alleged many other reasons.
But when had spoken much and long, an ardent flame of pure love seized
upon Catherine, and she sprang to her feet with such fervour as to
appear beside herself, and she said: ‘If I thought that your habit had
the power of gaining me one single additional spark of love, I should
without fail take it from you by force, if I were not allowed to have
it otherwise. That you should merit more than myself, is a matter that
I concede and do not seek, I leave it in your hands; but that I cannot
love Him as much as you, is a thing that you will never by any means
be able to make me understand.’ And she said this with such force
and fervour, that all her hair came undone, and, falling down, was
scattered upon her shoulders. And yet all the while this her vehement
bearing was full of grace and dignity.--And when back at home, and
alone with her Lord, she exclaimed: ‘O Love, who shall impede me from
loving Thee? Though I were, not only in the world as I am, but in a
camp of soldiers, I could not be impeded from loving Thee.’”[114]

There is probably no scene recorded for us, so completely
characteristic of Catherine at her deepest: the breadth and the
fulness, the self-oblivion and the dignity, the claimlessness and the
spiritual power--all are there.


VI. CATHERINE AND GIULIANO MOVE INTO THE HOSPITAL IN 1479, NEVER AGAIN
TO QUIT IT. SHE IS MATRON FROM 1490 TO 1495.

The special character, both in form and content, of Catherine’s
spiritual life and doctrine will occupy us in Chapter VI. Here we
have as yet specially to busy ourselves with its external and social
occasions and effects. And these effects were both large and constant;
indeed they were on the increase up to 1497, two years before this
second period comes to a close.


1. _Catherine and Giuliano occupy two small rooms in the Hospital._

For in 1479 the couple shift their quarters from outside the Hospital
to within that great building, and there, for eleven years, they
together occupy two little rooms, living without pay and at their own
expense, but entirely devoted to the care of the poor sick and dying
and of the orphans collected there.[115] Indeed Catherine never again
lived outside the walls of the Hospital during the thirty-one years
that still remained to her on earth.


2. _Catherine’s double life here, 1479-1490._

And here in these rooms, and for eleven years, she worked among
the sick, as but one of their many nurses. The spacious, high,
white-washed, stone-flagged wards, with the great tall windows shedding
floods of glaring light or cheering sunshine, according to the season
without and to the mood of the poor sick within, stand still as
they stood in Catherine’s day. True, new wards have been added; the
lay female Nurses of her time have been in part replaced by Nursing
Sisters, and the Observant Friars by Capuchins; much, very much has
been discovered since, both as to man’s body and as to the facts and
functions of his mind; all things, and man’s interpretation of all
things, seem as though irretrievably changed. And yet the mystery of
devoted love, its necessity, difficulty, and actual operative presence,
as an occasional pang and aspiration in us all, as a visible, dominant
influence in some of us, remain with and in us still unchanged, with
all the freshness of an elemental force, indestructible, inexhaustible.
This devoted work of Catherine, this her serving of the sick “with
the most fervent affection, and immense solicitude,”[116] had also
the remarkable circumstance about it that, “notwithstanding all
this her attentive,” outward-looking “care, she never was without
the consciousness of her tender Love; nor again did she, because
of this consciousness, fail in any practical matter concerning the
Hospital.”[117]


3. _Matron of the Hospital, 1490-1496._

And this double life continued thus, and grew in depth and breadth. And
at the end of fourteen years of such humble service, she was, in 1490,
appointed Matron (_Rettora_) of the whole Institution, apparently the
same year as that in which her now widowed cousin Tommasina entered the
Augustinian Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie. During the six years
in which she held this office, she had much administrative business and
responsibility weighing upon her. Large sums of money passed through
her hands, and she always managed to spend and to account for them with
the greatest care and success. Indeed “her accounts were never found
wrong by a single _danaro_ (farthing).”[118]


VII. CATHERINE AND THE PLAGUE. THE OUTBREAK OF 1493.

It must have been after she had thus shown a rare devotedness
and talent in an ordinary Nurse’s work, and had next, as Matron,
manifested, for some years, a remarkable administrative ability, that,
in 1493, she rose, in both capacities, to the very height of heroism
and efficiency.


1. _Catherine’s general activity._

Early in January of that year, quite exceptionally cold weather visited
the city: the harbour was frozen over; and early in the spring the
Plague broke out so fiercely, and raged so long--till the end of
August--that of those who remained in the stricken city, four-fifths
succumbed to the terrible disease. Most of the rich and noble, all
those that did not occupy any official post, fled from the town. But
Catherine not only remained at her post, but she it was no doubt
who organized, or helped to organize, the out-of-door ambulance and
semi-open-air wards which we know to have been instituted at this
juncture on the largest scale. The great open space immediately at the
back of and above the Hospital, where now still stretch the public
gardens of the Acquasola, she managed to cover with rows of sailcloth
tents, and appointed special Doctors (mostly Lombards), Nurses, and
Priests and Franciscan Tertiaries, for the physical and spiritual care
of their occupants. Throughout the weeks and months of the visitation
she was daily in their midst, superintending, ordering, stimulating,
steadying, consoling, strengthening this vast crowd of panic-stricken
poor and severely strained workers.


2. _The pestiferous woman._

And “on one occasion, she found” here, “a very devout woman, a Tertiary
of St. Francis, dying of” this “pestilential fever. The woman lay there
in her agony, speechless for eight days. And Catherine constantly
visited her, and would say to her, ‘Call Jesus.’ Unable to articulate,
the woman would move her lips; and it was conjectured that she was
calling Him as well as she could. And Catherine, when she saw the
woman’s mouth thus filled, as it were, with Jesus, could not restrain
herself from kissing it with great and tender affection. And in this
way she herself took this pestilential fever, and very nearly died of
it. But, as soon as ever she had recovered, she was back again at her
work, with the same great attention and diligence.”[119]

How much there is in this little scene! Beautiful, utterly
self-oblivious impulsiveness; a sleepless sense of the omnipresence
of Christ as Love, and of this Love filling all things that aspire
and thirst after it, as spontaneously as the liberal air and the
overflowing mother’s breast fill and feed even the but slightly
aspiring or the painfully labouring lungs and the eager, helpless
infant mouth; swift, tender, warm, whole-hearted affection for this
outwardly poor and disfigured, but inwardly rich and beautiful
fellow-creature and twin-vessel of election; an underlying virile
elasticity of perseverance and strenuous, cheerful, methodical
laboriousness; all these things are clearly there.

Only when everything had again returned to its normal condition did
she once more restrict herself to the administrative work of the
Hospital.[120]


VIII. CATHERINE AND ETTORE VERNAZZA, 1493-1495.

It must have been during this epidemic of 1493 that Catherine first got
to know, or at least first to work with, a man hardly less remarkable
than herself.


1. _Ettore’s family, marriage, and philanthropic work._

The Genoese notary Ettore Vernazza, Catherine’s junior by some
twenty-three years, (as in the cases of his still greater
contemporaries and compatriots, Columbus, Pope Julius II, and Andrea
Doria, the year of his birth remains uncertain, but is probably 1470,)
was a scion of the ancient house of Vernaccia, which derived its name
from a wine-producing village on the Eastern Riviera. A Riccobono
Vernaccia had been Chancellor of Genoa, as far back as 1345. Ettore,
the first of the family to write his name Vernazza, was the son of
the Notary Pietro Vernaccia and of Battistina Spinola, his wife. A
sister of his, Marietta, married into the Fieschi family.[121] And if
Catherine really did go among the pestiferous sick, she can hardly
have failed to meet Ettore, now twenty-three years old. For his eldest
daughter, the Augustinian Canoness, the Venerable Battista Vernazza,
a most careful writer and one full of a life-long vivid remembrance
of her father, in an account of Ettore, written by her in Genoa in
1581 (she was born in 1497, four years after the event she describes),
tells of “a great compassion which he had conceived when still very
young, at the time that the pestilence raged in Genoa, and when he used
to go around to aid the poor, and when he found that, by means of a
preparation of cassia, he could bring them back from (certain) death to
life.”[122]


2. _Ettore’s character; Catherine’s chief biographer._

Ettore was, and he kept and made himself, and rare graces fashioned
him ever increasingly into, a man of fine and keen, deep and
world-embracing mind and heart, of an overflowing, ceaseless activity,
and of a will of steel. To him, the earliest and perhaps up to the
end the most intimate, certainly the most perceptive, of Catherine’s
disciples and chroniclers, we owe the transmission of many of the
reminiscences of her conversion and early strivings (no doubt
primarily derived from her own self), and of probably more than half
of such authentic sayings and discourses of hers, as were recorded
contemporaneously with their utterance. Indeed all that remains to us
of written testimony, contemporaneous in this strict sense of the word,
and that is other than legal documents, can, up to 1499, be safely
attributed to him. And all such constituents of the now sadly mixed up,
and most varyingly valuable, materials and successive layers of the
_Vita ed Opere_ as can with probability be assigned to his composition,
are characterized by a remarkable clearness and consistency, restraint
and refinement, elasticity and freshness of spiritual apprehension
and sympathy. Thus Ettore’s influence back upon the formation of
Catherine’s literary image and of our entire, especially of our
authentic, conception of her, was predominant, and her influence
upon his whole life was decisive; and hence his life can be rightly
taken as an indefinite extension and new application and necessary
supplementation of her own life and doctrine. I shall then, for both
these reasons, try and work up what we can recover concerning the
successive stages of his intercourse with Catherine and of the growth
of his own life up to her death, into the corresponding vicissitudes of
her remaining years.

It must have been two years later (1495) that Vernazza became her
disciple; and probably some two or three years still further on, that
Ettore began to keep (no doubt at first only quite occasional) records
of her Sayings and Doings.[123]


IX. CATHERINE’S HEALTH BREAKS DOWN, 1496; OTHER EVENTS OF THE SAME YEAR.

The year 1496 is marked by various events external and internal.


1. _Three external changes._

In June, or some time before, Vernazza marries the beautiful
Bartolommea Ricci, of the distinguished family of that name. On
the 17th of June Giuliano sells his Palace in the Via St. Agnese.
And, probably at Midsummer, perhaps at Michaelmas, Catherine, forced
to do so by increasing physical infirmities, resigns her office of
Matron.[124]


2. _End of the extraordinary Fasts._

Catherine “was now no more able to have a care of the government of
the Hospital or of her own little house” (within its precincts) “owing
to her great bodily weakness. She would now find it necessary, after
Communion, to take some food to restore her bodily strength, and this
even if it was a fast day.” We thus get the beginning of a third
period with regard to such fasting powers. In the first, she had done
as all the world, but had been able to keep all the Church fasts and
abstinences. In the second, she had, during Lent and Advent, eaten
little or nothing, and had, during the remainder of the time, lived as
she had done before. And now, for the rest of her life, her eating and
fasting are entirely fitful and intermittent, and she has to abandon
all (at least systematic) attempts to keep even the ordinary Church
fasts and abstinences.

If we are determined to insist on the accuracy of the “twenty-three
Lents and twenty-two Advents” of her extraordinary fasts affirmed
already by MS. “A,” we shall have to understand this present inability
to fast as applying, till after Lent 1496, only to the times outside
of Lent and Advent, since this fasting period cannot be made to begin
earlier than Lent 1476. I take it that in this, as certainly in most
other cases, there was, in reality, a much more gradual transition than
the _Vita_ accounts would lead one to expect.


3. _She continues within the Hospital precincts. Her two maid-servants._

Catherine had ceased to be Matron, but she did not leave the ample
precincts of the Hospital; indeed she continued in the separate little
house, which she had, probably since 1490, been occupying with
Giuliano. But it will be better to describe her abode a little later
on, when we can be quite sure as to its identity.

She had now, as I think had been the case since soon after she had
left her Palace, two maids in her service: the widow and Franciscan
Tertiary, Benedetta Lombarda, who appears, already then as an old and
valued servant, in Giuliano’s will of October 1494, and who never left
Catherine till her death; and a younger, unmarried maid, either Mariola
Bastarda or a certain Antonietta. Argentina del Sale, too, will have
often, perhaps continually, been about Catherine, aiding her in various
ways; but she will not as yet have been living under the same roof with
her. As we shall find, this little perfervid and untrained intelligence
became the instrument, or at least the occasion, of the introduction of
the largest legendary incident into the ultimate _Vita_ of her mistress.


X. EVENTS OF 1497.

The next year, 1497, is marked by two events, of all but contradictory
import and effect.


1. _Birth of Tommasina (Battista) Vernazza._

On April 15 Vernazza’s first child, a daughter, is born; and Catherine
is her God-mother and holds her at the Font. Dottore Tommaso Moro, a
learned lawyer friend of Ettore, is the God-father, and the child is
given his name and is called Tommasina. What would Catherine have felt
or said had she foreseen the vicissitudes--they will occupy us in due
course--through which this, her fellow God-parent, was to pass, during
the storms of that Religious Revolution which were to break out so soon
after her death? She would, we may be sure, have at all events been
glad at the action and influence of her God-daughter towards and upon
her God-father, in those sad and most difficult times.


2. _Giuliano’s death._

And Giuliano was gravely ill ever since the beginning of the year,
if not before; and some time in August or September he died.[125] He
had been suffering long from a chronic and most painful illness; and
towards the end, “he became very impatient; and Catherine, fearful
lest he should lose his soul, withdrew into another chamber, and there
cried aloud for his salvation unto her tender Love, ever repeating
with tears and sighs these words alone: ‘O Love, I demand this soul of
Thee; I beg Thee, give it me, for indeed Thou canst do so.’ And having
persevered thus for about half-an-hour with many a plaint, she was
given at last an interior assurance of having been heard. And returning
to her husband, she found him all changed and peaceful in his ways,
and giving clear indications, both by words and signs, that he was
fully resigned to the will of God.” And “some time after his death she
said to a spiritual son of hers,” no doubt Vernazza: “‘My son, Messer
Giuliano has gone; and you know well that he was of a somewhat wayward
nature, whence I suffered much mental pain. But my tender Love, before
that he passed from this Life, certified me of his salvation.’ And
Catherine, having spoken these words, showed signs of regret at having
uttered them; and he was discreet and did not answer this remark of
hers, but turned the conversation to other topics.”[126] At all events
this conversation is thoroughly authentic, and Catherine’s reserve,
and her regret at having somewhat broken through her usual restraint,
are profoundly characteristic: the contributors to and redactors of
her Life have been increasingly blind, or even opposed, to all such
beautifully spontaneous and human little shynesses and regrets for
momentary indiscretions.


3. _Giuliano’s Will._

Giuliano had, by his Will of the 20th October 1494, ordered his body
to be buried in the Hospital Church; and this was now carried out by
Catherine. A vault of some dimensions must have been made or bought,
since later both she herself and Argentina del Sale declared their wish
to be buried in Giuliano’s “monument.” Perhaps the wish of the latter
was carried out.

But Giuliano had left two far more important and difficult matters to
the management of Catherine,--matters which, indeed, were respectively
full of pain and of anxiety for her,--Thobia, and his share in the
Island of Scios. As to Thobia, he had left £500 to the Protectors of
the Hospital, among which were reckoned £200 which he had already paid
them through his late mother, Thobia Adorna, for the keep of this
daughter of his, and had warmly recommended her to their kind care; and
had arranged, in case they refused this responsibility, that Thobia
(who must by now have been quite twenty-six years of age) should be
regularly paid the interest on this money. He also left to Catherine,
for payment to “a certain person in Religion,”--possibly a member of
a Third Order, and whose identity is carefully concealed, but who
cannot fail to be Thobia’s mother--“£150, in repayment of the same sum,
borrowed from her by himself and the said Catherine,”--money which this
poor mother will have spent on the child’s keep, up to the time when
Giuliano told his story to Catherine.

As to his two _carati_ (shares) in the lands of the Island of Scios,
farmed by the Genoese Merchant Company “Maona,” he desires that,
if sold, his cousins Agostino and Giovanni Adorno shall be able to
buy these _carati_ for a lower price than would be required of any
other purchaser. There are also elaborate conditions and alternatives
attached to a legacy of £2,000 to his unmarried nephew Giovanni
Adorno, with a view to his marrying and having legitimate children: an
anxiety which of itself would show how sincere had been Giuliano’s own
conversion, and which was evidently not far-fetched, since in this very
Will he leaves £125 to a natural sister of his, Catherine, daughter of
his father Jacobo, for the boarding (no doubt during the latter years
of her life) of his late mother, Thobia Adorna.

Giuliano had also left Catherine herself £1,000,--a return of her
marriage dowry, and £100 from himself; and in addition “all garments,
trinkets, gold, silver, cash, furniture, and articles of vertu, which
might be found either in his dwelling-place or elsewhere.” And he
does so because he “knows and recognizes that the said Catherine, his
beloved wife and heiress, has ever behaved herself well and laudably
towards himself,” and “wants to provide the means for her continuing
to lead, after his death, her quiet, peaceful, and spiritual mode of
life.” And he adds the condition that, “if the said Catherine were
to proceed to a second marriage (a thing which he does not think she
will ever do), then he deprives her of all the legacies and rights and
duties of heirship mentioned in this Will, and confers them upon the
honourable Office of the Misericordia of Genoa,”--a society with and
for which, as we have seen, Catherine had worked so much and so well.

Altogether Giuliano had left by this Will about £6,000 for Catherine
to allot and appropriate; and quite £4,000 of this sum-total demanded
careful and even anxious consideration, whilst £650 of it could not but
provoke painful memories and make a call upon all her generosity. And
by his Codicil of January 1497, he had given her still greater latitude
of action, by declaring that, as regarded his legacy to the Hospital,
Catherine should have full power and leave to abrogate or to modify
it, according to her will and pleasure.[127] Thus these documents
constitute an impressive proof of Giuliano’s full trust in the wisdom,
balance of mind and magnanimity of his wife, now herself already so
broken in health.


4. _Catherine’s execution of Giuliano’s Will._

It is nine months after Giuliano’s death, on May 19, 1498, that we can
watch and see how Catherine has been attempting to execute her trust,
and how her nature has responded to these various difficult calls
upon it, and to the claims of her own family. She first of all, then,
orders her body to be buried in the same grave with her husband, in the
Hospital Church; and that only the Friars and Clergy of the Hospital
shall be present at the funeral; and leaves £10 for her obsequies and
£50 for Masses for herself. She next leaves to the Priest Blasio Cicero
four shares of the Bank of St. George (about £200), of which he is to
pay £150 to a certain female Religious, in satisfaction for a certain
debt. And she abrogates Giuliano’s legacy to the Hospital, and, in its
place, herself leaves it four shares of St. George’s (at the time about
£200, but always tending to increase in value), in liquidation of the
£300 that remained unpaid from among the £500 of that legacy. She next
leaves to Benedetta Lombarda one share of Saint George’s, in addition
to the similar share left her by Giuliano; and to “Antonietta, dwelling
with Testatrix, £25, in case she shall live with her up to her death.”
As to the two _carati_, she leaves them to Giovanni Adorno, in lieu
of the money bequeathed to him by Giuliano. As to her own relations,
she leaves two shares of St. George’s apiece to her two nieces Maria
and Battista, the daughters of her eldest brother Jacobo, for their
marriage portions; and, if they all die before marriage, then all this
money is to go to their father. She leaves £10 to her Augustinian
Canoness sister Limbania; and institutes her three brothers Jacobo,
Giovanni and Lorenzo, and their heirs, her residuary legatees.

Here four things are noticeable. Catherine has herself undertaken the
expenses of Thobia’s keep; the apparent lessening on her part of the
sum originally apportioned for the purpose by Giuliano is doubtless
only apparent, and must proceed from the same cause which has produced
a similar apparent diminution in the amount of Giuliano’s legacy to
his nephew from £2,000 to £1,500. In the next place, this is the only
one out of the couple’s four Wills, in which the second maid is not
Mariola Bastarda, but a certain Antonietta. Catherine feels uncertain
as to whether Antonietta will persevere in her service to the end;
and we shall find that she has again disappeared in Catherine’s next
Will of 1506, and that Mariola has again taken up her old place. We
shall find that a story, of which the authenticity and significance
are most difficult to fix, attaches without doubt to one or the other
of these maids. In the third place, Catherine does not sell the two
_carati_, but leaves them, in lieu of the money bequeathed to him, to
Giovanni Adorno; no doubt from the feeling that thus, at her death,
this her share in the government and exploitation of the Greek island
would be in the hands of a man in the prime of life, who could help to
check malpractices. And lastly, she shows a generous forgiveness of
Giuliano, a delicate magnanimity towards Thobia and Thobia’s mother,
and a thoughtful affection for all her own near and grown-up relations,
by ordering her body to be buried in the same grave with Giuliano;
by herself undertaking the charges of Thobia’s keep, and appointing a
priest by name for handing over Giuliano’s legacy to the still unnamed
mother of Thobia; and by remembering her sister, although she had long
been provided for in her Convent, her three brothers, who were no doubt
indefinitely richer than herself, and especially her two marriageable
nieces. Altogether, of the £2,304 definitely accounted for in the
Will, she leaves £69 for her own funeral and for Masses for herself;
£400 for Thobia and her mother; £210 to her own relations; £125 to
servants; and £1,500 to her husband’s nephew. There is no trace here of
any indifference to the natural ties of kindred, or of an abstraction
of mind rendering her incapable of a careful consideration and firm
decision in matters of business: a point which we shall find to be of
much importance, later on.


5. _Ettore’s “Mandiletto”-work._

In this year, too, if not already in the previous one, Vernazza founded
the institution of the “Mandiletto.” Still a young man--for he was
now at most but twenty-eight--Ettore had been noticing, in his work
among the poor, how much misery of all kinds obtained in commercial,
money-making, hazard-loving Genoa, amongst persons who, even though
ill, refused to take refuge in the hospitals; and who, however poor
at present, had known better, even brilliant days, and were too proud
to beg, or even to accept alms from any one who could recognize them.
And hence he now organized a system for discovering and visiting such
persons in their own homes and for minimizing their pain in accepting
help, by arranging that the members of this little fraternity should
never visit such houses, except with some kind of little veil or
handkerchief (_fazzoletto_, _mandiletto_) applied to their faces.[128]

Catherine, who had helped the Uffizio della Misericordia so much, and
who herself so greatly disliked being noticed or even simply seen
whenever she was doing or suffering anything at all out of the common,
had no doubt, at least in a general way, inspired this beautifully
delicate means of preserving and sparing the bashfulness of the giver
and the dignity of the recipient. Throughout the remaining years of her
life she must have cared to hear Vernazza’s report as to the progress
of this work.


XI. BEGINNING OF HER THIRD, LAST PERIOD; END OF THE EXTRAORDINARY
FASTS; FIRST RELATIONS WITH DON MARABOTTO.

But it is in the next year, 1499, that we reach the actual beginning of
the third and last period of Catherine’s Convert life.


1. _End of the Fasts; transfer of the “carati.”_

Some of the events of this year are again predominantly external, or
but continuations or consequences of previous inclinations of her will.
It must have been at the end of the Lent of this spring-time that all
extraordinary fasting-power, of a kind that could be foreseen and
that more or less synchronized with the ecclesiastical season, left
her for good and all. And she had gone on feeling strongly her share
of responsibility for the government of that far-off island. Hence
she betook herself, on September 18 of this year, with the Notary
Battista Strata, who has drawn up nine out of the fourteen Legal Acts
of Giuliano and herself, to the great palace of the Cardinal Giuliano
della Rovere, who, four years later, became Pope Julius II. This palace
stood by the (now destroyed) Church of San Tommaso, and was at this
time the residence of Giovanni Adorno. And there, in the great Loggia
looking south, Catherine dictated the substance of an Act of Cession
then and there to her husband’s nephew of those two _carati_, which
weighed so heavily on her mind. Perhaps Giovanni was in poor health,
and Catherine was too eager to eschew her responsibility in the matter
to be willing to wait any longer.[129]


2. _Beginning of Catherine’s relations with Don Marabotto._

The chief event, however, from the point of view of her inner life,
and which gives us a second close and most important eyewitness for
her last period, was the beginning of her spiritual relations with Don
Marabotto.[130] “At the end of the twenty-five years during which she
had persevered the way of God without the means of any creature,” says
the _Vita_, “the Lord gave her a priest, to take care both of her soul
and of her body; a spiritual man and one of holy life, to whom God gave
light and grace to understand His operations within her. He had been
appointed Rector of the Hospital; and hence was in a position to hear
her Confession, say Mass for her, and give her Holy Communion according
to her convenience.”[131] Now the rare and profound isolation and
independence of her middle period render this turning to and finding
of human help specially significant; the numerous sayings addressed
to her Confessor to be found throughout the _Vita_ were all, with the
sole exception of those contained in the Conversion-scene, spoken to
Marabotto and transmitted by him to us;[132] and probably at least half
of the narrative of her Life and well-nigh all her Passion are due to
Don Marabotto’s pen. It is then important, and it is possible to get a
fairly clear idea as to the sort of man he was.


3. _Don Marabotto’s family and character; Catherine’s attitude towards
him._

Don Cattaneo came from a stock even more ancient and distinguished
than that of Vernazza. A Marabotto had had a lawsuit with the Bishop
of Genoa in 1128; Roggiero Marabotto had lent money to the King of
Sardinia in 1164; Martino Marabotto had been Ambassador to Rome,
Florence, and Lucca in 1256; Pelagio of that name had been Notary to
the Mint in 1435; Giorgio, a Doctor of Medicine in 1424; Ambrosio,
Lieutenant-Governor of Corsica in 1459. And the family, like the
Fieschi, had always been Guelph: Federico Marabotto had armed nine
galleys against the Ghibellines and had had a narrow escape from the
latter, during a dark night of 1330; and Antonio and Domenico were
known Guelph leaders in 1450 and 1452. Indeed the latter was Procurator
to the Fieschi family in 1443, and thus anticipated, by sixty years
and on a larger scale, Don Cattaneo’s management of Catherine Fiesca’s
modest affairs.[133]

Don Cattaneo himself we find ever gentle, patient, devoted and
full of unquestioning reverence towards Catherine; most valuably
accurate and detailed in his reproduction of things, in proportion
to their tangibleness; naïf and without humour, thoroughly matter of
fact, readily identifying the physical with the spiritual, and thus
often, unconsciously, all but succeeding in depriving Catherine’s
spirit, for us who have so largely to see her with his eyes, of much
of its specially characteristic transcendence and of its equally
characteristic ethical and spiritual immanence. Such a mind would
appear better fitted to follow,--at a respectful distance,--than to
lead such a spirit, as Catherine’s; and, indeed, to be more apt to help
her as a man of business than as a man of God. As a matter of fact,
however, he was quite evidently of very great help and consolation,
even in purely spiritual matters, to Catherine, during these last
eleven years of her life. Not as though there were any instances
of his initiating, stimulating, or modifying any of her ideals or
doctrines: she entirely remains, in purely spiritual matters, her
own old self, and continues to grow completely along the lines of
her previous development. And again he did attend, with an all but
unbroken assiduity, to matters not directly belonging to his province
_qua_ priest,--to her much-tried, ever-shifting bodily health, and,
probably some three or four years later on, to her financial affairs,
which latter were still of some variety and complication, owing to her
generous anxiety to do much for others, with but little of her own. But
between these two opposite extremes of possible help or influence lay
another middle level, in which his aid was considerable. For “whenever
God worked anything within her, which impressioned her much either in
soul or body, she would confer about it all with her Confessor; and he,
with the grace and light of God, understood well-nigh all, and would
give her answers which seemed to show that he himself felt the very
thing that she was feeling herself.” “And she would say, that even
simply to have him by, gave her great comfort, because they understood
each other, even by just looking each other in the face without
speaking.”[134] Marabotto’s Direction consists, then, in giving her the
human support of human understanding and sympathy, and, no doubt, in
reminding her, in times of darkness, of the lights and truths received
and communicated by her in times of consolation. Never does Marabotto
see, or think he sees, as far or as clearly as she sees, when she sees
at all; and it is the light derived by him from herself at one time,
which he administers to her soul at another.


4. _Catherine’s first Confession to Don Cattaneo._

The general tone and character of her first Confession to him are
described to us, no doubt from his own contemporary record. “She said:
‘Father, I know not where I am, either as to my soul or as to my body.
I should like to confess, but I cannot perceive any offence committed
by me.’” “And as to the sins which she mentioned,” adds Marabotto, “she
was not allowed to see them as so many sins, thought or said or done by
herself. But her state of soul was like unto that of a small boy, who
would have committed some slight offence in simple ignorance; and who,
if some one told him: You have done evil, would at these words suddenly
change colour and blush, and yet not because he has now an experimental
knowledge of evil.” “And many a time she would say to her Confessor:
‘I do not want to neglect Confession, and yet I do not know to whom to
give the blame of my sins; I want to accuse myself, and cannot manage
it.’ And yet, with all this, she made all the acts appropriate to
Confession.”[135]

We shall see, indeed, how keen, right up to the end, was her sense of
her frailty and of her general and natural inclination to evil. And her
teaching as to numerous positive and active imperfections remaining
in the soul, in every soul, up to the very end, is so clear and
constant, and so admittedly derived from her own experience, that we
can explain the above only by the supplementary part of her doctrine
(also derived from her own experience), which insists that some greatly
advanced souls do not, at the time of committing them, as yet see these
their imperfections, and that, by the time they have so far further
advanced as to see these imperfections, they are no more inclined to
commit them. In this way, then, there would be no fully formal sin or
deliberate imperfection to confess.


XII. HER CONVERSATIONS WITH HER DISCIPLES; “CATERINA SERAFINA.” DON
MARABOTTO AND THE POSSESSED MAID.


1. _Pure Love and Heaven._

It is probably during the next two years of her life, that occurred the
beautiful scene and conversation,--so typical of her relations with her
disciples during this first part of her last period (1499 to 1501),
which we can think of as her spiritual Indian summer, her Aftermath.
The scene has been recorded for us by her chief interlocutor, Vernazza.
Probably Bartolommea, Ettore’s wife, was present, and possibly also
Don Marabotto. “This blessed soul,” he writes, “all surrounded though
she was by the deep and peaceful ocean of her Love, God, desired
nevertheless to express in words, to her spiritual children, the
sentiments that were within her. And many a time she would say to them:
‘O would that I could tell what my heart feels!’ And her children
would say: ‘O Mother, tell us something of it.’ And she would answer:
‘I cannot find words appropriate to so great a love. But this I can
say with truth, that if of what my heart feels but one drop were
to fall into Hell, Hell itself would altogether turn into Eternal
Life.’”[136] “And one of these her spiritual children, an interior soul
(_un Religioso_),”--Vernazza, present on this occasion,--“dismayed at
what she was saying, replied: ‘Mother, I do not understand this; if
it were possible, I would gladly understand it better.’ But Catherine
answered: ‘My son, I find it impossible to put it otherwise.’ Then he,
eager to understand further, said: ‘Mother, supposing we gave your word
some interpretation, and that this corresponded to what is in your
mind, would you tell us if it was so?’ ‘Willingly, dear son,’ rejoined
Catherine, with evident pleasure.”

“And the disciple continued: ‘The matter might perhaps stand in this
wise.’ And he then explained how that the love which she was feeling
united her, by participation, with the goodness of God, so that she
no more distinguished herself from God. Now Hell stands for the very
opposite, since all the spirits therein are in rebellion against God.
If then it were possible for them to receive even a little drop of such
union, it would deprive them of all rebellion against God, and would
so unite them with Love, with God Himself, as to make them be in Life
Eternal. For Hell is everywhere where there is such rebellion; and Life
Eternal, wheresoever there is such union. And the Mother, hearing this,
appeared to be in a state of interior jubilation; whence with beaming
face she answered: ‘O dear son, truly the matter stands as you have
said; and hearing you speak, I feel it really is so. But my mind and
tongue are so immersed in this Love, that I cannot myself either say or
think these or other reasons.’ And the Disciple then said: ‘O Mother,
could you not ask your Love, God, for some of these little drops of
union for your sons?’ She answered, and with increased joyousness: ‘I
see this tender Love to be so full of condescension to these my sons,
that for them I can ask nothing of It, and can only present them before
His sight.’”[137]

I sincerely know not where to look for a doctrine of grander depth
and breadth, of more vibrating aliveness; for one more directly the
result of life, or leading more directly to it, than are those few
half-utterances and delicately strong indications of an overflowing
interior plenitude and radiant, all-conquering peace.

And even one such scene is sufficient to make us feel that the
following passage of the _Dialogo_ is, in its substance and tone,
profoundly true to facts: “This soul remained henceforth” (in this
third period) “many a time in company with its many spiritual friends,
discoursing of the Divine Love, in such wise that they felt as though
in Paradise, both collectively, and each one in his own particular way.
How delightful were these colloquies! He who spoke and he who listened,
each one fed on spiritual food of a delicious kind; and because the
time flew so swiftly, they never could attain satiety, but, all on fire
within them, they would remain there, unable at last to speak, unable
to depart, as though in ecstasy.”[138]


2. _“Caterina Serafina”._

Five times the _Vita_ compares her countenance, which, when she was
deeply moved, had a flushed, luminous and transparent appearance, to
that of an Angel or Cherub or Seraph;[139] and it even gives a story,
which purports to explain how she came to be called the latter. And
though this anecdote may be little more than a literary dramatization
of this popular appellation of Catherine; and although, even if the
scene be historical, Catherine has no kind of active share in bringing
it about; yet the passage is, in any case, of some real interest, since
it testifies to and typifies Catherine’s abundance of moral and mental
sanity and strong, serene restorative influence over unbalanced or
tempted souls, and this at a time when she herself had already been in
delicate health for about five years.

The story is interesting also in that it shows how strikingly like
the superficial psycho-physical symptoms of persons described as
possessed by an evil spirit were, and were thought to be, to those
of ecstasy, hence to Catherine’s own. Thus when an attack seized
this “spiritual daughter of Catherine,--a woman of large mind (_alto
intelleto_), who lived and died in virginity, and under the same
roof with Catherine” (no doubt Catherine’s second, unmarried servant
Mariola Bastarda is meant, and each must have had experience of the
other’s powers and wants from or before 1490 till 1497, and again
from 1500 onwards),--“she would become greatly agitated and be thrown
to the ground. The evil spirit would enter into her mind, and would
not allow her to think of divine things. And she would thus be as one
beside herself, all submerged in that malign and diabolic will.”--And
similarly we are told that Catherine would “throw herself to the
ground, altogether beside herself,” “immersed in a sea,”--in this
case, “of the deepest peace”; and “she would writhe as though she were
a serpent.”[140]

Yet this superficial likeness between these two states,--a likeness
apparent already in the similar double series of phenomena described
in St. Paul’s Epistles and in the Acts of the Apostles,--serves,
here also, but to bring out in fuller relief the profound underlying
spiritual and moral difference between the two conditions of soul.
For it is precisely in Catherine’s company that, when insufferable
to her own self, the afflicted Mariola would recover her peace and
self-possession, so that “even a silent look up to Catherine’s face
would help to bring relief.”[141]

It is in 1500, soon after Mariola’s return to her mistress (I take the
maid’s state of health to have occasioned her absence from Catherine
for two years or so), that this spiritual daughter is represented as
declaring in the first stage of one of these attacks,--or rather “the
unclean spirit” possessing her is said to have exclaimed to Catherine
“We are both of us thy slaves, because of that pure love which thou
possessest in thy heart”; and “full of rage at having made this
admission, he threw himself on the ground, and writhed with the feet.”
And then when,--all this is supposed to take place in the presence of
both Catherine and Don Marabotto,--the possessed one has stood up, the
Confessor forces the spirit step by step to speak out and to declare
successively that Catherine is “Caterina,” “Adorna or Fiesca,” and
“Caterina Serafina,” the latter being uttered amidst great torment.[142]


XIII. CATHERINE’S SYMPATHY WITH ANIMAL- AND PLANT-LIFE: HER LOVE OF THE
OPEN AIR. HER DEEP SELF-KNOWLEDGE AS TO THE HEALTHINESS OR MORBIDNESS
OF HER PSYCHO-PHYSICAL STATES.


1. _Increase of suffering and of range of sympathy._

It is indeed in this last period of her life that we can most clearly
see a deeply attractive mixture of personal suffering and of tender
sympathy with even the humblest of all things that live. And this is
doubtless not simply due to the much fuller evidence possessed by us
for these last years, but is quite as much owing to the actual increase
of these twin things within herself. “She was most compassionate
towards all creatures; so that, if an animal were killed or a tree
cut down, she could hardly bear to see them lose that being which
God had given them.”[143] And a beautiful communion of spirit can
now be traced even between plant-life and herself; and an innocent
self-diversion from a too exciting concentration, and help towards a
patient keeping or a bracing reconquering of calmness, is now found by
her, Franciscan-like, in the open air and amidst the restful flowers
and trees. Thus “at times she would seem to have her mind in a mill;
and as if this mill were indeed grinding her, soul and body”; and then
“she would walk up and down in the garden, and would address the plants
and trees and say: ‘Are not you also creatures created by my God? Are
not you, too, obedient to Him?’”--even though, I think she meant to
say, your life moves on so instinctive, calm, and freely expansive in
the large, liberal air, as I feel it to do, by its very contrast to my
own eager, crowded life, struggling in vain for a sustained perfection
of equipoise and for an even momentary adequacy of self-expression.
“And doing thus, she would gradually be comforted.”[144]

Indeed she would, in still intenser moods, use plants and other
creatures of God in a more violent fashion. But this is now no more
done as of old, for direct purposes of mortification; but, at one
time, from an unreflective transport of delight, delight which itself
seems ever to impel noble natures to seek to mix some suffering with
it; and, at another time, for the purpose of producing strong physical
impressios, counter-stimulations and escapes from a too great intensity
of interior feeling. “She would at times, when in the garden, seize
hold of the thorn-covered twigs of the rose-bushes with both her hands;
and would not feel any pain whilst thus doing it in a transport of
mind. She would also bite her hands and burn them, and this in order to
divert, if possible, her interior oppression.”[145]


2. _She alone keeps the sense of the truly spiritual, in the midst of
her psycho-physical states._

Indeed nothing is more characteristic of her psychic state, during
these years, than the ever-increasing intensity, shiftingness and
close interrelation between the physical and mental. But we shall find
that, whereas those who surround her, Confessor, Doctors, Disciples,
Attendants, all, in various degrees and ways, increasingly insist
upon and persist in finding direct proofs of the supernatural in the
purely physical phenomena of her state even when taken separately,
and indeed more and more in exact proportion to their non-spiritual
character: Catherine herself, although no doubt not above the medical
or psychical knowledge of her time, remains admirably centred in the
truly spiritual, and continually awake to the necessity of interior
spiritual selection amongst and assimilation and transformation of all
such psycho-physical impressions and conditions. Even in the midst
of the extreme weaknesses of her last illness we shall see her only
quite exceptionally, and ever for but a few instants, without this
consciousness of the deep yet delicate difference in ethical value and
helpfulness between the various psycho-physical things experienced by
herself, and of the requirements, duties and perceptions of her own
spirit with regard to them.

And this attitude is all the more remarkable because, to the outer
difficulty arising from the persistent, far more immediate, and
apparently more directly religious, view of all her little world
about her, came two peculiarities working in the same direction from
within her own self. There was the old constitutional keenness and
concentration of her highly nervous physical and psychical temperament,
and the rarely high pitch and swift pace of her whole inner life, which
must, at all times, have rendered suspense of judgment and detachment
with regard to her own sensations and quasi-physical impressions
specially difficult. And there was now the new intensity and closeness
of interaction between soul and body, which must have made such lofty
detachment from all but spiritual realities a matter of the rarest
grace and of the most heroic self-conquest.


3. _Catherine’s health does not break up completely till 1507._

The _Vita_, indeed, as we now have it, tells us that “about nine years
before her death,” hence in 1501, “an infirmity came upon her, which
neither her attendants nor the doctors knew how to identify”; and that
“there was confusion, not on her own part, but on the part of those
who served her.”[146] But this whole Chapter XLVII (pp. 127-132) of
the present _Vita_, which opens out thus, is wanting in MSS. “A” and
“B”; and is composed of documents which appear, in a fuller and more
primitive form and in their right chronological place, in the next
three chapters (pp. 132-160), chapters without doubt predominantly
due to Marabotto; and of the documents making up the present Chapter
XXXVIII (pp. 98, 99), which are earlier again, in both contents and
composition, and are very certainly the work of Vernazza. And this
means that, though the present Chapter XLVII claims to give a general
account of her condition during 1501-1510, it does not, as a matter of
fact, give us anything but details belonging without doubt to 1507-1510.

The manner in which this late compiler insists upon the directly
spiritual, indeed supernatural, character of even the clearly secondary
and physical phenomena of her state, make it highly probable that,
having once exaggerated the quality, he readily snatched at any
indications (possibly a slip of the pen in some MS., writing 1501
instead of 1507; we have a similar slip in MS. “A” which on p. 193
twice writes 1506 for 1509), which favoured an early date for the
beginning of her last illness. Certainly the legal documents at our
disposal show her to us still variously interested and active, right up
to 1507.

It will, then, be better first to describe this activity up to 1507,
and to take even the general questions concerning her illness in
connection with her last four years, 1507-1510.


XIV. CATHERINE’S SOCIAL JOYS AND SORROWS, 1501-1507.


1. _Birth of Ettore’s last two daughters._

It will have been during these years 1501 to 1507, unless indeed
already between 1497 and 1501, that Vernazza’s second and third
daughters were born; and if Catherine had stood God-mother to his
eldest child, Tommasina, it is inconceivable that she should not
have cared for Tommasina’s sisters, Catetta and Ginevrina. Certainly
their father, Catherine’s closest friend and disciple, gave detailed
attention, right up to the end of his strenuous life, to all three
children; and made most thoughtful particular provision, in his still
extant remarkable Will of 1517, for the youngest, Ginevrina, who at
that time was the only one not yet settled in life.[147] Thus Vernazza
knew how to combine all this detailed thought for his own children
with the spacious public spirit of which his Dispositions are a still
extant, most impressive monument; and Catherine, who was his deepest
inspirer, clearly led the way here, right up to the last four years of
her life. For we have already seen how she managed to conjoin, in a
fashion similar to Ettore’s, a universalist love for Love Transcendent,
with a particularism of attachment to individual souls, in which that
Love is immanent.


2. _Deaths of Limbania, Jacobo, and Giovanni._

And if she had joy over souls coming into the world, she had sorrow
over souls leaving it. For in the single year 1502 she lost her only
sister, Limbania, and her two elder brothers Jacopo and Giovanni. It
is true that the _Vita_ says: “There died several of her brothers and
sisters; but, owing to the great union which she had with the tender
will of God, she felt no pain, as though they had not been of her
own blood.”[148] But then we have already often found how subject to
caution and rebate are all such general, absolute statements; this
passage in particular is, by its vagueness and ambiguity (she had but
one sister of her own), stamped as late and more or less secondary;
and we shall trace, later on, a similar even more extensive _a priori_
modification of her authentic image in the _Dialogo_. Certainly her
Wills show no kind of indifference to her own relations. In that of
1498 she specially and carefully remembered these very three relations;
and in proportion as these two brothers’ children grow up and at all
require her help, Catherine specially refers to and plans for them,--so
for Jacobo’s eldest daughter Maria, in view of getting her married
(Wills of 1498, 1503, 1506, 1509); and for Giovanni’s three sons (Wills
of 1503, 1506, 1509). Jacobo’s second daughter seems also to have died
at this time, as she no more appears after the Will of 1498. We shall
see how exactly the same affectionate interest is shown by her towards
her still remaining brother and his two sons.[149]


3. _The Triptych “Maestà.”_

And she evidently still went on increasing the number of the objects
of her interest and affection, and the degree of her attachment to
such objects as she already loved. For in her Codicil of the next
year, January 1503, she gives a careful description of a picture
now belonging to herself, “a ‘Majesty,’ representing the Virgin
Mary with Saint Joseph, and the Lord Jesus at their feet, with her”
(Fieschi-Adorni) “coat-of-arms painted within and without.” The
picture evidently represented the Adoration of the Infant Jesus, and
was painted on wood,--a triptych: with Catherine’s arms painted both
inside and outside the two wings. She again describes it thus fully in
her Wills of 1506 and 1509, leaving it, on all those occasions, to a
certain Christofero de Clavaro (Christofer of Chiavari?). It is then
quite clear both that this picture had been specially painted by some
one for Catherine, and that Catherine, for some reason or reasons,
greatly treasured it. Who then was the painter and what was the reason?
I think both are not difficult to find.

We have seen how Catherine’s much-loved cousin, the widowed Tommasina
Fiesca, had in 1497 moved into the Monastero Nuovo in the Aquasola
quarter,--close to Catherine’s abode; so that the cousins will have
met constantly from that time forward. We have also seen that this
distinguished artist painted many a “Pietà” (the dead Christ on
His Mother’s lap, possibly with Angels on each side), and executed
a piece of needlework again representative of a group,--this time
God the Father with many Angels above, and Christ below. Indeed
Federico Alizeri has succeeded in rediscovering one of her works, a
representation of Christ crowned with thorns and surrounded by the
Instruments and Mysteries of His Passion, painted in fine outline upon
sheepskin mounted on a wood-panel.[150] And we have seen how much
Catherine had, as a child, been affected by a “Pietà,” and shall find
her, even after this date, still affected by a religious picture. There
can then be no reasonable doubt that Suor Tommasina was the painter
and giver of this picture,--again a group, a “Maestà,” instead of the
usual “Pietà.”

And the facts of Catherine caring to possess, to preserve, and to
transmit something thus specially appropriated to herself, with her
family arms upon a religious picture, are all deeply significant
touches, and quite unlike what all the secondary, and even some of the
primary, parts of the _Vita_ would lead one to expect.


4. _Increasing care for Thobia._

And this same Codicil shows us how her care, and no doubt her genuine
affection, for Thobia was growing. For she now leaves her the income
on two shares of the Bank of St. George (no doubt only a slight gift,
about £2 10_s._ a year; but Catherine possesses but very little that
she is free to leave as she likes, the claims upon her are very many,
and the young woman is already well provided for, considering her
social station), her better silk gown, a skirt, and various veils. The
poor girl died in 1504 or 1505, for in Catherine’s Will of 1506 she
appears as “the late Thobia.” She must have been about thirty years old
at the time.


5. _Argentina del Sale; story of Marco del Sale’s death._

But in lieu of poor Thobia, Catherine was now given by Providence a
new lowly object of affection and interest. For it was doubtless in
the late spring of 1505 that occurred the incident, of which we have
the beautifully simple and naïf record in Chapter XLVI of the _Vita_;
a record certainly based upon information supplied by Argentina, but
which I take to be the literary work of Vernazza, and to be more or
less contemporary with the events described. A humble young friend
or acquaintance of Catherine’s, who had perhaps already been her
occasional little day-servant, one Argentina de Ripalta, had now been
away from her and married, for a year, to a poor navvy working in the
Molo (Quay) quarter of the town; and this her husband, Marco del Sale,
was now dangerously ill, indeed he was dying of a cancer in the face.
And, having tried every kind of remedy, and seeing himself incurable,
and being thus in great and hopeless pain, Marco had lost all patience
and was as one beside himself. And then Argentina bethought herself of
Catherine, and came to the Hospital, and begged her to come and see her
husband, and pray to God for him.

And Catherine was at once at Argentina’s disposal, and straightway went
off with her. And having come into Marco’s room, she greatly comforted
him with her few but homely and fervent words. Then starting off again
in company with Argentina, Catherine entered, near to the house and
still close to the sea, into the little Church of Santa Maria delle
Grazie la Vecchia,--so called to distinguish it from the more recent
Chapel of the Augustinianesses, which bore the same general title,--and
there, kneeling in a corner, Catherine prayed for Marco. The little
seamen’s Church is still in use, with its many mementoes of four
centuries and more of ships foundered and of ships safely come to port.
And having here finished her prayer, Catherine returned with Argentina
to the Hospital. There Argentina left her, and returned to Marco, and
found him so changed that from a Devil he seemed turned into an Angel.
And with joyous tender feeling he asked: “O Argentina, come, tell me
who is that holy soul that you brought me?” But Argentina answered:
“Why, that is Madonna Caterinetta Adorna, a woman of most perfect
life.” And the sick man replied: “I beg of thee, by the love of God, to
take care to bring her here a second time to me.”

And so the next day Argentina returned to the Hospital and told all to
Catherine. And Catherine again promptly came back with Argentina. But
when Catherine had entered the room and approached the bed, Marco threw
his arms round her, and wept for a long space of time. And then, still
weeping, but with great relief, he said to her: “Madonna, the reason
why I wished you to come is, first to thank you for the kindness you
have shown me; and next to ask a favour of you, which I beg you not to
refuse me. For when you had left this room, Our Lord Jesus Christ came
to me visibly and in the form in which He appeared to the Magdalen in
the garden, and gave me His most holy blessing, and pardoned me all my
sins, and told me that I should prepare for death, because that I shall
go to Him on Ascension-Day. Hence I pray you, most tender Mother, deign
to accept Argentina as your spiritual daughter, and to keep her with
you constantly. And thou, Argentina, I pray thee, be content with this
plan.” They both gladly declared themselves ready and content.

When Catherine had gone away, Marco sent for a certain Augustinian
Friar of the Monastery of the Consolation, and carefully confessed his
sins and received Holy Communion; and then ordered all his worldly
affairs with a notary and with his relations. And he did all this in
spite of them all, who thought that his intense pain had driven him
off his head, and who kept saying: “Take comfort, Marco, soon you will
be well again; there is no occasion as yet for you to attend to these
things.”

And the Eve of the Ascension having come round, he again sent for the
same Confessor, and again confessed and communicated, and got him this
time to add Extreme Unction and the Recommendation of the Dying, and
all this with great composure and devotion. But as the night came on,
he said to the Friar: “Return to your Monastery; and when the time
comes, I will give you notice.” And then, alone with Argentina, he
took his crucifix in his hand, and turning towards his wife he said:
“Argentina, see, I leave thee Him for thy husband; prepare thyself to
suffer, for I declare to thee that suffering is in store for thee.”
This did not fail to come about, for she suffered later on, both
mentally and physically. And for the rest of the night he continued to
comfort her, and to encourage her to give herself to God and to accept
suffering as the ladder for mounting up to Heaven. Then when the dawn
had come he said: “Argentina, abide with God; the hour has come.” And
having finished these words, he expired; and his spirit straightway
went to the window of the cell of his Confessor, and tapping against
the pane said: “Ecce homo.” But the Friar hearing this, at once knew
that Marco had passed to his Lord.

And as soon as Marco’s body had been buried, Catherine took Argentina
to live with her as her spiritual daughter, and thus kept her promise.
And since she loved this daughter much, she was wont to take her with
her when she went out. And hence one day, when once more passing by
the little Church on the little square by the Quay, she and her young
daughter again went in and prayed. And on coming out, Catherine said to
Argentina: “This is the place, where grace was gained in prayer for thy
husband.”[151]


6. _Catherine’s social interests in 1506._

And in the following year, 1506, we still find Catherine full of
interest and activity of the most varied kind. On March the 13th and
16th Catherine was again busy for the Hospital, by receiving the
Foundlings and the various articles and monies anonymously deposited
there for their keep. And these can hardly have been altogether
exceptional acts, even for this period of her life.[152] And on the
21st of May she made her third Will, which is interesting for various
reasons. For it is in this document that we first hear of the deaths
of her two elder brothers and of Thobia, and (by implication) of that
of her sister Limbania and of her second niece Battista. And we can
once more trace here the continuity of her interests and attachments.
Her elder niece Maria is again provided with a marriage dowry; her
brother Lorenzo remains (now sole) residuary legatee; Thobia’s mother
gets her legacy compounded for an immediate settlement and payment; the
maids Benedetta and Mariola have their legacies somewhat increased;
the “Maestà” is again carefully described and allotted; and she again
orders her body to be buried alongside of that of her husband.[153]
Indeed fresh interests appear here. For the three sons of her second
brother and the eldest son of her third brother are now grown up; and
so she makes these four nephews her residuary legatees, should her
brother Lorenzo die before herself. Don Marabotto has now been her
Confessor and Chaplain for seven, and her Almoner for three years; and
so she leaves him the income of eight shares of St. George’s for his
lifetime, which, at 4 per cent. would make £16 a year,--the capital to
go, at Marabotto’s death, to her heirs. And Argentina del Sale has been
with her for just about a year; and so she leaves her various articles
of personal linen and bedding.[154]

But, above all, the place of this Will’s redaction is new amongst
the memorials of her life, and directly indicative of a still
further enlargement of her influence and interests. For if of the
fourteen legal documents drawn up for, and in the presence of,
Giuliano or herself, eleven were composed in the small house within
the great Hospital of the Pammatone, and only two others,--the
Marriage-Settlement, and the Deed of Transfer in favour of Giovanni
Adorno,--had hitherto been written elsewhere, this Will was executed in
the Refuge for Incurables, in the Portorio quarter, in the evening of
the day mentioned, in the presence of three weavers and one dyer,--two
trades strongly represented in this poor and populous quarter. Now
the choice of this place is deeply suggestive, because it became the
chief care and final home of Ettore Vernazza’s later years. Indeed it
is certain that, on the death of his wife, Vernazza came and lived
in the midst of these poor Incurables; and that this residence here
of Catherine’s closest friend did not begin later than three years
from this date--hence still during Catherine’s lifetime, in 1509. His
far-reaching Wills of 1512 and 1517 are both dated from this Refuge,
of which he was, by then, manager and chief supporter; and it is there
that he died his heroic death in 1524. Hence it is certain that now
already Vernazza must have been deeply interested in this fine, but
at that time still languishing, work (its fixed income did not as
yet amount to fully £400 a year), and he must often have been there;
possibly he had even already a room of his own in the house.

There can, in any case, be no doubt, that in the choice of this place
for the drawing-up of this Will, we have an indication, all the more
interesting because entirely incidental, of the wide and ever-widening
range, and of the entirely solid, indeed heroic character of
Catherine’s interest and influence. It also shows us that she was still
able to get about, although this Refuge, now the Spedale dei Chronici,
is, no doubt, not far away from her Pammatone home. If she could still
go there, she no doubt still could and did go to her cousin Suor
Tommasina’s Convent, which was certainly no further off. And I surmise
that many a spiritual colloquy will have taken place, with Catherine
as chief interlocutor, and Suor Tommasina and Ettore Vernazza as chief
questioners and listeners, in the parlour of San Domenico and in that
of the Refuge respectively.




