CHAPTER V

CATHERINE’S LAST FOUR YEARS, 1506 TO 1510--SKETCH OF HER CHARACTER,
DOCTRINE, AND SPIRIT


I. CATHERINE’S EXTERNAL INTERESTS AND ACTIVITIES UP TO MAY 1510.
OCCASIONAL SLIGHT DEVIATIONS FROM HER OLD BALANCE. IMMENSELY CLOSE
INTERCONNECTION OF HER WHOLE MENTAL AND PSYCHO-PHYSICAL NATURE.
IMPRESSIONS AS CONNECTED WITH THE FIVE SENSES.


1. _Indications of external interests._

Even during the next four years, up to May 1510, we still find
various most authentic and clear indications of external interests
and activities in Catherine’s life. Thus, on the 21st June 1507, the
Protectors of the Hospital address a letter to Don Giacobo Carenzio
(who had, as they tell him, been elected Master--_Rettore_--already
fifteen months previously), urging him to come and take up his post;
and Catherine, who, as we shall see, was later on variously helped
by this Priest, and who cared so much for the Hospital, cannot have
remained indifferent to that first election and to this present
reminder.

Again on the 6th December 1507, the Protectors, Lorenzo Spinola,
Manfredo Fornari, and Emmanuele Fiesco, met in Catherine’s room, and
decided, no doubt with her advice and co-operation, to allow another
widow-lady and devotee of the Hospital, Brigidina, wife of the late
Giacomo Castagneto, to settle within its precincts.[155] Then on
27th November 1508 she makes a Codicil, leaving an additional £25 to
Mariola, and a further article of dress to Argentina; and declaring
that she is “entirely content” with Don Marabotto’s administration of
her monies and charities. Don Cattaneo has then now become her Almoner,
and her charitable activity continues large. The document is drawn up
by Ettore Vernazza, an unimpeachable witness to Marabotto’s rectitude
and exactness.[156]

Indeed as late down as 18th March 1509 her long Will of that date shows
an admirable persistence of her old attachment for and interest in her
surviving brother, niece (the provision for Maria’s possible marriage
is particularly careful and detailed), and nephews (the youngest of
the latter, Giovanni, is omitted, no doubt because he had now become a
Cardinal, with a corresponding income); in Don Marabotto, who retains
the same little pension; in her three maids Benedetta, Mariola, and
Argentina, all of whose legacies get somewhat increased; and in the
fortunes of the Hospital and of Thobia’s mother (she repeats her
account of what she has already done for them).[157]


2. _Occasional imperfection of judgment._

Yet now at last we can find symptoms of the final break-up of her
health, and of an occasional slight or momentary deviation from, or
diminution of, her old completeness of balance in both judgment,
taste, and feeling,--although even now this occurs only in matters of
relatively secondary importance, and but heightens the impressiveness
of the still unbroken front which she maintains, in all her fully
deliberate acts, with regard to all essential matters. Indeed, it
is not difficult to feel, even where one cannot directly trace, in
all such acts and matters, a still further deepening of the heroic
watchfulness and childlike spontaneity, and of the humility and tender
_naïveté_ and creatureliness, of her general tone and attitude.


3. _Close-knittedness of her psycho-physical organism: her spiritual
utilization of this._

But before recounting the few instances in which we can trace an
indication of partly physical depression, or of some lessening of
mental alertness or volitional power in secondary matters, or of slight
passing unwilled _maladif_ impressions, let us attempt a somewhat
methodic description of the extreme sensitiveness and immensely close
interconnection of her whole psycho-physical nature, and of the general
modifications, both in quality and in quantity, which these impressions
were wont to go through; and all this, just now, on occasion of
incidents closely similar to those already experienced in her past life.

It would indeed be altogether mistaken to class all this sensitiveness
as necessarily but a form of illness; for the great majority, and all
the most characteristic, of her apparently physical pains and troubles,
are but varieties and heightenings of the always unusually swift and
profound impressionableness of her whole psycho-physical organism. With
the sole exception of that attack of pestilential fever (probably in
the year 1493), I can nowhere, right up to three days before her death,
find any trace in her life of illnesses or disturbances of any but a
psycho-physical, nerve-functional type.

Indeed her psychic self is throughout so impressionable, and the mind
is, ever since her Conversion, so active, dominant, and absorbed in
the actual and attempted apprehension of the great realities which,
though invisible, require for their vivid apprehension an imaginative
pictorial embodiment: that we shall have, in a later chapter, to ask
ourselves the question whether it was not the mind, or the imagination
at the mind’s bidding, which thus affected the psycho-physical life,
rather than the psycho-physical life which, primarily independent
of the former, offered itself as but so much raw, still unrelated
material, to the fashioning, transforming mind. Especially will it be
necessary to consider carefully the influence upon her mind, and upon
the chronicler’s accounts of her state, which may have been exercised
by the writings of the Areopagite and of Jacopone. It will then become
clear that these authors have undoubtedly contributed to the form in
which these truths and realities were, if not actually apprehended by
Catherine, at least described by her disciples.

Yet even this point remains, in Catherine’s case, (and indeed in that
of all the great Saints,) of no real spiritual or moral importance,
since all these great and generous souls persist in ever using these
psycho-physical things, whether they be projections or “givennesses,”
as but so many instruments and materials for the apprehension,
illustration, acquisition, and purification of spiritual truth and of
the spirit’s own fulness and depth. And Catherine’s persistence in this
attitude of utilization and transcendence of what the natural man so
continuously tends to make his direct aim and final limit continues
practically unbroken to the end. I will group these psychic impressions
according to the five senses.


4. _Impressions connected with the sense of touch._

The earliest, and up to the end the most marked and general, of all
such unusual impressions appears to have been one connected with the
sense of touch,--that feeling of mostly interior, but later on also
of exterior, warmth, indeed often of intense heat and burning, which
comes to her, the first as though sunshine were bathing her within or
without, the second sometimes as though a great fire were enveloping
her, and sometimes as though a living flame were piercing her within.

Already in 1473, on occasion of her Conversion, we find unmistakable
indications of such sensations; they are, however, of a predominantly
pleasurable kind. And I take it that during her great lonely
middle-period they will, in so much as present, have been of a similar
nature. But later on, from after 1499 onwards, these sensations and
attacks become increasingly painful,[158] and are specially described,
and variously alluded to, under the terms of _operation_, _assault_,
_siege_. When specially keen and concentrated, and accompanied by some
piercing psycho-spiritual perception, they appear under the terms of
_arrow_, _wound_; and the perception itself bears then the name of
_ray_ or _spark_ (of divine love).[159]

Now we lookers-on can, of course, with more or less ease, mentally
separate, in a general way, the latter, the spiritual apprehension,
creation and content, from the former, the psycho-physical occasion,
material and form; although it is certainly difficult, and probably
impossible, to decide, at least in any one case, how far it is her
mental activity that occasions her psycho-physical condition, or how
far it is the latter which occasions the former. But what actually and
demonstrably happened in Catherine’s case, was something incomparably
beyond the range to which such psycho-physical considerations apply.
For to her, psychically, a keenly sentient; rationally, a deeply
thinking, feeling, and willing creature,--these experiences, howsoever
classable, were most real, and, in course of time, more and more
penetrating and painful; and they were, to her own consciousness,
entirely prior to any interpretation or utilization of them. Hence,
for the present at all events, we had better take these states as they
presented themselves to her immediate and ordinary consciousness. And
this very same immensely sentient soul was so firmly centred, deep down
below and beyond the psycho-physical, in the Moral and Spiritual, that
these experiences were welcomed and actively used but as so many means
and materials for ethical purification and character-building, and for
the analogical apprehension and illustration of spiritual truths.

Thus it is that these sensations of burning which, during her years
of health, were themselves so pleasurable and peaceful, helped, as
we shall find when we come to consider her doctrine, to suggest and
illustrate for her the joys and health-giving influence of the presence
of God, both here and in Paradise, and of the soul’s apprehension of
God, as light for the understanding and warmth for the affections and
the will. And when, with her failing health, these sensations turned
into painful, in part seemingly physical attacks,--attacks which,
however, left the mind in an increased and ever-increasing peace and
contentment,--they again helped her to gain and develop her doctrine
concerning Purgatory.

In both cases her teaching gained thus a vividness of quasi-directly
sensible experience, of something in a manner actually seen and
felt, since it was built up out of suggestions derived from direct
sensations and psycho-physical states. And yet in both cases not all
such sensations, of themselves quite valueless and uninstructive from
an ethical and religious point of view, could have helped towards
anything of spiritual significance, had they not been sifted, taken
up, organized and transformed in and into a large and deep spiritual
experience and personality. There is absolutely nothing automatic or
necessary in the crowning, ethically significant stages of this whole
process, however rapid and instinctive and effortless, and simply of
a piece with the psycho-physical occasions, these utilizations and
grace-impelled and grace-informed creations may appear. We shall,
in proof of this, soon see how physical and literal and spiritually
insignificant remained, during the last four months of her life,
the apprehensions of her disciples as to these heats and piercing
sensations: these good, indeed devoted, people seem incapable of
measuring spiritual love by anything higher than thermometer-readings
or other physical tangibilities. And we shall also have to record one
or two momentary instances when this heat-feeling and apprehension
clearly assumed a _maladif_ character in Catherine herself.


5. _Impressions connected with taste and smell._

The unusual sense-perceptions which were the next to be aroused
were apparently those of taste and smell: although the one
certain indication I can find of such an unusual psycho-physical
taste-and-smell impression, of a pleasurable and not clearly _maladif_
character, is not earlier than 1499.[160] It came to her in connection
with the one great devotion of her whole convert life,--the Holy
Eucharist. “Having on one occasion received Holy Communion, so much
odour and sweetness came to her, that she seemed to be in Paradise.
Whence, feeling this, she straightway turned towards her Love and
said: ‘O Love, dost Thou perhaps intend to draw me to Thyself with
these savours? I want them not, since I want nothing but Thee
alone, and all of Thee.’”[161] Here, then, she turns away from and
transcends, precisely as St. John of the Cross was soon to insist so
strongly that we should do, the sensible and immediate, and reaches
on to the spiritual, ultimate, and personal. And similarly some such
psycho-physical experience seems presupposed in her declaration: “If
a Consecrated Host and unconsecrated ones were to be given to me,
I should distinguish the former from the latter as I do wine from
water.”[162] Yet her biographer can truthfully insist upon love being
the original cause of such recognition: “She said this, because the
Consecrated Host sent forth a certain ray of love which pierced her
heart.” And she herself gives a still more spiritual parallel instance
and explanation of such recognition: “If I were to be shown the Court
of Heaven, with all its members robed in one and the same manner, in
suchwise that there would, so far, be no perceptible difference between
God and the Angels: the love which I have in my heart would still
recognize God, as readily as the dog recognizes his master.” This love
indeed would move out to Him even more swiftly and easily, because
“love, which is God Himself, finds in an instant, without any means,
its own end and ultimate repose.”[163]

Clearly _maladif_ over-sensitiveness and shiftingness of the senses of
taste and scent will appear presently, during the last months of her
life.


6. _Hearing and Sight._

The most important and mental of the senses, hearing and sight, appear,
on the contrary, with little or nothing particularly unusual about
them, throughout her life.

For as to her sense of hearing, the inner voices already described as
heard by her at different times, cannot fairly be classed under this
or any other sense-perception, healthy or otherwise; since they appear
to have been most vivid and clear thoughts presented to her mind,
with in each case the consciousness that they were the suggestions of
Mind,--of a Spirit other than her own. They appear to have always been
described by herself as “words spoken to the mind,” “words as it were
heard.”[164] Traces of any _maladif_ affection of this sense will be
difficult or impossible to find, even during her last illness.

And as to sight, always so closely akin to mental processes, anything
at all really exceptional cannot, I think, be found in her life so far
at all. For her evidently great impressionableness to certain religious
pictures,--so as a child, in regard to the “Pietà,” and now again
apparently with the “Maestà,”--and to certain sights of nature, cannot
fairly be considered abnormal. And as to Visions, the only one recorded
so far, that of the Bleeding Christ, was primarily a mentally mediated
experience: “the Lord showed Himself to her in the spirit,” says the
account, no doubt in full accordance with her own analysis of such
experiences.[165] Some few disturbances of this sense will, however,
appear during the course of her last illness.


II. MORE OR LESS _MALADIF_ EXPERIENCES AND ACTIONS.

The amplest proof of the deep and delicate impressionableness of her
nature is probably, however, to be found in that profound melancholy,
that positive disgust with everything within her and without, and that
strong desire for death which we found to have possessed her during
the three months previous to her Conversion in March 1473. For we
should note that that melancholy did not directly spring from spiritual
motives or considerations: it was previous to all definite sorrow for
sin and to all full and willed sense of things religious and eternal.
Indeed, with the appearance of the religious standards and certitudes,
that crushing universal feeling of melancholy and of positive disgust
breaks up, and yields to contrasted joys and sorrows, and to a buoyant
energy in the very midst and through the very means of suffering and
of sacrifice. Thus the dawn of her spiritual re-birth was indeed dark
and oppressive; but this oppression did not directly proceed from any
clear consciousness of the Perfect and Eternal which arose within her
only as part and parcel of this explicit Conversion. The oppression
simply indicated, of itself, a nature so sensitive and claimful, as to
require, in order to achieve any degree of contentment, a spiritual,
regenerative, re-interpretative power capable of responding to and
matching the deepest realities of life. That nature was thus full of
the need of such realities and of such contact with them, but was
without the power of producing, or of adequately responding to, such
realities,--or indeed of imaginatively forecasting them. And similarly
in 1507, the dawn of her painful, joyful-sorrowful birthday to eternity
was again dark and oppressive and productive of an intense desire for
death, a desire which had, apparently, been entirely absent from her
soul ever since 1473. Here again this oppression was not directly
religious or moral, but, taken in itself, was simply psycho-physical.
Indeed this oppression marks the beginning of the special limitations,
difficulties, and slightly deflecting influences now introduced into
her life by henceforth steadily increasing positive illness. I propose,
then, to begin with this opening depression of hers, and next to go
through the main incidents of her remaining life, as far as possible,
in strictly chronological order. I will group all this around six main
facts and dates.


1. _Desire for death, 1507._

“In the year 1507 she on one occasion was present at the recitation
of the Offices for the Dead. And a desire to die came upon her. And
she said: ‘O Love, I desire nothing but Thee, and Thee in Thine own
manner: but, if it pleases Thee, allow me at least to go and see others
die and be buried, in order that I may see in others that great good,
which it does not please Thee should as yet be in myself.’ And her Love
consented to this; and consequently, for a certain space of time, she
went to see die and be buried all those who died in the Hospital. And
as, later on, her union with this her tender Love increased, her desire
for death disappeared little by little.”[166]

She is, then, still active, and moves about in the spacious Hospital
and in the adjoining Church. And this desire, as it gradually
disappeared, will, doubtless, not have left mere blanks in her
consciousness, or have reduced the sum-total of her feelings; but, with
that diminution, some of her old tenderness for and interest in others,
will have reappeared. And again we see how no one set of feelings,
one “psychosis,” ever simply repeats itself, in even one and the same
soul: for Catherine’s positive disgust with all things, which prepared
and accompanied her desire for death in 1473, is absent from the
otherwise similar desire of 1507. In both cases there is the same sheer
“givenness” and isolation of the feeling. _Then_, she did not desire
death to escape temptation or sin; _now_, she does not desire it,
directly and within her emotional nature, in order to get to God: in
each case the feeling stands simply by itself, and is not immediately
connected with religion at all. And finally, this incident, and its
later equivalent repetitions in November 1509 and September 1510, prove
once again on what a veritable bed of Procrustes those determined
_a-priorists_, the Redactors of the _Vita_, have placed, pulled about
and mutilated, as far as in them lay, the immensely spontaneous and
rich personality of Catherine, in their determination to find her ever
all-perfect, and perfect after their own fixed pattern. For it proves
to demonstration, either that Catherine continued liable to human
imperfections, or that not all desires are imperfect. And both these
things are true, beyond the possibility of doubt.


2. _The scent-impression from Don Cattaneo’s hand._

And next we get an instance of clearly abnormal sense-perception,
which is deeply interesting because of the vivid, first-hand form in
which the fact has come down to us, and still more on account of its
impressive illustration of the two possible mental attitudes towards
such matters. It will have occurred in 1508; and Don Marabotto is, in
any case, the other interlocutor in the scene, and its chronicler.
And if there is undoubtedly a somewhat ludicrous _naïveté_ about his
attitude at the time of the occurrence, there is also a striking
simplicity and self-oblivion in the perfectly objective manner in
which he chronicles the scene in all its bearings, and Catherine’s
marked superiority to himself. It is this complete directness and
simplicity of motive which, on the side of character, will have bound
these otherwise strangely diverse souls together; and which rendered
Don Marabotto, even simply as a character, not unworthy of his close
intimacy with Catherine.

The abnormality here concerns the sense of smell alone; the impression
here lasts a considerable time: and now she acquiesces in it, but only
for the purpose of moving through it, as a mere means. “Having been
infirm for many days, Catherine one day took the hand of her Confessor
and smelt it: and its odour penetrated right to her heart,” so that
“for many days this perfume restored and nourished her, body and soul.”
Don Marabotto then asks her what kind of thing this odour is that she
is smelling. And she tells him that it is an odour so penetrating and
sweet, as to seem capable of bringing the dead to life; that God had
sent it to her, to strengthen her soul and body, now that these were
so much oppressed; and hence “since God grants me this odour, I am
determined to derive strength from it, as long as He shall please that
I shall do so.” But Marabotto, “thinking that he must surely be able
to perceive what was being transmitted by himself, went smelling his
own hand, but to no effect.” And Catherine gently rebuked his action by
declaring: “The things which depend entirely upon God’s own free gift,
He does not give to those that seek them. Indeed He gives such things
at all, only in cases of great necessity, and as an occasion of great
spiritual profit.”[167]

The impression and consolation are here still connected with the
Holy Eucharist: for the hand which she smells is no doubt the right
one,--the hand which was wont daily to consecrate in her presence and
daily to communicate her. The declaration as to the odour’s power to
raise the dead to life has occurred already in connection with the
Holy Eucharist, and will have been in part suggested to her by such
Johannine passages as “I am the … Life,” “I am the Living Bread,” “he
that eateth this Bread shall live,” shall be made to live, “for ever.”
And although the odour is here the prominent impression, and “savours”
are wanting, yet “sweetness” still occurs, probably as a sort of
sensation of tasting.--Marabotto’s mind has in it, on this occasion,
two plausible assumptions, each strengthening the other; and Catherine
controverts both. He evidently thinks: “Catherine’s states are all most
valuable, hence real, hence objective: if then she says she smells this
or that, others will be able to do so too.” And: “What a man transmits,
that he can himself experience: hence, on this ground also, I should
be able to smell this perfume.”--And Catherine’s mind evidently also
contains two very different convictions: the first, that experiences,
even when thus but semi-spiritual, are, for all their reality, not
directly transferable from soul to soul; and the second, that all such
sensible and semi-sensible experiences, whether normal or exceptional,
are all but means at the disposal of the free-willing spirit, means
which become limits and obstacles as soon as they are treated as ends.

Thus if this experience points to a certain abnormality of condition
in the peripheral, psycho-physical regions of the soul, Catherine’s
attitude towards it, and towards the whole question occasioned by
it, has got a massive depth of sanity about it, perhaps unattainable
by, certainly untested in, the always and simply, even peripherally,
healthy soul.


3. _Shifting of her burial-place._

And in her Will of March 1509 we find traces of a certain weakening of
her former ample business capacity, and of her vigilance, perseverance,
and balance, in spite of friendly pressure or criticism, with regard
to matters of practical import. For, as to her general incapacity for
business, the Will contains a clause exempting Marabotto from all
future challenge of his administration of her monies, up to the date
of the making of this Will. And this clause finds its explanation in
the admission of the _Vita_, with regard to her life during these
last years, that, owing to the mysterious and shifting nature of her
infirmity, “there was confusion in governing her,” “confusion not
on her own part, but on that of those who served her,”[168] words
which will grow still clearer in our account of her last four months.
For this state of her health must have rendered the administration
of her affairs by another both necessary and difficult. And as to
the diminution of her vigilance and perseverance in matters of not
directly spiritual or moral import, we have here, for the first time,
a departure from her resolution, emphatically expressed in the Wills
and Codicil of 1498, 1503, 1506, of being buried beside her husband.
She now orders herself to be buried in the Church of San Nicolò in
Boschetto, and that so much is to be spent on the funeral as shall seem
fit to Don Marabotto.

Three points should here be borne in mind. For one thing, Catherine
had a long-standing affection for that beautifully situated
Pilgrimage-Church, partly no doubt from associations dating back to
her summer _villegiatura_ days at the neighbouring Prà, and partly,
probably, from memories connected with her sister Limbania, since, as
we have already seen, Limbania’s Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie
was the joint foundation of the two Genoese Monasteries of San Teodoro
fuore le Mura and of San Nicolò in Boschetto. Limbania had died in
that Convent in 1502, and Catherine had, in her Codicil of 1503, left
a small sum for mortuary Masses for herself to the Monastery of San
Nicolò.

But, next, it was doubtless the growing conviction as to her sanctity
amongst her immediate friends, and their desire to keep her grave
and remains, as an eventual place and object of veneration, distinct
from any others, perhaps specially from those of her husband, whose
defective reputation might otherwise damage or delay the growth of such
a cultus of his wife, which was the determining cause of this change
in the place of sepulture. These friends were able to prevail, no
doubt because her interest and determination in such matters had become
weakened by ill-health of now thirteen years’ duration. And they will
have fixed upon this place some four English miles away, partly because
it happened to be one she loved, but also because thus no question of
separating her remains from those of Giuliano would formally arise.
Her later Codicil will prove the presence of both these motives, and
Catherine’s unconsciousness as to the situation, and the vagueness of
her acquiescence.

And, finally, we must note that, if this action of her _entourage_
offends our present-day tastes and susceptibilities, it was yet
thoroughly in accordance with a quite hoary tradition and feeling in
such matters, and was in no sense an idea special to, or originated
by, this group of persons; and again, that the four Protectors of the
Hospital (the trustees and executors of the Will), her sole surviving
brother Lorenzo (the residuary legatee), and above all her closest,
great-souled friend Vernazza (one of the six witnesses), are all
parties to the pious stratagem, and share its responsibility with
Marabatto.


4. _The “scintilla”-experience; spiritual refreshment derived from a
picture._

We have next an important group of experiences and convictions in
November 1509. “On the 11th November 1509, there came upon her an
insupportable fire of infinite love; and she declared that there had
been shown to her one single spark (scintilla) of Pure Love, and that
this had been but for a short moment; and that, had it lasted even a
little longer, she would have expired because of its great force. She
could hardly eat, nor speak so as to be heard, in consequence of this
penetrating wound of love that she had received in her heart.”[169]

Few events of her life have left such profound traces, so many
echoes and waves and wavelets as it were, throughout both her
authentic sayings and the various secondary and tertiary imitations,
re-castings, and expansions of her original account as has this
scintilla-experience. I will here translate the nine varying
impressions and exclamations which, proceeding from different minds
and different dates, have, all but one, been worked up by the _Vita_
into a single paragraph, which, by its very multitude of flickerings
as to meaning and of experimentations as to form, gives us a striking
picture of the deep and many-sided influence of this single event, so
short in its clock-time duration. “This creature, all lost in her own
self, found her true self in one instant in God.” “Although she reputed
herself to be very poor, yet she remained rich in the divine love.”
“She, knowing the grace and operation to be all from God, remained lost
in herself, and living only in God.” “She gave her free-will to God,
and God then restored it to her.” “She gave her free-will to God, and
God thereupon worked with its means.” “O the great wonder, to see a
man established in the midst of so many miseries, and yet God having
so great a care of him! All tongues are incapable of expressing it,
all intellects of understanding it.” “That man becomes foolish in the
eyes of the world, to whom Thou, O Lord God, dost manifest even but the
slightest spark of Thine unspeakable Love.” “Thou, O God, desirest to
exalt man, and to make him as though another God, by means of love.”
Of later date or type: “In God she saw all the operations, by means of
which He had caused her to merit (in the past).” And of still later,
clearly secondary, character: “God showed her in one instant the
succession of His (future) operation, as though she would have to die
of a great martyrdom.”[170]

And this great experience of hers led on to a scene which, whilst
emphasizing the psycho-physical effect, occasion or concomitant of
such spiritual experiences, also gives us the strongest instance of
her impressionableness to pictures in particular. “Finding herself
in such ardour, she felt herself compelled to turn to a figure of the
Woman of Samaria at the well with her Lord; and in her extreme distress
Catherine addressed Him thus: ‘O Lord, I pray Thee, give me a little
drop of this water, which of old Thou didst give to the Samaritan
woman, since I can no more bear so great a fire.’ And suddenly, in
that instant, there was given her a little drop of that divine water;
and by it she was refreshed within and without, and she had rest for
some appreciable time.”[171] But, above all, this experience and its
precursor were, if not the actual beginning, at least the culminating
point in the experiences or projections which led to or articulated
her doctrine on Purgatory. In a later chapter I hope to trace the
connection between those experiences and this doctrine. Here we must
add two other vivid interior experiences and convictions of hers which
are placed by the _Vita_, no doubt rightly, in direct succession to,
and in more or less connection with, the great “scintilla”-operation,
although neither of them appears amongst the images and conceptions
which make up the _Trattato del Purgatorio_.

“One day” (she recounted this herself) “she appeared to herself to
abide suspended in mid-air. And the spiritual part wanted to attach
itself to heaven; but her other part wished to attach itself to earth:
yet neither the one nor the other managed to become possessed of its
object, and simply abode thus in mid-air, without achieving its desire.
And after abiding thus for a long time, the part which was drawing her
to heaven seemed to her to be gaining the upper hand (over the other
part), and, little by little, the spiritual part forcibly drew her
upwards, so that at every moment she saw herself moving further and
further away from earth. And although this at first seemed to be a
strange thing to the part that was being drawn, and this part was ill
content to be thus forced; yet when it had been so far removed, as no
more to be able to see the earth, then it began to lose its earthly
instinct and affection, and to perceive and to relish the things which
were relished by the spiritual part. And this spiritual part never
ceased from drawing it heavenward. And so at last these two parts came
to a common accord.”[172] And again on another occasion: “The soul is
so desirous of departing from the body to unite itself with God, that
its body appears to it a veritable Purgatory, which keeps it distant
from its true object.”[173]

This group of experiences straightway enforces some important spiritual
laws. For one thing, this scintilla-experience, since her Conversion
the deepest of her life, is clearly also the richest and most
complex,--witness the numerous, mutually supplementary or critical,
attempts at analysis furnished by even her immediate companions. And
this experience is only simple in the sense in which white light, which
combines all the prismatic colours, or a living healthy human body,
composed of numberless constituents, is simple.

And next, nothing indicates that this experience was of a character
essentially different from that of her older contemplations; and
everything appears to show that it was, substantially, a grace
addressed to, and an act performed by, her spiritual nature,--her
intelligence and free will, God’s Spirit stimulating and sustaining
hers in a quite exceptional degree, and hence less than ever weakening
or supplanting this her spirit’s action. It was as much a gift of
herself by herself to God, as if it had not been a pure grace from Him;
and yet her very power and wish and determination to give herself,
were rendered possible and became actual through that pure prevenient,
accompanying and subsequent gift of God.

Again, it is certain that either there was no clear mental scheme,
reasoning, or picture during the experience, or that, if there was,
it consisted of a spacial simultaneity rather than of a temporal
succession, and that it showed her, if her own soul at all, then that
soul in its most universally human, typical aspects and relations.
In no case was there anything historical or prophetical, strictly
biographical about it.

And then we have, even though she could give no kind of definite
account of it, the most solid reasons for accepting this experience as
genuine, wholesome, and valuable. For she evidently fully believed in
it herself; and we shall see how clearly and readily she continued,
even after this experience, to distinguish between wholesome and
mental, and _maladif_ and simply psychic, states of abstraction.
Again it became the occasion and material of most deep and fruitful
spiritual doctrine; whereas nothing is more empty and unsuggestive
than are the bare, brute “facts” of all merely nervous or hysterical
hallucinations. It also demonstrably strengthened her will for the
last deep sufferings and sacrifices yet to be gone through, and no
doubt added a fresh stimulus to her already profound influence over
Vernazza, and pricked him onwards on his career of the most solid,
heroic philanthropy and self-sacrifice. And yet we can see that her
psycho-physical organism is now functionally weak and ill. For great
physical exhaustion now follows upon an experience substantially the
same as those which used to strengthen her so markedly even in physical
respects.

As to the scene with the picture, we again get a case not unlike the
odour of Marabotto’s hand, in so much as here too the experience hovers
between the mental and physical, and there is a sensible impression as
from a physical substance with reference to a Person,--this taste of
a “divine water” moving here on to Christ, to God, the Living Water,
as that smell of sweetness moves on to the “Living Bread,” Christ, and
God. It is, unfortunately, impossible to identify that picture, which
may well have been a fresco-painting in some building or passage of the
Hospital, since destroyed, or on some extant wall, white-washed since
those days. The vivid picturings of the soul in mid-air, and of the
soul in the purgatory of its body, will be considered in connection
with her psycho-physical states and her doctrine.

But before leaving this November experience, we must give two
significant conversations held by her with Vernazza at the time, and
which have been no doubt handed down to us by himself. “One day,
speaking of this” (the scintilla-) “event with a spiritual person
(_Religioso_) she called it ‘a giddiness’ (_vertigine_). But that
person said to her: ‘Mother, I beg of you that you will yourself
select a person who may happen to suit your mind (_soddisfaccia alla
mente vestra_), and will narrate to this person the graces which God
has granted to you, so that, when you come to die, these graces may
not remain hidden and unknown, and an opportunity for God’s praise
and glory may not thus be lost.’ And she then answered that she was
entirely willing (_ben contenta_), if this be pleasing to her tender
Love; and that, in that case, she would not choose another person than
himself, although she was convinced that it was impossible to describe
even a small fragment of such interior experiences as occurred between
God and her soul; and that as to exterior things, few or none had taken
place in her case.” Here again we have evidence as to her habit of
making light of and transcending all psycho-physical phenomena, however
striking and mysterious; and we get a positive authorization conferred
by herself upon Vernazza, such as is claimed by no other contributor to
the _Vita_.

And “speaking with him some days later, she said: ‘Son, I have had a
certain prick of conscience, of which I will tell you. The other day,
when you told me that I might possibly remain dead some day during one
of those giddinesses, there seemed to arise in me, at that moment, a
feeling of joy, a profound aspiration which said: ”O, if that hour
would but come!“ And then this feeling suddenly ceased. Now I declare
to you, that I do not wish that in this matter there should be any
glimpse (scintilla) of a desire of my own for earth or heaven, or for
any other created thing; but that I wish to leave all things to the
disposition of God.’ Then this person answered, that there was no
occasion for her to have a prick of conscience, because, although joy
had awaked in her mind, and a sudden exclamation had occurred there,
at the mention of the word ‘death,’ yet that nothing of this had
proceeded from the will, nor had it been endorsed by the reason; but
that it had proceeded solely from the instinct of the pleasure-loving
soul (_anima_), which ever, according to its nature, tends to such an
end. And how the proof that this was a correct account, lay in this,
that her prick of conscience had not really penetrated to the depths of
her heart, but had remained on the surface, at the same slight depth
at which the movement of joy had remained. And she confessed that the
matter really stood thus, and remained satisfied.”[174]

Here three points are of interest. I take her impulse of deep longing
to die in one of those trances, to have arisen, not simply from joy
at the thought of dying, but from joy at the prospect of dying of
joy,--of dying with the joy fixed in that moment in the soul for
ever. For heaven itself appears here not as a synonym for God, but as
a creature, as the summing up of infinite and endless consolation of
all right kinds, spiritual and psycho-physical. And it is this that
makes her scruple thoroughly understandable, and but one more instance
of her virile fight with all direct attachment to the consequences and
concomitants of devotedness.--And next we should note her deep trust
in the spiritual experience and wisdom of Vernazza, the layman and
lawyer, some twenty-five years her junior; and her asking his advice
on a matter which we would readily suppose her to reserve for Don
Marabotto, who by now had been her Confessor and Spiritual Adviser for
many years.--And lastly, the depth and delicacy of Vernazza’s analysis
are most striking, with their clear perception of the various levels
and degrees of true selfhood and volition within the human soul: she
had really had neither a full will, nor a deliberate wish, nor indeed
any penetrating, spontaneous reproach of conscience; she had, in fact,
been suffering from a scruple, and he was required, and was able, to
make her see that this had been the case.


5. _Catherine’s sense of intense cold, and her attitude towards Don
Marabotto._

And in December 1509 and January 1510 we come across a group of
experiences and actions, in some respects different from, and
supplementary of, the set just concluded. For “in the month of December
she suffered from great cold,”--I take this cold to have been, at least
partially, special to her state, and not to have proceeded primarily
from the winter temperature,--“but she paid no attention to it.” “And
behold one night there came so great an attack (_assalto_) upon her,
that she could not conceal it. There was a great heaving of the body,
much bile was evacuated, and the nose bled. And she then sent for her
Confessor, and said to him: ‘Father, it seems to me that I must die,
because of the many weakenings of various sorts (_accidenti_) that have
happened to me.’” “And this attack (_assalto_) lasted for about three
hours,” “her body trembling like a leaf.” “And then her body became
quiet again, but was now so broken and weak that it was necessary to
give her minced chicken to revive her; and a good many days had to pass
before she returned to her (latter-day) vigour.”[175]

And “on the 10th of January 1510, she appeared determined to see her
Confessor no more, either as to help and comfort for her soul or as
to her bodily health. It seemed to her that he was too indulgent to
herself, in her sayings and doings. But the fact was, that he saw it
to be necessary that she should do all that her instinct prompted her
to say or do; and it would indeed have been well-nigh impossible to
force her to act against these interior movements of hers. Yet since
she was herself in cause, she did not acknowledge such necessities
(_ordinazioni_); rather these actions of hers appeared to her but as
so many disordered doings, and she went forcing herself to try and
not give trouble to those who were good enough to put up with her
(_chi la comportava_).--And when night came, she locked herself up
alone into a separate room, refusing food or conversation or comfort
from any one. But after a while she had to come out, with a view
to rendering a certain service, and her Confessor managed to slip
into the room unobserved and to hide himself there. And she, having
returned and locked herself in, and thinking herself quite alone,
said with a sobbing voice to her Lord: ‘O Lord, what wouldest Thou
have me do further in this world? I neither see nor hear, nor eat
nor sleep; I do not know what I do or what I say. I feel as though I
were a dead thing. There is no creature that understands me; I find
myself lonely, unknown, poor, naked, strange, and different from the
rest of the world; and hence I know not any more how to live with (my
fellow-) creatures upon earth.’ These and such-like words she spoke
so piteously, that her Confessor could bear it no longer; and he
discovered himself, and came up to and spoke to her. And God gave him
grace, so that she remained comforted in mind and body by his words,
and was in fair health for a good many days after.”[176]

Nevertheless “her Confessor, since his continual intercourse and close
familiarity with Catherine gave occasion to murmurs on the part of
some who did not fully understand his special work and its necessity,
left her and was absent for three days” (probably shortly after the
scene just related), “for the purpose of testing that work of his,
and seeing whether it was indeed all from God, and thus to escape
all scruple in the matter. But when, three days later, he returned
to her house and had learnt and considered the various accidents and
incidents which had occurred meanwhile, he was so entirely satisfied
with the evidence afforded by experiment, that he lost all scruple in
the matter, and indeed regretted having made the trial, because of the
great distress which she had suffered from it.” It will have been on
this occasion that she said to him: “I seem to see that God has given
to you this one care of myself, and hence that you should not attend to
anything else. For now I can no longer support alone so many exterior
and interior oppressions (_assedi_). When you leave me, I go lamenting
about the house, saying that you are cruel and do not understand my
extreme necessity; for if you did, you would pay greater attention to
it.”[177]

And it will have been later on again, in February and March, that she
intimated, during two of her violent attacks (on the first occasion by
signs, on the second by words), her impression that she would succumb,
and her wish to receive Extreme Unction. But Don Marabotto correctly
judged that she would safely get through these seizures, and the
anointing was put off for the present.[178]

This group is again interesting. For it gives us evidence as to
how dependent this character and career of the rarest loneliness
and independence had now become upon human help and sympathy; and
lets us see how illness had now introduced an excessive suddenness,
absoluteness, and shiftingness into her feelings and minor actions,
and an occasional slight querulousness into her remarks. It shows us
her old social, altruistic instincts and standard still at work within
her; for she still suffers from the consciousness, whenever she is
thrown back upon herself, of being different from other people; she
still longs to attend to the wants of others, regrets the trouble
she gives them, and feels grateful for the services they render; and
she still busies herself, in the reduced measure now possible to
her, with services of her own to others,--a “certain service,” which
she had to render, had sufficed to break through her self-imposed
seclusion. It lets us see how watchful against and suspicious of
self, and of what could flatter and indulge it, she still remained;
and how independent her judgment continued, even with regard to her
Confessor. And this her judgment we shall have good reason to hold to
have been remarkably well-grounded, in so far as this, that had only
Marabotto possessed a deeper insight into her psycho-physical state
and less of a determination to treat all her states and impulses as
equally solid and spiritual, or at least as equally to be yielded to,
he could have helped her more; and she would then, thus helped, have
been able, even now, fully to resist or to give way, in proportion to
the healthiness or the morbidness of the attack. And finally we see
how truly serviceable and necessary, and indeed repeatedly right where
her own estimate was wrong, was the help and sympathy and judgment
of her Confessor; and how difficult, entirely unselfish, and devoted
was his action and attitude. It is interesting to note that Catherine
was probably always right in her instinct as to matters directly
affecting herself, where the will came in, or could be made to come
in; and that she was wrong only in such a point of mere physical fact
and determinism as whether or not, and how long, her physical strength
would hold out.


6. _Events from January to May 1510._

I will here try and put together, in their actual succession from
January to May 1510, the chief psycho-physical phenomena and their
parallel utilizations, together with such mental and spiritual
experiences and actions as seem to have been only quite indirectly,
or not all, occasioned by her state of health. In a later chapter I
propose to study all this health matter in some detail. Here I would
simply warn the reader against treating, with certainly most of her
chroniclers, these psycho-physical phenomena as separately and directly
spiritual or miraculous or ethically significant. Found alone, they
would now, on the contrary, directly suggest simply nervous disorder of
some kind or other, a thing which, in itself, is always an evil. Their
interest and spiritual importance arises for us entirely from their
predominantly mental qualities; from their appearance in a person of
such powerful mind and large and efficient character; and from their
splendidly ethico-religious utilization by that same person.

On one day “she had an impression (‘wound,’ _ferita_) which was so
great, that she lost her speech and sight, and abode in this manner
some three hours. She made signs with her hands, of feeling as it were
red-hot pincers attacking her heart and other interior parts. But for
all this, she did not lose her full consciousness (_intelletto_).”
This was the second occasion on which she indicated her wish to be
anointed.[179] On another day “it was impossible to keep her in bed:
she seemed like a creature placed in a great flame of fire, and it was
impossible to touch her skin, because of the acute pain which she felt
from any such touch.”[180]

A little later on “she abode in so great a peace and interior
contentment that she was” in all respects “considerably relieved and
reinvigorated (_ristorata_). But she did not long remain in this
condition. For very soon she was in a state of interior nudity and
aridity, and she prayed: ‘Never hitherto, O my Lord, have I asked
Thee for anything for myself: now I pray Thee with all my might, that
Thou mayest not will to separate me from Thee. Thou well knowest, O
Lord, that I could not bear this.’ And to her disciples she said, in
connection with this desolation: ‘If a man were to take a soul from
Paradise, how do you think such a soul would feel? You might give it
all the pleasures in the world, and as much more as you can imagine:
and yet all would be but Hell, because of the memory of that divine
union’ (formerly possessed and now lost).”[181]

Again a little later on “she had another attack (_assalto_), when all
her body trembled, especially her right shoulder. It was impossible
to move her from her bed; she did not eat, drank next to nothing, and
did not sleep.”[182] On another day, “she had another attack,”--this
was the occasion of her third indication of a wish to receive Extreme
Unction,--“a spasm in the throat and mouth, so that she could not
speak, nor open her eyes, nor keep her breath except with extreme
difficulty.” “They applied cupping-glasses, with a view to aiding
her to find her breath and to regain speech, yet these helped but
little.”[183] For another day we are told that “in her flesh were
certain concavities, as though it were dough, and the thumb had been
pressed into it. And she called out in a loud voice, because of the
great pain.”[184]

On another day “her pains made her call out as loudly as she could,
and she dragged herself about on her bed. And those that stood by were
dumfounded, at seeing a body, which appeared to be healthy, in such
a tormented state. And then she would laugh, speak as one in health,
and say to the others, not to be sorrowful on her account, since she
was very contented. And this “set of attacks” lasted four days; she
then had a little rest; and, after this, those attacks returned as
before.”[185]

This group is in so far particularly difficult, as we have to try and
decide whether, and if so how far, these pains of hers were primarily
psychical, and, in some way and degree, originally, and by force
of long habits of concentrated religious thinking and picturing,
suggested, or at least stimulated, by the mind itself; or whether these
pains were primarily physical, although evidently only functional and
preponderantly nervous. For on the answer to that question depends,
if not our selection from amongst, at least our interpretation of,
the largely contradictory, successively “doctored,” and more or less
violently schematized evidence, of which the above passages give the
most characteristic and primitive parts. If it was the mind itself
which, unconsciously to its owner, suggested these pains, then we can
and must accept, as quite contemporary and indeed fully exact, those
passages which make her peace and even sensible consolation arise
during the same moments as, and in exact proportion to, the presence
of the pains. If, on the other hand, the pains arose independently
of the subconscious mind, and were merely mastered by the conscious
intelligence and will, then it seems reasonable to assume that we
have here, as is certainly the case in other matters and places in
the _Vita_, an ideal foreshortening, juxtaposition, and unification
of what, in the actual experience, occurred more lengthily and
successively.

It is certainly remarkable in this connection, that, whereas we have
had a clearly marked case of mental, spiritual desolation, outside of
one of these attacks, it is at least very difficult to find anything
certainly of the kind during one of them; indeed the juxtaposition of,
not simply profound spiritual peace, but of sensible, also psychic
or quasi-psychic, consolation with those pains, is so constant and
apparently spontaneous, that secondary, or at least schematic and _a
priori_, reporting seems to have been at work rather in the passages
which affirm the excessiveness of those pains, than in those which
insist that those pains were, so to speak, _not_ pains. All her own
authentic sayings leave the impression of immense psycho-spiritual
sensitiveness, of much actual mental and emotional suffering as well as
joy, but not, I think, of purely physical suffering. “I find so much
contentment on the part of my spirit and so much peace in my mind, that
tongue could not tell nor reason comprehend it; but on the part of my
humanity” (her psycho-physical organism) “all my pains are, so to say,
not pains,” she says, shortly after a particularly violent attack,
with four “accidents.” And a contributor declares that the joy and the
torment ever arose together. It is true that another passage says that,
during such attacks, “her disciples, seeing her suffer so much, desired
that she should expire, so as no more to have to see her in such great
and continuous torment”; but then this desire of theirs was evidently
rather a sympathetic feeling than a deliberate judgment, for, once
she has got over the attack, all this desire of theirs disappears as
rapidly as it had come.[186]


III. CATHERINE’S HISTORY FROM MAY TO SEPTEMBER 9, 1510.


1. _Catherine and the Physicians._

It is at the end of the preceding months that we are told how
“the Physician” (possibly the Hospital House-Surgeon) “attempted
to administer medicine to her. But it gave rise to such repeated
‘accidents’ (vomitings), that she all but died of it, and remained very
weak.”[187]

“And four months before she died,” hence in mid-May, “many physicians
were called together. And they saw and examined the patient, but
failed to find any trace of bodily infirmity, in spite of the care
and attention bestowed by them on the case. And she declared her
conviction that her infirmity was not of a kind requiring physicians
or bodily physic. But on the physicians persevering and ordering
her, she obediently took all that they prescribed, although with
great difficulty and to her hurt. Until at last those same physicians
concluded that there was no remedy within the art of medicine
applicable to the case, and that the infirmity was supernatural.”[188]

“But now there supervened, on his return from England, an excellent
Genoese physician, Maestro Giovan Battista Boerio, who, for many
years, had been in the service of the English King, Henry VII. And
Boerio visited Catherine, and warned her to beware of giving scandal
by refusing medical treatment. And she, in return, assured him that it
grieved her much if she scandalized any one; and that she was prepared
to use any remedy for her ailment, if such could be found.” And indeed
“joy arose within her, at the hope of being cured by him. But in the
following night much” psycho-physical “pain and trouble came upon her,”
and “she then reproved her natural self (_umanità_), saying: ‘Thou
sufferest this, because thou didst rejoice without (just) cause.’” Yet
after about three weeks’ trial of every kind of remedy, a trial which
left her as it found her, Boerio abandoned the task, but “henceforward
held Catherine in esteem and reverence, calling her ‘Mother,’ and often
visiting her.”[189]

Here we have an interesting group of facts. For one thing, we know how
King Henry “had for years been visited by regular fits of the gout;
his strength visibly wasted away, and every spring the most serious
apprehensions were entertained of his life.” “He had also pains in the
chest and difficulty of respiration.” And, “in the spring of 1509 the
King sank under the violence of the disease.”[190] And thus Boerio
will, a year after the death of his royal master, have been called
in to the sick-bed of the Viceroy’s daughter, not simply as a court
physician or as a generally skilful doctor, but as a man known to have
had long experience of a case which prima facie was not all unlike
Catherine’s.

Then it is impossible not to feel throughout these and other passages
of the _Vita_ which are concerned with physicians, a curious
combination of contradictory feelings. There is reproof of the doctors’
presumption in venturing to begin by treating her illness as though
it were a simply natural one; and there is the proud pleasure at thus
getting, through the breakdown of this their presumptuous undertaking,
professional testimony to the supernatural character of her infirmity.
And the two motives lead to the self-contradictory over-emphasizing
both of the Physicians’ moral worth and finality of testimony at the
end of each experience, and of their rationalistic rashness in being
willing to try again, a rashness assumed to be apparent to every one
but themselves before each new attempt. For they must be represented
as worthy and skilful men; else what value has their testimony? And
their action must be intrinsically foolish from the outset; else what
becomes of the transparently and separately supernatural character of
her illness?[191]

And then we can still see fairly clearly that Catherine does not share
the views of practically all her attendants, and of certainly all the
later contributors to and revisers of the _Vita_. For even now the book
still leaves intact the passages which show her as hoping to be cured
by Boerio, and as then condemning herself for having rejoiced without
cause,--evidently, without supernatural justification; as prepared
to believe that the physicians might be able to find an appropriate
remedy, and as willingly trying the remedies they actually offer her;
and as indeed declaring her doubt whether any physic would do her
any good, yet nowhere announcing a conviction as to the directly and
separately supernatural character of her illness. “Her attendants,”
says the obviously most authentic continuation of the passage
concerning the cupping-glasses given further back, “let these attacks
come and go, with as little damage as possible. Her body had to be and
was sustained without the aid of medicine, and solely by means of great
care and great vigilance.”[192]


2. _Catherine and Don Carenzio, Argentina, and Ettore Vernazza._

It will have been the end of June, or the beginning of July, when
these medical experiments ceased. But before them (on March 11 and
twice in April), and again three times during them (in May and June),
monies were paid, in Catherine’s name, by Don Giacomo Carenzio, now
resident as Rettore in the Hospital, in the matter of the granting
of Indulgences to the Church attached to the Hospital. And although
this affair, occurring thus so late on in her illness, in which we
have already found her not always to have dominated the plans of her
attendants, cannot well be pressed as necessarily characteristic of
her, yet I take it to be quite likely that she still took some active
part in the matter.[193]

Catherine certainly still attended to business, even two months later;
for, on August 3, Vernazza drew up a Codicil in her presence “in the
bedroom of Argentina del Sale,” says the document itself. Since the
Inventory, still extant, of the things found in Catherine’s rooms at
the time of her death, gives a list of the bedclothes of only two beds,
and these two beds are then both in the same room, and the one bed is
Catherine’s, and the other is that of the _famiglia_ (the servant)
Argentina: it is clear that, for at least the last six weeks of her
life, Catherine had only one person sleeping in her little house with
her, and that this person was the navvy Marco’s little widow. I take
it, with Vallebona, that the room was really Catherine’s ordinary
bedroom; but that, as Argentina now slept there as regularly as her
mistress herself, Catherine preferred, whether from humility or
affection (the latter motive seems the more probable), to think of the
room as belonging to Argentina.[194]

For some reason unknown to us, Vernazza, Catherine’s closest friend,
must have left Genoa soon after drawing up this Codicil. For he did not
draw up or witness her final Codicil of September 12, although, when in
Genoa at all, he now lived close by, and although this final Codicil
but gave effect to the plan regarding her sepulture which underlay the
change introduced into the Will of March 1509, a Will which had been
witnessed by himself. And, as we shall see, he was absent, indeed far
away (_lontano_), from her death-bed, some six weeks after the date at
which we have now arrived. I think we can only explain this departure
by assuming that already now, before his inspirer’s death, his zeal and
activity had expanded beyond the limits of the Genoese Republic; and
that, dying as she already was, and devoted to her as he ever remained,
he nevertheless (since there was now so little that he could hope to
do for her own person, and there was so much to do elsewhere in the
way of developing and applying her spirit and teachings) now rode off
to Venice or to Rome, as we know him to have done, so often and for so
long, during the fourteen remaining years of his life. And we have in
this a fact peculiarly characteristic of these two expansive souls,--of
the influence of the one, the frail woman, dying in her little
sick-room, and of the execution of her world-embracing aspirations by
the other, the strong man, battling, often at the risk of his very
life, for the poor and oppressed, outside, on the great trysting-field
of men’s passions and requirements.


3. _Psycho-physical condition and its utilization, August 10 to 27._

But Catherine, lying in her sick-room, suffered on August 10 from one
of her great burnings. “And next day, whilst her body was still in pain
and trouble, God drew her mind upwards to Himself. And she fixed her
eyes on the ceiling, and remained thus almost immovable for an hour,
and spoke not but laughed joyously. And when she had returned to her
more ordinary consciousness, she said this one thing only: ‘O Lord, do
with me whatsoever Thou wilt.’”[195]

On August 15, she, “when about to communicate, addressed many
beautiful words to the Blessed Sacrament, so that every one present
was moved to tears.”[196] During the following day and night she
suffered so greatly, that “all considered she would certainly die. She
asked,”--this was the third or even fourth time,--“for Extreme Unction,
and” this time “it was given her, and she received it with great
devotion.”

“On the day following,” the 17th, “she was in a state of jubilation
of heart (_giubilo di cuore_), which manifested itself exteriorly in
merry laughter. And, having been asked as to the cause, she said that
she had seen various most beautiful, merry, and joyous countenances, so
that she had been unable to refrain from laughing. And this impression
continued throughout several days, during which she appeared to be
improved in health.”[197] But on August 22 or 23, “she again had a
day of much heat and trouble. She remained maimed (paralyzed) in her
right hand and in one finger of the left hand. And then she remained as
though dead for about sixteen hours.”[198]

In the night of the 23rd or 24th (Feast of St. Bartholomew) she had “a
great attack in mind and body; and being unable to speak, she made the
sign of the Cross upon her heart. And, later on, she was understood to
have been molested by a diabolical temptation.”[199]

On the 25th “she was in great weakness. And she caused her windows to
be opened, so as to be able to see the sky. And, as the night came
on, she had many candles lit; and she chanted, as well as she could,
the ‘Veni, Creator Spiritus.’ And when she had finished she fixed her
eyes upon the sky, and remained thus an hour and a half, making many
gestures with her hands and eyes. And when she had resumed her ordinary
consciousness (_quando fù ritornata in sè_), she said repeatedly:
‘Let us go’; and then added: ‘No more earth, no more earth.’ And her
body remained greatly shaken from this contemplation (_vista_).” And
on August 27 “she saw herself as though bereft of her body and of its
animating soul, and her spirit alone in God above. And after this she
addressed those present and said: ‘Let only those come in who may be
necessary.’”[200]

This particular group is specially interesting. For it shows us
Catherine’s love of the large and expansive, of the spiritually simple
and interior, and of the supernatural and transcendent in her look-out
into the open; in her vivid apprehension of her spirit bereft of all
things except the Supreme Spirit, that spirit’s native element and
home; and in her gaze into the starlit Italian August sky above. And it
gives us indications, elsewhere so rare in her life, of her attachment
to the visible, audible, tangible vehicles and expressions of religion,
as so many helps and occasions of its immanence in our minds and
hearts, in her signing her heart with the sign of the Cross, her having
the candles lit and her chanting a definite traditional Church hymn,
and in her fourth demand of Extreme Unction and devout reception of
it. It is also noticeable how vivid and yet how undefined are her
impressions of those countenances, since neither she herself anywhere,
nor even her chroniclers in this place, explicitly identify them with
Angels; and how still more general and indefinite remains the “diabolic
temptation,” since in this case, only when it was over, was she
“understood” to have been thus tempted. Indeed any directly diabolical
temptation would be profoundly uncharacteristic of her special call
and way: all through the records of her life and teaching it is the
selfish, claimful Self that she fears “more than a demon,” “worse than
the devil”; she is, in a very true sense, too busy watching, fighting,
ignoring, supplanting Self, and ever putting, keeping, and replacing
God, Love, in Self’s stead, to give or find occasion for what, in this
her immensely strenuous inner life, would have been a remoter conflict.


4. _Persistent self-knowledge and excessive impressionableness._

The _Vita_ next gives us five most vivid but undated paragraphs as to
her health. I will take them together with such other dated occurrences
as will bring us down to September 10.

There is first a characteristic general fact, and a probably often
repeated remark of Catherine’s. “At times she would have no pulse,
and at other times she would have a good one; often she would seem to
sleep; and from this state she would awake, at one time completely
herself again, and at other times so limp, oppressed, and shattered
as to be unable to move. And those that attended on her did not know
how to distinguish one state from the other. And hence, on coming to,
she would sometimes say, ‘Why did you let me remain in this quietude,
from which I have almost died?’”[201] Thus Catherine’s attendants
are helplessly at sea concerning her psycho-physical condition, and
they identify, and directly supernaturalize, each and all of her
successive and simultaneous states. But Catherine herself remains
clearly conscious of different levels and values in these states: of
normal, grace-impelled, freely-willed, strength-bringing contemplations
and quietudes; and of sickly, weakening, more or less hysterical,
lassitudes and failures. And she is thus aware of the deep difference
between the two sets of states, that are externally so similar, at
the very time of experiencing the one or the other of them; and is
conscious, at the same time, both of being unable, by her own unaided
will, to give effect, from within, to this her own knowledge, and of
being able and willing, indeed anxious, to follow the lead and the
pressure of wisely discriminating will-acts, proceeding from without,
and, as it were, meeting her own wishes half-way, and thus turning them
into effective willings. She herself has still the knowledge, but, now
she is ill, she has no more the power. They have the power, but not the
knowledge. And she knows all this, through God’s illumination working
in and upon her own long and rich experiences, sound good sense, severe
self-detachment, close self-observation, and incorruptible veracity of
mind; and she knows it in spite of, and in direct opposition to, the
far more flattering misconceptions, and entirely well-meant and sincere
opinions (representative of the traditional and contemporary consensus
of view on these obscure matters) of the servants, lawyers, physicians,
relatives, and priests about her. The incident is closely parallel to
her scruple as to Marabotto’s spoiling her; and one more similar detail
will be mentioned later on.

But next, we get now abundant evidence that she was ill indeed. There
is the rapidly shifting fancifulness of the senses of taste and smell,
together with an ever-increasing difficulty of swallowing. “She would,
at times, be so thirsty as to feel capable of drinking all the water of
the sea, and yet she could not, as a matter of fact, manage to swallow
even one little drop of water.” “Seeing on one occasion a melon, and
conceiving a great desire to eat it, she had it given to her. But
hardly had she a piece of it in her mouth, but she rejected it with
great disgust.” “She often bathed her mouth with water, and then
suddenly she would reject it.” “To-day the smell of wine would please
her, and she would bathe her hands and face in it, with great relish;
and to-morrow she would dislike it so much, as to be unable any longer
to see or smell it in her room.”[202] And, in strict conformity with
this detail, I find an entry in the Hospital account-book for this
time, of money disbursed to the account of Catherine, for a cask of
wine for her use.[203]

Yet her biographers are evidently only stating the simple truth
when they declare that she continued to receive Holy Communion with
ease and safety; for not only are there three quite unsuspicious
passages, descriptive of her receptions of It, under most difficult
circumstances; but we find, on counting up the incidental and bare
mentions of her Communions, that, during the fourteen days from
September 2 to 15, her death-day, she communicated ten times, and one
or two further Communions may have been accidentally omitted.

There is, again, an occasional abnormal sensitiveness to colours,
and their mental connotations, at least in connection with red.
“On September 2, a Physician, a friend of hers,”--no doubt Maestro
Boerio,--“came to visit her, robed in his Doctor’s ‘scarlet,’” as was
no doubt the custom when visiting patients of quality. “And she bore
this sight for a little, so as not to hurt his feelings. But when
she could bear it no longer, she said to him: ‘Sir, I can no further
bear the sight of this gown of yours, because of what it represents
(suggests) to me.’ The Physician departed at once and returned clad
in another,” a black “gown.” The Chronicler, probably Boerio’s
priest-son, is no doubt substantially right in interpreting this as
meaning that the scarlet suggested to her a seraph aflame with divine
love. Yet I find, from the inventory of her final possessions, that
she possessed, and doubtless used, among her bedclothes a vermilion
silk coverlet and a vermilion blanket,--an undoubted indication
of her love for this colour.[204] These two vicissitudes of her
colour-affection no doubt mutually supplement and explain each other:
when not over-impressionable and not already stimulated to the full
of her capacity, this colour would suggest her central doctrine and
experience, and would be pleasurable; when over-impressionable and
already stimulated as much as, then and there, she could bear and
utilize, the colour would but strain and disturb her.

And, finally, there are sensations and impressions of extreme heat and
cold, and excessive sensibility or insensibility in tactual matters.
“At one time she was cold; and at another, burning hot.” “On one day,”
early in September, “she suffered great cold in her right arm, followed
by acute pain”; and on September 7, “her body felt all on fire; and,
since it seemed to her as though the whole world were aflame, she asked
whether this were the case, and had her windows opened, so as to be
reassured as to the real facts.”[205]

“At times she would be sensitive to such a degree, that it was
impossible to touch her sheets or a hair of her head; she would,
if this were done, cry out as though she had been grievously
wounded.”[206] The temporary paralysis and anaesthetic conditions have
been already described.


5. _Three spiritually significant events, September 4-9._

We can next consider together three spiritually significant incidents
which occurred during these penultimate days of hers.

“On September 4 she lay there in her bed, in great pain, her arms
stretched out in suchwise that she appeared like a body nailed to a
cross; as she was within, so did she appear without.” Here, then,
she finds a certain attraction and help in an external, quasi-ritual
attitude and act; for this attitude, however spontaneous and but
subconscious, was doubtless not simply accidental or the mere result
of pain. It is, with the Pietà-picture of her childhood and the
Conversion-vision of the Bleeding Christ, one of the only three direct
references to the Passion which I can find throughout her whole
life and teaching. This little act gave occasion to the “Spiritual
Stigmata”-legend, which is inserted here, in two paragraphs, by the
_Vita_, on the alleged, and I think actual, authority of the credulous
and long-lived Argentina. The legend is wanting in all the MSS.; its
late genesis and growth is clearly traceable.[207]

“On September 5, some time after her Communion, she suddenly had a
sight (_vista_) of herself, as dead and lying in a truckle-bed, with
many Religious, robed in black, around her. And she rejoiced greatly
at this sight. But afterwards, having a prick of conscience because of
this rejoicing, she confessed it to her Confessor.”[208] Here we have
once more a particular desire within Catherine’s soul, and a scruple
consequent upon it; and all this but ten days before her death.

And on the 9th, after Communion, there was “suddenly shown her a sight
of her (spiritual) miseries; and this gave great annoyance (_noia_) to
her mind. And, as soon as she was able to tell (confess) them, she did
so; and the sight then departed from her.”[209] Here, then, we have
clear testimony to imperfections perceived by herself as still within
her, and to her Confession of them as such; things characteristic
of her third as against her second period, but which most of the
contributors to the _Vita_ try hard to obscure even here.


IV. THE LAST SIX DAYS OF CATHERINE’S LIFE, SEPTEMBER 10-15.

And now the events of real significance which occurred during the last
six days of her life can be grouped under six heads.


1. _A great consultation of Physicians, September 10._

On the 10th there occurred a second, and last, great consultation of
Physicians. The number is this time given--they were ten: “of whom
several are still alive,” writes the final Redactor of the printed
_Vita_ of 1551. And, in this case, they did not prescribe any remedies;
but “examining her and inspecting everything with great diligence,
they finally concluded that such a case was (must be) a supernatural
and divine thing, since neither the pulse, nor any of the secretions,
nor any other symptom, showed any trace of any infirmity. They were
astounded, and departed recommending themselves to her prayers.” “When
she was not oppressed or tormented by her attacks (_accidenti_), she
seemed well; when she was being stifled by them (_suffocata_), she
seemed dead: and again, suddenly, the opposite condition would be seen.
And hence it was most clearly understood, that all this operation was
produced (_ordinata_) by the divine goodness itself.”[210]

Here we have a clear exposition of the two sets of phenomena which
specially impressed her _entourage_, and of the reasoning by which
these appearances were turned into direct proofs of the Metaphysical,
indeed of the Supernatural. There are three assumptions at work here.
What exceeds the knowledge of the Physicians of any one period, can be
safely held to exceed not only human knowledge throughout all coming
ages, but the powers of nature itself. All purely natural illness is
either simply physical or simply mental, and always shows traces
of a simply physical or of a simply mental kind. And all purely
natural illness is either slow in its transitions, or, at least, not
sudden in its transitions back and up to apparent health. And these
assumptions must have lain in those minds as part and parcel of their
hereditary furniture, in so far as they did not energize and aspire,
and did not, by moving out and up into the regions of Action and of
the Spiritual, of the Dynamic and of Love, transcend all that is
mechanically transmissible, and, with it, all that was bound to change
and be proved inadequate in the knowledge of their time. It was their
very religion which, with its strong predisposition and determination
to find immediate, independent, tangible, medically certified proofs
for an exceptional, indeed exclusive action of God, kept these
Physicians thus, even religiously, tied down in and by the Contingent
and Transitory. And it was her very religion which, by its grandly
ethico-spiritual Transcendence, kept Catherine above and outside the
very possibility of growing obsolete or old. We now see, with even
painful clearness, how inadequate, indeed how directly suggestive
of the contrary, were those Physicians’ and Redactors’ treasured
proofs. For neither the absence of all symptoms of physical or of
clearly mental disease, nor the presence of an astounding frequency,
abruptness, and completeness of change in the psycho-physical actions
and functions of the living person, nor, above all, the conjunction of
these two peculiarities, are for us now, taken by themselves, anything
but indications of nervous, hysterical derangement. It is in spite of
these things, or at least only on occasion of them, that Catherine
is great. Indeed one fails to see how, in any case, such purely
psycho-physical phenomenal data could, of themselves and directly, ever
compel any such metaphysical and spiritual conclusions. And, be it
noted, only in proportion as men abandon such impossible enterprises,
do they become sufficiently detached from these phenomena to be able
accurately to gauge their nature. These attendants who build so much
on these phenomena, do not see them as they are; Catherine, who builds
nothing on them, and who simply uses them as fresh means and occasions
of ethico-spiritual growth, sees them, to an astonishing extent, as
they really are.


2. _The final Codicil, September 12._

On the 12th, “she communicated as usual, but tasted no other food,
and after this she remained a very long time without speaking. And
after they had been bathing her mouth for some time, she exclaimed,
‘I am suffocating’ (_io affogo_). She said this because a little drop
of water had trickled into her throat, and she could not gulp it
down.” And in the evening the Notary Saccheri drew up in her presence,
with her nephew Francesco Fiesco and the maid Argentina del Sale as
two of the seven witnesses, a last Codicil, in which she, “although
languishing in body, yet possessed of her faculties (_in sua sana
memoria esistente_), ordained that her body should be buried in such
a place and Church as should be ordained by Don Jacobo Carenzio, the
present Rector of the Hospital, and Don Cattaneo Marabotto.” And “at
ten o’clock at night she complained of a very great heat (fire), and
then ejected from the mouth much black blood. And black spots appeared
all over her body, with very severe suffering. And her sight became so
weak that she could barely distinguish one person from the other.”[211]

Here at last we can plainly see the object which had moved her
friends, eighteen months before, to get her to fix upon San Nicolò in
Boschetto as her burial-place. They now, when she is at the point of
death, and in the last moment of fairly lucid mind, get her finally
to declare,--not that she is to be buried in the Hospital Church
apart from her husband, though this is what they themselves intend
to do, but simply that her grave is to be wheresoever Dons Marabotto
and Carenzio shall decide. It is interesting to note to how late a
date her friends thought it wise to postpone such a move, and in how
indirect and roundabout a fashion they had to attain their end. Yet it
is again plain that the whole scheme was willed and executed by her
family and friends unanimously; for, if Vernazza had been a witness
to the previous Will, so was Francesco Fiesco now a witness to this
Codicil.--We should also note that, if the difficulty in swallowing
of the early day is still entirely in keeping with her life-long
psycho-physical peculiarities, the attack at night is the first in her
life when the blood lost is described as of bad quality and where
spots appear on her person, indeed where any symptom of definite
illness is recorded. But now at last it is evident that downright
physical mischief is at work.


3. _Symptoms of organic lesion and delirium, September 13._

Before dawn “on the 13th, she evacuated much blood of a bad quality and
great heat, so that she remained even weaker than before. Nevertheless
she again communicated at her usual hour.” And later on “she fixed her
gaze immovably upon the ceiling, and made many gestures with her mouth
and hands. The bystanders asked her what it was that she was seeing,
and she said: ‘Drive away that beast that wants to eat…,’ and the
remainder of the words could not be made out.”[212]

Here two points are of pathetic interest. This great heat of her
blood was considered, no doubt from the first by at least some of
her attendants, and then later on more and more by the Redactors, as
so directly marvellous, spiritually significant, and confirmatory of
sayings of her own as to her interior ardours, that three various
though parallel anecdotes and proofs as to the intensity of its heat
are solemnly printed here by the _Vita_, only the first of which
appears in the MSS. Purely secondary, physical matters are thus, with a
short-sighted good faith and admiration, eagerly utilized to naturalize
and obscure a soaringly spiritual personality. Truly, she was not
simply mistaken as to her isolation: she too had the privilege to share
some of the piercing loneliness of Christ.

And next, we have here her last coherent utterance; and the care and
fearless honesty with which it has been chronicled and printed as
such--and as the concluding words of a chapter (Chapter L), up to at
least the fourth edition, Venice 1601--are truly admirable. The words,
“that wants to eat,” appear in MSS. “A” and “B,” and are, I think,
authentic. They may mean that the beast was looking about for some
unspecified food, or that it was wanting to devour her (the former is,
I think, the more likely meaning, for there is no indication of fright,
and _devorare_ would, in the latter case, be the more natural word). We
have, in any case, a quasi-physical, distinctly _maladif_ impression;
one which, as regards at least its apparently sensible embodiment, was
the simple projection of her own mind. And indeed there is nothing
to show that she had any consciousness of any spiritual significance
about it. It has got all the opaque, uninteresting character of mere,
given, unrelated, and unsuggestive fact, which all such purely nervous
projections always have; and stands thus in complete and instructive
contrast to her finely suggestive and transparent, spiritually
significant _Viste_, which contributed so largely to the volitional
stimulation and moral and religious witness and truth of her life.


4. _Catherine’s death, dawn of September 15, 1510._

During the early night hours of “the 14th, she again lost much blood,
and she weakened much in her speech. Yet she once more, and it was
the last time, communicated as usual. And throughout this day she lay
there, with her pulse so slight as to be unfindable.” And “many devoted
friends were present.”

And as the subsequent night ceased to be Saturday and became Sunday,
the 15th, “she was asked whether she wished to communicate. But she
then pointed with her right index-finger towards the sky.” And her
friends understood that she wished to indicate by this that she had to
go and communicate in heaven. “And at this moment, this blessed soul
gently expired, in great peace and tranquillity, and flew to her tender
and much desired Love.”[213]

Here three points are of interest. Catherine undoubtedly died at, or
shortly before, dawn on the 15th September, as is clearly required by
the older account on page 160_c_ of the _Vita_. Yet a second account,
sufficiently early to appear in all the MSS., is given on page 161_c_,
according to which she died on the 14th. The reason of this latter
pragmatic “correction” is obvious: the 15th is but the Octave of the
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, the 14th is the Feast of the Exaltation
of the Cross. The temptation to find a final, strikingly appropriate
synchronism, when, to do so, her death need only be pushed back some
six hours at most, was too great to be resisted to the end; and an
untrained, enthusiastic, imaginative mind like Argentina’s would,
probably from the very first, have almost unconsciously helped to
establish, or perhaps she single-handedly fixed, this date.

And next, the “many friends” present will no doubt have included her
sole surviving brother Lorenzo and his son Francesco, who, only three
days before, had witnessed her Codicil; one or other of the four
“Protectors” of the Hospital; Don Carenzio, the Rector; and Argentina
del Sale. But Vernazza, as we already know, was far away; and, as we
shall find in a moment, Mariola, and, above all, Marabotto, though both
in Genoa, were both absent from her death-bed. Now it is certain that
the absence of Marabotto cannot have been accidental, for death had
evidently been recognized by all to be imminent, ever since the 12th
at least; and he himself would certainly not have put anything in the
world before attending Catherine at the moment of her death. Nor, as
we shall find, was he ill just now. Yet we must, I think, suppose him
to have been (at least off and on) about her person, during the 12th,
up to the drawing up of the Codicil, which directly concerns himself
together with Carenzio. His own name appears second, no doubt because,
as the document itself mentions, Carenzio and not he is now Rector of
the Hospital in which the document is being drawn up. Marabotto will
have withdrawn after the attack on that night which left Catherine
hardly capable of any further distinguishing one person from another;
and he will have retired because Carenzio, from some little jealousy
or feeling of punctilio, cared to claim the right, as Rector, alone
to attend her at the last; or for some other slight reason such as
this. In any case, there is here one more indication of a certain
friction and rivalry amongst her attendants and chroniclers, which,
however painful, will help us in our study of the peculiarities of her
biography. There is, however, nothing to show that Marabotto’s final
withdrawal took place at the instigation, or even with the knowledge,
of Catherine; and the cause of that withdrawal can certainly not have
been a grave one.

And finally, there appeared eventually, at earliest in the fifth
edition, 1615, but possibly not till the sixth, in 1645, or even later,
a gloss which effectually prevents her “unedifying” remark of the 13th
from being her last utterance. After the words, “and at this moment,
this blessed soul,” there then appears the clause: “saying: ‘Into Thy
hands, O Lord, I commend my Spirit.’” The passage occurs in the late
and entirely secondary MS. “F,” which contains also other demonstrably
legendary “embellishments.”


5. _Intimations of her death vouchsafed to friends._

The _Vita_ gives an account of seven intimations or apparitions,
vouchsafed at the moment of her death to as many chosen friends and
disciples,--so many communications of her passage and instant complete
union with God. Although no names are given, it is easy to identify the
first six persons as Argentina del Sale, “a spiritual daughter of hers,
present at her death”; Mariola Bastarda, “another spiritual daughter of
hers, who had an evil spirit upon her (_il demonio adosso_)”; Maestro
Boerio, “a physician, her devotee”; Ettore Vernazza, “a very spiritual
man and her devotee”; Tommasa Fiesca, “a holy Religious woman, most
devoted to her”; and Benedetta Lombarda, “another Religious woman, who
had been a member of her household (_sua famigliare_).” The seventh
and last, “a nun” (_una monaca_), is so little characterized, as to
be incapable of certain identification: possibly Battista Vernazza is
meant, who, though but thirteen years old, was already an Augustinian
Novice.[214]

The order in which the first six names appear is evidently determined
partly by the degree of physical proximity to Catherine--Argentina by
her bedside, comes before Boerio in another house in Genoa, and Boerio
comes before Vernazza, since the latter is far away (_lontano_); partly
by sex--Boerio and Vernazza, though simple laymen, appear before the
three Religious women; and partly by the abnormal spiritual condition,
and consequent increase in the value of the testimony, of the souls
concerned--Mariola the Possessed comes first among all those not
actually present at the death. Even this order, and still more the form
of all these little notices, show plainly that the stress is laid, not
so much on the intimation of the death, as on that of the immediate
entrance into glory. Note that there is no reference anywhere to Don
Carenzio, certainly as much present at the death as Argentina; nor,
within this particular list, to Don Marabotto, as certainly absent as
Ettore Vernazza.

It is disappointing to find that, whereas such intimations, or at least
communications as to death at the moment of its occurrence, belong
to the best authenticated of the more mysterious human experiences,
and although we would expect to find some such unmistakably vivid and
first-hand accounts at this point in the life of one so spiritually
great and so deeply loved as was Catherine, the accounts are all,
with the possible exception of that concerning Boerio, very general
and colourless. As to Boerio we are told: “A Physician, her devotee,
was asleep, but awoke at the moment of her passing, and heard a voice
which said to him: ‘Abide with God; I am now going to Paradise.’ And
he called his wife and said to her: ‘Madonna Caterina has died at this
moment’; and this turned out to have been the case.”[215]

Two insipid, vague, and gossipy fragments concerning Don Marabotto
strive to make up for his absence from the list of the seven recipients
of synchronizing intimations. “Her Confessor during that night (14th to
15th) and throughout the following day (15th), had no notice whatever
concerning her.” This is told as if it had been something spiritually
remarkable, whereas it was evidently but strangely unkind on the part
of the other friends of Catherine. “The next day (16th) he attempted
to say a Mass for the Dead for the soul of Catherine.” He evidently
had been told on the evening of the 15th, or quite early on the 16th,
for there is here no claim to any supernatural intimation. “And he
found himself unable to pray for her in particular. And again on the
following day, whilst saying a Mass in honour of several Martyrs, his
mind was suddenly, from the Introit onwards, fixed upon Catherine’s
spiritual martyrdom, so that his abundant weeping made it difficult for
him to finish his Mass.”[216] There is, as so often with Marabotto,
something slightly comical, and yet respectable, because thoroughly
genuine, loyal, and truthful, about this his eager desire to experience
something unusual, the careful registration of something quite
commonplace, and the wistful attempt to make it out extraordinary after
all.


6. _Alleged miraculous condition of Catherine’s skin and heart._

There remain two more medical details, which are, however, of some
significance in connection with the spirit of her _entourage_.

Her skin is declared to have been, after death, of a yellow colour
throughout. Indeed in various places of the _Vita_ yellow or red colour
is noted in connection with her person, but generally as localized
about the region of the heart. But the accounts vary, indeed contradict
each other, so much, that I shrink from finally adopting any one
account.[217]

The action of her heart was often laborious or even acutely painful:
“At the last, owing to the great fire of pure and penetrating love,
that burnt within her heart, the skin over it became so tender as to be
unable to be touched. It seemed as though she had a wound right through
her heart. And she often held her hand over it; and it would pant like
a pair of bellows, on one day more than on another.”[218] And how
often had not Catherine spoken of the wondrous things, the spiritual
joys and sufferings, that she felt within her heart! And so some of
her materializing biographers, probably some of her attendants before
them, doubt not that “if only her (physical) heart had been examined
after death, some marvellous sign would have been found upon it.”[219]
We even find a report that “this holy soul, several months before her
death, left an order that, after her death, her body should be opened
and her heart examined, because they would find it all consumed (burnt
up) by love. Nevertheless her friends did not dare to do so.”[220] This
sheer legend will have been due to Argentina, and will have become
articulate long after the first deposition of Catherine’s remains.
There is certainly no other, indeed no kind of authentic, evidence of
any such wish or hesitation on the part of any one at the time. It is
sad to note how rapidly and easily, all but inevitably, the vivid,
spiritual ideas and experiences of Catherine were thus materialized and
spoilt.


V. SKETCH OF CATHERINE’S SPIRITUAL CHARACTER AND SIGNIFICANCE.

Before proceeding further to what is really still a necessary part
and elucidation of Catherine’s spiritual character and special
significance,--her doctrine and the posthumous effect, extension,
and application of her life and teaching upon and by means of her
greatest disciples,--it may be well to pause a little, and to try and
give, as far as the largely fragmentary and vague evidence permits, a
short and vivid picture and summary, in part retrospective and in part
prospective, of the special type, meaning and importance of Catherine’s
personality and spiritual attitude, and of the interrelation of the
two. In so doing I propose to move, as far as possible, from the
psycho-physical and temperamental peculiarities and determinisms
of her case, up to the spiritual characteristics and ethical
self-determinations; and to try and note everywhere what she was not as
definitely as what she was. For only thus shall we have some adequate
apprehension of the “beggarly elements” which she found, and of the
spiritual organism and centre of far-reaching influence which she left.
And only thus too will it be possible to see at all clearly the cost,
the limitations, and the special functions, temporary and permanent, of
her particular kind of soul and sanctity.


1. _Her special temperament._

It is clear then, first, that in her we have to do with a highly
nervous, delicately poised, immensely sensitive and impressionable
psycho-physical organism and temperament. It was a temperament which,
had it been unmatched by a mind and will at least its equals; had
these latter not found, or been found by, a definite, rich, and
supernaturally powerful, historical, and institutional religion; and
had not the mind and will, with this religious help, been kept in
constant operation upon it, would have spelt, if not moral ruin, at
least life-long ineffectualness. Yet, as a matter of fact, not only
did this temperament not dominate her, with the apparently rare and
incomplete exceptions of some but semi-voluntary, short impressions
and acts during the last months of her life; but it became one of the
chief instruments and materials of her life’s work and worth. Only
together with such a mind and will, is such a temperament not a grave
drawback; and even with them it is an obvious danger, and requires
their constant careful checking and active shaping.

And this temperament involved an unusually large subconscious life. All
souls have some amount of this life, but many have it but slight and
shallow: she had it of a quite extraordinary degree and depth. A coral
reef, growing up from, and just peering above, a hundred fathom-deep
ocean, would be an appropriate picture of the large predominance of
subconsciousness in this spacious soul. And even this circumstance
alone would cause her spiritual lights and fully conscious experiences
to come abruptly, and in the form of quasi-physical seizures and
surprises. Continuous, and possibly long, incubations of ideas and
feelings would thus be taking place in the subconscious region, and
these feelings and ideas would then, when fully ripe, or on some slight
stimulation from the conscious region or directly from the outer world,
make sudden irruptions into that full consciousness. Nor would such
natural suddenness of full consciousness really militate against the
claim to supernaturalness of the ideas and feelings thus revealed. For
they would still be most rightly conceived as the work of God’s Spirit
in and through the action of her own spirit: not their causation and
their source, but simply the suddenness of their revelation and the
channel of their outlet would lose in supernaturalness.

And hers was a soul with habitually large fields of consciousness.
Apparently from her conversion onwards, and certainly during the last
fourteen years of her life, the moments or days of narrow fields
were, till quite the last weeks or even days, comparatively rare;
and their narrowness was evidently always felt as most painful and
oppressive. And the interior occupation was so intense; the several
fields succeeded each other with such an apparent automatism and
quality of even physical seizure; and they were either so entrancing
by their largeness or so depressing by their narrowness: that to souls
not in tune with hers, she must, in the former moods, have appeared as
egoistic, as (in a sense) too much of a man, as one absorbed in great
but purely general, super-personal ideas which were making her forget
both her own and her fellow-creature’s minor wants; and, in the latter
moods, as downrightly egotistic, as (in a way) too much of a woman, as
one engrossed in her own purely individual, small and fanciful troubles
and trials. Yet the “Egoism” is not dominant during her middle period,
since it is certain that her charitable and administrative activities,
and close affective interest in the daily, physical and emotional lot
and demands of the poor and lowly, were most real and considerable.
And, in her third period, it was this very “Egoism” which, as we shall
see, was the form and means of the interior apprehension and exterior
elaboration of her most original and suggestive doctrines, and became
the occasion for her stimulation of other intensely active souls on
to great nation-wide enterprises of the most practical, permanent,
and heroic kind. And the “Egotistic” moods are unapparent before the
last two years or less of her life; and they then are clearly but
the occasional, involuntary suspensions or partial yieldings of her
normally iron will,--rare checks and intermittences which, with little
or no preventible faultiness on her own part, give us pathetically
vivid glimpses of what that normal life of hers cost her to achieve
and to maintain, and of what she would have been, if bereft of God’s
generosity ever awakening, deepening, and operating through her own.

All this sensitiveness, subconsciousness, spaciousness, variety, and
suddenness of apprehension and feeling; all this largely chaotic,
mutually conflicting, raw material of her spiritual life, even if it
had existed alongside of but feeble and inert powers of organization
and transformation, would not have failed to produce considerable
suffering; although, in such a case, that suffering would have
remained largely inarticulate, and would have left the soul checked
and counterchecked by various tyrannous passions and fancies. The soul
would thus have been less efficient and persuasive than the least
subconscious and sensitive specimens of average and “common-sense”
humanity. But, in her case, all this unusually turbulent raw material
was in unusually close contiguity to powers of mind and of will of a
rare breadth and strength. And this very closeness of apposition and
width of contrast, and this great strength of mind and will, made
all that disordered multiplicity, distraction, and dispersion of her
clamorous, many-headed, many-hearted nature, a tyranny impossible and
unnecessary to bear. And yet to achieve the actual escape from such a
tyranny, the mastering of such a rabble, and the harmonization of such
a chaos, meant a constant and immense effort, a practically unbroken
grace-getting and self-giving, an ever-growing heroism and indeed
sanctity, and, with and through all these things, a corresponding
expansion and virile joy. It can thus be said, in all simple truth,
that she became a saint because she had to; that she became it,
to prevent herself going to pieces: she literally had to save, and
actually did save, the fruitful life of reason and of love, by
ceaselessly fighting her immensely sensitive, absolute, and claimful
self.


2. _Catherine and Marriage._

Catherine’s mind was without humour or wit; and this was, of course, a
serious drawback. And her temperament was of so excessive a mentality,
as to amount to something more or less abnormal. For not only is there
no trace about her, at any time, of moral vulgarity of any kind, or of
any tendency to it; and this is, of course, a grand strength; but she
seems at all times to have been greatly lacking in that quite innocent
and normal sensuousness, which appears to form a necessary element of
the complete human personality. It is true that in the anecdotes of
her impulsive and yet reverent affection for the pestiferous woman and
the cancerous workman, with the finely self-oblivious sympathy which
moves her to kiss the mouth of the first, and long to remain with her
arms around the neck of the other, there is the beautiful tenderness
and daring of a great positive purity, of the purity of flame and not
of snow. And her love of her servants, Argentina in particular, and
of poor Thobia, is exquisitely true and constant. Yet even all this
can hardly be classed with the element referred to, with that love of
children and of women as the bearers of them, that instinct of union
with all that is pure and fruitful in the normal life of sex, such as
is so beautifully present throughout St. Luke’s Gospel, but which is,
at least relatively, absent from St. John’s.

Possibly her unhappy and childless marriage determined the
non-development or the mortification of any tendencies to such a
temper. But the absence referred to was more probably caused by her
congenital psychical temperament and state themselves; and, if so,
it would point to her as a person hardly intended for marriage, and
as one who, through no fault of her own, could not satisfy the less
purely mental of the perfectly licit requirements which make up the
many-levelled wants of a normal, or at least ordinary, man’s and
husband’s nature. Pompilia’s dying words, in Browning’s “Ring and the
Book,” would, probably at any time after her premature involuntary
marriage, have found an appropriate place upon Catherine’s lips, had
she ever thought it loyal or kind to utter them: “‘In heaven there is
neither marriage nor giving in marriage.’ How like Jesus Christ to say
that!”

Yet it is at least as difficult to think of her as really intended for
the cloister. That early wish of hers to join a religious community,
sincere and keen as it no doubt was at the time, evidently faded
away completely, probably already before her conversion thirteen
years later, and certainly before her widowhood. Perhaps she would
have been best suited, throughout her adult years, to the life of an
unmarried woman living in the world,--to the kind of life which she
actually led during her widowhood, with such changes in it as her
earlier, robuster health would have involved for those earlier years.
She would thus, throughout her life, have divided her energies, in
various degrees and combinations, between attention to the multiform,
practical, physico-emotional wants of the poor; the give and take of
stimulation and enlightenment to and from some few large-hearted,
heroically operative friends; and, as source and centre of all such
actual achievements and of indefinitely greater possibilities, indeed
as a life already largely eternal and creative,--contemplative prayer
of various degrees and kinds. But such a life, if it would have left
out much disappointment and suffering, and not for herself alone, yet
would also have been without the special occasions and incentives to
her sudden conversion and long patience and detailed magnanimity. Her
life, in appearing on the surface as less of a failure, would at bottom
have been less of a spiritual success.

Indeed the failures and fragmentarinesses of her life, even if and
where more than merely apparent to us or even to herself, helped and
still help to give a poignant forcefulness to her example and teaching.
There is nothing pre- or post-arranged, nothing artificial or stagey,
nothing, in the deliberate occupations of her convert life, that is
simply brooding about this woman: when she thinks or prays, she does
so; when she acts, she acts; when she suffers, she suffers; and there
is an end of it. The infinitely winning qualities of a simple veracity;
of a successive livingness, because ever operative occupation with the
actual real moment, and not with the after-shadow of the past nor with
the fore-shadow of the future; and, through all this, of a healthy
creatureliness are thus spread over all she does,--over her virtues,
which are never reflected as such within her own pure mind, and over
her very weaknesses and failings which, summed up in their source, her
false self, are ever being acknowledged, feared, and fought, with a
heroism not less massive because its methods are so wisely indirect.


3. _Catherine and Friendship and the Poor._

It is plain that Catherine’s temperament was naturally a profoundly
sad one, although her acutest attacks of melancholy were generally
succeeded by some unusually great expansion, illumination or
consolidation of soul. She had, to adopt a term of recent psychology,
a very low “difference-threshold”: easily and swiftly would her
consciousness be affected by every kind of irritant: even a slight
stimulation would at once produce pain, anxiety, or oppression of mind
or soul. She was thus evidently made for a few life-long friends,
for such as would deserve the privilege of giving much sympathy and
patience, and of getting back helps and stimulations indefinitely
greater both in quality and kind; and was not fitted for many
acquaintances of the ordinary kind, with their hurry of disjointed,
hand-to-mouth, half-awake thinking, feeling, and doing.

And it is very noticeable that her friendships and attachments of
all kinds were of a steadiness and perseverance to which there are
no real exceptions. To Giuliano, markedly inferior in nature though
he evidently was to her, and positively unfaithful during the early
years of their long, ill-assorted marriage, she remained faithful even
during those first years which she herself never ceased to condemn as
her pre-conversion period; she behaved with true magnanimity towards
himself and Thobia and Thobia’s mother; and she even evinced a certain
affective attachment to him and to his memory. And it would hardly
be fair to quote the change in the dispositions as to her place of
burial in proof of a change in her dispositions towards him. She whose
affectionate interest in Thobia is shown, by irrefragable documentary
proof, to have persevered, indeed increased, to the end of the poor
young woman’s life, will not have changed in her feelings towards her
own dead husband. Towards her brothers and sister, her nephews and
nieces, her numerous Wills and Codicils show that she entertained a
constant and operative affection.

These same documents prove that her affection and gratitude towards
Don Marabotto were equally sincere and provident. It is true that she
twice broke off relations with him, although only for a day and three
days respectively; and, at the last, this devoted friend of the last
eleven years of her life was no more about her. Yet we have remarked
that those two former absences were but caused by reasonable fears of
getting spoilt by him; and that the final absence was no doubt in no
way her doing. And perhaps the most impressive of all her attachments
were that to the Hospital, as representative of the sick poor whom
she had served, so actively and at such cost to self, for twenty-five
years and more,--all her legal dispositions and her very domicile for
the last thirty years of her life proclaim the permanent prominence of
this interest; and her affection towards her servants, since nothing
could be more considerate, thoughtful, equable, and persevering than
her care and love for Benedetta, Mariola, and Argentina. Here again I
cannot find any certain exceptions: for we know nothing of the history
of the servant Antoinetta except that, even on the one occasion of her
mention, it appeared already doubtful whether the girl herself would
care to remain with her mistress to the end.

There is but one apparent, and indeed a startling, exception to this
unbroken continuity of affection. Ettore Vernazza, certainly the
greatest and closest, the most docile and the most influential, of
her disciples, he to whom we owe the transmission of the larger and
the most precious part of her teaching and spirit, and who, as will
be seen, became, after her death even more than before it, and more
and more right up to his own heroic end, the living reproduction and
extension of the very deepest and greatest experiences and influences
of her life: Vernazza appears nowhere in her Wills, except as, on one
occasion, the actual drawer of the document, and, on another, as a
witness. And he was far away, and clearly not accidentally, at the time
of her death. I take it to be quite certain that we have here not an
exception, at the point of her fullest sympathy, to that gratitude and
permanence of feeling which obtained demonstrably in the other, lesser
cases; but that this silence and this departure are to be explained,
the former entirely, and the latter in part, by the special character
as much of Ettore as of Catherine, and by the special form which their
friendship assumed in consequence. I shall return to this point in my
chapter on Vernazza.


4. _Her Absorptions and Ecstatic States._

Catherine’s states of absorption in prayer, such as we find ever since
her conversion, were transparently real and sincere, and were so swift
and spontaneous as to appear quasi-involuntary. They were evidently,
together with, and largely on occasion of, her reception of the Holy
Eucharist, the chief means and the ordinary form of the accessions of
strength and growth to her spiritual life.

Possibly throughout the four years of the first period of her convert
life, certainly and increasingly throughout the twenty-two years of the
second, middle period, these absorptions occurred frequently, indeed
daily; they were long, and lasted up to six hours at a stretch; and
they were apparently timed by herself, and never rendered her incapable
of hearing or attending to any call to acts of duty or of charity, and
of breaking off then and there. And throughout these years she seems
to have known but one kind of absorption, this primarily spiritual
one, which appears to have been a particularly deep Prayer of Quiet;
and she appears to have always been, if exercised, yet also profoundly
sustained and strengthened, by it, even physically, for the large
activity and numerous trials and sufferings awaiting her on her return
to her ordinary life. And these were the years during which she lived
with no mediate guidance.

During the last eleven, perhaps even thirteen years of her life, first
one, and then, considerably later, a second change occurs in these
respects. First these profound, healthy, and fruitful absorptions, and
the power to occasion or effect, to bear or endorse them, diminish
greatly, though apparently gradually, in length, regularity, and
efficiency; indeed they do so almost as markedly as does the capacity
for external work, their former complement and correlative. The
spiritual life now breaks up into a greater variety of shorter and
more fitful incidents and manifestations. The sympathy of friends,
the sustaining counsel of priests, and the communication on her part
of many spiritual thoughts and experiences take, in large part, the
place of those long spells of the Prayer of Quiet or of Union, and
still more of that external activity which are both now becoming more
and more impossible to her. And next,--though not, as far as our
evidence goes, before the last six months or so of her life,--there
arises a second series of absorptions, externally closely similar, yet
internally profoundly different. These latter absorptions are primarily
psychical and involuntary, indeed psychopathic. And she herself shows
and declares her knowledge of this their pathological character, her
ability to distinguish them from their healthy rivals, her inability
to throw them off unaided, her wish that others should rouse her from
them, and her power to accept and second such initiation coming to her
from a will-centre other than her own.

Now her attendants and biographers, possibly all of them and even
during her lifetime, considered and called those healthy absorptions
“ecstasies”; and though we have clear evidence of her ever having
shrunk from so naming them herself, and though, here as everywhere, she
habitually turned away from considering the form and psycho-physical
concomitants of her spiritual experiences, and concentrated her
attention on their content and ethico-religious truth and power, there
seems to be no special reason for quarrelling with their application
of this term. Yet it is of great importance to observe that none of
her teaching can with propriety be called directly Pneumatic. For I
can find nothing that even purports to have been spoken in a state
of trance, nor anything authentic that claims to convey, during
her times of ordinary consciousness, anything learnt during those
states of absorption other than what, in a lesser degree, is probably
experienced, during at least some rare moments, by all souls that have
attained to the so-called Prayer of Quiet. It is quite clear, I think,
that in all these authentic passages, the states of absorption are
treated substantially as times when the conscious region of her soul,
a region always relatively shallow, sinks down into the ever-present
deep regions of subconsciousness; and hence as experiences which can
only be described indirectly,--in their effects, as traced by and in
the conscious soul, after its rising up again, from this immersion in
subconsciousness, to its more ordinary condition of so-called “full
consciousness,” _i.e._ as full a consciousness as is normal, for this
particular soul, in the majority of moments as are not devoted to
physical sleep.

But if apparently none of Catherine’s contemplations are derived
directly from things learnt during these times of absorption; those
contemplations are, none the less, all indirectly influenced, in
the most powerful and multiform manner, by these absorptions. For
these absorptions constituted the moments of the soul’s feeding and
harmonization, and they enriched and concentrated it, for the service
of its fellows, the occasion of further self-enlargement. And these
absorptions, with their combination of experienced fruitfulness and
undeniable obscurity, for the very soul that has passed through them,
when this soul has returned to ordinary consciousness, give to all,
even to the most lucid of her sayings, a beautiful margin of mist and
mystery, a never-ceasing sense of the incomprehensibility, and yet of
the soul’s capacity for an intellectual adumbration, of the realities
and truths in which our whole spiritual life is rooted,--realities and
truths which she is thus, without even a touch of inconsistency, ever
struggling to apprehend and to communicate a little less inadequately
than before.


5. _Catherine’s teaching._

Catherine’s teaching, as we have it, is, at first sight, strangely
abstract and impersonal. God nowhere appears in it, at least in so
many words, either as Father, or as Friend, or as Bridegroom of the
soul. This comes no doubt, in part, from the circumstance that she
had never known the joys of maternity, and had never, for one moment,
experienced the soul-entrancing power of full conjugal union. It comes,
perhaps, even more, from her somewhat abnormal temperament, the (in
some respects) exclusive mentality which we have already noted. But it
certainly springs at its deepest from one of the central requirements
and experiences of her spiritual life; and must be interpreted by the
place and the function which this apparently abstract teaching occupies
within this large experimental life of hers which stimulates, utilizes,
and transcends it all. For here again we are brought back to her rare
thirst, her imperious need, for unification; to the fact that she was a
living, closely knit, ever-increasing spiritual organism, if there ever
was one.

This unification tended, in its reasoned, theoretic presentation, even
to overshoot the mark: for it would be impossible to press those of
her sayings in which her true self appears as literally God, or her
state of quiet as a complete motionlessness or even immovability.
Yet in practice this unification ever remained admirably balanced
and fruitful, since, in and for her actual life, it was being ever
conceived and applied as but a whole-hearted, constantly renewed,
continuously necessary, costing and yet enriching, endeavour to
harmonize and integrate the ever-increasing elements and explications
of her nature and experience. And even on the two points mentioned,
her theory gives an admirably vivid presentment of the prima facie
impression produced by its deepest experiences upon every devoted soul.

And on other points her theory is, even as such, admirably sober,
closely knit, and stimulating. For, as to the cause of Evil, she ever
restricts herself to finding it in her own nature, and to fighting it
there: hence the personality of Evil, though nowhere denied, yet rarely
if ever concerns her, and never does so directly in her strenuous and
practical life. Yet, on the other hand, this fight takes, with her, the
form not primarily of a conflict with this or that particular fault,
these several conflicts then summing themselves up into a more or less
interconnected warfare; but it makes straight for the very root-centre
of all the particular faults, and, by constantly checking and starving
that, suppresses these. And hence the Positive, Radical character of
Evil is, in practice, continuously emphasized by her.

Yet this root-centre of Evil within her was most certainly not
conceived by her as a merely general and abstract false self or
self-seeking. Her biographers, mostly over-anxious to prove the
innocence of her nature, even at the expense of the heroism of her life
and of the reasonableness and truthfulness of her statements, are no
doubt responsible for the constant air of would-be devout and amiable
(!) exaggeration which she wears on all this self-fighting side of
her. Yet we have, I think, but to take the simplest and most authentic
of the rival accounts,--those which give us the smallest quantity
of self-denunciation, and we can understand the quality of this
self-blame, and can fix its special, entirely concrete and pressing,
occasion and object. For considering the immense claimfulness, the
cruel jealousy, the tyrannous fancifulness, the brooding inventiveness,
the at last incurable absoluteness of the weak and bad side and
tendency of a temperament and natural character such as hers, had
it been allowed to have its way, there is, I think, nothing really
excessive or morbid, nothing that is not most healthy and humble,
and hence sensible and admirably self-cognitive and truthful, about
this heroic strenuousness, this ever-watchful, courageous fear of
self, and those declarations of hers that this false self was as bad
as any devil. To such a temperament and _attrait_ as hers only one
master could be deliberately taken, or could be long borne, as centre
of the soul: God _or_ Self;--not two: God _and_ Self. And hence all
practice on even tolerance of, as it were, separate compartments of
the soul; all “a little of this, and not too much of that” spirit; all
“making the best of both worlds” temper; all treatment of religion as
a means to other ends, or as so much uninterpreted inheritance and
dead furniture or fixed and frozen possession of the mind, or as a
respectable concomitant and condiment or tolerable parasite to other
interests: all such things must have been more really impossible to her
than would have been the lapse into self-sufficiency and self-idolatry,
and the attempt to find happiness in such a downward unification.

And the one true divine root-centre of her individual soul is ever,
at the same time, experienced and conceived as present, in various
degrees and ways, simply everywhere, and in everything. All the world
of spirits is thus linked together; and a certain slightest remnant
of a union exists even between Heaven and Hell, between the lost and
the saved. For there is no absolute or really infinite Evil existent
anywhere; whilst everywhere there are some traces of and communications
from the Absolute Good, the Source and Creator of the substantial
being of all things that are. And to possess even God, and all of
God, herself alone exclusively, would have been to her, we can say it
boldly, a truly intolerable state, if this state were conceived as
accompanied by any consciousness of the existence of other rational
creatures entirely excluded from any and every degree or kind of such
possession. It is, on the contrary, the apprehension of how she, as
but one of the countless creatures of God, is allowed to share in the
effluence of the one Light and Life and Love, an effluence which,
identical in essential character everywhere, is not entirely absent
anywhere: it is the abounding consciousness of this universal bond and
brotherhood, this complete freedom from all sectarian exclusiveness and
from all exhaustive appropriation of God, the Sun of the Universe, by
any or all of the just or unjust, upon all of whom He shines: it is all
this that constitutes her element of unity, saneness, and breadth, the
one half of her faith, and the greater part of her spiritual joy.

And the other half of her faith constitutes her element of difference,
multiplicity and depth, and is itself made up of two distinct
convictions. No two creatures have been created by God with the same
capacities; and, although they are each called by Him to possess Him
to the full of their respective capability, they will necessarily,
even if they all be fully faithful to their call, possess Him in
indefinitely and innumerably various degrees and ways. And, so far,
there is still nothing but joy in her soul. Indeed we can say that the
previous element of unity and breadth calls for this second element
of diversity and depth; and that only in and with the other can each
element attain to its own full development and significance, and thus
the two together can constitute a living whole.

But the second conviction as to difference is a sombre and saddening
one. For she holds further that the diversity is not only one of
degrees of goodness and a universal fulness of variously sized living
vessels of life and joy; but that there is also a diversity in the
degree of self-making or self-marring on the part of the free-willing,
self-determining creatures of God. Here too she still, it is true,
finds the omnipresent divine Goodness at work, and in a double fashion
and degree. The self-marring of some, probably, in her view, of most
souls, gets slowly and blissfully albeit painfully unmade by the
voluntary acceptance, on the part of these souls, of the suffering
rightly attaching, in a quite determinist manner, to all direct,
deliberate, and detached pleasure-seeking of the false self. And this
is Purgatory, which is essentially the same whether thus willed and
suffered in this world or in the next. And the self-marring of other,
probably the minority of, sinful souls, though no longer capable of
any essential unmaking, is yet in so far overruled by the divine
Goodness (which, here as everywhere, is greater than the creature’s
badness), that even here there ever remains a certain residue of
moral goodness, and that a certain mitigation of the suffering which
necessarily accompanies the remaining and indeed preponderant evil is
mercifully effected by God. And this is Hell, which is essentially
the same, whether thus, as to its pain, not willed but suffered here
or hereafter. Thus she neither holds an _Apocatastasis_, a Final
Restitution of all things,--what might be called a Universal Purgatory,
nor a Gradual Mitigation of the sufferings of the lost; but the
eventual complete purgation and restitution applies only to some,
though probably to most, souls, and the mitigation of this suffering,
in the case of the lost, is not gradual but instantaneous.

Here again, then, we find her thirst for unification strikingly at
work. For she discovers one single divine Goodness as active and
efficient throughout the universe; and she everywhere finds spiritual
pain to consist in the discordance felt by the rational creature
between its actual contingent condition and its own indestructible
ideal, and such pain to be everywhere automatically consequent upon
deliberate acts of self-will. Hence the suffering is nowhere separately
willed or separately sent by God; and, in all cases of restoration,
the suffering, in proportion as it is freely willed by the sufferer,
is ever medicinal and curative and never vindictive. It is these
considerations which make her able to endure this sombre side of
reality.

Now it is all this second set of beliefs, all this faith in diversity,
multiplicity, and depth, which prevents any touch of real Pantheism
or Indifferentism from defacing the breadth of her outlook, and
effectually neutralizes any tendency to a sheer Optimism or Monism.
She loves God’s Light and Love so much, that she is indefatigable in
seeking, and constantly happy in finding, and incapable of not loving,
even the merest glimpses of it, everywhere. And yet, precisely on that
same account, everywhere the central passion of her soul is given
to fostering the further growth of this Light and Love, to already
loving it even more as it will or may be than as it already is, and
thus deeply loving it already, in order that it may be still more
lovable by and by. And thus the universality, and what we may call
the particularity, of God’s self-communication and of the creature’s
response, are equally preserved, and in suchwise that each safeguards,
supplements, and stimulates the other. And thus her grace-stimulated
craving, both for indefinite expansion and breadth and for indefinite
concentration and depth, is met and nourished by this width and
distance, this clarity and dimness of outlook on to the rich and
awe-inspiring greatness of God and of His world of souls.

And union with this one Centre is, for all rational free-willing
creatures, to be achieved, at any one and at every moment, by the
whole-hearted willing and doing, by the full endorsing, of some one
thing,--some one unique state and duty offered to the soul in that
one unique moment. Thus life gets apparently broken up into so many
successive steps and degrees of work, each to be attended to as though
it were the first and last; and as so much special material and
occasion for the practice of unification, ostensibly in the matter
supplied and for the moment which supplies it, but really in the soul
to which it is offered and for the totality of its life. Her soul
is, even if taken at any one moment, and still more, of course, if
considered in its successive history, overflowing with various acts,
with (as it were) so many numberless waves and wavelets, currents
and cross-currents of volition; and the warp and woof of her life’s
weaving is really close-knit with numberless threads of single
willings, preceded and succeeded by single perceptions, conceptions,
and feelings of the soul. Yet the very fulness of this flow and the
closeness of this weaving, their great and ever-increasing orderliness
and spontaneity, such as we can and must conceive them to have been
present during the majority of the moments of her convert and waking
life, tended, during such times, to obliterate any clear consciousness
of their different constituents, and to produce the impression of
one single state, even one single act. And this very action, even
inasmuch as thus felt to be simple and one, is furthermore experienced
psychically as a surprise and seizure from without, rather than as a
self-determination from within. And this psychic peculiarity is taken
by her as but the occasion and emotional, quasi-sensible picturing of
the ever-present and ever-growing experience and conviction that all
right human action, the very self-donation of the creature, is the
Creator’s best gift, and that the very act of her own mind and heart,
in all its complete inalienableness and spontaneity, is yet, in the
last resort, but an illumination and stimulation coming from beyond the
reaches of her own mind and will, from the mind and will of God. And
thus Ethics are englobed by Religion, Having by Doing, and Doing by
Being: yet not so that, in her fullest life, any of the higher things
suppress the lower, but so that each stimulates the very things that it
transcends.


6. _Catherine’s literary obligations. Her corrections of the
Neo-Platonist positions._

We shall trace further on how largely and spontaneously she has, from
out of the many different possible types and forms of spirituality,
chosen out, assimilated and further explicated certain Platonic and
especially certain Neo-Platonic conceptions. We shall be unable to
suggest any likely intermediary, or to assume with certainty a direct
derivation, for these conceptions from Plato, or indeed from Plotinus
or Proclus; and shall nevertheless be obliged to postulate some now
untraceable communication, on some most important points, between Plato
and herself. Besides this, she derives one Platonic conception from the
Book of Wisdom and a corresponding passage in St. Paul; and a certain
general Platonic tone and imagery from the Joannine Gospel and First
Epistle. Her Neo-Platonism, on the contrary, she derives, massively
and all but pure, through two of the Pseudo-Dionysian books and her
dearly loved Franciscan Mystic Poet, Jacopone da Todi. It is indeed
to the Pauline, Joannine, Dionysian, and Jacopone writings that she
owes, with the exception of a certain group of Platonic conceptions,
practically all that she did not directly derive from her own psychical
and spiritual experiences.

Now her assimilation of this particular strain of doctrine has
remained but partial and theoretical with respect to those parts of
Dionysian Neo-Platonism which were not borne out by the facts of her
own Christian experience; but it has extended even to her emotional
attitude and practice, in cases where the doctrine was borne out by
these facts.

Thus we shall find that she often speaks theoretically of Evil as
simply negative, as the varyingly great absence of Good. Yet, in
practice and in her autobiographical picturings, she fights her bad
self, to the very last, as a truly positive force. The force of God
is everywhere conceived as indefinitely greater, as, indeed, alone
infinite; yet the force of Evil is practically experienced and pictured
as real and positive also, in its kind and degree.

Again, she often speaks as though her spiritual life had, at some one
particular moment, simply arrived at its final culmination, and had
attained God and perfection with complete finality,--such, at least, as
this particular soul of hers can achieve. Yet, very shortly after, we
find her unmistakably in renewed movement and conflict, and observe her
mind to be now fully aware of that past “perfection” having been but
imperfect, because that act or state is now seen from a height higher
than that former level: hence that “perfection” was perfect, at most,
in relation to its helps and opportunities in and for its own special
moment.

Again, it is at times as though she conceived her body to be a sheer
clog and prison-house to the soul, and as though the soul’s weakness
and sinfulness were essentially due to its union with the flesh. But
here especially her later commentators have amplified and systematized
her teaching almost beyond recognition; the authentic sayings of this
kind, though too strong to be pressed, are few, and belong exclusively
to the last stages of her illness; and, above all, these declarations
are checked and entirely eclipsed by her normal and constant view as
to the specific nature of Moral Evil. For this Evil consists, for her,
essentially in the self-idolatry, the claimful self-centredness of
the natural man, ever tending, in a thousand mostly roundabout ways,
to make means and ends, centre and circumference, Sun and Planet
change places, and to put some more or less subtle wilfulness and
pleasure-seeking in the place of Duty, Happiness, and God. Few, even
amongst the Saints, can have realized and exemplified more profoundly
the indelible difference between pleasure and happiness, between
the false and the true self; and few have more keenly, patiently
felt and taught that the soul’s true life is, even eventually, not a
keeping or a getting what the lower instincts crave: but that, on the
contrary, a whole world of pleasures which, however base and short
and misery-productive, can be intensely and irreplaceably pleasurable
while they last, has successively to be sacrificed, for good and all;
and that what is retained has gradually to proceed from other motives,
to be grouped around other centres, and be ever only a part and a
servant, and never a master or the whole. The gulf between every kind
of Auto-centricism and the Theo-centric life, between mere Eudaemonism
and Religion, could not be found anywhere more constant or profound.

Again, it is at times as though the absence or suppression of even
the noblest of human fellow-feelings and of particular parental and
friendly, attachments, and not their purification and deepening,
multiplication and harmonization, were the end and aim of perfection.
But little or nothing of this belongs, I think, to any deliberate and
enduring theory of hers, still less to her full and normal practice;
and the impression of such inhumanity is, in so far as it is derived
from authentic documents, entirely caused by and restricted to her
early convert reaction, and her late over-strained or worn-out
psycho-physical condition.

Again, it is sometimes as though she believed indeed in an
energizing and progress of the soul, yet held this progress to be,
after conversion, an absolutely unbroken, equable, necessary and
automatic increase in perfection; and that such a soul’s last state
is, necessarily and in all respects, better than were its previous
stages.--The Redactors of her life most undoubtedly think this.
Because, for instance, she was Matron from 1490 to 1496, and could no
more fill the post from 1496 to 1510:--therefore “not to give part of
her activity to such external work was more perfect than to give it,”
is the argument that underlies their scheme for these two periods.--Yet
I can find nothing in her teaching to show that she held any such
view. She was, indeed, ever too much absorbed, by the experiences and
duties of her successive moments, to find even the leisure of mind
requisite for the manufacture of so doctrinaire a system. And indeed
there is nothing in the conception of sanctity, or in that of a gradual
and general increase in generosity and purity of the saintly soul’s
dispositions and intentions, which requires us to hold that such a
soul’s last state and efficiency is, in every respect, better than the
first. For the range and volume of the efficiency, wisdom, balance,
appropriateness of even our goodness is not determined by our will and
the graces given to our will alone. Physical and psychical health and
strength, illness and weakness; helps and hindrances from friends and
foes; the changing influences and limitations of growing age; and the
ever-shifting combinations of all these and of similar things,--things
and combinations which are all but indirectly attainable by our wills
in any way: all this is ever as truly at work upon us as our wills and
God’s spiritual graces are in operation directly within ourselves. And
if Catherine’s richness, breadth and balance of soul are, considering
her special and successive health and circumstances, remarkable up
to the very end, and probably actually grew to some extent with the
growing obstacles, yet those qualities hardly grew or could grow _pari
passu_ with these obstacles. The manifold efficiency and the unity in
multiplicity were distinctly greater before 1496 than after. And thus
the Saints too join their lowlier brethren in paying the pathetic debt
of our common mortality. They too can be called upon to survive the
culmination of their many-sided power, and to retain perpetual youth
only as regards their intention and the central ideas and the spiritual
substance of their soul.

Once more she seems as though, to make up for this apparent suppression
of the element of time, unduly to press the category of space, at least
in her contemplations. We shall see how often in these contemplations
God Himself, and the soul, or at least its various states, appear as
places; so that the whole spiritual life and world come thus to look
rather like an atomic co-ordination, a projection on to space and a
static mechanism, than an interpenetrative subordination, a production
in time or at least in duration, and a dynamic organism.--Yet it will
be found that all this imagery is consciously, though no doubt quite
naturally, used only _as_ imagery, and that it is thus used both
because it was spontaneously presented to her mind by her psychic
peculiarities and because it readily adapted itself as a vehicle to
express one of the deepest experiences and convictions of her spirit.

For her psychic peculiarities involved, on the one hand, a curiously
rapid and complete change and difference of states of consciousness,
and, on the other hand, a remarkable absence (or at least dimness) of
consciousness as to this transition itself, which, however abrupt,
was of course as truly a part of her inner life as were the several
completed states and outlooks. Now the apparently static element and
harmony in any one of these states could, of course, be at all clearly
presented in no other form than that of a spacial image; whereas the
changing element in all these states seems to have accumulated chiefly
in the subconscious region, to have at last suddenly burst into the
conscious sphere, and to have there effected the change too rapidly to
permit of, or at least to require, the presentation of this element
as such, a presentation which could only have taken the form of a
consciousness of time or of duration. From all this it follows that, to
her immediate psychic consciousness, each of her successive experiences
presented itself as ever one spacial picture, as one “place.”

And the imagery, thus quasi-automatically presented to her, could
not fail to be gladly used and emphasized by her to express the
deepest experiences of her spiritual life. For it was the element of
simultaneity, of organic interpenetration, of the God-like _Totum
Simul_, which chiefly impressed her in these deepest moments. And hence
the soul is conceived by her as, in its essence, eternal rather than an
as immortal--as, in its highest reaches and moments, outside of time
and not as simply wholly within it; and as, on such occasions, vividly
though indirectly conscious of the fact. Heaven itself is thought
of not as eventually succeeding, with its own endless succession,
to the finite succession of these our fleeting earthly days; but as
already forming the usually obscure, yet ever immensely operative,
background, groundwork, measure and centre of our being, now and here
as truly as there and then. And hence again, Heaven, Purgatory, and
Hell are for her three distinct states of the soul, already effected
in their essence here below, and experienced as what they are, in part
and occasionally here, and fully and continuously hereafter. Thus
the fundamental cleavage in the soul’s life is not between things
successive,--between the Now and the Then, and at the point of death;
but between things simultaneous, between the This and the That, and at
the point of sin and of self-seeking.

And finally, she seems at times to speak Greek-wise, as though
the soul’s life consisted essentially, or even exclusively, in an
intellection, a static contemplation. Yet we have already seen how
robust and constant is her ethical dualism, how essentially, here
below at least, happiness consists for her in a right affection and
attachment, in the continuous detaching of the true self from the false
self, and the attaching of the true self unto God. And we should note
how that intellection itself is conceived as ever accompanied by a
keen sense of its inferiority to the Reality apprehended, and as both
the result and the condition and the means of love and of an increase
of love. And again we should note that this sense of inferiority
does not succeed the intellection, as the result of any reasoning on
the disparity between the finite and Infinite, but accompanies that
intellection itself, and corresponds to the surplusage of her feelings
over her mental seeings, and of her experience over her knowledge. And
we should add the fact that, in the most emphatic of her sayings, she
makes the essence of Heaven to consist in the union of the finite with
the Infinite Will; and that this doctrine alone would seem readily to
harmonize with her favourite teaching as to Heaven beginning here below.


7. _Her attitude towards Historical and Institutional Religion._

If the Platonic and Neo-Platonic elements appear, at first sight,
as massive and even excessive constituents of Catherine’s doctrine,
Historical and Institutional Christianity seems, on a cursory survey,
to contribute strangely little even to her practice. Not one of her
ordinary contemplations is directly occupied with any scene from Our
Lord’s life. The picture of the “Pietà,” so impressive to her in her
nursery-days; the great Conversion-Vision of the Bleeding Christ; and
the slighter cases of the signing of herself with the sign of the Cross
and of her lying with outstretched arms, which occurred during the
last stage of her illness, are the sole indications of any immediate
occupation with the Passion; whilst the two cases of the Triptych
“Maestà” and the painting representative of Our Lord at the well,
(cases which indicate an attraction to the Infancy and to at least one
incident of the Public Life,) complete the list of all direct attention
to any incidents of Our Lord’s earthly existence. As to occupation with
or invocation of the Saints, inclusive of the Blessed Virgin, I can
find but one instance, the invocation of St. Benedict, two days before
her Conversion. We have seen, as to Sacramental Confession, how little
there can have been of it, throughout the long middle period of her
Convert Life; and how she was, during this time, simply without any
priestly guidance. And she never was a Tertiary, nor did she belong to
any Confraternity, nor did she attempt to gain Indulgences, nor did she
practise popular devotions, such as the Rosary or Scapular.

Nor could these facts be quite fairly met, except to a certain
relatively small extent with regard to Confession, by insistence upon
the changing character of the Church’s discipline, if we thus mean
to assert that she did not, in these matters, act exceptionally with
regard to the practice and theory of fervent souls of her own time.
For, on all the points mentioned, the ordinary fervent practice was
already, and had been for centuries, different; and, in the matter of
priestly guidance, her chroniclers have not failed to transmit to us
the wonders and murmurs of more than one contemporary.

Yet here again the prima facie impression is but very incompletely
borne out by a closer study.

For first, none of these historical and institutional elements are ever
formally excluded, or attacked, or slighted. Indeed, in the matter of
Indulgences, we have seen how she arranged or allowed that monies of
her own should be spent in procuring certain facilities for gaining
them by others.

And next, special practices, more than equivalent in their irksomeness,
are throughout made to take the place of ordinary practices, in so
far and for so long as these latter are abstained from. An unusually
severe ascetical penitential time, and then the rarest watchfulness and
continuous self-renouncement, take thus, for a considerable period, the
place of the sacramental forms of Penance.

And thirdly, if there is an unusual rarity in Confession there is an
almost as rare frequency of Communion; and authentic anecdotes show us
how she scandalized some good souls as truly-by this frequency as by
that rarity. Indeed throughout her convert life, an ardent devotion
to the Holy Eucharist forms the very centre of her daily life; during
probably thirty-five years she only quite exceptionally misses daily
Communion; and she has the deepest attraction to the Mass, and a holy
envy of priests for their close relation to the Blessed Sacrament.
And though there are no contemplations of hers directly occupied with
the Holy Eucharist, yet we shall find this experience and doctrine
to have profoundly shaped and coloured teachings and apprehensions
which, at first sight, are quite disconnected with It. We can already
see how all-inclusive a symbol and stimulation of her other special
attractions and conceptions this central devotion could not fail to
be. She found here the Infinite first condescending to the finite; so
that the finite may then rise towards the Infinite; the soul’s life,
a hunger and a satisfaction of that hunger, through the taste of
feeling rather than through the sight of reason; God giving Himself
through such apparently slight vehicles, in such short moments, and
under such bewilderingly humble veils; and our poor _a priori_ notions
and _a posteriori_ analyses thus proved inadequate to the living soul
and the living God.--Extreme Unction also was highly esteemed: she
spontaneously demanded it some four times and finally received it with
great fervour. Church hymns too--witness the “Veni, Creator,” chanted
on her death-bed--and liturgical lights are spontaneously used.

And lastly, her practice in the matter of Confession and of priestly
advice became, during her last thirteen years identical in frequency
with that of her devout contemporaries; and thus her life ended with
the practice, on all the chief points, of the average, ordinary
devotional acts and habits of her time. And this final practice of the
ordinary means, together with her life-long dislike of singularity and
of notice; her humble misgivings in the midst of her most peaceful
originalities, and the utter absence of any tendency to think her way,
inasmuch as it was at all singular, the only way or even the best
way, except just now and here for her own self alone; her complete
freedom from the spirit of comparing self with others, of dividing
off the sheep from the goats, or of having some short, sure, and
universal means or test for holiness: all this shows us plainly how
Catholic and unsectarian, how truly free, not only from slavish fear
and pusillanimous conformity, but also from all enthralment to merely
subjective fancies, from all solipsism or conceit was her strong soul.


8. _Three stages of the Spiritual Life; Catherine represents the third._

It has been well said that there are three stages of the spiritual
life, and three corresponding classes of souls.

There are the souls that are characterized, even to the end of
their earthly lives, by that, more or less complete, naturalistic
Individualism, with which we all in various degrees begin. Catherine’s
own time and country were full of such thoroughly Individualistic,
unmoral or even anti-moral men, who, however gifted and cultivated as
artists, scholars, philosophers, and statesmen, must yet be counted as
essentially childish and as clever animals rather than as spiritual
men. And she herself had, during the five years which had preceded her
conversion, tended, on the surface of her being, towards something of
this kind.

Next come the souls that have recognized and have accepted Duty and
Obligation, that are now striving to serve God as God, and that are
attempting, with a preponderant sincerity, to live the common and
universal life of the Spirit. These of necessity tend to suspect, or
even to suppress and sacrifice, whatever appears to be peculiar to
themselves, as so much individualistic subjectivity and insidious high
treason to the objective law of Him who made their souls, and who now
bids them save those souls at any cost. The large majority of the souls
that were striving to serve God in Catherine’s times belonged, as souls
belong in these our days, and will necessarily and rightly belong up to
the end, to this second, universalistic, uniformative type and class.
And Catherine herself evidently belonged prominently to this type and
class, during her first four convert years.

And there are, finally, an ever relatively small number of souls that
are called, and a still smaller number that attain, to a state in which
the Universality, Obligation, Uniformity, and Objectivity, of the
second stage and class, take the form of a Spiritual Individuality,
Liberty, Variety, and Subjectivity: Personality in the fullest sense
of the term has now appeared. And this fullest Spiritual Personality
is the profoundest opposite and foe of its naturalistic counterfeit,
of those spontaneous animal liberalisms which reigned, all but
unrecognized as such because all but uncontrasted by the true ideal and
test of life, prior to that prostration before absolute obligation,
that poignant sense of weakness and impurity, and that gain of strength
and purity from beyond its furthest reaches, experienced by the soul at
its conversion.

Yet that merely subjective, liberalistic Individualism of the first
stage can only be kept out, even at the third stage, by retaining
within the soul all the essential characteristics of the second
stage,--by a continuous passing and re-passing under the Caudine Forks
of the willed defeat of wayward, self-pleasing wilfulness, and of the
deliberate acceptance of an objective system of ideas and experiences
as interiorly binding upon the self. For if the second stage excludes
the first, the third stage does not exclude the second. Yet now all
this, in these rare souls, leads up to and produces a living reality
bafflingly simple in its paradoxical, mysterious richness. For now
the universality, obligation, and objectivity of the Law become and
appear greater, not less, because incarnated in an eminently unique and
unreproduceable, in a fully personal form. And at this stage only do we
find a full persuasiveness.

Catherine attained unmistakably, after her four years of special
penitence, to this rare third stage. For not only is she essentially
as individual and unique as if she were not universal and uniform; and
essentially as universal and uniform as if she were not individual: but
she is indefinitely more truly original and subjective, because of her
voluntary boundness and objectivity. Indeed she is solidly and really
free and personal, because the continuous renunciation and expulsion
of all naturalistic individuality remains, to the very end, one of the
essential functions of her soul.

From all this it is clear how easy it would be to misread the lesson
of her manifold life, and to turn such examples as hers from a help
into a hindrance. For her melancholy temperament, her peculiar psychic
health, her final external inefficiency: all this is too striking
not to tempt the admiration, perhaps even, the hopeless and ruinous
imitation, of such crude and inexperienced souls as know not how to
distinguish between the merely given materials and untransferable
determinisms of each separate soul’s psychical and temperamental native
outfit, and the free, grace-inspired and grace-aided use made by each
soul of these its, more or less unique, occasions and materials.
Those materials were, of themselves, of no moral worth, and lent
themselves only in part with any ease to the upbuilding and realization
of her spirit’s ideal. And it is only this, her wise and heroic use
of her materials,--though this also, of course, is not directly
transferable,--that represents the spiritually valuable constituent of
the life.

Similarly with the form, and the psychic occasions or accompaniments
of her very prayer and spiritual absorptions, and with some of the
constituents of her doctrine, if taken as speculative and analytic and
final, rather than as psychological and descriptive and preliminary.
These things again could easily be misused. For the former are largely
quite special and, in themselves, morally indifferent peculiarities,
transformed and utilized by quite special graces and life-long
spiritual heroisms. And the latter, we shall find, were never intended
to be systematic, complete or ultimate; and indeed they owe their
true force and value to their being the occasional, spontaneous and
immediate expressions and adumbrations of an experience indefinitely
richer and more ultimate than themselves.

And finally, it would of course be absurd to take the limitations of
her activity and interests, even if we were to restrict ourselves to
those common to all the stages of her life, as necessarily admirable,
or as universally inevitable. For there is, in the very nature of
things, no equation between her one soul, however rich and stimulating,
or even all the souls of her class and school, or of her age or
country, on the one hand, and the totality of religious experience,
and its means and incorporations, on the other hand, even if, by
totality, we but mean that part of it already achieved and accepted by
grace-impelled mankind.


9. _The lessons of Catherine’s life._

And yet Catherine’s life and teaching will be found full of suggestion
and stimulation, if they are taken in their interpenetration, and if
due regard is paid to their fragmentary registration, to the necessary
distinction between what, amongst all these facts, was mere means,
occasion, and temporal setting, and what amongst them was aim and
end, utilization and abiding import, and to the fact that all this
experience is but one out of the indefinitely many applications,
extensions, and mutually corrective and supplementary exemplifications
of the spirit and life of Christ, as it lives itself out throughout
the temperaments, races and ages of mankind. Above all it can teach
us, I think, with a rare completeness, wherein lies the secret of
a persuasive holiness. For Catherine lets us see, with unusual
clearness, how this winningness lies in the pathetically dramatic
spectacle and appeal presented by a life engaged in an ever-increasing
ethical and spiritual energizing,--whether in a slow shifting and
pushing of its actual centre, down and in from the circumference of
the soul to its true centre, and from this true centre enlarging
and reorganizing its whole ever-expanding being again and again; or
in an apparently sudden finding itself placed, and loyally placing
itself, in this true centre, and then from there prosecuting and
maintaining the organization and transformation of its varyingly
peripheral life, a life treated at one time as central and complete.
And this persuasiveness can here be discovered to be greater or
less in proportion to the thoroughness and continuousness of this
centralization and purification; to the degree in which this issues in
a new, spontaneously acting ethico-spiritual personality; and to the
closeness and costingness of the connection between those means and
this result. Such a soul will be persuasive because of its ever seeking
and finding a purifying intermediacy, a river of death, to all its
merely naturalistic self-seeking.

And it is this nobly ascetic requirement and search and end which no
doubt explain what, at first sight, is strange, both in its presence
and in its attractiveness, in her own case and more or less in that of
all the mature and complete Saints,--I mean, the large predominance of
an apparently Pantheistic element in her life, the strong emphasis laid
upon an apparent Thing-Conception of God and of the human spirit.

It was clearly not alone because of the Neo-Platonist element and
influence of the books she chiefly used that she, in true Greek
fashion, finds and allows so large a place for conceptions of
things, for images derived from the natural elements, and for mental
abstractions, in her religious experiences and teachings: God appearing
in them predominantly as Sun, Light, Fire, Air, Ocean; Beauty, Truth,
Love, Goodness. For, after all, other elements could be found in these
very books, and other writings were known to her besides these books:
hence this her preference for just these elements still demands an
explanation.

Nor was it ultimately because, nervously high-pitched and strained
as she was by nature, she even physically craved and required an
immense expansion for this her excessive natural concentration. She
thus evidently longed first to move through, and to bathe and rest and
spread out her psychic self, in an ample region, in an enduring state
of quasi-unconsciousness, in an (as it were) innocently animal or even
simply vegetative objectivity, indeed in an apparent bare element and
mere Thing, before, thus rested, braced, and as it were now healthily
reconcentrated, she more directly met the Infinite Concentration and
Determination, the Personal Spirit, God. For, after all, hers was so
heroic a spirit, and so self-distrustful, indeed self-suspecting, a
heart, that a mere psychic affinity or requirement would have failed so
permanently and deliberately to captivate her mind.

Nor, finally, was it ultimately because her domestic sorrows or
inexperiences, or even her very psychic peculiarities and apparent
lack of all even innocent sensuousness, left the images of Bride and
Bridegroom, of Parent and Child, perhaps even of Friend, respectively
painful, empty, or pale to her consciousness. For, even so, she could
and did care, with a beautiful affectiveness of her own, for her
brothers and sister, for Vernazza, her “spiritual son,” and for many a
humble toiler or domestic. And indeed her whole tendency is ultimately
to find God’s special home, the only one of His dwelling-places which
we men really know, in the human heart of hearts.

The ultimate and determining reason was no doubt her deep spiritual
experience and conviction (as vivid as ever was the psychic tendency
which gave it form and additional emotional edge and momentum) that
she must continuously first quench and drown her feverish immediacy,
her clamorous, claimful false self, and must lose herself, as a merely
natural Individual, in the river and ocean of the Thing, of Law, of
that apparently ruthless Determinism which fronts life everywhere,
before she could find herself again as a Person, in union with and in
presence of an infinite Spirit and Personality.

Thus Greek Fate is here retained, but it is transformed through being
transplaced. For Fate has here ceased to be ultimate and above the very
gods, the poor gods who were so predominantly the mere projections of
man’s Individualism: Fate is here intermediate and a way to God--the
great God, the source and ideal of all Personality. And indeed this
Fate is not, ultimately, simply separate from God; it is indeed
omnipresent, but everywhere only as the preliminary and subaltern,
expression, for us men, of the Divine Freedom that lies hidden and
operating behind it. And we men attain to some of this Freedom only by
the inclusion within our spiritual life of that Fate-passage and of our
actual constant passing through it, on and on.


10. _Three points where Catherine is comparatively original; and a
fourth point where she is practically unique._

In the general tendency and form of her inner life and conviction
Catherine has, of course, substantially nothing but what she shares
with all the Mystics, in proportion as these retain Law, Ethics, and
Personality; and she has much that forms part of the convictions of
all Christians, indeed of all Theists. Yet in the degree and precise
manner of her elaboration and application of those things, and again in
the circumstances of their documentary transmission, Catherine will, I
think, be found in three points comparatively original, and in a fourth
point practically unique.

First she has, as we have seen, not only a strikingly persistent
attitude of transcendence and detachment with regard to her
psycho-physical state in general (this is indeed an attitude common
to all ethically sound and fruitful Mystics: witness in particular
St. John of the Cross); but she has also a most remarkable faculty
and activity of discrimination between her own healthy and morbid
states. Even this latter power she probably shares, in various degrees,
with all such ethical-minded Mystics as nevertheless suffered from
a partially _maladif_ psycho-physical condition: witness especially
St. Teresa.--Yet contemporary documentary evidence, for not only such
actual variations between healthy and unhealthy states, but also for
the Mystic’s knowledge of and witness to the existence of both and
to the difference between the two, is necessarily rare. I know of no
evidence more vivid and final, although of much that is larger in
amount, than the evidence furnished by Catherine’s _Vita_.

And next she has both a constant, deep sense that religion never
consists simply in ends but in means as well, and never ceases to use
and practise the latter; and a concomitant keen apprehension of the
difference between means and ends, and ever illustrates this sense
of difference by the striking variety and liberty of the practical
attitude which she is successively moved to take, and actually does
take, towards this or that of the Institutional helps of the Church.
Here again she but exemplifies a principle which underlies the
practice of all the Saints, in proportion to their maturity and full
normality. And indeed our Lord Himself, the Model and the King of
Saints, when asked which was the greatest of the Commandments, did
not answer that He could not and would not tell, since to distinguish
at all between greater and lesser Commandments would be liberalism;
but, on the contrary, fully endorsed and canonized such a distinction
and discrimination, by actually pointing out two Commandments as
the greatest, and by declaring that from them depended all the law
and the prophets. Hence to organize, and more and more to find and
give their right, relative place and influence to all the different
things practised and believed, is as important as is the corresponding
practice and acceptance of all these different things. Yet, here again,
full evidence both for such fidelity and docility and for such variety
and liberty of soul, with regard to the means of religion, is rare:
the records of the modern Saints mostly give us but the docility;
those of the Fathers of the desert generally give us but the liberty:
Catherine’s _Vita_ gives us both.

And thirdly, she is, amongst formally canonized Saints, a rare example
of a contemplative and mystic who, from first to last, leads at the
same time the common life of marriage and of widowhood in the world.
Here again any misapprehension of the importance or significance of
this fact would readily lead to folly. For it is undeniable that it has
been the monastic life which, in however great variations of degree,
form and lasting success, has furnished Christendom at large with an
impersonation of self-renunciation sufficiently isolated, massive
and continuous, to be deeply impressive upon the sluggish spiritual
apprehension of the average man. And indeed self-renunciation is so
universally necessary and so universally difficult; upon its presence
and activity religion, and all and every kind of rational human life
depend so largely; without its tonic presence they are so necessarily
but a dilettantism, a delusion or an hypocrisy: that to body it forth
for all men must ever remain an honour and a duty specially incumbent
upon some kind of Monasticism. For it is but right, and indeed alone
respectful, to the Spirit of God, so manifold and mysterious in its
gifts and inspirations, that every degree and kind of healthy and
heroic self-renunciation should be practised and embodied; and that
special honour should attach to its most massive manifestations.

Yet our general knowledge of poor, rarely balanced human nature
and our detailed historical experience respectively anticipate and
demonstrate how easy it is, on this point also, to confound the means
with the end, and a part with the whole. And by such confusion either
self-renunciation, that very salt of all truly human existence, gets
actually stapled up in one corner of the wide world and of multiform
life; or this apparent stapling becomes but a pedantic pretence and
would-be monopoly, the salt meanwhile losing all its savour. And these
two abuses and errors easily coalesce and reinforce each other. The
fact is that the total work and duty of collective humanity,--the
production of a maximum of true recollection, rest and detachment,
effected in and through a maximum of right dispersion, action, and
attachment; above all a maximum of ethico-spiritual transformation of
the world and, in and through such work, of each single worker,--is
too high for any single soul, or even class or vocation, to hope to
exhaust. Only by all and each joining hands and supplementing each
other can all these numberless degrees and kinds of call and goodness,
together, slowly, throughout the ages, get nearer and nearer to that
inexhaustible ideal which lies so deep and ineradicable within the
heart of each and all. And thus will the two fundamental movements of
the soul, as it were its expiration and its inspiration, the going
out to gather and the coming home to garner, be kept up, in various
degrees, by every human soul, and each soul and vocation will as keenly
feel the need of supplementation, as it will apprehend the beauty and
importance of the special contribution it is called to make to the
whole, a whole, here as everywhere, greater than any of its parts,
although requiring them each and all.--Now Catherine suggests and
illustrates such a doctrine with rare impressiveness: for the pure and
efficient love of God and man, the one end and measure for us all, ever
consciously dominates all and every means within her admirably balanced
and unified mind; and the renunciative element is, under mostly quite
ordinary exterior forms, as complete and constant as it could be found
anywhere.

And lastly, her doctrine contains one conviction, or group of
convictions, as original as, in such matters, one can expect to find.
We get here the soul’s voluntary plunge into Purgatory, its seeking
and finding relief, from the now painful pleasure of sin, in the now
joy-producing pain of purification; and the soul’s discovery and
acquisition, if and when in predominantly good dispositions, of its
ever-fuller peace and bliss, because its ever-increasing harmonization,
in freely willing the suffering intrinsically consequent upon its
own past evil pleasures and the resulting present imperfections of
its will. And this cycle of facts and laws here springs from, and
begins with, the soul’s life Here and Now, and is held to extend (on
the ever-present assumption of the substantial persistence of the
spirit’s fundamental spiritual properties and laws) to the soul’s life
Then and There. Thus these two lives differ with her rather in extent
and intensity than in kind. I think that, taken just thus, and with
this degree of explicitness, this group of convictions is practically
unique. We shall study and illustrate this particular cycle of doctrine
in full detail. But it is indeed time now to move on to a more
systematic and general account of her teaching.




