letter I had from him this morning."

He rummaged in his pocket, and produced the following, which Mrs.
Mifflin read:


DEAR MR.  MIFFLIN,

I am so delighted that you and Mrs. Mifflin are willing to try the
experiment of taking my daughter as an apprentice.  Titania is really a
very charming girl, and if only we can get some of the "finishing
school" nonsense out of her head she will make a fine woman.  She has
had (it was my fault, not hers) the disadvantage of being brought up,
or rather brought down, by having every possible want and whim
gratified.  Out of kindness for herself and her future husband, if she
should have one, I want her to learn a little about earning a living.
She is nearly nineteen, and I told her if she would try the bookshop
job for a while I would take her to Europe for a year afterward.

As I explained to you, I want her to think she is really earning her
way.  Of course I don't want the routine to be too hard for her, but I
do want her to get some idea of what it means to face life on one's
own.  If you will pay her ten dollars a week as a beginner, and deduct
her board from that, I will pay you twenty dollars a week, privately,
for your responsibility in caring for her and keeping your and Mrs.
Mifflin's friendly eyes on her.  I'm coming round to the Corn Cob
meeting to-morrow night, and we can make the final arrangements.

Luckily, she is very fond of books, and I really think she is looking
forward to the adventure with much anticipation.  I overheard her
saying to one of her friends yesterday that she was going to do some
"literary work" this winter.  That's the kind of nonsense I want her to
outgrow.  When I hear her say that she's got a job in a bookstore, I'll
know she's cured.

                                   Cordially yours,
                                         GEORGE CHAPMAN.


"Well?" said Roger, as Mrs. Mifflin made no comment.  "Don't you think
it will be rather interesting to get a naive young girl's reactions
toward the problems of our tranquil existence?"

"Roger, you blessed innocent!" cried his wife.  "Life will no longer be
tranquil with a girl of nineteen round the place.  You may fool
yourself, but you can't fool me.  A girl of nineteen doesn't REACT
toward things.  She explodes.  Things don't 'react' anywhere but in
Boston and in chemical laboratories.  I suppose you know you're taking
a human bombshell into the arsenal?"

Roger looked dubious.  "I remember something in Weir of Hermiston about
a girl being 'an explosive engine,'" he said.  "But I don't see that
she can do any very great harm round here.  We're both pretty well
proof against shell shock.  The worst that could happen would be if she
got hold of my private copy of Fireside Conversation in the Age of
Queen Elizabeth.  Remind me to lock it up somewhere, will you?"

This secret masterpiece by Mark Twain was one of the bookseller's
treasures.  Not even Helen had ever been permitted to read it; and she
had shrewdly judged that it was not in her line, for though she knew
perfectly well where he kept it (together with his life insurance
policy, some Liberty Bonds, an autograph letter from Charles Spencer
Chaplin, and a snapshot of herself taken on their honeymoon) she had
never made any attempt to examine it.

"Well," said Helen; "Titania or no Titania, if the Corn Cobs want their
chocolate cake to-night, I must get busy.  Take my suitcase upstairs
like a good fellow."


A gathering of booksellers is a pleasant sanhedrim to attend.  The
members of this ancient craft bear mannerisms and earmarks just as
definitely recognizable as those of the cloak and suit business or any
other trade.  They are likely to be a little--shall we say--worn at the
bindings, as becomes men who have forsaken worldly profit to pursue a
noble calling ill rewarded in cash.  They are possibly a trifle
embittered, which is an excellent demeanour for mankind in the face of
inscrutable heaven.  Long experience with publishers' salesmen makes
them suspicious of books praised between the courses of a heavy meal.

When a publisher's salesman takes you out to dinner, it is not
surprising if the conversation turns toward literature about the time
the last of the peas are being harried about the plate.  But, as Jerry
Gladfist says (he runs a shop up on Thirty-Eighth Street) the
publishers' salesmen supply a long-felt want, for they do now and then
buy one a dinner the like of which no bookseller would otherwise be
likely to commit.

"Well, gentlemen," said Roger as his guests assembled in his little
cabinet, "it's a cold evening.  Pull up toward the fire.  Make free
with the cider.  The cake's on the table.  My wife came back from
Boston specially to make it."

"Here's Mrs. Mifflin's health!" said Mr. Chapman, a quiet little man
who had a habit of listening to what he heard.  "I hope she doesn't
mind keeping the shop while we celebrate?"

"Not a bit," said Roger.  "She enjoys it."

"I see Tarzan of the Apes is running at the Gissing Street movie
palace," said Gladfist.  "Great stuff.  Have you seen it?"

"Not while I can still read The Jungle Book," said Roger.

"You make me tired with that talk about literature," cried Jerry.  "A
book's a book, even if Harold Bell Wright wrote it."

"A book's a book if you enjoy reading it," amended Meredith, from a big
Fifth Avenue bookstore.  "Lots of people enjoy Harold Bell Wright just
as lots of people enjoy tripe.  Either of them would kill me.  But
let's be tolerant."

"Your argument is a whole succession of non sequiturs," said Jerry,
stimulated by the cider to unusual brilliance.

"That's a long putt," chuckled Benson, the dealer in rare books and
first editions.

"What I mean is this," said Jerry.  "We aren't literary critics.  It's
none of our business to say what's good and what isn't.  Our job is
simply to supply the public with the books it wants when it wants them.
How it comes to want the books it does is no concern of ours."

"You're the guy that calls bookselling the worst business in the
world," said Roger warmly, "and you're the kind of guy that makes it
so.  I suppose you would say that it is no concern of the bookseller to
try to increase the public appetite for books?"

"Appetite is too strong a word," said Jerry.  "As far as books are
concerned the public is barely able to sit up and take a little liquid
nourishment.  Solid foods don't interest it.  If you try to cram roast
beef down the gullet of an invalid you'll kill him.  Let the public
alone, and thank God when it comes round to amputate any of its
hard-earned cash."

"Well, take it on the lowest basis," said Roger.  "I haven't any facts
to go upon----"

"You never have," interjected Jerry.

"But I'd like to bet that the Trade has made more money out of Bryce's
American Commonwealth than it ever did out of all Parson Wright's books
put together."

"What of it?  Why shouldn't they make both?"

This preliminary tilt was interrupted by the arrival of two more
visitors, and Roger handed round mugs of cider, pointed to the cake and
the basket of pretzels, and lit his corn-cob pipe.  The new arrivals
were Quincy and Fruehling; the former a clerk in the book department of
a vast drygoods store, the latter the owner of a bookshop in the Hebrew
quarter of Grand Street--one of the best-stocked shops in the city,
though little known to uptown book-lovers.

"Well," said Fruehling, his bright dark eyes sparkling above richly
tinted cheek-bones and bushy beard, "what's the argument?"

"The usual one," said Gladfist, grinning, "Mifflin confusing
merchandise with metaphysics."

MIFFLIN--Not at all.  I am simply saying that it is good business to
sell only the best.

GLADFIST--Wrong again.  You must select your stock according to your
customers.  Ask Quincy here.  Would there be any sense in his loading
up his shelves with Maeterlinck and Shaw when the department-store
trade wants Eleanor Porter and the Tarzan stuff?  Does a country grocer
carry the same cigars that are listed on the wine card of a Fifth
Avenue hotel?  Of course not.  He gets in the cigars that his trade
enjoys and is accustomed to.  Bookselling must obey the ordinary rules
of commerce.

MIFFLIN--A fig for the ordinary rules of commerce!  I came over here to
Gissing Street to get away from them.  My mind would blow out its fuses
if I had to abide by the dirty little considerations of supply and
demand.  As far as I am concerned, supply CREATES demand.

GLADFIST--Still, old chap, you have to abide by the dirty little
consideration of earning a living, unless someone has endowed you?

BENSON--Of course my line of business isn't strictly the same as you
fellows'.  But a thought that has often occurred to me in selling rare
editions may interest you.  The customer's willingness to part with his
money is usually in inverse ratio to the permanent benefit he expects
to derive from what he purchases.

MEREDITH--Sounds a bit like John Stuart Mill.

BENSON--Even so, it may be true.  Folks will pay a darned sight more to
be amused than they will to be exalted.  Look at the way a man shells
out five bones for a couple of theatre seats, or spends a couple of
dollars a week on cigars without thinking of it.  Yet two dollars or
five dollars for a book costs him positive anguish.  The mistake you
fellows in the retail trade have made is in trying to persuade your
customers that books are necessities.  Tell them they're luxuries.
That'll get them!  People have to work so hard in this life they're shy
of necessities.  A man will go on wearing a suit until it's threadbare,
much sooner than smoke a threadbare cigar.

GLADFIST--Not a bad thought.  You know, Mifflin here calls me a
material-minded cynic, but by thunder, I think I'm more idealistic than
he is.  I'm no propagandist incessantly trying to cajole poor innocent
customers into buying the kind of book _I_ think they ought to buy.
When I see the helpless pathos of most of them, who drift into a
bookstore without the slightest idea of what they want or what is worth
reading, I would disdain to take advantage of their frailty.  They are
absolutely at the mercy of the salesman.  They will buy whatever he
tells them to.  Now the honourable man, the high-minded man (by which I
mean myself) is too proud to ram some shimmering stuff at them just
because he thinks they ought to read it.  Let the boobs blunder around
and grab what they can.  Let natural selection operate.  I think it is
fascinating to watch them, to see their helpless groping, and to study
the weird ways in which they make their choice.  Usually they will buy
a book either because they think the jacket is attractive, or because
it costs a dollar and a quarter instead of a dollar and a half, or
because they say they saw a review of it.  The "review" usually turns
out to be an ad.  I don't think one book-buyer in a thousand knows the
difference.

MIFFLIN--Your doctrine is pitiless, base, and false!  What would you
think of a physician who saw men suffering from a curable disease and
did nothing to alleviate their sufferings?

GLADFIST--Their sufferings (as you call them) are nothing to what mine
would be if I stocked up with a lot of books that no one but highbrows
would buy.  What would you think of a base public that would go past my
shop day after day and let the high-minded occupant die of starvation?

MIFFLIN--Your ailment, Jerry, is that you conceive yourself as merely a
tradesman.  What I'm telling you is that the bookseller is a public
servant.  He ought to be pensioned by the state.  The honour of his
profession should compel him to do all he can to spread the
distribution of good stuff.

QUINCY--I think you forget how much we who deal chiefly in new books
are at the mercy of the publishers.  We have to stock the new stuff, a
large proportion of which is always punk.  Why it is punk, goodness
knows, because most of the bum books don't sell.

MIFFLIN--Ah, that is a mystery indeed!  But I can give you a fair
reason.  First, because there isn't enough good stuff to go round.
Second, because of the ignorance of the publishers, many of whom
honestly don't know a good book when they see it.  It is a matter of
sheer heedlessness in the selection of what they intend to publish.  A
big drug factory or a manufacturer of a well-known jam spends vast sums
of money on chemically assaying and analyzing the ingredients that are
to go into his medicines or in gathering and selecting the fruit that
is to be stewed into jam.  And yet they tell me that the most important
department of a publishing business, which is the gathering and
sampling of manuscripts, is the least considered and the least
remunerated.  I knew a reader for one publishing house:  he was a babe
recently out of college who didn't know a book from a frat pin.  If a
jam factory employs a trained chemist, why isn't it worth a publisher's
while to employ an expert book analyzer?  There are some of them.  Look
at the fellow who runs the Pacific Monthly's book business for example!
He knows a thing or two.

CHAPMAN--I think perhaps you exaggerate the value of those trained
experts.  They are likely to be fourflushers.  We had one once at our
factory, and as far as I could make out he never thought we were doing
good business except when we were losing money.

MIFFLIN--As far as I have been able to observe, making money is the
easiest thing in the world.  All you have to do is to turn out an
honest product, something that the public needs.  Then you have to let
them know that you have it, and teach them that they need it.  They
will batter down your front door in their eagerness to get it.  But if
you begin to hand them gold bricks, if you begin to sell them books
built like an apartment house, all marble front and all brick behind,
you're cutting your own throat, or rather cutting your own pocket,
which is the same thing.

MEREDITH--I think Mifflin's right.  You know the kind of place our shop
is:  a regular Fifth Avenue store, all plate glass front and marble
columns glowing in the indirect lighting like a birchwood at full moon.
We sell hundreds of dollars' worth of bunkum every day because people
ask for it; but I tell you we do it with reluctance.  It's rather the
custom in our shop to scoff at the book-buying public and call them
boobs, but they really want good books--the poor souls don't know how
to get them.  Still, Jerry has a certain grain of truth to his credit.
I get ten times more satisfaction in selling a copy of Newton's The
Amenities of Book-Collecting than I do in selling a copy of--well,
Tarzan; but it's poor business to impose your own private tastes on
your customers.  All you can do is to hint them along tactfully, when
you get a chance, toward the stuff that counts.

QUINCY--You remind me of something that happened in our book department
the other day.  A flapper came in and said she had forgotten the name
of the book she wanted, but it was something about a young man who had
been brought up by the monks.  I was stumped.  I tried her with The
Cloister and the Hearth and Monastery Bells and Legends of the Monastic
Orders and so on, but her face was blank.  Then one of the salesgirls
overheard us talking, and she guessed it right off the bat.  Of course
it was Tarzan.

MIFFLIN--You poor simp, there was your chance to introduce her to
Mowgli and the bandar-log.

QUINCY--True--I didn't think of it.

MIFFLIN--I'd like to get you fellows' ideas about advertising.  There
was a young chap in here the other day from an advertising agency,
trying to get me to put some copy in the papers.  Have you found that
it pays?

FRUEHLING--It always pays--somebody.  The only question is, does it pay
the man who pays for the ad?

MEREDITH--What do you mean?

FRUEHLING--Did you ever consider the problem of what I call tangential
advertising?  By that I mean advertising that benefits your rival
rather than yourself?  Take an example.  On Sixth Avenue there is a
lovely delicatessen shop, but rather expensive.  Every conceivable kind
of sweetmeat and relish is displayed in the brightly lit window.  When
you look at that window it simply makes your mouth water.  You decide
to have something to eat.  But do you get it there?  Not much!  You go
a little farther down the street and get it at the Automat or the
Crystal Lunch.  The delicatessen fellow pays the overhead expense of
that beautiful food exhibit, and the other man gets the benefit of it.
It's the same way in my business.  I'm in a factory district, where
people can't afford to have any but the best books.  (Meredith will
bear me out in saying that only the wealthy can afford the poor ones.)
They read the book ads in the papers and magazines, the ads of
Meredith's shop and others, and then they come to me to buy them.  I
believe in advertising, but I believe in letting someone else pay for
it.

MIFFLIN--I guess perhaps I can afford to go on riding on Meredith's
ads.  I hadn't thought of that.  But I think I shall put a little
notice in one of the papers some day, just a little card saying


                         PARNASSUS AT HOME
                         GOOD BOOKS BOUGHT
                             AND SOLD
                       THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED


It will be fun to see what come-back I get.

QUINCY--The book section of a department store doesn't get much chance
to enjoy that tangential advertising, as Fruehling calls it.  Why, when
our interior decorating shark puts a few volumes of a pirated Kipling
bound in crushed oilcloth or a copy of "Knock-kneed Stories," into the
window to show off a Louis XVIII boudoir suite, display space is
charged up against my department!  Last summer he asked me for
"something by that Ring fellow, I forget the name," to put a punchy
finish on a layout of porch furniture.  I thought perhaps he meant
Wagner's Nibelungen operas, and began to dig them out.  Then I found he
meant Ring Lardner.

GLADFIST--There you are.  I keep telling you bookselling is an
impossible job for a man who loves literature.  When did a bookseller
ever make any real contribution to the world's happiness?

MIFFLIN--Dr. Johnson's father was a bookseller.

GLADFIST--Yes, and couldn't afford to pay for Sam's education.

FRUEHLING--There's another kind of tangential advertising that
interests me.  Take, for instance, a Coles Phillips painting for some
brand of silk stockings.  Of course the high lights of the picture are
cunningly focussed on the stockings of the eminently beautiful lady;
but there is always something else in the picture--an automobile or a
country house or a Morris chair or a parasol--which makes it just as
effective an ad for those goods as it is for the stockings.  Every now
and then Phillips sticks a book into his paintings, and I expect the
Fifth Avenue book trade benefits by it.  A book that fits the mind as
well as a silk stocking does the ankle will be sure to sell.

MIFFLIN--You are all crass materialists.  I tell you, books are the
depositories of the human spirit, which is the only thing in this world
that endures.  What was it Shakespeare said--


     Not marble nor the gilded monuments
     Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme--


By the bones of the Hohenzollerns, he was right!  And wait a minute!
There's something in Carlyle's Cromwell that comes back to me.

He ran excitedly out of the room, and the members of the Corn Cob
fraternity grinned at each other.  Gladfist cleaned his pipe and poured
out some more cider.  "He's off on his hobby," he chuckled.  "I love
baiting him."

"Speaking of Carlyle's Cromwell," said Fruehling, "that's a book I
don't often hear asked for.  But a fellow came in the other day hunting
for a copy, and to my chagrin I didn't have one.  I rather pride myself
on keeping that sort of thing in stock.  So I called up Brentano's to
see if I could pick one up, and they told me they had just sold the
only copy they had.  Somebody must have been boosting Thomas!  Maybe
he's quoted in Tarzan, or somebody has bought up the film rights."

Mifflin came in, looking rather annoyed.

"Here's an odd thing," he said.  "I know damn well that copy of
Cromwell was on the shelf because I saw it there last night.  It's not
there now."

"That's nothing," said Quincy.  "You know how people come into a
second-hand store, see a book they take a fancy to but don't feel like
buying just then, and tuck it away out of sight or on some other shelf
where they think no one else will spot it, but they'll be able to find
it when they can afford it.  Probably someone's done that with your
Cromwell."

"Maybe, but I doubt it," said Mifflin.  "Mrs. Mifflin says she didn't
sell it this evening.  I woke her up to ask her.  She was dozing over
her knitting at the desk.  I guess she's tired after her trip."

"I'm sorry to miss the Carlyle quotation," said Benson.  "What was the
gist?"

"I think I've got it jotted down in a notebook," said Roger, hunting
along a shelf.  "Yes, here it is."  He read aloud:


"The works of a man, bury them under what guano-mountains and obscene
owl-droppings you will, do not perish, cannot perish.  What of Heroism,
what of Eternal Light was in a Man and his Life, is with very great
exactness added to the Eternities, remains forever a new divine portion
of the Sum of Things.


"Now, my friends, the bookseller is one of the keys in that universal
adding machine, because he aids in the cross-fertilization of men and
books.  His delight in his calling doesn't need to be stimulated even
by the bright shanks of a Coles Phillips picture.

"Roger, my boy," said Gladfist, "your innocent enthusiasm makes me
think of Tom Daly's favourite story about the Irish priest who was
rebuking his flock for their love of whisky.  'Whisky,' he said, 'is
the bane of this congregation.  Whisky, that steals away a man's
brains.  Whisky, that makes you shoot at landlords--and not hit them!'
Even so, my dear Roger, your enthusiasm makes you shoot at truth and
never come anywhere near it."

"Jerry," said Roger, "you are a upas tree.  Your shadow is poisonous!"

"Well, gentlemen," said Mr. Chapman, "I know Mrs. Mifflin wants to be
relieved of her post.  I vote we adjourn early.  Your conversation is
always delightful, though I am sometimes a bit uncertain as to the
conclusions.  My daughter is going to be a bookseller, and I shall look
forward to hearing her views on the business."

As the guests made their way out through the shop, Mr. Chapman drew
Roger aside.  "It's perfectly all right about sending Titania?" he
asked.

"Absolutely," said Roger.  "When does she want to come?"

"Is to-morrow too soon?"

"The sooner the better.  We've got a little spare room upstairs that
she can have.  I've got some ideas of my own about furnishing it for
her.  Send her round to-morrow afternoon."



