Chapter II

The Corn Cob Club[1]


[1] The latter half of this chapter may be omitted by all readers who
are not booksellers.


The Haunted Bookshop was a delightful place, especially of an evening,
when its drowsy alcoves were kindled with the brightness of lamps
shining on the rows of volumes.  Many a passer-by would stumble down
the steps from the street in sheer curiosity; others, familiar
visitors, dropped in with the same comfortable emotion that a man feels
on entering his club.  Roger's custom was to sit at his desk in the
rear, puffing his pipe and reading; though if any customer started a
conversation, the little man was quick and eager to carry it on.  The
lion of talk lay only sleeping in him; it was not hard to goad it up.

It may be remarked that all bookshops that are open in the evening are
busy in the after-supper hours.  Is it that the true book-lovers are
nocturnal gentry, only venturing forth when darkness and silence and
the gleam of hooded lights irresistibly suggest reading?  Certainly
night-time has a mystic affinity for literature, and it is strange that
the Esquimaux have created no great books.  Surely, for most of us, an
arctic night would be insupportable without O. Henry and Stevenson.
Or, as Roger Mifflin remarked during a passing enthusiasm for Ambrose
Bierce, the true noctes ambrosianae are the noctes ambrose bierceianae.

But Roger was prompt in closing Parnassus at ten o'clock.  At that hour
he and Bock (the mustard-coloured terrier, named for Boccaccio) would
make the round of the shop, see that everything was shipshape, empty
the ash trays provided for customers, lock the front door, and turn off
the lights.  Then they would retire to the den, where Mrs. Mifflin was
generally knitting or reading.  She would brew a pot of cocoa and they
would read or talk for half an hour or so before bed.  Sometimes Roger
would take a stroll along Gissing Street before turning in.  All day
spent with books has a rather exhausting effect on the mind, and he
used to enjoy the fresh air sweeping up the dark Brooklyn streets,
meditating some thought that had sprung from his reading, while Bock
sniffed and padded along in the manner of an elderly dog at night.

While Mrs. Mifflin was away, however, Roger's routine was somewhat
different.  After closing the shop he would return to his desk and with
a furtive, shamefaced air take out from a bottom drawer an untidy
folder of notes and manuscript.  This was the skeleton in his closet,
his secret sin.  It was the scaffolding of his book, which he had been
compiling for at least ten years, and to which he had tentatively
assigned such different titles as "Notes on Literature," "The Muse on
Crutches," "Books and I," and "What a Young Bookseller Ought to Know."
It had begun long ago, in the days of his odyssey as a rural book
huckster, under the title of "Literature Among the Farmers," but it had
branched out until it began to appear that (in bulk at least) Ridpath
would have to look to his linoleum laurels.  The manuscript in its
present state had neither beginning nor end, but it was growing
strenuously in the middle, and hundreds of pages were covered with
Roger's minute script.  The chapter on "Ars Bibliopolae," or the art of
bookselling, would be, he hoped, a classic among generations of book
vendors still unborn.  Seated at his disorderly desk, caressed by a
counterpane of drifting tobacco haze, he would pore over the
manuscript, crossing out, interpolating, re-arguing, and then referring
to volumes on his shelves.  Bock would snore under the chair, and soon
Roger's brain would begin to waver.  In the end he would fall asleep
over his papers, wake with a cramp about two o'clock, and creak
irritably to a lonely bed.

All this we mention only to explain how it was that Roger was dozing at
his desk about midnight, the evening after the call paid by Aubrey
Gilbert.  He was awakened by a draught of chill air passing like a
mountain brook over his bald pate.  Stiffly he sat up and looked about.
The shop was in darkness save for the bright electric over his head.
Bock, of more regular habit than his master, had gone back to his couch
in the kitchen, made of a packing case that had once coffined a set of
the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

"That's funny," said Roger to himself.  "Surely I locked the door?" He
walked to the front of the shop, switching on the cluster of lights
that hung from the ceiling.  The door was ajar, but everything else
seemed as usual.  Bock, hearing his footsteps, came trotting out from
the kitchen, his claws rattling on the bare wooden floor.  He looked up
with the patient inquiry of a dog accustomed to the eccentricities of
his patron.

"I guess I'm getting absent-minded," said Roger.  "I must have left the
door open."  He closed and locked it.  Then he noticed that the terrier
was sniffing in the History alcove, which was at the front of the shop
on the left-hand side.

"What is it, old man?" said Roger.  "Want something to read in bed?" He
turned on the light in that alcove.  Everything appeared normal.  Then
he noticed a book that projected an inch or so beyond the even line of
bindings.  It was a fad of Roger's to keep all his books in a flat row
on the shelves, and almost every evening at closing time he used to run
his palm along the backs of the volumes to level any irregularities
left by careless browsers.  He put out a hand to push the book into
place.  Then he stopped.

"Queer again," he thought.  "Carlyle's Oliver Cromwell!  I looked for
that book last night and couldn't find it.  When that professor fellow
was here.  Maybe I'm tired and can't see straight.  I'll go to bed."


The next day was a date of some moment.  Not only was it Thanksgiving
Day, with the November meeting of the Corn Cob Club scheduled for that
evening, but Mrs. Mifflin had promised to get home from Boston in time
to bake a chocolate cake for the booksellers.  It was said that some of
the members of the club were faithful in attendance more by reason of
Mrs. Mifflin's chocolate cake, and the cask of cider that her brother
Andrew McGill sent down from the Sabine Farm every autumn, than on
account of the bookish conversation.

Roger spent the morning in doing a little housecleaning, in preparation
for his wife's return.  He was a trifle abashed to find how many
mingled crumbs and tobacco cinders had accumulated on the dining-room
rug.  He cooked himself a modest lunch of lamb chops and baked
potatoes, and was pleased by an epigram concerning food that came into
his mind.  "It's not the food you dream about that matters," he said to
himself; "it's the vittles that walk right in and become a member of
the family." He felt that this needed a little polishing and
rephrasing, but that there was a germ of wit in it.  He had a habit of
encountering ideas at his solitary meals.

After this, he was busy at the sink scrubbing the dishes, when he was
surprised by feeling two very competent arms surround him, and a pink
gingham apron was thrown over his head.  "Mifflin," said his wife, "how
many times have I told you to put on an apron when you wash up!"

They greeted each other with the hearty, affectionate simplicity of
those congenially wedded in middle age.  Helen Mifflin was a buxom,
healthy creature, rich in good sense and good humour, well nourished
both in mind and body.  She kissed Roger's bald head, tied the apron
around his shrimpish person, and sat down on a kitchen chair to watch
him finish wiping the china.  Her cheeks were cool and ruddy from the
keen air, her face lit with the tranquil satisfaction of those who have
sojourned in the comfortable city of Boston.

"Well, my dear," said Roger, "this makes it a real Thanksgiving.  You
look as plump and full of matter as The Home Book of Verse."

"I've had a stunning time," she said, patting Bock who stood at her
knee, imbibing the familiar and mysterious fragrance by which dogs
identify their human friends.  "I haven't even heard of a book for
three weeks.  I did stop in at the Old Angle Book Shop yesterday, just
to say hullo to Joe Jillings.  He says all booksellers are crazy, but
that you are the craziest of the lot.  He wants to know if you're
bankrupt yet."

Roger's slate-blue eyes twinkled.  He hung up a cup in the china closet
and lit his pipe before replying.

"What did you say?"

"I said that our shop was haunted, and mustn't be supposed to come
under the usual conditions of the trade."

"Bully for you!  And what did Joe say to that?"

"'Haunted by the nuts!'"

"Well," said Roger, "when literature goes bankrupt I'm willing to go
with it.  Not till then.  But by the way, we're going to be haunted by
a beauteous damsel pretty soon.  You remember my telling you that Mr.
Chapman wants to send his daughter to work in the shop?  Well, here's a
