Part II

Lectures to Theosophical Students




Lecture I

The Sixth Sub-Race


I have chosen for the subject of my lecture to-night one which I think is
important—the Sixth Sub-Race. Both outside and inside the Theosophical
Society a certain amount of good-humoured ridicule has been cast on
the way in which Theosophists talk about Races, Sub-Races, Root-Races,
Cycles, Rounds, and so on, some people condemning such talk as
exceedingly unpractical. Really that is not so. When our great teacher H.
P. Blavatsky traced for us _The Secret Doctrine_, that wonderful panorama
of the past evolution of the Races on our globe, she was not only giving
us the story of the past, but also presenting us with the key to the
future. And I propose to-night to try to show you how it is possible for
the Theosophist who has carefully studied the principles underlying past
evolution, to apply these to the evolution of the future, and so learn
how he may best co-operate with the divine plan which is slowly working
itself out. The advantage of Theosophical teaching is that it gives us a
definite scheme into which the evolution of mankind, stage by stage, fits
without difficulty and without blunder.

Now, if we think for a moment of what we call the larger and the smaller
cycles, we can realise that the large scheme of the Races, the smaller
scheme of the sub-races, and the evolution of man himself, all go along
parallel lines. Understanding one, we can understand all. I will pause
on the evolution of the Races, in order to remind you of the repetition,
within the limit of each race, of the smaller sub-races. We need not go
very far back. It will be enough to consider the Race that preceded our
own, the great fourth Root Race, and our own. The fourth Root Race was
the Atlantean. I only allude to it in order to remind you that from the
midst of that race the Fifth Race, in its turn, arose. Now the choosing
out of a new Race is the task of a particular Personage in the Occult
Hierarchy, whose only name, so far as we know it, is that which has been
borrowed from the Hindū, the Manu, the Man, or the Thinker, the ideal or
typical man. The Manu forms in His own mind, after the master conception
of the Planetary Logos, the plan of the man that is to be, which He will
gradually realise along the lines of natural evolution. These laws of
evolution are used by the Manu with scientific knowledge, and therefore
with certainty. In the same way that a scientific breeder, dealing with
the animal kingdom, can breed towards a desired type, so, on a higher
plane, does the Manu of the Race mould by the same laws of evolution
the physical form of the Race He desires to evolve. And always the type
is formed in the matter of the higher planes before it is reproduced in
the matter of the lower, the mental and emotional characteristics being
first conceived, and then a physical body which will best express them.
The Manu chooses the type according to the particular qualities which
are to be evolved, which are marked out for Him by the basic plan of
the constitution of man himself. Looking at your own nature, you have
certain distinct departments: the physical body; the astral body; the
mental body; the body of the higher mind, the causal; and then that
of the pure, compassionate Reason, the buddhic. Now if we take those
three types, the emotional, mental, and buddhic, we have the three with
which we are immediately concerned. Desire, or emotion, was the great
characteristic of the fourth Race. The mind was the slave of the lower
feelings; that race had as its motive power the development of the desire
nature. But in the sub-races of the fourth Race the other principles had
also to be evolved, but to a very poor degree; and as time went on, the
fifth sub-race of that began to develop the lower mind. Out of that fifth
sub-race the selection of the Manu of the time was made, and He chose out
certain families that He thought He could shape into the required type.
The first choice was not successful, the people proving too stiff-necked
and too little plastic to be moulded into the Race that was to be;
but it left behind it, in the history of the world, that marvellously
interesting people, the Hebrew, and that idea of being a “chosen people”
survives even to this day. The second and successful selection had as its
issue our own fifth Root Race. Now, side by side with the evolution of
the sub-race, came the evolution of the Root Race which was to succeed,
and that is why I have referred to the past. As the fifth sub-race of the
fourth Root Race was developed, the beginnings of the fifth Root Race,
the great Aryan Race, appeared one million years ago.

We can leave our fourth Race with its sub-races, having only regarded it
for the purpose of throwing light on the present. The evolution of the
fifth Race went on, and sub-race after sub-race was born. The earliest
of all settled in Northern India, and gradually conquered that great
peninsula, the first sub-race of the stock of the Aryans. There came
out after that the second sub-race, which wandered westward, as all the
later sub-races did; then came the third, the Irānian; then the fourth,
the Keltic; and the fifth, the Teutonic. So far we have come in the
history of the sub-races of our own fifth Root Race. Now, notice that
these overlap each other as they develop. The first of these sub-races is
still a mighty power in Asia, showing signs that its day is by no means
done, and that the Indians, if they have behind them a civilisation of
hundreds of thousands of years, have also before them a mighty future,
the first signs of which are being seen in the India of to-day. Signs,
some encouraging, some disturbing for a time, are being seen on every
hand that new life is being poured into its veins, signs of the birth of
a new Indian nation. Of the second sub-race we have not any nation at
the present time. Along the Mediterranean Basin it has left many traces
of its civilisation, which are being unburied by our archæologists; but
so little mark, so to speak, did it leave on history that a large number
of its wonders were deemed to be legends and myths. The next sub-race,
the great Persian race, is almost outworn. The Persians of to-day have
little in common with the Irānian of the past. The chief traces of
them, in fact, are on the Indian continent, the Parsīs, a race which has
dwindled and is gradually passing away. But when we come to the fourth
sub-race, the Keltic, we see great possibilities in that still. It gave
birth to the older Greece, the country of Beauty and Philosophy. It gave
birth also to Rome, with her remarkable ruling powers. It spread over
Europe, founding one nation after another from itself, and spreading
into Ireland and Scotland, made there possibilities that have not yet
all flowered into effect. In Ireland you have a strange mingling of the
remains of the fourth Root Race with the fourth sub-race of the fifth; a
great deal of the Atlantean influence still exists, many of the tutelary
deities of Ireland, the gods of the mountains, being largely they who
mingled with Atlantean life and thought, and are still exercising their
potent influences over the younger though still ancient Keltic sub-race.
There, again, we have great possibilities of revival and of growth, for
the fourth sub-race and the sixth sub-race are necessarily interlinked.
Just as the emotional nature stretches upwards and causes sympathetic
action in the spiritual nature, so with the Races and sub-races that
represent these principles upon earth; the fourth and the sixth Races,
like the fourth and sixth sub-races, are closely intertwined. Ireland has
not been kept apart for nothing; the separation between the Kelt and the
Teuton is not without its meaning. We shall find among that Keltic people
possibilities of spiritual power, and we may look possibly for some
mighty influence to flow thence into the great Christian organisation of
Rome, who is now on the balance as to whether she is to sink down along
the line that the Papal Encyclical seems to trace for her and become
the enemy of the Spirit of the Age, or whether the Modernist party in
the Roman Church is to rise into power, purify and vivify that ancient
Communion, and make her again what she ought to be, the Church of Saints,
the type and symbol of the purest and loftiest form of Christian thought.
It may be that Ireland will co-operate also in the great purification
which I pray may come to the Roman Communion, and make its revival
possible. And that is closely connected with the sixth Root Race, and
therefore partly with the sixth sub-race.

Now, after the fourth sub-race came our own; and when we find that this
fifth sub-race, the Teutonic, is carrying on so rapidly the development
of the concrete and scientific mind, when we notice that it is beginning
its last conquest, the conquest of the air, then, if we have learned
the lesson of the past, we may learn to see the signs of the sub-race
which is to succeed it. But these sub-races overlap each other, and it
is at the moment of the zenith of the one that the next is born. Go
back to the zenith of the fourth sub-race, when the fifth was beginning
to develop, when Rome was mighty, then it was that the Goths in German
forests were beginning to be born into Europe; and to draw together into
tribes, which were to grow into nations. Quietly and silently the new
sub-race was being born while its predecessor was reaching the highest
point of the civilised world of its time. Slowly it began to develop its
own peculiarities and powers, and from that day the Teutonic sub-race
has grown stronger and stronger, more and more dominant, and, though a
small minority compared with the population of the world, is dominating
that world by the force of its scientific mind, spreading everywhere, and
making itself the very crest of the advancing wave.

But let us turn away our eyes from the dazzling glow of the present to
look for the quiet places where the birth of the future is beginning to
appear. Just because the fifth sub-race is so strong and dominant, we
look over the world for the beginnings of its successor, which shall rule
the world not by the force of the concrete mind, but by the force of the
pure and compassionate Reason, which will conquer not by power but by
love, not by competition but by co-operation, and found, therefore, an
Empire that will long endure. For it is true now as ever that “They that
take the sword shall perish by the sword,” and the Empire that is to
live will be the Empire that wins its way by love and benediction, that
is a teacher and a defender, and not only a ruler. The sixth sub-race,
the Coming Race, will be born with the sixth Root Race in it, which is
to grow so much more slowly. The coming of the sixth sub-race you may
almost begin to see around you. It is not to be born in a single place,
not to belong to a single nation, for it is the type of humanity, of the
unifying Wisdom, and out of all nations and all peoples and all tongues
it will gather together its chosen for the new type of thought which is
to be born. And what that type will be we can easily outline by thinking
of the characteristics of the buddhic principle in man. What are those
characteristics? First of all, union, and hence in the outer world
co-operation. The very essence of all action in the sixth sub-race will
be the union of many to achieve a single object, and not the dominance
of one who compels others to his will. The work of the future will not
be, “Do so-and-so and follow me,” but, “Let us advance together to a
goal that we all realise as desirable of attainment.” If you are looking
for the sign of anyone who is beginning to show the marks of that sixth
sub-race to-day, you will find it in those who lead by love, sympathy,
and comprehension, and not by dominance of an imperious will; for the
qualities of that sub-race will be found scattered here and there through
the sub-race which it is gradually to supplant. You may trace out the
coming of the sixth sub-race in the scattered people found in our fifth
sub-race, in whom tenderness is the mark of power. Anyone who desires to
take part in the building of that race needs to develop now the power
to work with others rather than against them, and so, by a continual
common effort, to replace the spirit of antagonism and competition. It
is a synthesising spirit which we shall find in the forerunners of our
sixth sub-race—those who are able to unite diversity of opinion and of
character, who are able to gather round them the most unlike elements
and blend them into a common whole, who have that capacity for taking
into themselves diversities and sending out again unities, and utilising
the most different capacities, finding each its place, and welding all
together into a strong whole. That is one of the characteristics which
marks the type of being out of whom this sixth sub-race will gradually
develop. A strongly marked characteristic will be compassion. That
virtue is comparatively rare in the energetic, strongly individualised
West. Compassion is that quality which is at once affected by the
presence of weakness, answering to it with patience, with tenderness,
and with protection. You may notice how very often amongst ourselves,
taking the ordinary fifth sub-race type, the presence of weakness is
provocative. It does not call out compassion, but impatience—very
characteristic of the fifth sub-race. Quick to understand and grasp
a fact, it is impatient with the weakness and mental dulness which
cannot easily appreciate the differences which seem to it so clear.
The typical fifth sub-race civilisation is a civilisation that sees in
weakness a field to exploit, a thing to enslave, something to trample
under foot, in order to rise on it, and not to help to exist for itself.
“Inevitable,” you say, “in a bustling civilisation like this, that the
weak should go to the wall.” I do not deny that it has been inevitable
in the development of the strong individualism of the present. That
individualism is a priceless result, cheaply bought even by the suffering
it has caused. Without that strong individualism you would not have the
foundation on which the great co-operative civilisation could be built.
For you cannot synthesise weaknesses, and it was necessary to make the
strong and patient individuality in order that you might have something
to blend together into a harmony in the future that is yet to be born.
It is a very shortsighted view of human nature which sees in the growth
of a particular quality a thing which is wholly undesirable; for there
is nothing which is wholly undesirable in the evolution which is guided
by perfect Wisdom and perfect Love. The most unlovely product of the
fifth sub-race civilisation will be one of the bricks that will be built
into the foundation of the sixth sub-race and of the sixth Root Race.
For out of the strong individuality the strong virtues can be built,
and compassion is a virtue of the strong, and not of the weak. The
feeble, sentimental sympathy that comes with the poor and undeveloped
nature is not compassion. It has no power of healing in it, and no power
of protection. The person who, seeing a suffering or wrong, or even
a physical accident, goes into hysterics over it, is not the strong
helper who heals and protects. It is not the skilful nurse who goes into
hysterics over the agony of the patient in pain, leaving that patient
to suffer while she is having the cheap luxury of sentimental tears. It
is only out of the strong natures you can build up real compassion. The
compassion which does not help is useless, and help can only be given
where knowledge guides feeling, and understanding shapes the remedy.
Hence out of these strong individualities, when their object has been
changed and the greater Self has taken the place of the smaller self, out
of those the sixth sub-race, which has pure Reason for its dominating
principle, will gradually appear. When in yourselves you find the germs
of compassion, and know that that is to be part of the dominating
characteristic of the coming sub-race, then cherish these germs to the
utmost. But remember that they must grow out of the germinal feeling of
sympathy into the strong power to uplift and to save; for compassion
is the great mark of the Saviour. And the Saviour is never weak, but
strong, and out of his strength grows his compassion. You can test it
for yourself. Having to deal with someone who is very slow, you are
impatient. Why? Because you are weak. You are not strong enough to make a
question clear with slow and deliberate intent, not strong enough to bear
with the stupidity and feebleness.

The next great thing you want is the sense of unity, and that you can
never have unless you are strong. There is nothing harder in the world
than to pierce through a man’s weakness and his poor qualities, which
are on the surface, and to see within the growing power of the God.
Yet that is what you have to do if you would be truly wise. You see in
the people around you to-day a large number of faults. How far do you
see behind every fault the seed of divinity which will develop into a
virtue? Has the old Platonic idea ever struck you, that there is no
strong dividing line between the vice and virtue except the quantity
which is present? The undeveloped virtue is a vice; the virtue in excess
is also a vice. The golden mean between the two is the virtue. Take a
common illustration—cowardice on one side, recklessness on the other.
Courage is the mean between the two. And so in everything excess is
vice, whether a defect or a surplusage, and the perfect equilibrium
between them alone is virtue. If you would realise that for yourselves,
wherever you see a vice in your neighbour, you will look through the
vice to the virtue that shall be, and in the greatest faults of the
present you learn to see the promise of the future. You find a person
intolerant. He thinks you are a fool because you cannot see the same way
as he. This is apt to wake in you a similar intolerance. But if you saw
through the intolerance the growing though undeveloped love of virtue,
if you saw through the intolerance the passionate desire to find the
right and do it, the passionate hatred of all that does not seem right,
you would be very patient; for presently the flower of the virtue will
blossom out and show the beauty which all the time was within. You hear
abuse, or slander, or calumny. You think it is hateful. But the person
who is doing it in his ignorance is mistaken, and that is a reason for
compassion, and not for anger. The more cruel the ignorance may make a
person, the greater the demand for the compassion, which, because it
understands all, overcomes all; nay, does not even overcome, because to
overcome would mean separation; but realises the unity between oneself
and another, and takes the weakness of another as one’s own. Now these
things are well enough known in principle. Why not practise them? Why,
in difficulties like those we have been passing through, should there
be angry words on both sides? The Theosophist who understands has no
room for anger, but only room for compassion. These are the things that
in the sixth sub-race we shall want. All these must begin to grow now,
and germinate in the heart of every one of you who would take part in
the building of that coming sub-race. And hardest of all to develop, in
a race where separateness has been the type of greatness, is the sense
of unity. This sense of unity and of compassion will be a strength and
power which is only one for service, which makes the measure of strength
the measure of responsibility and of duty. And so your character will
be marked—if you are a candidate for the sixth sub-race—will be marked
by a great sense of duty, and a great indifference to what are called
“rights.” There is a splendid word of Mazzini that “every right grows
out of a duty discharged.” That is utterly true. It is the discharge of
duty out of which inevitably the right grows, and then the right comes
not by combat, but by the inevitable necessity of nature. Because where
everyone discharges his duty, everyone enjoys his rights without conflict
and without demand. The mark of our own sub-race is the demanding of our
rights. But to those who know the law of karma there is nothing that need
be claimed, because you possess all which is yours. The karma brings
to you everything to which you have a right; and if what is called an
injustice is done you, it is only the balancing up of an ancient wrong.
You think people can hurt you. Then you do not believe in the law of
karma. It is your own hand that strikes you, and no one else’s. No one
can injure you or wrong you, no one can commit any injustice against you.
The whole of that which you suffer comes out of your past. These people
are mere puppets who come forward to claim the debt that you have to
pay. If you really believed that, then the man who demands a debt from
you would be your friend whom you would welcome; for karma’s debts are
never demanded twice. There is no error in her account. But, as a matter
of fact, hardly any of you believe it in actual life. What you profess
does not make one scrap of difference. You do not believe unless you live
what you say you believe. And if you believed it, you would know that
no slander could wrong you, no injury hurt you, and that the words of
the Christ on His way to His Passion were absolutely true: “You could do
nothing at all against me except it were given you from above.” That is
the secret of the patience of the Christs; they know the law, they live
by it and accept it. And that utter belief in Law, and therefore the
recognition of duty, that is another of the great marks of the race that
is to be. Every one of you who works that out now in life, who, in face
of an apparent wrong, is calm and receptive, who takes an injustice as
a debt that is paid and cancelled, that man or woman is a candidate for
the coming sub-race, and for the Root Race that shall be gathered out
of its midst. For the sixth Root Race is to be taken out of the sixth
sub-race that is now being born, and according to the qualities you make
in yourselves will be the effectiveness of your candidature for both.

And now look at another side of that growing sub-race. I have laid
most stress on qualities, because qualities shape form; but it is also
true that the bodies of that sub-race will show a different type from
the bodies of the present—will be far more sensitive to all the finer
vibrations of matter, built up within the finer aggregations. And side
by side with the development of the finer and more nervous physical
body will be inevitably the greater organisation of the body that comes
next, the astral, with its corresponding senses. Now notice how in the
difference between the fourth and fifth Root Races it is the nervous
system which is the greatest physical difference. Compare the nervous
system of a Chinaman, or Japanese, with the nervous system of an Aryan,
and you will see the enormous gulf that separates the two Races. A
fourth Race man will recover easily from a tremendous laceration that
would have killed a fifth Race man by mere nervous shock, and it is in
your nervous system that there will be the great difference between
the fifth and sixth Root Races, and the change will show in the sixth
sub-race. You have to solve one of the hardest physical problems; to
have a sensitive, delicate, complicated nervous system hand in hand with
complete health. You can easily strain your system into sensitiveness,
but that is different to refining it into sensitiveness, making it
responsive to the most delicate vibrations from without, but with a
perfect sanity and health. On that you can also work. By the deliberate
use of meditation for the refining of the brain you can gradually build
up—if you do not carry it to excess—an extreme sensitiveness, and at
the same time perfect balance and sanity and health. You must not think
that with fifth Race bodies you can bring about at once sixth Race
characteristics; but within the limitations imposed upon you by your
fifth Race bodies you can gradually develop an increasing sensitiveness
which will react on the astral body, and organise and develop that at
the same time. And you will find, if you will notice the people round
you, that there are being born at the present time more and more children
who show this delicate sensitiveness, hand in hand with generosity, with
tenderness, with broadness of mind, with quick and keen intelligence.
These are children who will gradually develop into the type of the new
sub-race. When they become numerous, and become fathers and mothers
in their turn, then they will gradually prepare for the birth of the
children who will belong to the sixth Root Race. Within the one the other
will be born. Hence all of you who are parents will do rightly and wisely
to study carefully the characters and types of the children whom karma
places in your hands for training. If you see in them the dawning powers
of the coming sub-race, this greater sensitiveness, this tendency to see
where many are blind, do not force it by unwise admiration, do not check
it by equally unwise unbelief. Let the children of to-day grow up among
the healthiest possible conditions, but also amongst the most refined
that you can give them. Remember that in the training of the higher
emotions beauty is an essential factor, and that without the bringing
of beauty into home and daily life the birth and growth of the coming
sub-race will be hindered. You have to war against the ugliness of the
present-day civilisation. You have to strengthen the tendencies which
are beginning to show themselves, and which make for beauty. You must
realise that beauty is an essential part of utility; and that it is the
most narrow-minded utility which thinks that beauty can be left on one
side, and that the ugliness in daily life is not a retarding factor in
the growth of the more refined sub-race that will partially take birth
amongst us. These are very practical things. They deal with your daily
life, with the home of every one of you, and the duties that fall upon
you there. You must not let your Theosophy be outside your daily life.
If Theosophy is to be the moulding force of the race that is to be born,
it must show itself out in your lives, in your thought and action. It is
the great privilege of the Theosophical Society to be the nucleus of
that coming Root Race, and amongst our members there should be some at
least ready to take part in the building of the sixth sub-race. You would
not be amongst us if you had not had in you something to draw you along
the lines of this swifter evolution. You hardly appreciate the forces of
the past which have brought you into the Society. Some come in and drop
out again. They are those who are coming in touch with it for the first
time. Others come in and stay in for years, and then drop out. They are
in a stage a little further on, and have been in it before, and will
return to it in lives to come. There are some who, gripped by it from the
beginning, never move again in their utter fealty to its ideals, whom no
personalities can throw out of it, who belong to Theosophy rather than
have Theosophy belonging to them. These are they who have been in it many
a time before, and will come into it again, to live and die in it over
and over again, life after life. Well for you who are here to-day that
in the trials of the last few years you have not allowed personalities
to blind you to principles, nor real or imaginary faults in persons
to make you shrink in your loyalty to Theosophy itself. Persons die;
principles live. Men and women pass away with their virtues and faults,
but the Theosophical Society will endure generation after generation.
Well for you if in the storm you have been able to stand firm; great the
benediction that comes upon you that in the day of trial you have not
denied your Master, in the day of suffering you have not forsaken and
fled away.




Lecture II

The Immediate Future


You may remember that when we last met I spoke to you about the sixth
sub-race, and my speech this evening turns on the same set of ideas,
although from a different standpoint, rather more special to the Society
than to the world at large. In this lecture I am concerned rather with
the view of the nature of the Theosophical Society which was held in
its earliest days, dropped a little out of sight, and is now being very
generally recalled, so that the Society should rise to the height of its
opportunity and do the work that lies before it in the immediate future.
If you will turn back to the days of H. P. Blavatsky in India you will
find she was fond of dwelling on a particular relation held by two of
the Masters, primarily to the Society, and secondarily to the coming
civilisation of which the Society is the herald. She used to refer her
Hindū friends to the statements in their own Purānas, in which it was
said that two Kings would come at the end of the Age, and that to them
would be given the kingdom of the new and opening Age. These statements,
which are often repeated, raised in the hearers the inquiry, “Who are
the two Kings?” and then she gave them a hint that the two Kings of
the Purānas were the two Masters who were the real Founders of the
Theosophical Society. That set the keen brains of the students to work.
They promptly began to try and find out what were the names of the two
Kings. One of these students found it, wrote a paper, which was published
with H. P. Blavatsky’s approval, giving the names of the two Kings—Moru
and Devāpi—two names mentioned in many of the Purānas in relation to
the past history of the Hindūs, one of them, Moru, belonging to the
Solar Dynasty, descending directly from Rāma, one of the Avatāras—that
before Shrī Krshna—a great King, said to have retired from his throne
and to have gone to Shamballa, there to wait until he was recalled to
lead the human race; the other, whose name was given as Devāpi, was the
elder brother of the famous King of the Lunar Dynasty, to which the next
Avatāra belonged. He was the elder brother of the father of Bhīshma, and
he similarly gave up his right to the crown, retired to the same place,
and the same phrase is used with regard to him, that he was to wait
there the coming age. Now H. P. Blavatsky was very much delighted at the
ingenuity of her students, and said that the outline was correct, and it
was published. H. P. Blavatsky often referred to this function of the two
Masters who were responsible for the founding of the Society. As in these
latter days that idea of the Masters as the Founders of the Society has
been challenged, I may perhaps say I have myself seen that fact stated
in the writing of the Master “M.” I have read the letter in which He
says that He and His fellow Adept “K. H.” had taken on themselves the
responsibility of a new spiritual movement in the world; that there was
some doubt in the Lodge as to the wisdom of the movement at that time;
and that they were allowed to take that step only on the condition that
they should found and work the Society through others whom they could
direct and control. Then He went on to say that He had chosen a disciple
of his own, H. P. Blavatsky, and that He had sent her to America to
look for another disciple, H. S. Olcott, and that these were the outer
founders of the Society. Hence to me and to many others who believe that
these letters are genuine the nature of the origin of the Society cannot
be a matter of doubt.

Starting, then, from that standpoint, we find certain things were said
by H. P. Blavatsky as regards the nature of the Society, and certain
things by the Masters themselves. Both are very important for us in
consideration of the immediate future. The first of these things was
indicated by hints which the more advanced students could understand—that
the inner purpose of the Society was to prepare the world for the coming
of a new Race, and to be itself the nucleus of that Race; that one of
the Teachers was to be the Manu of the race, the other the Bodhisattva.
Now those exact facts were unpublished at the time, but they passed from
one to the other among the more advanced students of that period. Coming
into the Society in 1889, this particular fact did not come within my
knowledge until 1895. After the Coulomb struggle the Society for a time
dropped away from the occult path on which H. P. Blavatsky had started
it, and these ideas fell out of sight and were forgotten except by a
limited number. In 1895 they were re-communicated to myself by my
own Master, and have since been passed on to the older members of the
Theosophical Society.

Let us pause for a moment on the statement with regard to the Manu and
Bodhisattva. Every Root Race has for its guide a great Adept, much higher
than the great ones we call the Masters, and that office filled by a
mighty Being is an office the name of which indicates simply the man, the
thinker. The connotation is the ideal, typical man, making rather the
emphasis on the article “the.” The name is peculiarly suitable, because
each of these Manus at the head of the Root Race is the type of the
Race over which he is to preside. The types of the seven Races are part
of the plan of the Planetary Logos, and that plan is worked out, stage
after stage, by the Manus of the races. It is left to the Manu Himself
how He shall proceed with His work. He takes the responsibility of the
method He chooses. When the time comes to plan out the new Race, then the
coming Manu begins to take up His office, and always in connection with
another great Brother of His own rank, who is called the Bodhisattva.
The Manu of the Fifth Race, as you know, collected His people together
out of the fifth sub-race of the Fourth Root Race, sent out messengers
to call them together, brought them together, moulded them generation
after generation, and at last evolved them to the necessary physical
type. For the work of the Manu is double: to choose out those who show
in consciousness the germs of the new stage which is to evolve in the
coming Race; then, having chosen them out and stimulated that germ within
them, to set to work to shape the necessary bodies. Now in that far-off
time our own Manu of the fifth Root Race had to choose materials out of
the fifth sub-race, and He did not choose at all those who were regarded
as the best specimens of the day. Remember that the fourth sub-race,
like the fourth Root Race as a whole, showed out very powerfully all the
passional characteristics and the psychic qualities which accompanied
them. It was the fourth sub-race, the Toltec, which made the great
Empire, with the city of the Golden Gate as metropolis, that whose armies
spread over the known world, conquering everywhere, and in that sub-race
psychic qualities naturally played a great part. You will remember that
at the earlier stage of great emotional and passional manifestation,
psychic qualities are very largely developed before the development of
the lower mind. That evolution belongs to the astral body as a whole,
working not through the astral chakras, but through the astral centres
connected with our physical senses. The fourth sub-race carried all that
to the highest point. Children in the schools were picked out for their
paths in life by clairvoyance; and in all matters of policy, statecraft,
etc., clairvoyants were consulted, so that by the exercise of the psychic
qualities they might get the best possible knowledge to be had at the
time. Now the characteristics of the fifth sub-race were the diminution
of psychic power and the germinating of the seed of mind, and these
two things necessarily went together, so that, as that fifth sub-race
developed, the people of it were rather looked down upon by the highly
evolved psychic sub-race which preceded it. These people seemed to be
inferior; they could not use the powers which put their predecessors in
the very forefront of civilisation, and made this world and the astral
world almost one and the same. The children born with very little of
these psychic powers, the men and women who showed still less of it, were
by no means thought to have within them the promise of the future. Yet
out of these the Manu chose His material, because they showed the germ of
the mind which was specially wanted as the characteristic of the coming
Race. It did not matter that it was only a germ, or that they were much
less effective than the people of the mighty civilisation in which they
appeared. He was looking to the future, and so these people were by no
means the people whom the Atlanteans of the day would have chosen if
consulted in the matter. But the great people do not always consult with
the smaller people, who are so very sure of the rightness of their own
judgment. They have an uncomfortable way of following their own ideas;
and, as the Master “M” once said of some people who remarked that He
did not come up to their idea of an Adept, “The mark of the Adept is
not kept at Simla.” And that sentence is rather a good one to remember.
So also the mark of the disciple is not kept in London or in Chicago,
but in a very different part of the world, and to that those who know
something about it try to conform. So the choice of the Manu of the day
would have been regarded as a very poor one by the wise folk of the time.
Nevertheless he carried away his people and built them up into a great
Race.

Now there is something very instructive in that when we try to understand
the method of His choice in the light of the past, and the analogy of
principles. For we can see that if the germs of a sixth sub-race—from
which, later, a sixth Root Race will be born—are to be chosen out by Him
from the materials that the fifth sub-race affords, then the nature of
His choice probably will not be that which would be made by the leaders
of that fifth sub-race itself. Theirs to carry on to the highest point
the concrete, scientific mind, which is the glory of their sub-race.
Theosophists sometimes ask: “Why do not the great men of Science come
into the Theosophical Society?” Simply because they have their own work
to do; and their work at present is not to build the future civilisation,
but to lead to its highest point the present one. In the future, when
they shall have led that civilisation to the highest point, and when
it has taken its place at the head of the world’s thought, then will
come the time for these great minds to be reborn into another race, and
build on the splendid intellectual foundation they have laid. The work
of the world is the end that the great Ones consider, and these strong
scientific minds to-day are needed by the world to carry on the present
civilisation to the highest point. How unwise it would be to take them
away from the work that no one else can do, and set them to other work
they would do badly, not having turned their energies to the particular
qualifications that are wanted for it. And so in the wise plan of the
Manu of the fifth Race, the flower of the fifth or Teutonic sub-race
is taken in order that it may be raised up to the highest point of the
mānasic civilisation, and be carried on to its zenith of splendour
of scientific knowledge. But meanwhile it is His duty to help in the
building up of the other types—still his Race is the sixth sub-race—and
so to co-operate with His successor the Manu of the sixth Root Race.
For remember the Manu of all the sub-races of a Root Race is the same.
He is the Manu of the whole Race; when the time comes for beginning the
new Root Race, then the Manu of the Race that is regnant co-operates
with the Manu of the Race which is to come. Hence He who is to be the
Manu of the sixth Root Race, the Master “M,” the Moru of the Purānas, He
has begun His work. And He has begun it in a humble and insignificant
fashion, as the world would say, by striking the keynote of Brotherhood,
and by drawing into a Society those whose hearts thrill responsive to
that note. And why? Because the higher emotion that answers to universal
Brotherhood, to love of all, without distinction of race, sex, caste,
colour, or creed—that is the emotion, that is the germ of the buddhic
principle in man, the principle of unifying, of drawing the separated
together, of blending into one separate individualities, and making them
realise the spiritual unity which overshadows and underlies them all.
Hence universal Brotherhood is the only thing which is binding on members
of the Theosophical Society. Nothing else. The Theosophical teachings
as to Karma, Reincarnation, or the Masters, are not binding on the mind
or conscience of any member. This is an important point. It is not only
because a truth is better seen by the unfettered intellect than by an
intellect on which a dogma is imposed, though that is of importance; but
because the material which can be moulded into the Coming Race is the
material that can recognise the necessity and the beauty of universal
Brotherhood, and if that be recognised, nothing else for the moment is
necessary. Hence that is the only binding principle. Hence, also, the
attempts to narrow it down, prompted by those Dark Powers who do not
desire that the Society should grow and prosper for thousands of years
to come, the attempts to put in a little restraint here and a little
obstacle there, judging for the moment, and not for the future. That is
the inner meaning of having that one thing alone our bond of union. And
so the Manu made that the keynote to attract those who would answer,
“Yes; that is the very thing I want to join in and help.” And so the
nucleus of the great sixth Root Race began to be formed. But that is not
an immediate future, although already beginning. The sixth sub-race is
the immediate future; under the rule of the Manu of the fifth still, but
co-operating with the Manu of the Sixth, in order that those who show
signs of being fit material for the Coming Race may have a preliminary
practise of the virtues of that race. Hence the stress that H. P.
Blavatsky laid on this inner side of the working of the Theosophical
Society; and hence the need, because the time is passing rapidly,
to make public what has been kept private in the past of this inner
purpose, which has really dominated the Society from within, although not
recognised without.

Let us see how that immediate future should be recognised in its
characteristics, and thus prepared for. First of all we must understand
the words spoken long ago under the inspiration of the coming
Bodhisattva, that the Theosophical Society was to be “the corner-stone
of the future religion of humanity.” Now every sub-race has a special
religion, as it were. The religion of the fifth sub-race is Christianity.
What is the future religion of humanity in this sense? It differs from
all that have gone before. It is no longer an exclusive and separatist
faith, but a recognition that in every religion the same truths are
found; that there is only one true religion, the Divine Wisdom; and
that every separate religion is true just so far as it incorporates the
main teachings of that Divine Wisdom. The one supreme religion is the
Knowledge of God; to that everything else is subsidiary. Just in so far
as any special religion puts within the reach of its followers the means
for rising to that supreme knowledge, in so far is that religion worthy
of its place. And when that supreme test is not thoroughly answered—when
dogmas, and ceremonies, and rites become more important than this inner
truth of the gaining of individual knowledge of the Supreme—then the
religion becomes narrower, weaker, unspiritual, until a time comes when
either the religion must die or a new impulse must be poured into it to
bring it back to its original position, a channel for the knowledge of
God. Now, in the past many religions have done their work and passed
away, and we come to the present time, when certain great religions
are living. And when the great new spiritual impulse came, it was not
charged with the building of a new religion, but with the vitalising of
those great existing religions, to make them realise their underlying
foundation; they were vivified in order to help them to rise to a
more spiritual and mystic interpretation of their teachings; and when
that was done, they were to be blended together into a brotherhood
of Religions, so that all should recognise the Divine Wisdom as their
root. That was the first work of the Theosophical Society. It was done
all over the world. See how in India Hindūism was revived; in Ceylon,
Buddhism. Ask the ordinary missionary who comes over here, who is not
generally very broad-minded, and he will tell you that the great opponent
of Christianity in the East is the Theosophical Society. Then, if you
press him and ask, “But are Theosophists antagonistic to you?” “No,” he
will say, “but they strengthen the other religions, and thus prevent our
making converts.” And that is true. It is not our business to convert
people from one religion to another, but to try to make every one
realise the splendour of his own religion. Naturally, in India—except
in Travancore, where there has been a Christian Roman Catholic colony
from the very early centuries of the Church—Christianity is an alien
religion, and only grows by injuring the older religions of the land.
Naturally, then, the missionaries look on the Theosophical Society as
an opponent, because it has been the great factor in the revival of
Hindūism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, and is beginning to be a factor
in the revival of Muhammadanism. Now, when you see that, and when you
come to the West and see how the same influence has been widening the
Christian Church, how mystical Christianity is spreading everywhere in a
way that would have seemed incredible some three years ago—see how narrow
it was, and look now, how everywhere the mystic thought is spreading, and
see how, in the Roman Catholic Church, the spreading of this spirit has
become so wide that the Pope is forced into fulminating against it, and
in the Modernism that he condemns we find Theosophy mentioned as one of
the forms—you will realise that that part of the work is almost done. I
do not mean that we are not to continue spreading abroad more spiritual
ideas, but that the work has been done so effectively already that it is
almost passing into the hands of the religions themselves. The clergy
are now preaching so much Theosophy that it hardly seems necessary to
continue preaching the parts they have adopted. The Theosophical teaching
as to the nature of the Christ in His birth in the human form, and His
growth into Divine Manhood—how common a doctrine that is now within all
the Churches of the West. The fact of Reincarnation is also becoming more
and more widely accepted—a doctrine no longer to be laughed at, but to
be carefully argued over, and forming a part of the deepest thought of
the Christian world. So that while we must still go on with that part
of the work, there are other parts of our work now that we ought to be
ready to take up. That religion of the future which is to include all
the religions as sects within itself, all of them going on into the
future, but recognising themselves as a Brotherhood, that is to be the
dominant religious thought of the great sixth Root Race, and in the sixth
sub-race we shall find it spreading everywhere. Now, how mighty will be
the advantage; because the moment all religions are seen to be branches
of one stock, then each religion can share with others the specialty
which it has been its duty to develop in the world. And nowadays, when
the Christian goes to India, instead of trying to convert the Hindū,
which he can never do, what he ought to do is to offer to share with
him that great special characteristic of Christianity, the principle
of self-sacrifice, and the helping of the weaker by the stronger—the
dominant note of Christianity. It is the doctrine of the Cross, the
emblem of self-sacrifice, of the coming down to the depressed in order
to lift them, leading them up side by side with ourselves. That is the
noblest thought of Christendom, typified in the mystic Christ; and that
you might well offer to share with the Hindūs, for that does not come
out so strongly in their great Faith. Rather will they bring to you in
exchange the doctrine of the immanence of God. Two things, Dr. Miller
has written, Hindūism brings to the world: the immanence of God, and the
solidarity of man. When religions exchange their best instead of finding
out each other’s weaknesses, then you have outlined the religion of the
future. Our work in that future is to continue what we have so well
begun, and spread this liberal, thoughtful, religious ideal through all
religions, destroying none, but permeating all.

Next we have to consider what we ought to do in the training of the
next generation; for there is great need that the Theosophical ideal of
education should spread through Western minds, and especially through
Britain and its empire. Religious education at the present time is in
peril; how great that peril is may be measured by the Moral Education
Congress gathered together in London last year to try to find a moral
basis that should furnish education apart from all the sanctions of
religion—a hopeless task, but none the less a sign of the peril of the
times. Now, we have had secular education in India. It has been the
English education the Government has given there. It could not give any
other because of the different religions of the country, and it was bound
not to help any one of these to the detriment of the others. The moral
result has been disastrous. It has fostered selfishness, indifference to
the country, lack of public spirit. It has given us a race of men who
have acquired from the West its superficial qualities, but not its inner
strength, not its inner capacity. And the troubles you have in India now
are largely the result of this anti-religious education, which has made
hundreds of the best Indian type skeptics, a thing which has only been
checked with the growth of the Theosophical Society throughout India. We
have turned back that irreligious wave, with the result that the Indian
Government to-day regards the Theosophical Society as the most likely
agency for training the youth of India along lines of freedom and order
at the same time. They realise that we have put our finger on the weak
point in their own system, and that our plan of giving to the child the
religion of his parents is really the way to solve that religious problem
in India. Now, over here you have to face the problem how to preserve
religion while letting dogmatism go; how to find a common ground, a few
common principles, which all Christians inculcate, leaving to a later
time in life the special sectarian divisions which the young man and
woman can acquire later if they wish. Now, in that the Theosophical
Society may well play a great part in the immediate future, strengthening
all the influences which make for the keeping of religion as an integral
part of education, helping to soften the bitter sectarianism, and
persuade the different denominations to remember that they are Christians
more than that they belong to this, that, or the other denomination. If
we succeed in that, then the service to the education of the empire will
be supreme.

Along other lines we want, if we can, to persuade the public mind to
become a little more receptive of new ideas; to lose a little of its
pride, and learn a little humility. Unless we are quite sure that
we are at the very top of human evolution, and that nothing greater
than ourselves can be evolved, then it would be the part of wisdom to
recognise that the next type, which is the type of the future, must be
different from the type of the present, and, in the beginning of its
evolution, new and strange. You may remember how J. S. Mill, in speaking
of liberty, laid immense stress on originality, and complained that
modern methods were tending to make all come to a single level; to do
away with the eccentric, even with the original. Now, for growth, variety
is wanted. Where there is no spontaneous variation in types, you have
stagnation. And yet every one of us is so fond of our own particular line
of thought that we take it almost as an offence if someone starts a new
thought which we cannot at once fit into our own mental grooves. Now, we
must try to correct that, first in ourselves, and then in the public at
large, especially in view of the coming of that mighty Teacher I have
spoken of. When He comes, the type of the sixth Root Race, He must be
very different from all of us, otherwise He would not be the type of the
new departure. How can we avoid treating Him when He comes exactly as
our predecessors of the fourth sub-race treated Him when He came last to
start the fifth? It is so easy for all of us, looking back to the mighty
Figure of the Christ, to realize something of its splendour, but we see
Him through the glamour of the religion which has made His name supreme
in many of your hearts. Try and put yourselves back in time, and see how
strange that new type would have then seemed to you, how against all your
prejudices. So different was He that He raised an antagonism so bitter
that they could not bear Him amongst them for more than three years,
and then murdered Him. It is hard for us to realise that. We are apt to
think, “If I had been there, I would have stood beside Him; I would not
have been amongst those who slew Him.” And yet there is no particular
reason to think we should not have done the same. It is a great lesson
for the immediate future. For when He comes again to bless this beginning
of a sixth sub-race, the buddhic, He will show out the qualities of
Buddhi prominently, and those are by no means very acceptable to the
modern world. Look fairly at your own minds and see how you stand on your
rights. It is the spirit of the time. If you have not what you think your
rights, you make a clamour for them. For the mānasic civilisation that
is the proper way, but those who want to go on in the new future that is
dawning have to throw all that aside. You must relinquish your “rights.”
If you are trampled on, you must recognise that it is only yourself of
the past trampling on yourself of the present: no one can trample on you
except a person who embodies your own past injustice, and is working out
that which you yourself have created. That is a very unpopular view, as
unpopular as the Sermon on the Mount. And so along many other lines of
that which is admirable from the popular standpoint—power, dominance,
the spirit which tramples down all opposition. How different from that
of the Wisdom which rules, but rules from within, “mightily and sweetly
ordering all things.” And if you will think over this in detail and work
it out, you will find you will have to change your ideal of what is
admirable, and build up on ideal on the basis of Spirit and unity, and
not on rights and claims. And that is one reason why the Theosophical
ideals very often find themselves rejected in the outer world. Those are
the qualities needed for the world as it shall be; and if we are to be
builders of that immediate future, we must develop them in ourselves.
But you may say: “Is it not rather a big assertion to make that this
Theosophical Society is really a nucleus of a great Root Race; that it is
the beginning of a sub-race? What right have you to make such a claim?”
The answer is, that looking back to the last choice, we should expect
to find the beginning of the new Race and new sub-race among those who
were not the leaders of the present, but had in them the germ of the
future. That is why our people are gathered not from the leaders and
the thinkers, but from the loving, the compassionate, the brotherly. It
seems a feeble thing, this power of Brotherhood. It is the mightiest
thing in all the world. And although it is true that we cannot expect to
find amongst us men and women of magnificent intellect and overwhelming
power of thought, we may expect to find amongst us the compassionate,
the gentle, and the loving, and those give the plastic material which
will yield itself to the fingers of the Manu to be moulded into a new
type, a higher evolution. Hence, from time to time the great shakings
that take place to shake out those who are too purely intellectual, and
who do not think the word Brotherhood is a word that ought to be heard
so much amongst us. The Masters have chosen Brotherhood as our mark, and
we cannot march in Their army if we will not bear Their sign. And so,
if mind makes us too self-assertive, too sure of our own superiority,
then we must be shaken out of this movement. So do not in this immediate
future be troubled if we still continue to go along our own quiet road of
attracting the loving and the gentle rather than those who are mighty in
their intellectual power. The thing of vital importance is the Spirit of
Brotherhood, and that we must never let go. And remember, in the whole
of the struggles of the future, as in those of the past, that they must
always rage round persons, and those who think more of personalities
than of principles are inevitably shaken out. If you make a person’s
presence or absence a reason for being in or out of the Society, you are
showing the spirit of separation, which cannot realise a principle, but
thinks only of the passing and transient personality. What can it matter
whether any one of you agrees or disagrees with Mr. Leadbeater, or with
Mr. Mead, or with anyone else? These are all persons. The principle of
the Society remain unshaken. Presidents are elected and Presidents die,
but the Society goes on. What folly, then, to give up a place in a mighty
movement because the person temporarily at the head of it is a person who
does not exactly fit into the shape you have made as your own particular
ideal. It does not matter. The Society is not bound by its President any
more than by anyone else. It is bound only by its great central principle
of Brotherhood. And so all of you who have stood through the past shaking
have shown that you care more for principles than for persons, and it
does not matter whether, so to speak, you have agreed or disagreed with
the President so long as you have stood firm within the Society; for
there lies the principle, whilst the other is only personality. Cling,
then, to that principle to which you have clung through the past storm;
recognise that whether a person be right or wrong, noble or ignoble,
great or small, that is a matter of secondary importance. The work of
the future lies in the movement, and not in the hands of any particular
individual who may happen to be here. Whether you or I come back to
this great movement in other lives depends on ourselves, and not on the
opinion that anyone else may happen to have about us. None can throw us
out of it if we are worthy to remain in it; none can keep us in it if we
are unworthy to be part of it. And realising kārmic law, realising the
greatness of the movement and its work in the future, let us join hands,
whether we agree or disagree with each other on any other matter save
that of Brotherhood, and go forward into the future that is unfolding
before us, brighter than ever the past has shone; go forward to the
making of the sub-race out of which the Root Race shall spring, under
the banner of our Manu and our Bodhisattva, the mighty Ones of years and
millennia to come.




Lecture III

The Catholic and Puritan Spirit in the Theosophical Society

The Value and Danger of Each


I want to try to trace out the somewhat difficult subject of the place of
the Puritan and the Catholic Spirit in our Society. I want to show that
both types are necessary in every great movement; that both have their
value and place, yet also their dangers. And if we realise that both are
necessary, it may help each type to be tolerant as regards the other, and
to see that each has its dangers.

Now, all the world over these two types are found; they are, in fact, two
marked temperaments, intellectual and emotional, into which, roughly,
you might throw almost all thoughtful and educated people, and even
the thoughtless and ignorant, for those also will show similar types,
although naturally less attractively, because more extreme, than they
may be among the class of people who at least are seeking to understand
themselves, and to gain some measure of equilibrium. Looked at from
the outside, the Catholic type is certainly the more attractive, and
therefore I want to impress upon you the value of the Puritan type;
because, being less attractive, its value is more likely to be
overlooked. If the Puritan spirit were completely lost, mankind would
lack that vigour and strength and tendency to free thought and free
judgment which are so essential to human evolution. Unfortunately, it has
often been united with a very cold and forbidding exterior; and if we
take the two types as we find them in the reign of Charles I., certainly
the Puritan is not very attractive from outside—hard, rather sour,
forbidding, and austere. But it is not quite fair to judge the Puritan by
that type in the reign of the Stuarts. It is not fair to pick out a type
at the moment where these two difficulties face it—danger to itself, and
the extreme evil of the type it is opposing. It is hardly fair to take
that moment for a judgment of the value of the temperament in itself.
But even if you take the Puritan of the time of Charles I. and Cromwell,
you can hardly help noticing, if you go beyond externals, the extreme
moral value of that type amid those difficult and dangerous surroundings.
Austere as it was, it was the austerity that was trying to guard itself
against continual danger of pollution, and naturally it ran into
extremes, as all reactions run, with the inevitable result that another
reaction followed on the first, and you had the loose and profligate
type of the Court of Charles II. It is the types I want to disentangle
from these special manifestations, and, looking at them apart, from all
conditions that may emphasise one characteristic or another.

Now, in what does the Puritan type exactly consist? It seems to
consist in an attitude of protest and criticism rather than of ready
acceptance of the prevailing thought of the time. The Puritan mind is
essentially critical, and critical in the modern sense of the term,
which, instead of making the critic a judge, makes him an opponent and
condemner. We must remember, however, that the true critical spirit is
absolutely necessary for human progress, even though it often slips into
condemnation and cynicism. The Puritan is always intellectual (I am
speaking of the purer type), a man in whom mind is predominant. He is of
the type that tends to separation rather than unity; he stands alone,
sufficient for himself (I say that rather than “self-sufficient,” the
second form connoting a rather unpleasant quality). We must realise the
strength of this type. The strength may slip into austerity, but that
very largely grows out of the religion to which the Puritan may happen to
be attached. You do not find him in his more aggressive form unless he
is protesting against something he regards as dangerous and mischievous.
Naturally, under these considerations he is thrown into the attitude of
combat, and hence all that is harshest and most hostile inevitably comes
to the surface. But that is not a necessary part of the Puritan spirit.
Looking at him as the intellectual man in whom emotion in this particular
life is comparatively weak, or if not weak, repressed; seeing that in him
the mental qualities are those which in this incarnation he specially
endeavours to develop; understanding that the mind can only be developed
where the qualities of analysing, comparing, and judging are active,
you can readily see how, in the face of opposition, these qualities
would turn into antagonism and protest. But I do not think antagonism
and protest are a necessary part of the Puritan spirit. In peaceful
times your Puritan would be distinguished rather as the analytical or
intellectual man, most valuable to any community into which he may be
thrown at the time. For you cannot develop the mind without developing
these analysing qualities: synthesis comes later, the one belonging to
the lower, the other to the higher Manas. Both need to be developed.
While the lower Manas is developing, you must have these qualities of
analysis, comparison, and judgment without which it is not possible to
lay a strong foundation for any belief. You must recognise the utter
necessity for the challenging, questioning, even doubting and sceptical
spirit. Only by means of this can error be detected, and the traditions
that come down from the past be gradually purified of the accretions that
have come to them during the ignorant periods through which they may have
passed. To be sceptical is no fault, but rather a virtue. If there is to
be progress at all, there must be challenging of that which has come down
from the past, so that, testing, analysing, criticising, you may be able
to separate the truth from the error. How would religion become ever more
and more spiritual if men are only to inherit, and never to examine and
understand? And since no religion or other form of thought can ever come
down through centuries without picking up a large amount of error, if we
had not this critical and challenging spirit all religions would grow
into superstitions, and that which is most valuable for the race would
gradually be covered under a mass of ignorant error. Hence at certain
times in the history of the race a great outburst of the Puritan spirit
is necessary. That alone will bring about fundamental changes, religious,
moral, and social; that alone has the courage to go forward whilst in
a minority, and test with the test of reason every belief and every
tradition. We must not, then, blind ourselves to the immense value of
this spirit in the intellectual development of man. For always, inasmuch
as religious and social order has come by some great Teacher enormously
beyond his own generation in religious, moral, and social development,
inevitably his teachings, handed down generation after generation, will
in many respects tend to be covered with superstition.

Let us pause for a moment and see what the word “superstition” means.
I do not think I can give a better definition than my old one:
“superstition is the taking of the non-essential as the essential.”
I think that you will find that that covers all the cases which you
would call superstitions—a truth originally; but in every truth there
are necessary and accessory parts. As the understanding of the truth
is clouded, the accessories take on too large a value in the minds of
people, until at last the accessory is everything and the essential
nothing.

I told once an Indian story which marks out clearly what is superstition.
There was once a very holy man in the habit of offering a sacrifice
by pouring butter into the fire—one of the ordinary Hindū ceremonies.
Morning after morning he duly performed this rite. He was much admired
by his neighbours, and the regularity of the discharge of his religious
duties led them to consider him a model worthy of imitation. This good
man happened to have a cat. As he was kindly-hearted and affectionate,
the cat loved him, and used to come up and interrupt his religious
service; so he put a collar round the cat and tied it to the bedpost
to prevent interruptions. Time went on, a few generations passed, and
then all of the people who copied this admirable saint not only offered
the sacrifice, but also considered it a part of the rite to have a
cat tied to the bedpost. Still more time went on, until at last all
that remained of the original ceremony was the cat tied to the bedpost
and nothing else. Now there is superstition: the harmless accessory
had become necessary, until it occupied the whole of the worshippers’
minds. This is often the case in religions which have lasted long, and
have had many ignorant adherents. They cannot distinguish between the
inner meaning and the outer form; and gradually the outer form becomes
everything, and the inner meaning disappears. Then comes the time when,
superstition having taken the place of truth, there rises up the critical
intellect of man, attacks the whole, and challenges the authority. Only
sometimes the critic is not evolved enough to recognise the truth at the
same time that he wars against the error. More often he takes the whole
as superstition and tries to destroy it completely. There you have the
history of many reformations. Take the great Reformation of the sixteenth
century. If you look back to that you will see that an enormous amount
of valuable truth was thrown aside in trying to get rid of the surface
error with which the truth had been covered. And so in tracing down the
growth of the Puritan spirit from the time of Luther, through Calvinistic
Switzerland, up to Scotland with John Knox, and then looking at it as it
spread over England, and became so powerful under James I. and Charles
I., you will recognise that in the whole of that there is a gradual
throwing away of everything that the mind could not grasp and understand,
and consequently a great loss of the spiritual side of things. The result
of that historically has been that the truth that was thrown away in the
getting rid of the error came back again a little later. And so with
certain fundamental tendencies in man, against which the Puritan of that
time set himself utterly—the use of images in public worship, the use of
music, the use of garments different from the everyday garments, and so
on—all these points that he threw aside as part of the Papal abomination
came back again, slowly, steadily, gradually spreading through the whole
of the Anglican Church. So that you have this remarkable object-lesson,
which it would be well for all Puritan-spirited people to remember.
You may visit a cathedral to-day. Outside the cathedral you will see
the statues which were broken by Cromwell’s soldiery; and inside the
cathedral, on or round the high altar and chancel, you will see the
modern statues placed there in order to help the devotional spirit in the
congregation.

I have purposely taken the Puritan spirit outside the Theosophical
Society so that you may look at it apart from any special question of
interest to our own Society. If you see the value of that in religion,
you will welcome its presence in the Theosophical Society. You will
realise that that spirit is wanted in order to balance and keep in check
what might otherwise be the excess of the Catholic spirit. You will
realise that our critical friends are doing us an immense service in
their criticism, and that it only becomes mischievous when the critical
spirit grows into antagonism and dislike, which need not at all accompany
it, and should not accompany it in a well-balanced and thoughtful mind.
We must have that spirit amongst us, otherwise the enthusiastic will
run away too rapidly and fall into error. The chill that sometimes it
causes is a very valuable element for mental growth. We do not want to
have nothing but chill—that will prevent growth altogether; but if we
were more tolerant with each other, then we might have the advantage of
the chill, which would keep the intellectual atmosphere clear and sharp,
without having the very life chilled out of us by criticism.

Let us now pause on what we mean by the Catholic spirit. By that I
mean the spirit which is reverent of tradition, which is willing to
submit to reasonable and recognised authority, which is willing to take
a great plan and co-operate in it, and realise that the presence of
the architect of the plan, if He be a person highly developed, say a
Master, is enough to give it authority, and that there is no lack of
freedom or dignity in accepting the plan of a greater, and working it
out to the utmost of one’s ability. It is the spirit which, largely
emotional, when it rises into love of the higher and becomes devotion,
causes sympathetic vibrations on the buddhic plane, and so begins the
awakening of the Spirit above the intellect. Again, with this Catholic
spirit you always find the love of beauty. It is artistic. It seeks to
clothe thought in forms of beauty. It loves ceremonial, takes a pleasure
in harmonised expression of thought, and desires that everything round
it should be emotionally satisfactory as well as intellectually sound.
Moreover, its mind is eminently teachable, where the Puritan is not.
Hence it is far easier to lead it along the path of what is called
Occultism. The Catholic mind very readily recognises that those above
itself in development may be able by guidance and teaching to help it
to reach knowledge which, unaided, it would be unable to achieve. The
Puritan would walk alone; the Catholic would utilise every assistance
that can be given in evolution, including the assistance of human beings
more highly developed, as well as of spiritual intelligences. And so
you have round it an atmosphere which readily responds to impulses from
the spiritual worlds, and always with this spirit you find the tendency
toward Occultism of various kinds. I do not think you ever find that
tendency in connexion with the Puritan spirit. You may find with the
Puritan spirit sometimes a lofty form of mysticism, a recognition of a
Spirit as the Life of the universe, and an attempt to realise that Spirit
within oneself. That you may reach largely by way of the intellect,
and emotion is not necessarily concerned in it. Intellectually you may
realise unity, and then pass into the mystical ideal of the One in the
Many, to be recognised in each. And you do find occasionally in the great
Puritans of the past a very noble, though somewhat stern and cold, form
of mystical belief; whereas the moment you come to Catholic mysticism,
you find yourself in an atmosphere charged with emotion. The Catholic
Mystic is swept up in a great surge of emotion to the Object of his love;
the Puritan Mystic calmly, almost coldly, recognises the greatness of the
Object of his worship, intellectually tries to realise, and by that to
some extent unifies himself with It. You have an example of the Puritan
Mystic in Cromwell. Read his letters, read the letters of the man, wrung
out of his heart by the strain of doubt and despair, and clinging, in
spite of all temptation, to his belief in the reality of a Divine Power
whose instrument he was. You will rise from that reading with a new idea
of the strength of the man, and realise that with all that strength there
was the recognition of the strength of God and of his own strength as
being only an instrument in the divine hands. But you never find the
Puritan Mystic the expression of love, of passionate affection, that are
so common among the Catholic Mystics; and more than anything else is the
difference marked when you come to deal with Occultism.

And there, in our own Society, is a point we ought to pause upon. The
Catholic type amongst us will be one that will readily respond to the
idea of the Masters, the Puritan less quickly. The Catholic mind in the
Theosophist will not only recognise the ideal of the Masters, but will be
fired with a desire to tread the path that They have trodden. There will
be a looking up of reverence, an outstretching of the hand for guidance;
a realisation that by that dependence more rapid progress may be made
than along any other line. That which is invisible will exercise a potent
attraction; he will always be trying to know something of the invisible
worlds and their inhabitants, he will always be reaching out toward these
worlds and trying to expand his consciousness into communication with
them. He will be willing to train himself with that in view, and you
will have in him the possibility of the Occultist which you will not find
in the Puritan type. For you cannot begin this part of occult knowledge
along the purely intellectual lines. The intellectual exertion will check
at once the evolution of the other vehicles. The moment you begin to
think: “What am I doing? Is it imagination? Is it hallucination?” you
check the growth of the subtler faculties of the man. You are obliged
for a time to go on without questions, feeling, sensing, groping, and
refusing to allow the mind to come in with its analysing spirit, that
chills everything down so much that these budding faculties, as it were,
shrink back from the touch of the frost, refusing to unfold. “Well,”
you say, “there is a danger. The person may become overcredulous, may
be utterly led astray.” True. It is the necessary danger of all such
research. Only step by step do you learn by experience to distinguish
between the true and false, between the thought-forms created by yourself
and the inhabitants of other worlds into which you are penetrating with
half-opened eyes. But remember that distinguishing does not do away with
the reality of the thought-form. Your own thought-forms which surround
you when you first pass on to the astral plane are real forms in astral
matter. They deceive you, yes, because they are your own creations, and
only give you back the things you are thinking about. They repeat to you
your own thoughts, and there lies the element of danger. But you can only
outgrow that by experience, exactly in the same way that the baby learns
that it cannot catch hold of the glittering thing at the end of the room,
but, to reach it, must cover a great deal of space. You do not think it
heartbreaking because the baby makes mistakes. You are content that he
shall learn. Why not be as philosophical about yourselves? You know that
they will grow out of their ignorance by experience. So will you. Those
who always want to be right are people who will never make Occultists.
The Occultist must be ready to plunge forward, and possibly tumble into
a bog, but be ready to go on again afterwards, learning by experience
to understand. Those who will not face this have not enough of the
Catholic spirit to make Occultists, and had better leave it for another
incarnation.

There is another danger, one especially seen here—the dependence upon
another. I have often been asked: “How can you develop independence
and judgment if you are always trying to do the will of another, whom
you call your Master?” The answer is simple. You look to your Master
for direction, and He may point you to some work to be done. You take
the work because He told you to do it. So far you are the obedient
servant; but your judgment, your reason, all your thought-power, all
your initiative, are taxed to the utmost in the achievement of the task.
A sensible Occultist never goes running to his Master and asking, “How
shall I do this?” He knows that is not the Master’s work. The Master has
done His part in saying “Do that.” How you do it tests you, and brings
out your strength and weakness. And the Master is far too wise to prevent
your bringing out your strength and discovering your weakness by doing
for you what He has told you to do. Hence the Occultist develops all
his faculties in the attempt to do his Master’s will. The two things
work well together, and he does not become weak but strong in realising
that the Master is greater than he, and knows far better the plan of the
work, while he himself, in carrying out his own portion of it, finds full
employment for every faculty of brain and heart.

It is scarcely possible for the typical Puritan to become an Occultist in
the life in which this side is being so strongly developed. You cannot
understand everything when you go into unknown worlds; and unless you
are willing to be ignorant, there is no possibility of discovering new
knowledge. Every pioneer of science—to quote, I think, Faraday—“runs
about like a dog with his nose to the ground, trying to find out a
trail.” That is exactly the way of the experimenter. You must search for
yourself for the trace which will guide you to the desired knowledge;
and if you will not do that, you must take the results of others, and be
content with these results for this life.

But, now, how will these two types of spirit work when they come to, say,
such a question as that of Mr. Leadbeater? You will have at once the
working of the critical intelligence which sees faults more readily than
virtues, and bad motives more readily than good. That is its weakness.
But it also has its value in pointing out certain dangers into which
the Society might otherwise slip. The Catholic spirit will be far more
ready to take it for granted that one from whom they have learned much,
whom they know to have far vaster knowledge than their own, may have
some other reason which they do not see, which would justify to the doer
what he has done, and they do not feel that curious sense that they
must save their neighbours’ souls, whether their neighbours desire it
or not. They are content to say, “This is my road, that is his”—a wider
and more generous spirit. Nevertheless, I think we should do well also
to recognise that the presence in the Society of the critical and even
judging spirit has at some times its value. But it is not a foundation
on which anything can be built, and that is sometimes forgotten. You
cannot build an enduring edifice on the grounds of protest against
someone else. It cannot endure. It is curious to notice that the same
people who condemn personality when the tendency of the personality is
love and devotion, are the people who show personality most strongly when
they antagonise and dislike. I admit to the full that principle should
guide, not personality; but I cannot admit that a love for a personality
is wrong, whilst a hatred of a personality is right and admirable. Both
may put persons above principles if the two come into clash. And it is
putting a personality above a principle when you desert the Theosophical
Society, forgetting the great principles which make it immortal, and
leave it, protesting against it, because one or two people hold views
with which you do not agree. It is the _ne plus ultra_ of personality.
Mr. Leadbeater and Mrs. Besant are both comparatively old, and cannot
at the most live very long. What utter folly, then, to desert the great
principles incarnated in the Society because of the antagonism of two
transitory personalities! If Theosophy be anything at all, then it is
everything in life, and is not to be given up for anyone, whether saint
or criminal. Suppose a hundred murderers were members of the Society, is
that any reason why you or I should go out of it? It seems to me that the
fact that we disapprove of that so much is a reason for staying in the
Society, in order to strengthen it in the hour of its peril and to carry
it through.

We need in the whole of this to study our own nature first, and find out
our weak points, and then to guard against that weakness in the time
of storm and stress. And we need, more than that, to realise that very
often when people oppose us, they oppose us because of their virtues,
and not because of their vices. That is, that the people who are utterly
against me now are against me because of their virtues. They are wrong
in the view they take—they misconstrue; that does not matter. But the
fundamental reason why they oppose is because they believe that I am
condoning what is wrong. That is a good feeling and right. But it is not
right when it goes into hatred and calumny, when people go about telling
abominable stories of all kinds which are utterly false, using them as
weapons to injure. But, none the less, the beginning lay in a virtue—the
desire to guard the Society from harm; and that ought to be recognised
even when it has run into excess. If we can do that, then, in the midst
of struggle, we shall be learning the true Theosophical spirit, which
sees the good first, and only recognises the excess afterwards. And my
suggestion is: “Train yourself, in your ordinary thinking, to see first
the good of a person or thing, and only afterwards allow yourself to see
the weakness or evil.” Then you will get all the good of your critical
spirit, and be guarded against much harm. But if you see the bad side
first, you are likely not to see the good side at all. These things test
our members, and show whether we are fit to go along this great path or
not—show whether we are ready to be part of that great Sixth Race which
is coming, or whether we are so wedded to our own opinions that outside
those we can see nothing good.

The trouble is practically over, but we should remember its lessons—a
wider tolerance, a sterner self-criticism, and a more charitable attitude
towards our fellows. You cannot be too hard in criticising yourself,
nor too tolerant and charitable towards your neighbour. Remember that
in every one of us the Self is endeavouring to express something of
himself. In our own case we have the right to criticise every obstacle
put in the way of His manifestation, to be hard in our judgment of
ourselves, pitiless in our condemnation of our every fault and weakness.
But we cannot govern the manifestation of the Self in another; hence our
criticism is useless and impertinent—does not help, but hinders; for if
the other person is wrong, as you think he is, then your harsh judgment
makes an added barrier in his way when the Self in him is trying to guide
him back to the right, whereas your charity, your tolerant respect, will
help him to realise the noblest in him. Hence the lesson of this great
shaking should be criticism of ourselves and charity to all around us.
Recognition of our own type, clear self-judgment, so that we may walk
aright and help others as much as may be; and, above all, so to purify
our own characters that we may be channels for the life that flows in the
Society, and may not soil it as it passes through ourselves. The Society
can never die by attacks from without, nor by desertions from within;
it can only die when its members are careless of their own thought,
their own character, their own ideas; that, and that alone, can make the
Society unworthy of the guidance of its Teachers. It was once said: “So
long as three men remain in the Society worthy of our Lord’s blessing it
cannot perish.” That was a word spoken by a Master in the days when the
Society was weak and struggling, and when the few people that belonged
to it feared it would never survive the storm that shook it in the time
of the Coulomb attack. Think of that if any other storm should approach
us—although we are not likely now to have another for the next twelve
years; but when a storm comes, remember that inspiring idea, that as long
as three remain in the Society it cannot perish; and add to that the vow
registered by the Higher Self: “If others depart, I will be one of the
three.”




Lecture IV

The Sacramental Life


I am to speak to you to-night on a subject of deep interest to those who
regard the religions of the world from the standpoint of Occultism. In
all the great religions we find what are called “sacraments,” to take the
Western name; and in all religions the object is the same—the endeavour
to spiritualise the ordinary life of man; to make it possible for men
and women living in the world, blinded by their bodies, unable to rise
above the material limitations—to enable those men and women to come
into direct touch with higher worlds and higher beings, and so, from the
definite sacramental act, to pass on until the whole life may become a
sacrament by the radiation of spiritual life through the material coating.

Now different religions have different numbers of sacraments, although
the essence remains the same. In Hindūism the sacraments are very
numerous. Ten are recognised as of universal application, but the number
will run up to thirty or forty if you take all the ceremonies that are
distinctly recognised as having this character among the more orthodox
Hindūs. The number, after all, is immaterial; it is the fundamental
idea which is important. As knowledge of the meaning of the sacraments
spreads, especially in the Western world, it will be found that many
things that have been put aside as superstitious will come back with
a new light and power. Certain ideas which were cast aside at the
period of the Reformation were thrown aside rather by reaction than
for any defensible reason. The way in which many of the thoughts and
dogmas of the Roman Catholic Church were pressed among the people, the
widespread ignorance of meanings while forms were carefully observed,
not unnaturally brought about a powerful reaction when reason began to
challenge the ceremonies. As occult knowledge had practically fallen into
the background among the great mass of the Roman Catholic priesthood,
there came rejection of that which could not be rationally explained.
As we are able to see the justification for very much that then was
rejected, however, we realise that many of these things will come back.
And if we think, it is not unnatural that these should return. Going back
to the early days of religion (I am thinking now of Christianity, but
it is the same in all the great religions), we find the Founder and his
immediate disciples who shape and mould the religion. As these men were
men to whom the spiritual world was familiar, and as their duty was to
make bridges between the ordinary mass of men and the great spiritual
teachings of religion, it was inevitable that in the forms of worship
laid down by them there should be in the background occult truths. Hence
we find in the early Church the great institution of the Mysteries; and
I shall want, later on, to show the relation between the Mystery, the
Sacrament, and the great legend of the Holy Grail.

Let us now consider what a sacrament really is. I do not think we can get
a better definition than in the Catechism of the Anglican Church: “An
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace”—something that
is outer, tangible, that the senses can appreciate, a material object;
then, with that, indissolubly connected, certain facts of the invisible
world, so that the outer sign is able to act as a channel for the inner
reality. But also, under the heading of “outward and visible sign,” you
want something beyond the material object; you want a material gesture
and material words. These three things are always present in a sacrament;
some material object which is the immediate channel, certain sounds or
words which make a change in the subtle material mingled with the denser
material of that object, and a gesture called often the “sign of power,”
as the words are called “words of power.” Now the gesture must be one
through which magnetism can be thrown on to the object which is affected
by the words.

Let us see how those facts are bound together in the sacrament itself,
and what is their connexion with the constitution of man and of the
worlds in which he lives. The worlds with which the man is connected,
for our present purpose, we can take as the physical, astral, mental—the
three worlds in which turns the wheel of births and death. He is in those
three—either in all of them together, as when in the physical world;
in two of them, as when in the astral world; in one only when in the
heavenly world. For remember that only in the physical world are the
three bodies available that connect him with all of the three at the
same time. In these three worlds, then, man is continually living. He
is related to them by his physical body, astral body, and mental body,
so that you have a living intelligence, a spiritual being, who, by means
of the matter that he has appropriated in these three worlds, is able to
come into contact with each of them. But now arises the question: Given
a spiritual intelligence clothed in this triple veil of matter; given
the fact that that spiritual intelligence, by the veil of matter, is in
contact with three worlds—how shall he be able to come gradually into
conscious connexion with each, so that the stream of spiritual life,
coming down from the spiritual world, may at once purify the matter of
his bodies, illuminate his consciousness in these three stages, and so
begin the great work of spiritualising the whole man? That is the problem
that religion has had to solve. So far as ordinary Protestantism is
concerned, the body has been cast aside as a very temporary possession,
only occupied by the spiritual intelligence during one brief life,
and hardly worth troubling about. Hence the body has become very much
neglected from the ordinary standpoint of Protestantism, and the reaction
against that has taken the form of materialism, so that you find people
rejecting the view of the worthlessness of the body, and falling into a
materialism in which the body is made the most important thing. Instead
of that, in the earlier days of the great faiths, the body was regarded
as a valuable possession, a thing to be made holy, to be sanctified, in
order that it might be a fitting instrument of the spiritual intelligence
therein embodied.

And so, in all these earlier days of religions, continual relationships
were being made, first between the spiritual world and the lower worlds,
and then between the embodied intelligence and the bodies that that
intelligence is wearing. Hence the sacraments which should touch both
body and consciousness, which should sanctify the material vehicles
while illuminating the spiritual intelligence, which should make the
whole man really spiritual in order that the object of incarnation might
be accomplished—that matter in all the worlds should be rendered the
obedient servant of Spirit. That was the object of the sacrament. Hence
the necessity for the material object in order that it may come into
touch with the dense body. Hence the need of the signs in order that,
by the vibrations set up, sent on to subtler planes, the subtler bodies
might be set vibrating, and be able to receive the downfall of spiritual
life. Hence also the need for the gesture, so that the magnetic force
sent out in the consecration might link together the denser and the
subtler matter by this bond of magnetism, and in that way might make
the whole of the material object a vehicle for the higher life while
preparing the bodies for the reception of that downflow.

Now let us, in order to work out these principles, take the sacrament
of Baptism. In this you know that you have the whole of these three
conditions of a sacrament present—water, the material object; the
words of power; the consecration of the water. You have the words of
consecration, praying God to sanctify this water to the mystical washing
away of sin; and then you have the sign of power—the cross made over the
water—in order that the magnetism from the fingers of the priest may
magnetise it, and be the link between the physical water and the astral
matter which interpenetrates it.

I pause for a moment on the phrase “words of power.” The whole
understanding and use of such words depends on the fact that every sound
causes certain definite vibrations. Wherever there is a sound there is
a correlated vibration. Now a mantra, or word of power, is a certain
definite succession of sounds made by an Occultist in order to bring
about certain definite results. That is as much a scientific fact as a
fact that none of you would challenge—that you can by producing a musical
note set up vibrations in a glass or rod or string which is sympathetic.
You remember the experiments of Tyndall. He would show how by a certain
sound you could shiver a piece of glass. What really happens? The glass
begins to vibrate. As the vibrations are made by the note, it repeats
them; if it is more than the glass can respond to, the particles are
torn asunder and the glass is broken. Exactly a similar line of thought
conducts you to the use and meaning of the mantra. The Occultist tries
certain sounds. He finds out what are the sounds that bring about the
vibrations that he desires. Having discovered that experimentally, he
puts those sounds into a definite order and then gives a sentence which
will reproduce that sequence of sounds whenever the sentence is uttered.
This sequence of sounds causes vibrations, which in their turn set up
vibrations in the subtle bodies. The more the mantra is repeated, the
more powerful the result. Hence the use of repetition that you find so
much in Church formulæ. Hence the use of the rosary, so that you may not
have the jar of counting in producing the vibrations that you require.
Now it is obvious that a mantra cannot be translated without losing
part of its power. It may still have a power from the thought which is
in it, but the sequence of sounds is affected. Hence the special value
of the mantra apart from the thought which the words embody. Hence the
wisdom of the Greek and Roman Catholic Churches in using their words of
power as given by the Occultists who devised them. Unfortunately, in
the Reformation, occult knowledge being at a discount, it was thought
you could translate the words of power without losing the effect. You
keep the effect caused by the thought; you lose a very large part of
the mechanical effect caused by the sounds. What is lost of ordinary
mechanical effect has to be brought about by devotion or will-power;
whereas if you produce the vibrations mechanically, you then have all
your devotion and will-power left undiminished to bring about the higher
results. There is the value of the scientific ways of dealing with the
bodies. It is not a question of consciousness now, but of the bodies, and
only secondarily of the effect on the consciousness of the vibrations
of the bodies; yet that also cannot be left out. Just as a change in
consciousness brings about a certain vibration, so does a vibration bring
about a corresponding change in consciousness. Hence to set up right
vibrations helps the consciousness to remain in a certain condition,
and we naturally find that in the Greek and Roman Catholic Churches the
effects produced by the words of the sacrament are greater than these
produced in Churches where the words of power are translated. One
advantage that comes out of that is that, in the first case, where the
priest is using the words that themselves make the vibrations, the man’s
character, devotion, and knowledge are not as important as they are in
the case where the mechanical effect is lost, and the priest must supply
by his own devotion and will-power that which could be more readily
produced by the mantra. It is out of that that has come the statement
that the unworthiness of the priest does not destroy the worth of the
sacrament. Certainly it is not as potent where the priest is unworthy,
but where the mechanism is perfect, the worker not being perfect is less
important.

Now if a clairvoyant watches what is done when a sacrament is taking
place, he sees that on the repetition of the words of consecration
and the making of the sign of power a visible change occurs in the
consecrated object. It is most marked if we turn to the Mass, or Holy
Communion. You have there on the altar the sacred elements—the bread
and the wine. According to the Roman Catholic doctrine, at the words of
power, what is called “transubstantiation” takes place. That teaching
has been very much misunderstood by the ordinary Protestant. He does not
realise that in every visible object there is an invisible and formative
idea; that that idea, working along ordinary lines, produces one of the
ordinary objects that you see around you; but that if the idea be changed
by the use of a word of power, a mantra, that that change of the idea
produces a change of astral matter, and in the etheric and even dense
physical matter also a change of vibration is set up. And although it
is true that in the densest matter the vibration is not powerful enough
to alter the arrangement of the particles, it is true that in all the
most important part of that object a change has occurred, and it is that
change which is indicated by the word “transubstantiation.” No instructed
Roman Catholic ever was foolish enough to think anything save that which
I am now putting to you. Now if that idea seems strange, let me remind
you of a simple fact which will throw light on the whole thing. Students
of organic chemistry are familiar with isometric compounds. Those
compounds are made up of exactly the same number of the same chemical
elements. Nevertheless, the chemist will tell you that according to
the inner arrangement of those elements will be the qualities of the
thing. You may have in some of the higher carbon compounds (even so low
down as where you have entering into the base only four carbon atoms)
an arrangement or rearrangement of those elements such as to give you
entirely different qualities—in one case a poison, in the other harmless.
That change of arrangement makes all the difference. Is it so strange,
then, that in changing the inner arrangement the qualities change? In
the invisible worlds these things can be seen, so that that piece of
opaque bread, when the words are spoken, utterly changes in appearance,
becoming luminous and shining out in every direction. Now the moment
one sees that, one begins to realise what a sacrament means from the
material standpoint. You are dealing with an object that can be changed
in its qualities. You are reconstituting the subtle portions of that by
the forces you are bringing to bear on it. With what object? In order
that, from the planes above the mental, spiritual power pouring down may
find a vehicle which is able to assimilate it and carry it down to the
densest plane of matter, and by that vehicle may be passed on to those
who are partakers of the sacrament. And not only do you see that change
appearing in the elements, but you see also that that change draws to the
altar numbers of those whom the Hindūs call Devas, and the Christians
call Angels, who lend their powers to the helping of the worshippers, and
change the atmosphere of the whole place to which they throng.

Now the moment anyone sees this, he realises that much has to come back
to some of the religious sects of the West in order to make them what
they ought to be. And the result of losing sight of all this inner part
of the Christian ceremonies, rites, and formulæ has been the tendency
to grow more and more materialistic, until you find that the ordinary
Protestant knows of nothing as between himself and God, nothing of the
work of all that mighty hierarchy of spiritual intelligences who form the
ladder between earth and heaven. Hence the gradual disappearance from the
modern mind of the teaching of the ministry of Angels. How much of it
has slipped out of knowledge, and how much all life has lost of beauty
by the passing away of these links between the higher and lower worlds.
When a person takes the sacrament, you have there the actual physical
touch all along the material lines, a real purification of the body as
well as illumination of the intelligence. But you may say: “Does it all
turn on this outward ceremony—these words and signs?” No. There is, in
addition to that, in the consciousness of the worshipper, a tremendous
potency which assimilates that which pours down from the higher worlds.
And although it be true that that potency is very much more readily
assimilated when all the material coverings have been tuned and made
ready to receive it, none the less is it also true that even where that
part of the sacrament is wanting it is a veritable means of grace to
those who realise the inner meaning, although not understanding the
importance of the outer form. I think that there is little doubt that,
as Occultism spreads, this will all come back to the Churches; for it is
part of the Theosophical mission to restore that which has been lost, to
bring to knowledge again that which has been forgotten.

And there are also other things in relation to this which will come
into modern life again as the truth of the sacrament is recognised. So
many discussions there have been about the Apostolic Succession, the
passing of power from one to another by a sacrament, not recognised as
a sacrament in some part of the Anglican Church, but recognised by the
Roman Catholic Church as the Sacrament of Holy Orders. There, again, a
physical passing of magnetism; there, again, a definite succession, a
hierarchy which is an image of the hierarchy in higher worlds. For always
religions have reflexions of the realities of the higher worlds, and
these reflexions have their power and their use. Now, in the ordinary
Protestant community, and even in the great Anglican Church itself,
only two sacraments are normally recognised—the sacrament of the altar
and that of the font. Outside those, as you know, the Greek and Roman
Catholic Churches have others in addition to that of Holy Orders above
mentioned—all of them, from the standpoint of the sacramental life,
important. They have the Sacrament of Confirmation; but that ought surely
to be recognised as a sacrament everywhere, for you have there the
essential parts of the sacrament and the conveying of a spiritual power.
So also they have the Sacrament of Penance, in which the spiritual power
is again conveyed which enables the penitent by effort and repentance
to regain spiritual strength when it has been injured by sin. So you
have also the Sacrament of Matrimony, and the loss of the sacramental
side of marriage has led very largely to its degradation in Protestant
countries. So also the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, which is, curiously
enough, coming back among Protestants. Look at the accounts of the Guilds
of Healing established in the Church—no less than three in the Anglican
community. They have restored the sacramental use of oil, founding
themselves upon a passage in the New Testament: “Is any sick, let him
call the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord”—a sacramental act. You have the oil as
the vehicle of the magnetism, the name of the Lord as the word of power,
and in putting on the oil ever the sign of the Cross is used. Now it
is a very significant thing that that has been brought back definitely
by members of the Anglican Church, priests and laity, to-day; and one
wonders very much why in the Roman Catholic community, with the occult
knowledge of its leaders, it has that use of sacramental oil only at the
death-moment, when its great value cannot be utilised. That is one of
the points I cannot quite make out in studying the ritual of the Roman
Catholic Church.[4]

Now, supposing that you recognise that fact of a sacrament, how would
it affect your ordinary daily life? It would gradually discipline your
mind to realise that all life is sacramental, rightly understood; that
every outer action should be connected with a spiritual truth; and in
this way all your actions would cease to be hindrances, and would tend
to become helpers. Among the Hindūs this is largely recognised, for all
the great actions of the daily life with them are sacramental. Every true
Hindū, on waking, prays that as his eyes open to the light of the day, so
his Spirit may open to the light of the inner Self. In his daily bath,
as he pours the water over his body, his prayer is, that as the water
washes the body, so may the mind be cleansed and the heart purified. All
the bodily actions are consecrated as the reflexions of the spiritual
life, and the effect of that is to make a disciplined, self-controlled,
balanced character. The daily training gradually makes the whole life
orderly; and it is not without significance that in the religions where
the sacramental life is realised, there it is that you find the type of
character that all speak of as the Saint—a man who is ever alive to the
realities of the higher world; the man who lives in the Spirit, although
also living in the body.

Now I said that this idea was connected with the Mysteries and with the
Grail. Let me try and show you how; and in this I am using the thought of
the great French writer, Schuré, who, writing on the mystical idea in
the music of Wagner, pointed out the close resemblances and differences
between the sacrifice of the Mass and the legend of the Grail. Now it
is a historical fact, apparently, that with the disappearance of the
Mysteries from Europe and the Christian Church, this legend began slowly
to work its way among the European nations. There were the Mysteries of
Jesus, and those played in the Christian Church exactly the same part
that is played by the Yoga training, say, in Hindūism or Buddhism. There
was the life of the ordinary sacraments for the ordinary believer. Those
were the means whereby the true believer came into touch with the higher
worlds. But when a man had learned all he could in the outer circle of
the Church, when he had used the sacramental means of grace so that he
was able to say that his life was pure, that he had been “for a long
time conscious of no transgression,” then he was allowed to present
himself as candidate for the Mysteries of Jesus. Within those Mysteries
the realities replaced the outer mechanism of the sacrament. There, no
longer by gift from without, as in the sacrament, but by effort and
struggle the vision of the spiritual life was attained. And when those
Mysteries passed away, not because there were not teachers, but because
there were no pupils ready to be taught, then it was that this story of
the Grail was given as an announcement, however veiled, that the ancient
Path still remained open to the worthy aspirant. For what is the inner
meaning of the Grail, and how do the main points of it connect with the
Christian sacrament? Different, yet similar. In the one it is the outer
form of bread and wine, symbolising the body and blood of Christ; in the
other, the sacred cup, in which it was said that once a year the blood
of Christ shone out with brilliant and purifying light. In both an outer
symbol. But in the sacrament that outer symbol is given to the believer,
and, without effort of his own, the greater Self outside him gives to
the weaker Self within. But in the Grail it is by effort and struggle,
by temptation and resistance, that the vision becomes possible. He has
entered on the Path where outer aid is withdrawn, and where the inner
power must replace the outer assistance. In the Church sacrament, faith
is the means whereby the truth must be attained. In the inner, vision and
knowledge take the place of faith, for the successful knight sees the
vision of the Grail—the Cup, with all its glory, is revealed before him.
And so in the outer a dogma is taught, in the inner there is knowledge.
But what is a dogma? Knowledge imposed by authority. In the Grail it is
an inner revelation, a true initiation into the Mysteries; and it is that
inner revelation which takes the place of dogma, a revelation which comes
by inner illumination instead of being taught by the outer authority of
a Church. And so you find that in that vision the dove appears—symbol of
inspiration. The inspiration of the inner revelation is ever there, and
that inner revelation belongs to the body of the Initiates, the elect
out of all humanity. They hand it on to the world outside, that which is
knowledge to them becoming dogma to the outer world. And so you can see
that in the Grail legend the teaching of the Mysteries was symbolically
conveyed, and those who were able to pierce through the meaning of the
legend had their feet placed upon the Path where the symbols became
reality; the principle running through was identical. And so the lesson
was taught that for those who cannot yet themselves build a bridge to
the higher world, the outer sacrament is given as the bridge to unite
the two; but when the man is able to make his own bridge, the sacrament
for him is no longer necessary. He can reach the worlds above without
the assistance of the bridge, and then he becomes the Knight of the
Grail. That is still true. The Churches must ever give the sacraments,
because the masses of their believers are not yet evolved enough to be
able to build their own bridge. For those who have reached the point in
spiritual manhood where the other worlds are known and are ever present
in consciousness, for them the value of the sacrament is over, and the
reality of the inner life no longer needs the grace that is conveyed by
the sacrament.

Now if you realise the facts I have been putting to you, if you
understand what the sacrament means and what its value is, you will never
speak lightly, contemptuously of it, remembering that those who need it
receive in it a real power, and that those who have gone beyond that
necessity are those who are ever the tenderest to the souls that still
require it, and are careful that with their wisdom they do not bewilder
the ignorant, that they do not lessen the means of grace for those who
are unable to reach knowledge for themselves. And inasmuch as it is the
duty of the members of the Theosophical Society to know these facts of
the different worlds, and to use them for the helping of others, they
have the duty of trying to bring back the realisation of all the immense
value which may be found in these rites which are little understood
by the more skeptical communities to-day. That your mission and your
privilege. Whether in your own religious communities you still find help
or not in these outer veils of spiritual things, that is a comparatively
small matter. As long as they help you, use them to the utmost; and when
you no longer need them, then treat them with the reverence which is due
to them, and explain them to those who do not understand them. Not very,
very long will pass before all and much more than I am saying to you will
become common knowledge in the Churches. Yours the privilege of knowing
a little sooner than the outside world; not because you are specially
favoured, but in order that you may carry knowledge to the outside world.
For every one of you ought to lead the sacramental life, and that means
that you shall be a channel by which the spiritual forces shall pour
down and spread through you to those who surround you, vivifying and
spiritualising the world. That your privilege, from the knowledge that
has come to you; that your duty, for knowledge brings responsibility. And
just in proportion as you understand the occult truths out of which the
esoteric religions have sprung, so will you try to make those religions
deeper, more vital, more spiritualising to all that belong to them, so
that you may truly act as servants of religion, for such servants every
lover of the Divine Wisdom should be.




Lecture V

Address on White Lotus Day 1909


All over the world to-day the sun in rising has seen in country after
country men and women gathering together to bear in memory those who have
passed onward through the gate of death, but who, in passing through the
gate, have remained even more living than they were when they carried the
burden of the flesh; men and women who have left their names behind them
as workers for the Ancient Wisdom in its modern dress, and whose memories
remain dear and precious because of the work they did, because of the
message they spread.

We have listened this evening to verses from the _Bhagavad-Gītā_, to
lines from _The Light of Asia_. In India, on the early morning of to-day,
words were read from that same sacred Scripture of the eastern land,
spoken there in its ancient tongue, the Sanskrit. In town after town,
village after village, the memory of those same lives is kept in mind.
There also _The Light of Asia_ has been read, and the sacred memory of
the Buddha has been recalled. And all over India, from the Northern
Himalayas down to the South, thousands of the poor have been fed by the
branches of our Society in memory of those who lived, of those who
passed away, some of whom have come back to earth again. And as the sun
came onwards along its western path, it lighted up other countries also,
which kept the same memory, used the same books, spoke the same names,
and so across Italy, and Russia, and Germany, and then in France, and now
here, and a few hours hence across the Atlantic, in America, the same
memories will be recalled, the same books will be read, the same thoughts
will be spoken and will spread from heart to heart. For all round the
globe this day is kept sacred in memory of those who died, as men say,
amongst us, but who live to carry on the mighty work that here they took
up for the brief day of mortal life. And we think of our dead, our truly
living, not with sorrow, not with mourning, but with glad hearts and
thankful lips, for we know that death is nothing but a passing from one
world to another, a dropping of one body for the more effective wearing
of a subtler, finer, more powerful one than that which, outworn, is cast
away. For we have learned, and some of us know practically, that that is
true which is written in that same Eastern Scripture of which we heard
some verses to-day, that the Dweller in the body throws aside the outworn
body as a man throws aside garments outworn; and as the man takes new
garments for his wearing, so does the Dweller in the body take new bodies
for his wearing, for new days of a never-ending, an immortal life.

And we think of those who have gone onward to-day—not only of our
greatest, but of all who have worked and striven for the same great
cause. And perhaps it is fitting that first in that great roll we should
send message of love to the one who has left us last, who laboured
so long and so faithfully in France—Dr. Pascal—the General Secretary
there, who only a few weeks since passed to the rest so well deserved.
A weary time had he in the passing; years of weakness, of suffering, of
ever-decreasing strength. And many ask, when they see so long an illness
and so much of pain, when they see a life that was bright and helpful and
full of service set to this world in so long a twilight of sadness and
suffering, sometimes they ask: “Why should one who served so well have so
long and so sad a passing to the other side?” But people do not always
understand that, when a man has worked well and done good service, ere he
goes to his rest for a little time on the other side, it is well for him
to pay the debts incurred, which otherwise would hamper the new life when
it comes back to earth; and that there can be no better karma—sad as it
may seem to the outward sight—than when these ties of the past are fully
paid before the day of passing comes, so that the new birth is unshadowed
by the shadows of the past, and debt is paid which otherwise would be
demanded when the new life is born. So that in a life like that, which
has ended sadly, as men say, with body failing and brain failing, looking
at that with seeing eyes we see the preparing for a better birth, a
greater service, and we know that it is well that the debt was paid, and
that the new life shall come unencumbered with the sad heritage of the
past. And so to our friend to-night we send messages of love and gladness
that the debt is paid, thankfulness that he has passed over, so that he
may come back again to work under conditions fairer, nobler, more full of
promise than those in which he worked so bravely and so nobly through the
life that now has closed.

And as we look back we see the faces of many friends, all of whom we
commemorate—some of our own country, some of other lands, some near at
hand, and some far off, who have passed to the other side in order that
they may return. For you remember that it is written: “Certain is death
to the born, and certain is birth to the dead.” And those who have passed
onward are some of them turning their faces earthward once again, because
the times demand fresh workers, and much is to be done in the years that
are dawning upon us.

And one man stands out strongly in the minds of all, our President, the
President-Founder, who passed away only two brief years since, and who
is residing in his Master’s home, but not altogether resting as men call
rest, inasmuch as he is ever eagerly working for the Movement he loved
and loves, and longing for the day when he shall be permitted to take
again a body to do once more the work to which for many lives he has been
devoted.

And there rises the greatest name of all, H. P. Blavatsky, the name of
her who threw down the body she was wearing on this 8th of May, which,
for her dear sake, was chosen as the day of commemoration of all our
workers who have passed onward—her name dearest and nearest to our
hearts, the Messenger of the Lodge, she who was chosen to bring back
to a world in darkness the light which she carried so bravely and
unflinchingly through a life of suffering and toil. And strange is her
recompense, that she, round whom so many quarrels arose, she who was a
sign of storm and dispute through the warrior life that she led, she
who saw the Society well-nigh crumble round her in those days of the
Coulomb plot, when all over the world it seemed that Theosophy was doomed
to popular contempt, and deserted by most who at one time had welcomed
it; she who, wherever she went, met storm and trouble, who perhaps was
more loved and more hated than anyone of our own time, she has now the
recompense that hers is the one name which is everywhere beloved through
the great Society of which she and her colleague were the founders, and
also among those who have gone out of it through the past years, those
who left it in the Judge secession, those who have gone out since;
hers is the one name that unifies, to whom all look back as teacher
and as friend. And a great and a beautiful lesson grows out of that,
that although life separates, death unifies; and those who in life went
away, as it seemed, from the movement that she made, look back to her
as founder, and round her name, among the prominent people inside and
outside the Society, there runs to-day absolute unanimity, and a peace
without one ripple of dissent.

And to me that seems a very beautiful thing, that the name that was the
name of strife and of combat has become the one name which is recognised
as the foundation of the Movement everywhere, no matter by what passing
changes that Movement may have been affected. And it carries with it a
valuable lesson. These changes that we think so much of do not matter;
all the storms and troubles are of no account; on this great advancing
tide of truth and light, it matters not what apparent storms may come,
what rocks may be in the way, what angry waves may rise and break,
what feelings may be expressed—the whole of it vanishes in the face of
the great unifier, Death; and those who were rent asunder because they
thought more of personalities than of principles, they catch sight again
of the principle when death has smoothed away the difficulties of the
persons over whom they quarrelled. And so, looking back to her to-day, we
can see in her life and death a presage of the future. None of the storms
matter, and none of the secessions and divisions count in the great work.
They are all mere trivial incidents of passing days, and the one great
Life rolls on, only the richer for the divergence, only the fuller for
the differences which it catches up and blends into one.

And on this day, looking backward to those who have gone through death’s
portal, shall we not also look forward to those who are coming back
through birth’s portal to work in the Movement in the future as they
worked in the Movement in the past? How far has it struck you, during the
days of storm and stress through which you have been passing, that to
those who believe in Reincarnation and Karma there is no possibility of
real separation, no possibility of lasting discord? For those who went
far away apparently from the Movement, or who left it by the gateway
of death, see on the other side the fundamental unity, even though on
this side, for a while, they may have been blinded by the superficial
differences, and join together in the work from which, on this side
perhaps, for the moment, they had let themselves slip away for some
trivial discord, some passing divergence of opinion. Take that great man
amongst us round whom raged the last great struggle, the one before the
struggle which is now nearing its close—W. Q. Judge—one of the greatest
and noblest workers in our Movement, even though in the last days of
his life he made the great rent in the Theosophical Society which cost
us for the time pretty well the whole Society in America. He again,
winning clearer vision on the other side after something of difficulty
and something of struggle (for the man was strong, and was not easy
to move or change even when the physical body had been cast away), he
after a while worked his way through the mistake that had been made, and
has again thrown his life force, his enormous energy into the Movement
of which the outer partial manifestation here is the Theosophical
Society, and into that Theosophical Society also. For remember that the
Theosophical Society is only the partial manifestation of that great
stream of Life which is flowing in the other worlds, and of which some
appears here. This great Theosophical stream is like one of those rivers
which flows underground, and then bubbles up above the ground so that
all can see. And the river of the Ancient Wisdom, with its source in
the Great Lodge of the Masters, is out of sight for the greater part of
its course, in worlds greater and higher than this, and then comes up
above the earthly surface and shows itself partially in what we call
the Theosophical Society; and into that River of Ages lives which have
passed onward throw their energy from the other worlds, so that they are
working in the same Movement and strengthening the same current, and are
not apart from us, but with us all the time.

And then there are some others to whose return amongst us we have the
right to look forward. One whom I may remind you of, who has not passed
through death’s gateway, although out of sight for so long, is that
faithful chelā of H. P. Blavatsky—Damodar—who left India after the great
Coulomb struggle, went up into the Himālayan region, and found his way to
his Master’s home near far-off Shigatze. He has been living and working
there ever since, and is now a man of middle age, but his return ere
very long we may without fear look forward to. He will come back to us
with all the gained knowledge that he has won during these many years’
training in the presence of the Teachers Themselves; he has already shown
himself in India, not physically, but preparing to come back when the
Movement is ready for his work, and the getting ready of it is the work
which we have to do in the few years in front. For ere many years have
gone we may look for his coming as a leader and teacher amongst us.

And of those who passed through death’s gateway some have already come
back, H. P. Blavatsky amongst them; so that in the years that come many
of you will see that strong life again manifested amongst us to take
share in the working of the Society, for which he is working now as ever
before. Remember how a Master said of him: “The brother whom you know as
H. P. Blavatsky, but we—otherwise.” One who was spoken of in such words
by the Master M. does not leave the work to which he has put his hand
because the worn-out body was thrown aside for the time—the brother whom
we know as H. P. Blavatsky, but They otherwise, the great and strong
disciple will again come amongst us to work more powerfully than in the
woman’s body that last time he wore. And others, too, who worked with
him in the earlier days—Subba Rao, whose name many yet know; he is now a
lad of nearly fifteen, in the Indian body once more, born in fact in the
same family (using the word “family” in the wider Indian sense), a lad of
fifteen, very soon to be ready again to take up his work.

And there are others, less well known, who have been reborn, and who are
preparing to take part in the great forward movement which is so soon
to begin. But before that work could begin it was necessary to have the
shaking through which we have been passing during the last three years.
I have told you often that from time to time these shakings recur, and
are necessary before a great time of onward progress. Few of you probably
will remember the progress that was made after the Coulomb trouble, but
many of you will remember the spring forward which the Society took after
the American secession. History repeats itself in small cycles as well as
in large ones, and before the great forward movement could take place it
was necessary that the shaking should occur once more, to shake out for
the moment those who were not ready to go forward.

What is the great difficulty before the world? When those who know more
and are able to teach are to come forward and live among the men and
women of the time, and bring to them the treasures they have harvested
of the Wisdom of the ancient days, the one thing that stands in the way
of their reception is the spirit which is not able to recognise greatness
when it sees it, but meets it with suspicion, doubt, slander, calumny;
which ever supplies evil motives where there is no understanding of
the reasons for action, and so paralyses those who know, and builds up
barriers which even they cannot overstep. You saw it in the life of H.
P. Blavatsky. Look back to that life of hers; see how her efforts, her
endeavours to teach and spread the Wisdom, the message with which she
was charged, were everywhere frustrated. And that has been so now for
very many centuries. When the greatest of all Teachers came, that mighty
Teacher whom in the East we call the Bodhisattva, whom in the West we
call the Christ, when He came—mightiest of spiritual Teachers, the very
spirit of Wisdom and love incarnate—He could not live three years in this
world ere He became so insupportable to the people of His day that they
slew Him, while His love for the Father was denounced as blasphemy, His
teaching denounced as coming from the devil. And that same spirit has
been seen ever since. The great teachers have ever been met with the same
spirit, and we have to change it. The chief mission of the Society at the
moment is to prepare the way of the Lord, and the only preparation that
can be made is to substitute reverence for greatness instead of suspicion
and hatred. And because that is the immediate work which lies before
us, it was necessary to shake out of the Society those whose spirit was
rather suspicion of greatness than acceptance of it when seen. For the
immediate work is the preparing of the world for the coming of greater
Ones, in order that the new impulse may be given when the new sub-race
and Root Race are to be born.

That is the immediate work, the preparation for the coming of some
of those whom I have been mentioning—Damodar, Subba Rao, H. P.
Blavatsky—not, remember, with flourish of trumpets, or with anyone
declaring “this is so-and-so” and “this is someone else,” with the
exception, perhaps, of the first named (Damodar), who went as a boy to
his Master, and is now middle-aged, but will be recognised by old Indian
friends. But others will be coming in new bodies, unknown, with no proof
of who they are. They will have to make their way, they will have to
prove their apostolate, and probably their views of things will be very
different from the views of many of those in the Theosophical Society.
Inevitably so; for people whose eyes are opened to more than one world
cannot see things, as those see them whose eyes are blind save to one;
those who see the wider horizon will have different thoughts from those
who are cabined in by the life and conventions of their day. And that is
why the great Ones are always misunderstood, for They must be other than
those to whom They come, else how could They teach? And that is where
your General Secretary spoke very truly in saying that the mind often
misleads, and the things we “think” cover over the things we “know.” Now
the things you know, you know by the light of the Spirit which is within
you; by that intuition which is the voice of the pure, not the impure
reason, speaking above the mind and through the mind, but very often in
contradiction to the mind. And in order to hear that voice of intuition,
so far as I know, there is only one way, that when once you see the Light
shine out through any human being, you hold to that human being, no
matter what the mind may say. That is what spells success, and that was
pre-eminently the case with H. P. Blavatsky, for anyone more confusing
to the ordinary mind you could not possibly come across—awkward, athwart
one’s conventions in every way; in speech, manner, actions, the very
reverse of all that you would expect. When I first met her and saw in her
the power of the Master, from that day to this I have never challenged
and never doubted her. And very, very largely because of that have come
the knowledge and power that I have won not by reasoning and arguing—“Was
she right or wrong?” “Would it not have been better if she had been
different from what she was?”—but having once seen in her the Light of
Truth, refusing to see anything else except the Messenger of the Master.

And that is what you need in the coming days, that is what some of you
have been winning through the storms of the last three years—to realise
that when once you have known a teacher to be a teacher you shall cling
to that knowledge, no matter what clouds for a time surround, no matter
what storms for a time may hide; for that means intuition, which is above
the concrete mind; it means the testimony of the God within you to the
God without you, and that cannot lie. And we have to spread that through
the whole Society in order to make the way possible for those who will
be coming amongst us during the next few years, and the greater Ones who
will come later if we can welcome the Messengers, but not otherwise. Our
years of mortal life are not those by which time is reckoned in the great
cycles of the occult world. It is true that we say: “Probably between
thirty and forty years hence a great Teacher will come back, the greatest
Teacher, the Teacher of Gods and men.” But a date like that, which is
counted by the revolutions of the world, is always a doubtful thing from
the occult standpoint; for time there is measured by consciousness, and
not by the turning of the sun. Efforts may shorten or failure may retard
the date, and hence it is always rather vaguely put; and if, when these
less great ones came we were not able to receive them, if we are repelled
by the superficial appearance and have not the intuition to recognise the
Messengers, that will inevitably delay the coming of the greater Ones.

At different times different virtues are wanted. To know the virtue of
the time and to develop it, that is wisdom. At one time courage is the
great thing wanted; at another time recognition of spiritual greatness,
and the power to hold to it, and that is the virtue wanted now. Not in
order that you and I as individuals may take part in this great work, but
in order that the world may be prepared, that the way of the Lord may be
made straight, so that He may come. For He cannot come to be a curse to
the world instead of a blessing, as He would be if the world were wholly
unprepared. And so greater and greater Ones will be coming in order that
the greatest of all may be welcomed when He appears amongst us.

Some of you think, but you think mistakenly, that you would recognise,
say, a Master, or even a Christ, if He appeared. Are you so sure? They
never have been recognised by the people of their time save by a small
minority, and why should we be different? The Christ was not recognised
when He came last; His Messengers have not been recognised since, save
by a minority. They are so different from the people of their time that
there is much to get over before you can recognise them. And it is a
good practice sometimes to throw yourself back to those days in Judea
when the Son of Man trod the earth. Realise what He would have seemed to
you then, not what he seems to you now through the vista of centuries
of the adoration of millions of men. What would he have seemed as the
vagabond travelling about on foot, with a number of half-educated
people round Him, disturbing the peace of society, antagonistic to the
respectabilities of His day, looked down upon by the aristocracy of
the time? See Him as they saw Him, and ask yourself: “Should I have
recognised the Christ?” And that is where the test has been, right
through these last three years, and where it will be as the people I
have been speaking of gradually come amongst us again. If you would
recognise them when they come, try to cultivate the power which answers
to greatness without, by cultivating greatness within, remembering that
spiritual recognition is the recognition of all those who are kindred to
yourself. If you have the virtue in you of the spiritual man you will
know spiritual men when you meet them; but if you cannot answer to Him,
then He will pass you by unknown, and probably disliked.

Now our work is clear before us: to try to change the public opinion of
the world into the attitude which is sometimes called disparagingly
hero-worship, which is essentially the thing we need at the present
time—the power to know the hero when we see him. “No man is a hero,”
it is said, “to his valet.” And people think that that means that he
is small when seen close by. Not so; but that the small soul which is
typified by the word “valet” cannot appreciate the greatness of the hero
near whom he stands. The servant soul does not recognise the greatness
of the hero, and therefore the hero is no hero to him. Only the heroic
recognises the hero; and if you can develop that in yourself which is
like a Master, then, and then alone, will you know a Master when He
comes. And the best way to cultivate it is for a time to let go that
spirit of criticism which makes people so superior to those around them.
Cultivate the faculty of admiration rather than that of criticism.
Try, when you meet a person or when you read a book, to see the good
things in the book or person, and not the faults. And the faults in the
people around you, these are no business of yours; and if you would once
understand that and live it, your path would be so much easier. So many
of you are so anxious to get other people out of their faults that you
really have no time to look after your own steps and put them in the
right way. The faults of the other people will work out through karma,
and they are not your business—a hard but true lesson. Of course, if
you are a master or a teacher, and have others in your charge, their
faults are then yours to correct; but you are not, generally speaking,
masters or guardians, and you have no responsibility to criticise or put
others right. Take out of your friends the value of the good and let
the faults go. You need not say they are virtues, you need not pretend
that you think wrong right; but you can say: “That part of the man is not
my business; let me help the God in him to manifest, and let the other
side in him wear out in its own way.” If you can do that you will be
more useful now than in any other spirit, and it is that lesson I would
ask you to take with you. Think of H. P. Blavatsky and of those who have
passed away in the spirit that they helped us, and not in the spirit that
would blind our eyes to their value, and then carry that spirit on to the
people around you, and in every one round you try to see the God, and
let the rest go. Admire the admirable, and leave aside the regrettable;
for in doing it you will help them more to conquer their faults than by
criticism.

Seeing the God in them, and loving and trusting, that will help them
to grow out of the limitations, of the blunders and errors that are
hindering the divine manifestation. And remember that is what is wanted
now, not for yourselves only but for every one around you, so that when
the Teachers come They may be able to remain in the world amongst us.
They dare not come yet, because even in the Theosophical Society They
would not be welcomed. A Master who came amongst you now would not
for the most part be very much liked by you; His ways, His views, His
thoughts would be so different, He would raise suspicion and dislike.
We saw it in the earlier days when They came out more, and were met by
judgment and criticism, until one of Them said, in the fashion in which
They look at ignorant criticism; “The standard of the Adept is not kept
at Simla, it is kept at Shamballah and I try to accommodate myself to
that.” There is a great lesson in that for all of us. The standard of
those who are passing onward into the higher life is not the standard of
the judgment of the people around them, but the standard that the Masters
hold up before them, to which they are ever trying to conform. Think of
that in your attitude to the people around you; remember that on you,
and on people like you everywhere, depends the success or the failure of
the next great manifestation of the divine life on the earth; that this
Theosophical Society, spread everywhere over the world, is literally the
John the Baptist to prepare the way for the coming of the Christ; to fill
that part is your work and duty—and need I say, your privilege, your
highest honour?

To leave the Society now, in the days which are just dawning, surely it
is bad karma enough, and you should only feel the tenderest thoughts of
pity towards any who go out from us in the days when to belong to the
movement is the greatest crown that can be given for any nobility of
past life that any one of us may have had. No words of harshness or of
condemnation, nothing that will make it harder for them to return, but
everywhere gentlest and most tolerant speech—this is our duty to our
immediate brethren; and to the world what I have told you.

And so from this White Lotus Day look forward more than backward,
rather to the work that is coming than to the difficulties that are now
well-nigh over. Remember, for your strengthening, that the only great
shaking has been here and in America, nowhere else. You can count on your
fingers practically in other countries those who have been shaken out.
You have had the struggle and have come out well. It is practically over
now. There may be some slight effort made now to make things difficult,
but what does it matter, with such hopes before us, with such strength
behind us, with such knowledge within us? Why should we allow ourselves
to be ruffled by anything that can take place in this outer world of
men? We have been through many such struggles in past lives, shall have
to go through many greater ones in lives to come; why make too much
of present-day trouble? Those whose lives are in eternity need not be
troubled with even what seem to be great difficulties to the men and
women of the world. And so to you I would say: Gather together on the
Day of Memory, but turn it now more into day of looking forward. Let the
past go; it has done its work, it is over. Turn your eyes to the work
that is opening before us, more splendid than any work of the past. And
remember it is not the Messengers who may stand in front who are the
strength of the Society, but that the life comes from the Masters and the
strength from the Lodge. Knowing that, you need not mind even if those
of us who are well known in the world make mistakes, are attacked, or
evil spoken of. Never yet a Messenger of the Lodge that went through life
without being evil spoken of, and you need not grudge us the sign of our
apostolate; for such has ever been the sign of the Messengers through
all ages. Rather rejoice with us that the stress for the time is over,
and the days of going forward are upon us; do not let the remnant of the
trouble shake any one of you, but know that the Masters are with us, and
where they are no failure can come.




Lecture VI

The Nature of the Christ

Delivered to the Christo-Theosophical Society, at the invitation of Sir
Richard and Lady Stapley, Tuesday, May 25, 1909.


It is with pleasure that I find myself amongst you, as I have often found
myself before. I think my membership in the Theosophical Society is of
about the same length as the life of your Society. We both began our
careers, so to speak, about the same time, in the same year.

The subject that I have taken is in many ways a difficult one, and one
that may very naturally arouse differences of feeling. It is, however,
one which is being discussed very much in the Christian Church at the
present time, and it is for that reason that it seemed to me that it
might be useful if we could exchange thoughts on a subject of enormous
importance. I also want to make certain suggestions which I think may
be welcomed in regard to an idea to be found in the East, which perhaps
is not quite familiar over here; and which presages a unity greater and
profounder than could be reached, I think, in any other way. Naturally,
I am putting only my own views, and they commit no one but myself. These
questions that touch alike the intellect and the heart must always be
treated reverently by those who realise the Brotherhood of man, and they
are also ideas of the profoundest importance with regard to the future of
religion and of civilisation.

In the _Hibbert Journal_ of January last the subject that I have taken
for our talk was to some extent discussed from the standpoint of one who
I suppose would be called an extremely liberal Christian. The writer is
the Rev. R. Roberts, Congregational minister, of Bradford; his name is
still in the Congregational Year-book, but I heard that he was not at
present ministering in any pulpit. I take his view as my starting-point
this afternoon. The title of his article is at first sight a little
startling from the ordinary Christian standpoint, “Jesus or Christ?”
and he distinctly puts forward the view, and argues for it with a good
deal of ability, that we have to do at once with one supposed to be a
historical person, and then apparently with what he could only regard as
a Mystical Ideal.

So far as I can gather from what he says, he does not regard the Christ
as historical, though he does not very clearly draw the line as to how
he would separate, historically, the Jesus of the Gospels from that
Ideal which he names “The Christ.” He says that he and many other people
find themselves beset by certain difficulties: “Are the claims to be
presently set forth made on behalf of a spiritual ‘Ideal’ to which we may
provisionally apply the word ‘Christ,’ or are they predicated of Jesus?”
Then he goes on to say that insistence on limitations of knowledge,
restrictions of outlook, evasions of issues, and disillusionments of
experience, true enough of a historic Jesus, may not be wholly relevant
to a spiritual “Christ Ideal,” expanding and enriching through the ages
into “the Christ that is to be.” Then he says it would be still less
applicable to one who is regarded as the “fulness of Godhead,” “Very God
of very God.” That, practically, is his thesis, and he tries to show in
this article that very many difficulties might be avoided if Christians
were willing to recognise a Christ Ideal side by side with the historical
Jesus. In that way they might evade some of the difficulties which are
pressed against the conception of Jesus as the Christ by large numbers
of people who find their faith challenged and themselves in difficulties
by these objections which are put to them both inside and outside the
Church. He quotes Dr. Fairbairn, writing on _Christ in Modern Theology_.
“If He knows as God while He speaks as man, then His speech is not
true to His knowledge, and within Him a bewildering struggle must ever
proceed to speak as He seems and not as He is. If He had such knowledge,
how could He remain silent as He faced human ignorance, and saw reason
wearied with the burden of all its unintelligible mysteries? If men could
believe that once there lived on this earth One who had all the knowledge
of God, yet declined to turn any part of it into science for man, would
they not feel their faith in His goodness taxed beyond endurance?” That
view (which appears to be adopted by Mr. Roberts) does not seem to me
necessarily at all a sound one, and it is by no means certain that a man
speaking in a particular age to people among whom great limitations of
knowledge existed, and with a particular object before Him—not to enlarge
the bounds of science, but to deepen spirituality and lay a strong
foundation of morals—that such a Teacher, however highly illuminated,
however much speaking as the very Spirit of God, would say all that He
knew with regard to external facts and external phenomena, with the
certainty of making very difficult the reception of His message on
points enormously important—on points, in fact, of vital and essential
need for the higher spiritual progress of man. Hence it does not appear
to me that Dr. Fairbairn’s issue is at all well taken. Every great
teacher—not for the moment considering the special divinity of Christ or
Jesus—who is speaking to people less instructed than himself is under a
similar difficulty. If on matters of ordinary scientific knowledge he is
illuminated where they are not, the very fact that he presses that upon
them would bewilder and confuse. You cannot enable the human intellect
to evolve at what might be called a supernatural rate. It is capable of
growth, and often of rapid growth, but if you try to force it beyond the
rapid natural growth, you will only perplex, bewilder, and confuse; and
if your aim is not, broadly, to increase scientific knowledge, which
man will inevitably find out for himself after a time, but to help him
to the things which need spiritual illumination in order that he may
receive them, then such a difficulty as is put here as to the inner
bewilderment which would be felt by the speaker to speak as he seems, and
not as he is, would not be bewilderment at all, but a quite deliberate
limitation of what he said, with a view to the effectiveness of his work,
and that which he desired to give to the people of his time. That is
true necessarily of every great prophet, of every highly inspired man;
and the greatness of the inspiration would chiefly be shown, not in the
amount of physical knowledge which he might give, but rather in his
avoidance of certain difficulties which, when the race grew more learned,
might come in their way and complete their ideas. That is to say, he
would evade the scientific difficulty as far as he possibly could, and
would do it deliberately, knowing that that was not his particular
work, and that he could not do his own work if he turned aside in this
direction. So that, as far as I am personally concerned, looking on this
from the standpoint of the Theosophist and Occultist, these difficulties
to me do not exist. I realise that they must always be found where one
who is superhuman—I object to the word supernatural—comes in any age of
the world’s history in order to teach a new conception of religion, and
in order to adapt what he is giving to the civilisation which he intends
to influence.

It appears to me that it is a perfectly rational and necessary thing
that the growth of knowledge from the ordinary standpoint should be
left to work its way out along the lines of intellectual development;
anything less than that will check intellectual growth inevitably, for
intellectual growth can only come about by the freest of thought, the
freest of discussion, the most absolute liberty to challenge everything
and to controvert anything which appears to be illogical. The condition
of intellectual growth is that of complete freedom, and any sort of
limitation which is put upon it by the knowledge of a great teacher
will only check that intellectual evolution which is essential for the
future growth of man. Many similar difficulties, of course, are made
with regard to all inspired Scriptures, and for that reason it seems to
me that it is well that we distinguish definitely between the spiritual
work of the spiritual teacher and the scientific investigation of the
scientific student; that it should be realised that these two departments
of human activity work under different laws to a very great extent, and
that that which is spiritually known cannot always be justified to the
intellect until that intellect becomes spiritually enlightened—that
is, that you have to deal in man with a being who is fundamentally a
spiritual being, in whom the divine Spirit becomes incarnate, embodied,
but in whom that divine Spirit is going to unfold along three great
lines of unfoldment which we find in all human consciousness, which we
recognise as in the divine nature itself. It has to unfold to an ordered
Activity which should be truly in harmony with the laws of nature, which
are the expression of the divine nature in this manifested form. It has
to unfold along the Intellectual line, and that unfoldment must be left
utterly unfettered. It has also to evolve along that line which in its
lowest stages is emotion, in its higher stages is religion; and that
spiritual unfolding, the highest characteristic of Spirit showing itself
out as Will, has to be developed from above more than from below, to come
downward by illumination more than to climb upward by reasoning. Unless
we can understand this complicated nature of man in whom divinity is
gradually unfolding and mastering matter at every stage of its unfolding,
mastering, purifying it, ultimately spiritualising it; in all its
earlier stages limited by the matter that it has yet failed to master,
gradually making it plastic and ductile, and then in its higher stages
having utterly subdued it to its own purposes—unless we can understand
that that is a rough outline of human evolution, we shall constantly
find ourselves in difficulties between the intellectual growth and the
spiritual unfolding. Hence whenever a man comes to earth in whom divinity
is far more manifestly unfolded than in his fellow-men, he can only shed
down upon them illumination from the spiritual region, stimulate their
aims, but not control their intellect. If that be realised, then the
whole of these difficulties, which are being made at the present time
about the obvious limitations outwardly of the knowledge of the supreme
Christian Teacher, will entirely fall out of court, and you will see that
He was speaking to the people of His day in the way that He could best
affect them in order to help forward their evolution from the standpoint
where they were, and was not the least intent on showing out His enormous
knowledge, which would only have crushed rather than assisted.

Suppose for the moment you can take that way of looking at human
evolution—and it seems to me the most rational way of looking at it—then
we come to deal with this special manifestation of the Teacher who was
the Founder of Christianity, a Hebrew speaking to Hebrews, and having
to reconcile the speaking to the people of His day with the speaking to
people of generations after generations, through centuries and perhaps
millennia to come, then we should be perfectly able to realise that we
are here face to face with one of those supreme divine manifestations,
and that in studying it we must be ready to separate between the Teacher
of religion and the man speaking to the men of His day, and accepting
their limitations in order that He might reach them effectively. I
want to carry you very much further than that in what I say; all that
might very well be accepted by any rational and intelligent Christian,
especially if he finds himself able to realise that what is said of the
divinity of Jesus is true at a very much lower level of all His brethren,
that all men are fundamentally and essentially divine; that that which
was said by the great teacher S. Paul: “Know ye not that your body is
the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?” and that
which was answered by Jesus Himself, when he was challenged for calling
Himself the Son of God: “Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are
Gods, and ye are all the children of the Highest?” is literally true. If
you realise all that is implied in that statement, that He is the first
among many brethren, you will see that every Son of Man is potentially,
and will hereafter be actually, a Son of God, meaning by that that Deity
will unfold within him, and that a manifestly divine humanity is the
natural goal of evolution.

One realises, in looking at an article like this, that by the mystic
Christ—that is what the writer means—he means that in the Epistles a
somewhat different view is taken from that of the Gospels, the one
dealing specially with an historical person, the other with an indwelling
Spirit. He realises that when the Apostle Paul declares to his converts
that he is travailing in birth for them until Christ be formed in them,
when he says in another passage that they are to develop to the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ, he is holding up before them
a picture of the birth in the soul of this divine Spirit that he spoke
of as Christ, and the gradual unfolding of that into the perfection of
divine manhood. That is perhaps the most inspiring ideal that can well be
put before Christian people, that not only outside them but within them,
not only as an outer helper but as an indwelling Spirit, this idea of
the Christ is to be realised, and that that unfolding of the Christ in
man is a real fact in religious consciousness, making that highest stage
of human evolution when the man becomes perfect, and there only remains
before him the superhuman evolution after the human is finished.

But I want to put to you rather a different idea of this relation between
Jesus and Christ. I recognise to the full the value of that mystic ideal,
I have not one word to say against it; in fact it is one that, when I am
speaking to Christians, I constantly proclaim—the absolute necessity of
that indwelling presence. But there is another view of this great Being
which may be less familiar to you, which is the view taken by those who
are sometimes called Occultists, in a very special sense of the term.
Let me put it to you quite baldly for the moment, and then work it out
a little more. The view that we take of that great Teacher who came to
the world some two thousand years ago is, that the child who was born
and who grew up into manhood until the time of the Baptism was a man
of marvellous purity, of extraordinary spiritual intuition, but a man
that we should call a disciple; that it was his to train and guard that
pure body in preparation for the incoming of the indwelling Christ, and
that in the Gospel story it is the event of the Baptism which marks the
coming of the Christ. Let me just recall the words to you for a moment:
“When Jesus went down into the water, the heavens opened, and the Spirit
of God came down upon Him like a dove, and abode upon Him. And a voice
was heard from heaven saying, ‘This is my beloved Son; hear ye Him.’”
Now it is clear that that event, marked out so distinctly in the Gospel
story, must connote something of enormous importance. There was no need,
as it were, for Him who was to be the Teacher to be baptised, and to
receive the downcoming Spirit of the Most High, unless in that there was
hid some profound spiritual truth, unless something was there afterward
that was not there before; and it is _then_, from the occult point of
view, that the _Jesus_ became the _Christ_. But let me put it to you even
a little more closely. Here, of course, is where the point of difference
will probably arise in the minds of many in regard to what I am saying,
for all might be willing to recognise that that might imply a great
downflow of spiritual energy, of divine life. From our standpoint Jesus
the Hebrew, the individual, the spiritual man, stepped out of the body
that he had been dwelling in through all those years and preparing for
the coming of his Lord, giving it over as a holy temple for the incoming
of the supreme Teacher, so that the body became the habitation of the
supreme Teacher for the three years of the ministry. Now that view, as
many of you who have studied Christian history will know, was very widely
held in the early Church; although it was condemned later as the Gnostic
heresy, none the less it was quite orthodox until its formal condemnation
within the Catholic Church, until the time that it was expelled. You
find it in many of the early writings of the learned Christian teachers,
you find it warred against by some others of the Christian teachers and
doctors and bishops of the time, but none the less it was a view which
had very wide prevalence in the early Church; it was accepted by large
numbers of profoundly learned men; and although ultimately condemned as
a heresy in the forms in which it was put, it might none the less not be
improbable, even from the standpoint of the orthodox, that some truth was
hidden in it in the broad sense, even if the form in which it was put
forward in the Church of those days was justly condemned. My own view is
that they were right, not in all the details of the way in which they put
it, but in the fundamental fact. Let us suppose for a moment that they
were so; then the question would necessarily arise—who is the Christ? And
it is there that, as I said, there was one view that might be unfamiliar
to you in the West, yet which, it seems to me, should be to the Christian
a view full of beauty and full of hope for the future. There is only one
Supreme Teacher of mankind. There is a great office above all those whom
we Theosophists speak of as Masters—a Master of Masters, so to speak—the
one Supreme Teacher. In Christendom you speak of him by the Greek name, a
name which, as you know, was taken from the Grecian mysteries, of which
a particular grade of initiation bore the name of the Christos, and the
Adept who reached that grade was spoken of as the Christos. That was the
name which was adopted in the early Church, according to the account in
the Acts, to designate this great Teacher who had come to the world, and
we should say, rightly adopted. It is an instance of spiritual insight
recognising a great truth.

But now, supposing I ask you to go to the people of other religions for a
moment, the ancient religions that we find in the eastern world. Suppose
I ask a member of the most ancient of those, the Hindū faith: “Do you
recognise in your religion one supreme World-Teacher above all religions,
and not belonging to one exclusively—a universal Teacher?”—he would say,
“of Gods and men”; over here you would say, “of Angels and men,” because
the word there, Deva, is equivalent to your word Angel. He would at once
say: “Why, yes; of course we recognise one Supreme Teacher at the head
of all spiritual life and impulse, and we call him (pardon me if I use
for the moment their name) the Jagat-Guru—the World-Teacher.” Supposing
I went to another great religion there—the Buddhist—and I asked a member
the same question: “Do you recognise in your religion a Supreme Teacher?”
his answer would at once be, “Why, of course we do. There is only one
who holds the place of Teacher over all Gods and all men; one Teacher
only who is the Teacher of the world. We call Him the Bodhisattva—the
Wisdom-Truth.” No nobler name could be given to Him; He is the Wisdom and
the Truth; not the Buddha, as you may have expected me to say; He was
not the Teacher. When He reached Buddhahood He passed away from earth.
It is while He is going onwards to Buddhahood that He is known by this
name of Wisdom-Truth, or Boddhisattva. During the whole of that period
of teaching He has this name; and then when the supreme illumination
comes to Him his office is finished, and He passes away from earth. Of
course, as we know, the last Buddha remained in his body for some time,
still teaching, but none the less the office of the Teacher is not to the
Buddhist the Buddha, but he who is to be the Buddha—what you would call
the Christ glorified and ascended, not the Christ on earth teaching and
suffering. It is interesting to notice how in the various religions these
same points arise and these same differences are seen under different
names, so that we see that in these two greatest of eastern religions a
Supreme Teacher is recognised. Now, from the occult standpoint, it is
that Teacher who came as the Christ; and, supposing that all Christian
people recognised that fact, they would reach the hearts of the eastern
world far better than they do now, if, instead of telling them they must
worship the Christ, they would say to them, “You are already worshipping
Him under a different name,” which is supremely true; for it is the same
Being who holds that office through all these thousands of years, the
same supreme Perfection. He only comes into manifestation in order to
help His younger brethren; He leaves that body when its utility for the
moment is over; when, being so great in comparison with the people to
whom He came, they could no longer tolerate His presence.

Now that is the view of the nature of the Christ which you would find
among, say, Occultists or well-instructed Theosophists. They recognise
in the Christ of Christendom the Supreme Teacher of the world, but they
do not admit that He will come only once to the world; they reverence
and honour Him now as still the Supreme World-Teacher, but they do not
identify Him with the great disciple who took the Jewish name as Jesus,
and who is now amongst us as the Master who is the Guide and Helper of
the Christian Church. There is the point where the difference would come
in. The orthodox Christian would claim Him as supreme over all religions,
but he would hardly recognise difference between the disciple who has
become the Master with the special Christian Church in His charge, and
the Supreme Teacher who, while He certainly ever sends His benediction
upon Christianity, sends it also upon the other great religions of
the world. This is where I feel the difference might come in between
myself and many of you. To us the great Master Jesus, who is, as you
would also acknowledge—those of you, at least, who are members of the
Church of England—thus still dwelling in a human body, still embodied
literally, has that power which the Master on the higher planes of being
has, of being spiritually in touch with all who call upon Him, with
all who look to Him for guidance, but none the less still possesses a
physical body. This is a point of enormous importance (although not as
important as spiritual omnipresence), for it means to us, and it means
to many Christians who think with us, and are Theosophists with us, a
possibility of a close and personal relation, as of a disciple to a
Master, which goes somewhat beyond the spiritual communion which every
true Christian has with his great Teacher. How should I put that to
convey exactly what I mean in clear and definite language? I must put
it, I think, by giving a general principle with regard to these great
Beings whom we speak of as Masters, divine men, men made perfect, which
works through the whole of that great Brotherhood. They have many ways
of working in the world; through their own subtle, spiritual bodies
they work, sending out floods of blessing over the whole world; but, in
addition to that spiritual impulse and spiritual blessing which flow
into every heart that opens itself to receive them, with an ever present
and potent power, there is an even closer and more specialised communion
between the Spirit as embodied and those who are still wearing human
bodies themselves, a possibility which the saints have realised of that
personal and individual and specialised communion with their Master where
they saw Him, heard Him; where to them He became, not only a spiritual
presence, but an individualised Teacher, and even Friend; where they
knew themselves as disciples, and knew Him as Master, which is the
great mark, after all, of those who are specifically called the saints.
For that close and intimate and specialised relationship the body is
necessary; and hence, although sceptics have very often challenged that
Article of the Church of England where it says that “He did truly take
again His body, with flesh and bones, and all things appertaining to the
perfection of man’s nature,” it does convey a fundamental and essential
truth: the great Teacher is not only a spiritual Presence, He is a human
though divine Being, who can be specifically and personally known. And
if this latest impulse of Divine Wisdom which we call Theosophy is to be
of use to Christendom, it will be along these lines of gradually winning
Christians back to a conception that has been very largely lost—that
their touch with their Divine Master must be much closer and more
realised in the brain and human heart as contact of disciple and Teacher,
than when they are thinking of Him as Deity, when they are regarding Him
as the second Person in the Trinity. How far that will commend itself
to many of you it is, of course, impossible for me to say; but let the
outline, at least, be clear, so that it may be definitely understood.
It is the conception of a Christ for whom a body was prepared, and
prepared by His own well-loved disciple, who guarded, tended, trained it
through the years of childhood, of youth, and of early manhood; a body
surrendered to the incoming mighty Personage, who is the Supreme Teacher
of the world, incoming at the point marked by the Baptism, worn until
the time of the death, so that through the whole of that teaching, the
ministerial life, it was not Jesus but the Christ who was the Teacher who
founded Christianity. That body is laid aside, but He is still Lord of
all religions, and He gives to His well-beloved disciple who became the
Master Jesus this religion specifically as his charge, his work in the
world. Other religions would have other Masters, but only one Supreme;
others would look to other divine men made perfect, but would recognise
beyond them this Master of Masters; and hence all religions draw together
in the Supreme Teacher, and find there unity in that greatest and
mightiest of all. So that every religion looks up to the one Teacher
through Masters who specifically belong to the various faiths of the
world. That is the view which is very generally held in the Theosophical
Society, although none is bound to accept it, inasmuch as we impose no
dogmas upon anyone; it is the view which is taken by those who have been
most thoroughly instructed in this matter; and it seems to me that it is
one of extreme interest to thoughtful people, even if they do not find
themselves able to accept it.

That is, then, the view of the nature of Christ that I would submit to
you; and if you look at it you will see that the whole of the criticisms
to which I have referred fall to pieces, and no longer need disturb
the hearts or consciences of any; for it would be recognised that you
have here a manifestation of the same great Being, but not a unique
manifestation, who adapts Himself to the needs of His time, gives out
so much of His wisdom and truth as He thinks can be accepted by the
people of His day and generation, but who, in giving it, gives with it
an inspiring Spirit, which enables future generations to find more and
more in that teaching, and as they themselves develop spiritually, to
find ever greater depths in the teaching which had been given by the
Christ. You will see how naturally that view passes on into the future,
and why it is that many of us, believing that a new civilisation is
dawning upon earth, also believe that the same Supreme Teacher will again
be manifested, again to tread the earth as He trod it in Judæa, again to
enlighten the world with spiritual wisdom, again to strike the keynote of
a new civilisation, gathering all the religions of the world under that
supreme teaching of His own, so that we look forward to a coming Christ
as well as backward to a Christ in His last manifestation on the earth.




Lecture VII

The Theosophical Student in face of Revelation, Inspiration, and
Observation

_A Lecture delivered to the British Convention of the Theosophical
Society, July 4th, 1909_


Friends: Those who seriously take up the study of Theosophy should
not be satisfied with the mere reading of the voluminous theosophical
literature poured out into the world through the centuries of the
past, and continuing to flow into it in our own days. They should, in
addition, if they have any innate faculty for such investigation, prepare
to develop the faculties by which they may verify for themselves that
which they are told by others. But in all cases much theoretical study
is desirable before passing on into the practical, and in most cases it
may not be possible to develop the subtler senses within the limits of
the present incarnation, although a good foundation may be laid for such
development in the next. Hence theoretical study must form a large part
of the training of every theosophical student, and his attitude towards
such study is a matter of serious importance. He needs to discriminate
between the books he reads, and to suit his attitude to the type of the
book; he must seek to understand what is meant by Revelation, what by
Inspiration, and to distinguish revealed from inspired literature, and
both from the records of observations.

Some Scriptures which are regarded as authoritative lie at the back of
all the great religions. Thus Hindūism has the Veda. The word means
knowledge, and this knowledge is of that which is eternally true. It is
the knowledge of the Logos, the knowledge of the Lord of a universe;
the knowledge of what _is_, not of what _seems_; the knowledge of
realities, not of phenomena. This abides ever in the Logos; it is part
of Himself. In its manifested form, as revealed for the helping of man,
it becomes the _Vedās_, and in this form goes through many stages, until
finally little of the original remains. All Hindū schools of philosophy
acknowledge the supreme authority of the Vedas; but after this formal
acknowledgment is made, the intellect is allowed to range freely at its
will—to inquire, to judge, to speculate. Rigid as Hindūism is in its
social polity, it has ever left the human intellect free; in philosophy,
in metaphysic, it has ever realised that truth should be sought, and no
penalty inflicted on error; error being sufficiently penalised by the
fact that it _is_ error, and breeds misfortunes under natural laws. Even
to-day that ancient liberty is maintained, and a man may think and write
as he will provided that he follows in practise the social customs of
his caste. The Hindū divides all knowledge into two types—the supreme
and the lower. In the lower he places all his sacred books—following in
this the dictum of an Upanishad[5]—together with all other literature,
all science, all instruction; in the category of the supreme he places
only “the knowledge of Him by whom all else is known.” There you have
Hindūism in a nutshell. When once supreme knowledge has been attained and
illumination has been experienced, all Scriptures become useless. This
is asserted plainly and boldly in a well-known passage in the _Bhagavad
Gītā_: “All the Vedas are as useful to an enlightened Brāhmana as is a
tank in a place covered over with water.”[6] What need of a tank when
water is everywhere? What need of Scriptures when the man is enlightened?
Revelation is useless to the man to whom the Self is revealed.

In the early days of Buddhism the Vedas held high place, for the Lord
Buddha, as Dr. Rhys Davids says, “was born and brought up, and lived and
died a Hindū.”[7] But the charter of intellectual freedom for Buddhists
is contained in the wise advice of their Teacher: “Do not believe in a
thing said merely because it is said; nor in traditions because they have
been handed down from antiquity; nor in rumours, as such; nor in writings
by sages, merely because sages wrote them … nor on the mere authority of
your own teachers or masters. But we are to believe when the writing,
doctrine, or saying is corroborated by our own reason and consciousness.
For this I have taught you: not to believe merely because you have heard;
but when you believed of your own consciousness, then to act accordingly
and abundantly.”[8] Even revelation, for the Buddhist, must be brought to
the touchstone of reason and consciousness; there must be a response to
it from within, the interior witness of the Self, ere it can be accepted
as authoritative.

In the Christian and Muhammadan faiths—both largely influenced by
Judaism—the authoritative nature of revelation is carried further than in
any earlier faith. In modern days the yoke of a revealed Scripture has
been much lightened for Christianity by the growth of the critical spirit
and by the researches of scholars. The modern Christian student is little
more hampered by his revelation than is the Hindū by his. A conventional
reverence is yielded, a lifting of the hat, and then the student goes
freely on his way.

What is Revelation? It is a communication from a Being superior to
humanity of facts known to Himself, but unknown to those to whom He makes
the revelation—facts which they cannot reach by the exercise of the
powers that they have so far evolved. These facts can be verified at any
time by one who has climbed to the level of the Revealer, who may be an
Avatāra, a Rishi, a Founder of a religion. They “speak with authority,”
the authority of knowledge, the one authority to which all sane men
bow. We do not find that these great Beings wrote down Their teachings
Themselves; They taught, but They did not record. Some follower, some
disciple, it may be after the lapse of many years, even of centuries,
wrote down what he or his forefathers had heard; hence the revelation—and
to this rule there is probably no exception—is inevitably to some extent
coloured, narrowed, distorted by the transcriber. That which was heard
originally by those round the divine Teacher exists indeed in the
ākāshic records, and may ever be recovered thence by those who have
developed the inner senses by which those records may be read. In many
cases true records will have been made at the time by highly qualified
persons; but such precious books are kept securely in the custody of
their chosen guardians, in secret temples, in rock libraries, available
for the study of high Occultists, but of none other.

The Muhammadans would claim that in the case of their sacred book there
is more certainty that the very words of their Prophet were preserved.
And doubtless to this is due the overwhelming authority of _Al Qurān_ in
the minds of the faithful of Islām.

What should be the attitude of the Theosophical Student towards
revelation? He should treat the Scriptures of the world with reverence,
remembering their origin, but none of them with submission, remembering
that they are transmitted to him by varied channels. He should call to
his aid the best scholarship, should gain all the light he can from
archæological and historical researches, and use his best critical
judgment in separating the essential truth revealed from all the
accretions that may have grown up around it. If he has developed his
higher psychic qualities, he should try to trace and disentangle the
ancient from the modern, search the ākāshic records for comparison,
confirmation, or contradiction of the revelation as it has come into his
hands. How immense might be the services of such Theosophical Students as
they become more numerous and better equipped for this gigantic task. And
without this external equipment much may be done by inner unfoldment;
he may unfold within himself his own spiritual powers; he may seek in
profound meditation the truth which shines in the revelation beneath many
a veil of ignorance and misconstruction; he may so purify his life that
his bodies will become translucent of the light of the spirit within him,
will illumine the written words. “The things of God knoweth no man but
the Spirit of God.” But that Spirit dwells in every child of man; and
as His light shines out, the divine things are revealed to the pure in
heart. Until the inner Spirit thus responds to the revealed teachings
and statements, the Theosophical Student must hold his judgment in
suspense before the claims of any revelation. It is not true _for him_
until he can re-echo it in the voice of his own Spirit, his deepest Self.
Useful and beautiful it may be; worthy of profoundest study and reverent
research are the world’s Bibles. But until they are affirmed by the
Spirit within submission cannot be yielded, lest that should be given to
the errors of men which is due only to the divine Spirit.

What is Inspiration? The raising of the normal human faculties by some
extraneous influence through grade after grade of intellectual, moral,
and spiritual power, up to the point where the extraneous influence may
even expel the man from his body and use it for the expression of another
individual; where the new possessor is a Being at a height utterly
transcending man, inspiration may pass into revelation. Some may think
the word should be restricted to the raising of the powers of the subject
from above their normal capacity to the highest point of their possible
exercise, short of the expulsion of their owner and his replacement by
another individual greater than himself.

The lower grades of inspiration are within the experience of very many.
Have you never felt, when listening to a speaker whose knowledge and
power transcended your own, that your mental faculties were lifted to a
higher level than that to which you could rise unaided? On such occasions
you grasp questions that hitherto have eluded you; you see plainly, where
before there had been obscurity; the field of thought becomes illumined,
and objects are seen in hitherto undreamed-of relations—you feel that
you know. On the following day you desire to share with a friend the
treasures you acquired, and you begin to recount the luminous exposition,
to describe the great horizons which opened before you. You fail: where
is the light, where the far-off scenes over which your eyes had swept?
Your mind has sunk again to its normal level; the inspiration has passed
away. As with the intellectual, so with the moral faculties. You had seen
an unknown beauty, had felt an overwhelming admiration for the lofty
and the pure: what has become of the warmth, the ardour? Are the cold
ashes of the intellectual approval all that remains of the throbbing
heart, the passionate delight in the moral ideal? Why does it now look so
cold, so grey, so unattractive? You were raised to a higher level than
you can reach unassisted; but none the less has the moral ideal and its
power been shown to thee “in the Mount,” and the fact that you have once
experienced its all-compelling power will render you more susceptible to
it in the future, and the day will come when that which you felt when
inspired by another shall become the normal exercise of your own moral
faculties.

Coming to higher grades of inspiration, we may know, some of us, what it
is to stand in the presence of the Masters, and to feel the marvellous
uplift of Their presence. There is no need for words, no need for
teaching; Their presence is enough. From that presence we go out again
into the ordinary world, to feel the difference of its atmosphere from
that of the Holy One. But, _we have known_, and the memory remains an
abiding power.

Those who have written or spoken under inspiration have been thus
uplifted, their own intellectual and moral faculties have thus been
stimulated, and raised far above their normal level. It is still they who
write or speak, and their own characters and temperaments colour what
they say, leave their own impress on what they write. But they write and
speak far more nobly, far more powerfully than they could do unassisted.

And so we may rise from grade to grade of inspiration until we reach the
stage at which the mind and emotions of the man no longer sway his body,
but the body is wholly taken possession of and used by One greater than
himself. Then it is no longer the man himself who speaks, but “the Spirit
of” his “Father who speaketh in” him; his own limitations are struck
away, his own idiosyncrasies vanish, and the inspired utterances flow
forth unsullied. Then inspiration may range into revelation.

The process of all this is a very simple one. We know that by the
correlation between changes in consciousness and vibrations of matter,
each change in consciousness is accompanied by a vibration of the matter
appropriated by the consciousness and forming its body; each vibration
of the matter of a body is accompanied by a change in the embodied
consciousness. Either one of the pair may be the initiator; the other
ever responds. When two or more people are together, one more evolved
than the other or others, the more evolved person, thinking, desiring,
acting, sets up in his own bodies, mental, astral, and physical, a series
of vibrations which corresponds to the changes in his consciousness;
these vibrations cause similar vibrations in the mental, astral, and
physical matter intervening between himself and the less advanced person
or persons present. These vibrations in the intervening matter cause
similar vibrations in the neighbouring body or bodies. These vibrations
are immediately answered by corresponding changes in the embodied
consciousness or consciousnesses, and the person or persons concerned,
thus placed _en rapport_ with one more advanced, think, desire, act on
a higher level than would be possible for them on their own initiative.
They are able to understand more keenly, to feel more warmly, to act more
nobly than they could do unassisted. When the stimulus is removed they
gradually sink back to their normal level, but memory is left, and they
remember that they “have known.” Moreover, it is more easy for them to
respond a second time, and so on and on, until they establish themselves
on the higher level permanently. Hence the value of companionship with
those more advanced than ourselves, of living “in their atmosphere.”
Words are not necessary; little speech may pass; but insensibly the
subtle body is tuned to a higher key, and only, perhaps, when the
companionship is interrupted do the younger become conscious of the
change which has thus been brought about by contact with the elder.

Similar results may be brought about by reading the writings of those
who are more evolved than we are. A similar series of changes is set up,
though less powerfully than by the living presence. Moreover, intent and
reverent study may attract the attention of the writer whether he be in
or out of the body, and may draw him to the student, and thus cause the
latter to be enveloped in his atmosphere quite as potently as though he
were physically present. Hence the value of reading noble literature:
we are keyed up to its level for the time, and such reading, steadily
persevered in, will lift us to a higher level and establish us thereon.
Hence the value of a brief reading before meditation, lifting us into
an air more favourable to the work of meditation than we can start from
unassisted. Hence the value also of “holy places” for such meditation,
places where the atmosphere is literally vibrating at a higher rate than
our own; and hence the advice so often given by the instructed, to keep,
if possible, a room or closet set apart for meditation, such a place soon
gaining an atmosphere purer and subtler than that of the surrounding
world. It is of little use for the theosophical student to be acquainted
with these laws if he does not utilise them to his own helping, and to
the helping of those around him.

What should be the attitude of the theosophical student towards the
inspired man or the inspired book? He should be receptive, stilling all
his normal vibrations so far as is possible, and opening his whole nature
to the impact and influx of the waves of vibration that pour forth upon
him. But his attitude should be more than receptive: he should gently
endeavour to attune himself and to co-operate with the inflowing waves.
He should try to strengthen the sympathetic vibrations, so that the
accompanying changes in consciousness may be as complete as possible. For
this he must pour out to the inspiring Object his love, his trust, his
complete confidence and self-surrender, for thus only can he attune his
bodies into sympathy with those of the Inspirer. He must, for the time,
empty himself of his own ideas, his own feelings, his own activities,
surrendering himself to reproduce, not to initiate. As the unruffled lake
can mirror the moon and the stars, but as that same lake rippled by a
passing breeze can yield only broken reflexions, so may the lower being,
steadying his mind, calming his desires, and imposing stillness on his
activities, reproduce within himself the image of the higher, so may the
disciples mirror the Master’s mind. And so, also, if his own thoughts
spring up, his own desires arise, will he have but broken reflexions,
dancing lights, that tell him nought.

If you are going to read one of the inspired books of the world—_The
Imitation of Christ_; _The Golden Verses_ of Pythagoras; _The Light on
the Paths_; _The Voice of the Silence_—it is well to preface the reading
with a prayer, if that be your habitual way of raising your consciousness
to its highest mood, or with the repetition of a mantra, or the soft
chanting of some familiar and beloved rhythm, in order to bring yourself
into a sympathetic condition. Then read a phrase, re-read, brood over it,
savour it mentally, suck out its essence, its life.

Thus shall your subtle body become, to some extent at least, attuned to
that of the inspired writer, and repeating his vibrations, shall set up
in your consciousness the corresponding changes. Priceless is the value
of inspired books: they are steps of a ladder set up between earth and
heaven, a veritable Jacob’s ladder, on which descend and ascend the
angels of God.

There remains a third class of books worthy of the attention of the
theosophical student, but towards which his attitude should be entirely
different from those which he adopts towards the revealed and the
inspired. These are books containing the observations of students more
advanced than himself, observations carried on upon planes above the
physical, observations made by students who are evolving in knowledge
of, and in power on, those planes, and have not yet reached the stature
of the Perfect Man. There are books such as _The Secret Doctrine and
Esoteric Buddhism_, written by disciples, which are not records of the
direct observations of students, but are rather transcriptions of the
teachings of Masters, into which errors may creep by misunderstandings
of those teachings. H. P. Blavatsky herself told us that there were
inevitably errors in _The Secret Doctrine_; and as we have in that
wonderful book her own descriptions of the pictures shown to her by her
Master, there is an opening for possible errors of observation: these are
probably not serious, as she was carefully overlooked and aided during
the writing. These two books stand apart from the bulk of our literature,
the Masters having been largely concerned in their production. The books
I have in mind are those written by disciples, using their own normal
faculties, faculties still in course of evolution; books relating chiefly
to the astral, mental, and buddhic planes, to the constitution of man,
to the past of individuals, nations, races, and worlds. We are gradually
accumulating a large amount of literature of this kind, a literature of
observations by students using superphysical faculties. With regard to
this, certain things need to be borne in mind.

First: the students in question are in course of evolution, and the
faculties of which they make use to-day, which have become their normal
faculties, are more developed and reach higher planes than those which
they used ten or fifteen years ago. Hence they see now very much more
than they saw then, both in quantity and quality, and this enlarged
sight must inevitably give reports differing in fulness from that of the
earlier and narrower vision.

Secondly: this greater fulness will change relative proportions and
perspective. A thing which seemed imposing and independent when seen
alone, may become subordinate and comparatively insignificant when seen
as a part of a larger whole. It may change form and colour, seen with
surroundings which become visible only when it is looked at with a higher
vision. That which was a globe, sailing through space, to the physical
eye, becomes the free end of a continuous body, materially attached to
the sun, when seen with superphysical sight. Was it false to describe it
a globe? Yes, and no.

It was and is a globe on the physical plane, answering to all that is
meant by a globe down here. In subtler regions it is not a globe, but a
body, the tip of which is a globe only to gross vision, vision to which
its continuation is invisible.

Thirdly: the keener vision detects intermediate stages before unseen, and
shows a series of changes between two which, to the less acute sight,
were in immediate sequence. Thus, in the earlier observations, it was
said that the ultimate physical atom broke up into astral matter. When
a similar phenomenon is studied twelve years later, it is seen that the
physical atom breaks up into an immense number of inconceivably minute
particles, and that these immediately group themselves into forty-nine
astral atoms, which may or may not, again, combine into astral molecules.
Again, a whirling wall was mentioned: keener vision sees no wall, but an
illusory enclosure, caused by rapid motion, like the fiery circle traced
by a whirling fire-tipped stick. So, in the continuous light of gas or
electricity, a whirling disk of black and white rays shows grey; put out
the lights, and let the darkness be rent by a lightning-flash, the disk
hangs motionless, every black and white ray distinct. Which is the true
observation? The eye in each case bears true witness to what it _sees_.
The different conditions impose upon it different visions.

Other differences also arise, but these may serve as samples. Are, then,
books relating to observations useless? They only become useless, even
mischievous, when the theosophical student treats them as revelations
or inspirations instead of as observations. Observation is the basis of
scientific knowledge; the correction of earlier observations by later
ones is the condition of scientific progress. The student of optics,
when confronted with the black-and-white rayed disk, the grey disk, the
whirling disk hanging motionless, does not conclude that the conflicting
observations make observations useless. He searches for and finds the
conditions of light, of the constitution of the eye, which explain the
equally true though contradictory reports. He submits the observations
to renewed experiment and to the scrutiny of reason, until from the
contradictions emerges the many-sided truth.

What should be the attitude of the theosophical student to books of
observations? To all such books you must take up the attitude of the
scientific student, not of the believer. You must bring to bear upon them
a bright intelligence, a keen mind, an eager intellect, a thoughtful
and critical reason. You must not accept as final, observations made by
other students, even though those students are using faculties which
you yourselves have not as yet developed. You should accept them only
for what they are—observations liable to modification, to correction,
to reviewal. You should hold them with a light grasp, as hypotheses
temporarily accepted until confirmed or negated by further observations,
including your own. If they illuminate obscurities, if they conduce
to sound morality, take them and use them; but never let them become
fetters to your mind, gaolers of your thought. Study these books, but do
not swallow them; understand them, but hold your judgment in suspense:
these books are useful servants but dangerous masters; they are to be
studied, not worshipped. Make your own opinions, do not borrow those of
others; do not be in such a hurry to know that you accept other people’s
knowledge, for ready-made opinions, like ready-made clothes, are neither
well-fitting nor becoming.

There is a dangerous tendency in the Theosophical Society to make books
of observations authoritative instead of using them as materials for
study. We must not add to the number of blind believers who already
exist, but to the number of sane and sober students, who patiently
form their own opinions and educate their own faculties. Use your own
judgment on every observation submitted to you; examine it as thoroughly
as possible; criticise it as fully as you can. It is a poor service you
do us when you turn students into popes, and, parrot-like, repeat as
authoritative, statements that you do not know to be true. Moreover,
blind belief is the road to equally blind scepticism: you place a
student on a pedestal and loudly proclaim him to be a prophet, despite
his protests; and then, when you find he has made some mistake, as he
warned you was likely, you turn round, pull him down, and trample on him.
You belabour him when you should belabour your own blindness, your own
stupidity, your own anxiety to believe.

Is it not time that we should cease to be children, and begin to be men
and women, realising the greatness of our opportunities and the smallness
of our achievements? It is not time to offer to Truth the homage of
study instead of that of blind credulity? Let us ever be ready to
correct a mistaken impression or an imperfect observation, to walk with
open eyes and mind alert, remembering that the best service to Truth is
examination. Truth is a sun, shining by its own light; once seen, it
cannot be rejected. “Let Truth and falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth
put to the worse in a fair encounter?”




FOOTNOTES


[1] I am told that these punishments are no longer used in English jails.
If that be so, a step has been made in advance.

[2] The _principle_ of reincarnation is accepted, in this sense, by many
Spiritualists, who deny that man returns to earth. With them another line
of argument would be followed to prove the necessity of reincarnation on
earth.

[3] See _The Science of the Emotions_, by Bhagavān Dās, Theosophical
Publishing Society.

[4] A Roman Catholic friend tells me that it is also used in cases of
great danger, and that a friend of hers was thrice raised by it from what
threatened to be a deathbed.

[5] _Mundakepanishat_, I. i. 5.

[6] _Loc. cit._, ii. 46.

[7] _Buddhism_, p. 116.

[8] _Kalama Sutta_ of the _Anguttara Nikaya_.




                              TOPICAL INDEX
                                   TO
                              THE CHANGING
                                  WORLD

                                   BY
                              ANNIE BESANT

                             ARRANGED BY THE
                           CHICAGO LODGE, T.S.

                         FOR THE USE OF STUDENTS

                            Copyright 1910 by
                        THEOSOPHICAL BOOK CONCERN
                      26 Van Buren Street, CHICAGO




INDEX


    A

    Abbas Effendi, spiritual teacher and prophet, 150

    Adept, mark of, 231
      standard of, at Shamballah, 294, 295
      (see Masters of Wisdom, also Manu).

    Ākāshic records, contain original revelations, 321

    Age, signs of closing, 3
        in religion, 7-16
        in science, 16-21
        in art, 21-24
        in social conditions, 27-46
      transitional, 4, 5, 149, 150
      signs of opening, in religion, 54-63
        in science, 63-70
        in art, 70-74
        in social conditions, 75-102

    America, social conditions in, 34, 35, 36

    Ancient Wisdom, a great river, 285
      truths of, Theosophy, 183
      religion traced to universal, 190

    Angels, and Archangels, 137, 191, 271
      disappearance of the teaching, 271

    Archaeology (see comparative Mythology), 113, 188, 189

    Archangels (see Angels).

    Aristotle, 107

    Art, beauty a necessity, 21, 22
      in India, 21, 22
      imitative, not creative, 23
      new, created by new senses, 70, 77
      colour and sound, coloured sounds, 70, 72, 73
      reaches out by emotion, 73
      colour and emotion, sound and emotion, 70, 71, 72, 73
      and Theosophy in the coming civilization, 200, 201, 202
      restoration of, a necessity, 201
      is beauty, not common place, 202

    Artist, the, priest of the beautiful, 202

    Aryan Race, fifth root race, 3
      ideal type of, 116
      to develop mind, 118
      greatest development of mind, 118
      sub-races of, 137, 138, 212, 213
      fourth sub-race, emotional, 184
      fifth sub-race, 214, 215
        characteristics, 217, 218
        dominant note, 184
      selection of stock for and development of, 229, 230

    Astral aura (see Aura).

    Astral body of next race, 53, 54
      organized under pressure of thought, 124
      activity of its sense organs, 125
      its senses and psychism, 125
      and the pituitary body, 125
      vibrations and emotions in, 167
      organization of, 170, 172, 173, 174
      and dreams, 175
      unifying with physical, 176
      false methods of organization, 177, 178
      organized by meditation and purity of life, 178, 179

    Astral colours (see Colours).

    Astral senses, 51, 53, 57, 58, 59
      effect of development, 60-63
      builders of new art, 70, 73
      methods of development (see astral body), 177-179

    Atlantean Race, the fourth, predominant traits, 114, 211
      source of the fifth root race, 115, 210
      fourth sub-race of, the Toltec, 115
      fifth sub-race of, the Semitic, 115, 230, 231
        new root race, 115, 211
        chosen from, 115, 211
        developed mind, 211

    Atlantis, continent of, 113

    Atom and science in the West, 17
      the chemical, our power of seeing, 64
      experiments in seeing (see Clairvoyance), 64, 65
      vibrations of, and consciousness of the Logos, 165
      physical, earlier and later observations compared, 330

    Atonement, vicarious, 148

    Aura, colours of the astral, 166
      colours of, and consciousness, 166
      vibrations of, and consciousness, 167, 168

    Australia, social condition in, 37-41

    Avatāra, description of, 133, 134, 135

    Aztecs (see Mythology), 113, 189


    B

    Bāb, messenger in Persia of coming Christ, 150

    Baptism, a sacrament (see Sacraments), 266, 267
      marked incoming of the Christ (see Christ), 306

    Beauty, a necessity, 21, 22
      human, finest type of, 116, 117
      what it means, 201
      theosophy teaches reverence for, 201
      in ancient Greece, 193, 203
      an essential part of utility, 224

    Besant, Annie, joined Society in 1887, 228
      facts re-communicated to her in 1895, 229
      referred to as temporary personality, 258
      her opponents, 259
      and H. P. B., 290
      her message to the T. S., 296

    Bhagavad-Gītā, referred to, 279
      quoted, 280, 282
      on scriptures and the enlightened man, 319

    Bibles, of the race, testimony of, 156, 157

    Birmingham, 201

    Blavatsky, H. P., practical proof of Brotherhood, 26, 27
      on socialism, 44
      and “The Secret Doctrine”, 209
      referred to, 26, 227
      disciple of Master M., 228
      and inner side of T. S., 234
      tribute to, on White Lotus Day, 1909, 282, 283, 284
      her return, 286, 287
      her endeavor frustrated, 288
      a messenger of the Masters, 290
      and Mrs. Besant, 290
      and errors in secret Doctrine, 328

    Bodies, evolution of, 49, 52, 54
      the instruments of higher consciousness, 155
      natural, triple differentiation, 162
      spiritual and natural, 163
      spiritual, 163
      physical, organization of, 169, 170
      subtle, organization of, 170
      mental, organization of, 171
      spiritual, organization of, 172
      signs of organization of astral (see Telepathy, also Dreams), 173
      astral, organization of, 170, 171, 172, 173
      unifying physical and astral, 176
      departments of man’s nature, 211
      of sixth sub-race, 222
      value of scientific way of dealing with (see Pituitary Body,
        also Astral), 268

    Body, human, of Jesus, 147

    Books, and the Theosophical Student, 318
      revealed, 321
      inspired, 327
      of observations, 328, 329, 330
        when useless or mischievous, 331

    Brotherhood, H. P. B.’s example of, 27
      showing itself, 45
      applied to social conditions, 75
      not equality, 75, 76, 77
      societies which recognize, 77
      and reincarnation, 78, 79, 80
        karma, 81
        religion, 83, 84, 85
      family and state, 78, 86, 87, 88
      and education, 82, 89
        capital punishment, 95
        economics, 97, 98, 99, 100
        politics, 101, 102
      of religions, 237
      mightiest thing in all the world, 242
      chosen by Masters as our mark, 243

    Bodhisattva, the supreme teacher, 137
      manifests in every sub-race, 137
      last manifestation as the Christ, 149
      will again appear, 149
      (see Hermes, Zarathustra, Orpheus)

    Buddha, Wisdom-Truth.
      spiritual man, 118
      “The Enlightened”, 135
      one in every Root race, 135
      the, belongs to our race, 136
      Gautama, last manifestation, 136
      former manifestations in Aryan race, 136
      passed on, Son united with Father, 142

    Buddhi, qualities of, (see Christ), 241

    Buddhism, revived in Ceylon, 236

    Buddhists, their intellectual freedom, 319-320


    C

    Catholic Spirit, emotional temperament, 245
      definition of, 252
      its mind teachable, 253

    Catholic Spirit, easily lead along path of Occultism, 253
      and Mysticism, 253
      type of, responds to idea of Masters, 254
      and Occultism, 255-256
        the Leadbeater question, 257-258

    Chaldæa, 189

    Christ, the time of birth (see Rome), 4, 5
      “Jesus or Christ” (see Hibbert Journal), 10, 11, 147, 298, 299
      type of spiritual man, 118
      supreme teacher of fifth sub-race, 142, 143
      the Divine Power, the Spirit of God, 147
      signs of His coming, 148, 149
      looked for by occult world, 151
      shall we recognize Him, 151, 152, 153, 292
      characteristics of, 152, 153
      The Wisdom, 160
      words of, 222
      the Mystic, emblem of self-sacrifice, 238
      showed new type to fifth sub-race, 241
      will show qualities of Buddhi, 241
      His reception and treatment, 288
      “Christ in Modern Theology”, 299
      time of His coming, 291
      His powers, 303
      unfolding of in Man, 305
      and Jesus, relation between, 305
      view taken of Him by occultists, 305
      His incoming marked by Baptism (see Baptism), 306
      the, who is He?, 307
      the world teacher, 309
      not Jesus, founder of Christianity, 312
      not a unique manifestation, 313
      will again be manifest, 313

    Christos, office of, 143
      the anointed one, 144
      grade of initiation in Mysteries, 144, 307

    Christian life, mystic, 148

    _Christians Commonwealth_, 183

    Christianity, early days of, 145
      mysteries in, 145
      and comparative Mythology, 189
      keynote in, 193
      mystical, spreading, 236
      should give idea of self-sacrifice, 238
      how to preserve it, 239, 240
      and revealed Scriptures, 320

    Church, the early, and the Gnostics, 145
      the early, and the Mysteries, 263
      Anglican, referred to, 272
      Guilds of healing in, 273
      must ever give sacraments, 277

    Civilizations, of the past—perished, 27-28
      of men, a succession is observed, 184
      the coming prevailing mark spirituality, 184
        and Brotherhood, 185
      religion in coming, 184-185

    Clairvoyance, under hypnotism (see Röntgen rays), 67, 57, 58
      slight, seeing atom, 64
        Aura, 165-166

    Clairvoyant vision of sacrament, 269

    Clement of Alexandria (see St. Clement)

    Colour, new, given by new senses, 70
      new, to indicate higher emotions, 70
      Astral, seen by some painters (see Mortimer Menpes), 71
      and sound, coloured sounds, 73
      in Astral aura, 166
      each religion has its, 192

    Comparative Mythology (see Mythology)

    Conscience must be enlightened, 13
      and matter, development of, 52
      human, 69, 74
      and correspondences, 104
      evolution of, three stages, 106-107
      first dawn of, will to live, 109
      second, of emotions, 110
      third, power of mind, 110
      coming type of, 118
      mark of, in coming race, 119-120
      higher, and flesh and alcohol, 124
      unfoldment stimulated by meditation, 127, 176
        purity, 178
      of Logos, Great Beings in, 133
      the larger, 155
        and bodies, 155
        higher, evidence of, 156-157
        threefold division in man (see St. Paul), 159
        waking the, 159-162
        and form, relation between, 165
        of Logos and atomic vibrations, 165
        signs of unfolding, 172
        man dominated by, 184
        next principle to unfold, 184
        unfolding taught in every religion, 191
      and vibrations of matter,   325

    Correspondences, principle of, 104
      used by Mystics, 104
        science, 104
        Swedenborg, 104
      theory of, used to explain past and forecast future, 104-107
      and embryology, 106
      in evolutionary stages, 106

    Cortez, 189

    Coulomb Plot, 283

    Crime (see Penology)

    Cromwell, Oliver, and Charles I. (see Puritan Spirit), 246
      example of Puritan Mystic (see Reformation), 254


    D

    Damodar, tribute to, 286
      his return, 289

    Deduction in ancient philosophies, 107
      and the science of mathematics, 107
      characteristic of the Platonic method, 107
      explains past and forecasts the future, 108, 110
      used by Occult Science, 108
      later stages of evolution traced by, 111
      and reincarnation, 111

    Desire and will, 161
      determined by attractions outside (see Emotions), 161

    Devāpi, sketch of, 227
      Bodhisattva of the sixth race, 228

    Devas, 137
      drawn to altars of sacraments, 271

    Dreams, physical, 175
      show organization of Astral body, 175


    E

    Economics, conditions in England, 97, 98
      in Australia, 99
      and Brotherhood, 97, 98, 99, 100
      problems solved by whom (see Social Conditions) (see Supply and
        Demand), 100, 101

    Education, and morals, 12
      in the Old Testament, 14
      and religion, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 86
        social problems, 82, 86, 87, 88
        Brotherhood, 82-89
      in play, 88, 89
      religious, in peril in England, 238
      in India, influence, of Theos. Soc., 239

    Egypt, ancient, compared with Southern Mexico, 113
      Book of the Dead (see Comparative Mythology), 189
      religious keynote, knowledge, 193

    Emotions, colour and sound, 70, 71, 72
      art reaches out by, 73
      Wisdom-Love reflected as emotions, 109, 110
      fourth root-race (see Atlantean), 114
      root of, 161
      science of (see Science of Emotions by Bhagavān Dās), 167, 168
      dominant note of Keltic sub-race (see Aryan), 184

    Epistles, the, deal with an indwelling Spirit (see Christ, also St.
        Paul), 147, 304

    Esoteric Buddhism and the Masters, 328, 329

    Evolution, slow course of, 3
      of Divine germ, 48, 49
      of bodies and senses, 49
      of new race, 114, 115, 116
      of nervous system, 121
      higher, and environments, 121
      hastening, by meditation, 126, 127
      of consciousness into Divine Man, 191
      human not at the top of, 240
      goal of, a manifest Divine humanity, 304


    F

    Fairbairn, Doctor, on “Christ in Modern Theology”, 299
      issue not well taken, 300, 301


    G

    Garibaldi, referred to, 82

    Gautama Buddha (see Bodhisattva), 141

    Genius, 172

    Germany attained national unity, 81

    Glasgow, 201

    Gnosis, ancient (see Theosophy), 185

    Gnostics, necessary in Christian Church (see Origen), 145

    Gnostic, heresy, 306

    God, extra cosmic, 9
      immanent, 10
      spiritual knowledge of, how reached, 55
      “The kingdom of God is within you”, 55
      existence of, how demonstrated, 9, 55, 56, 57
      manifesting triple nature (Trinity), 159
      consciousness of, and vibration of atom, 165
      unity of, taught in every religion, 190
      in manifestation ever triple, 190
      vast family of, 191
      how we may help, to manifest, 294

    Gospels, the, deal with an historical person (see Christ), 147, 304

    Goths, 117, 214

    Grail (see Holy Grail).

    Greece, keynote of religion, beauty, 193
      ancient, beauty in, 203


    H

    Haeckel, 113

    Hebrew people, 211
      and the Founder of Christianity, 303

    Hermes, the Thrice Greatest (see Bodhisattva), 138

    Hibbert Journal, article “Jesus or Christ”, 10, 11, 298, 299
      “Christ in Modern Theology”, 299

    Hierarchies, recognized by Masons and by Theosophists, 77
      based on Brotherhood of Man, 78
      of superhuman beings, rank in, 132
      of spiritual intelligences, 191
      not known to Protestants, 271
      and apostolic succession, 272

    Hindūism, a text book of, 83, 84
      revived, 236
      its two great teachings, 193, 238
      and secular education, 238, 239
      sacraments numerous in, 262
      all great actions are sacramental, 274
      and the Veda (see Veda), 318
      in a nutshell, 319
      and freedom of intellect, 318, 319

    Historical sense in East and West contrasted, 139, 140

    Holy Grail, legend of, the Mysteries and Yoga, 275
      and the Ancient Path, 275
      inner meaning, 276
      connection with Christian Sacrament (see Sacraments), 277

    Humanity, submerged classes of, 28, 29, 30
      deterioration of physique, 32, 33
      stunted and deformed (see Social Conditions), 201

    Human nature changing, 43, 44, 80
      changed by thought, 81
        great ideals (see Mind), 82

    Hypnotism used by physicians (see Science), 67

    Hysteria, how produced (see Nervous System), 199


    I

    India, art in life of, 21, 22
      social conditions in, 28, 29
      Burmans, illustrate sense development, 50
      music of, 72
      the caste system, 79
      religion of, 83, 84
      Kashmir type of Aryan, 116, 117
      false method of developing consciousness, 177, 178
      the Yogi in, 199, 200
      a mighty past and a mighty future, 212
      White Lotus Day, memorial services in, 279

    Induction and science, 107
      limited to observed facts, 107

    Initiates and inner revelation, 276

    Initiations reflected in Mysteries, 143
      of the Hierarchy, 144

    Inspiration, what is it?, 322
      and revelation, 322, 324
      lower, within experience of many, 323
      and the Masters, 324
      in writing and speaking, 324
      and true mediumship, 324
      process of, simple, 325
      through companionship, 326
      through books, 326

    Inspirational reading and meditation, 326

    Inspired books, 327
      men and books and the Theosophical student, 327

    Intellectual growth, condition of, complete freedom, 301
      and spiritual unfolding, 303

    Intuition, above concrete mind, 290
      light of spirit within, 289, 290
      must be developed by Theosophists, 290

    Iranians, 213

    Ireland, people belong to fourth sub-race of Aryan, 212
      kept apart, 213
      Keltic race highly emotional, 184

    Italy obtained national unity, 81, 82


    J

    Jesus, mysteries of (see St. Clement), 146
      and Christ, 147
      divinity of, 304
      quoted, 304
      and Christ, relation between, 305
      to guard pure body for the Christ, 305
      stepped out of body, 306
      and Christ, view held in early Church, 307
      the Master, guide of Christian Church, 310
      still dwelling in human body, 310
      possibility of personal relation with, 310
      His work in the world, 312

    Judge, W. Q., secession, 283
      tribute to, on White Lotus Day, 1909, 285


    K

    Karma, and brotherhood, 81
        human nature, 81
        reincarnation, 81
      law of, inviolable sequence, 81
      law of, 221, 222
      paid in this life (see Dr. Pascal), 281
      belief in, 284

    Keltic, fourth sub-race of the Aryan root-race, 140
      Orpheus leader of (see Races, also Aryan), 140, 141

    Kings, Moru and Devāpi (see Masters of Wisdom), 227


    L

    Law, universal, 191, 192
      one eternal, taught by Christ and Buddha, 194
      natural law does not change, 198, 199

    Leadbeater, C. W. L., and the Catholic and Puritan spirit, 257
      a transitory personality, 258
      cause of great shaking of T. S., 260

    Lemuria, lost continent of, 113

    Lemurian, third root-race, characteristics of (see Races), 113

    _Light of Asia_, 279

    Lodge, Great, of the Masters, source of wisdom, 285
      the, its messengers, 296

    London, conditions of living in, 122, 123
      life contrasted with country life, 123

    Love, wisdom expresses itself as, 161


    M

    Mahdi, in Africa, 150

    Man, divine, 45, 46
      a spiritual intelligence, 48
      the real spiritual individuality of, 163
      dominated by consciousness, 184
      spiritual, mark of, 118, 119
      nature of, 211
      can achieve all things, 204
      is growing Godlike, 204
      constitution of, and sacraments, 264, 265
      body of, and Protestantism, 265
      the spiritual, will know spiritual men, 292
      God in, help the God to manifest, 294
      a spiritual being in whom Divine Spirit will unfold, 302
      spiritual nature to unfold along three lines, 302

    Manchester, 201

    Mantra, words of Power, 267, 268, 269
      and experiments of Tyndall, 267
      sound as used in, 267
      use of, in Greek Church, 268

    Manu, the thinker, 210
      evolves race, 210
      chooses type, 211
      guide of root-race, 229
      type of race, 229
      of fifth root-race, his work, 229, 230

    Masons, fraternity of, 77

    Masters of Wisdom, 180
      their teachings withdrawn, 148
      Brotherhood of Teachers, 187
      preside over human evolution, 192
      two related to Theos. Soc., 226, 227
        Kings, Moru and Devāpi, 227
      and their pupils, 256, 257
      quoted, “the standard of the adept”, 294, 295
      how to know a Master, 293
      their way of working in world, 311
      the uplift of their presence, 324
      and inspiration, 324
        _The Secret Doctrine_, 328, 329
        _Esoteric Buddhism_, 328, 329

    Matter appropriated by spirit, 164
      Deity manifest in, 164
      spirit master of, 165
      and spirit, relation between, 165
      power over, 68, 69, 168, 169
      vibrations of, and consciousness, 325

    Mazzini, 221

    Medicine, deadlock in, 19, 20, 21
      hypnotism and clairvoyance used by physicians, 67
      and vivisection (see Clairvoyance), 67
      power of mind in treatment of disease, 68

    Meditation, concentrated thinking, 58
      artificially awakens senses, 59, 60
      quickens evolution, 126, 127
      three stages of, 127
      stimulates unfolding consciousness, 127
      develops instrument used in unfolding consciousness, 176
      used for organization of finer bodies, 199
      and inspiration, 326

    Menpes, Mortimer, description of painting, 71

    Mexico, 189

    Mill, J. S., 240

    Miller, Dr., 238

    Mind, creates and restores, 68
      supremacy over matter, 68, 69
      characteristic of Teutonic sub-race (see Aryan), 118

    Moral Educational Congress, 238

    Moru, sketch of life, 227
      letter quoted, 227, 228
      Manu of sixth root-race, 228
      co-operates with Manu of fifth root-race, 233
      has begun His work, keynote brotherhood, 233, 234

    Music, the new, 72
      of India, 72
        Russia, 73
      every religion has note of its own, 192

    Myer’s book on Human Personality, 175

    Mysteries, Orphic, 140, 141
      Greek thought in, 143
      Christos, grade of, 143
      reflexions of initiations, 143, 144
      of Jesus (see St. Clement of Alexandria), 146
      of Kingdom of God, 146
      in early church, 263
      followed by legend of the Holy Grail, 275
      of Jesus took place of Yoga in Hindūism, 275

    Mysticism and Puritan and Catholic spirit, 253

    Mystic Puritan, example in Cromwell, 254

    Mythology, comparative, 8, 188, 189
      and dogmatic Christianity, 189
        comparative religion, 190


    N

    Nerves, sensory and motor, 169

    Nervous system, of fourth and fifth races compared, 52
      increase of nervous diseases, 53
      of sixth sub-race, 53, 222, 223
      evolved according to law, 60
      changing type unstable, 120
      greater tension causes madness (see Psychology), 121
      its finer evolution, conditions impossible, 121
      delicate type of, 121, 122
      in coming race, 121, 122, 123
      flesh food unsuited to finer type, 124
      of Chinese and Japanese compared with Aryan, 222, 223

    Nineveh, 189


    O

    Observation, basis of scientific knowledge, 331

    Occultism and the Catholic spirit, 253
      in the church, 263

    Occultist, possibility of, in Catholic type, 254, 255
      not found in Puritan type, 255
      must be willing to learn by experience, 256
      develops faculties in doing Master’s will, 256, 257
      and the mantra, 267
      records of revelations accessible to him only, 321

    Olcott, Col. H. S., referred to as founder of T. S., 228
      the President Founder, tribute to, 282

    Old Testament in education, 14

    Origen’s writings, 145, 146, 147

    Orpheus, leader of fourth sub-race (see Bodhisattva), 140, 141


    P

    Parsīs, 213

    Pascal, Doctor, tribute to, 281

    Path, the, 275, 276, 277

    Penology, criminal population, 33, 34
      criminals and their treatment, 89-91
      habitual criminals, 92
      probation system, 94, 95
      capital punishment, 95, 96
      criminal of lopsided development, 91
      prison labor, 92, 93

    Periods, the present a transitional, 4, 5
      related to Mighty Beings, 133, 134
      four great world, 133

    Persia, keynote of religion purity, 193

    Persians, 212

    Philosophy, Hindū, and the Vedas, 318

    Pituitary Body, use of, development of, 125
      affected by flesh and alcohol, 125, 126, 197, 198
      connecting link between grosser and finer senses, 51, 196

    Plato, his philosophy, 107

    Politics, liberty and the franchise, 101
      class legislation in England, 101
      liberty, 101, 102
      freedom and self-control, 102

    Protestant, knows nothing of hierarchy, 271

    Protestantism, its attitude towards physical body, 265
      and materialism, 265
      recognizes two sacraments only, 272

    Psychic, low grade of intelligence in undeveloped, 115
      qualities developed before lower mind, 230

    Psychism, powers of, where found, 114
      higher, how produced (see Astral Body), 125

    Psychology, new, the, 18, 19
      range of possibilities (see Nervous System), 69, 70
      soul in relation to spirit (see Soul), 160

    Purānas, 226, 227

    Puritan Spirit and intellectual temperament, 245
      value of, 245, 246
      in reign of Charles First and Cromwell, 246
        Charles Second, 246
      description of, 247, 248
      outburst of, necessary, 248
      and intellectual development of man, 249
      growth of, and loss of the spiritual, 250, 251
      in Theosophical Society, 251, 252
      and lofty form of Mysticism, 253, 254
        Occultism, 255-257
        the Leadbeater question, 257, 258


    R

    Races, root and sub, 1, 2
        religion of, 235
      and senses, 49, 50
      choice of new, 210
      fourth and sixth, closely interlinked, 213
      Lemurian, dominant characteristics of, 113
      Atlantean (see also Atlantean), 113
        passion and lower psychism of, 114
        characteristics of Semitic sub-race, 115, 230
        highest civilization in Toltec, 115, 230
      Aryan (see also Aryan), 3
        source of, 229, 230
        second sub, Hermes leader of, 138
        third sub, Zarathustra leader of, 140
        fourth sub, Orpheus leader of, 140, 141
          interlinked with sixth sub, 213
          reached its zenith, 214
        fifth sub, the Christ leader of, 142, 143
          characteristics of, 151, 152
        sixth sub, physical characteristics, 53, 222
          mental and emotional characteristics, 152, 154, 232
          general characteristics, 215, 216, 217
          interlinked with fourth sub, 213
          candidature for, 222
      the coming, source of, 215
        type of, 117-119
        body of, 120-121
        consciousness of, 119-120
        preparation for, 127-130
        religion and civilization of, 130, 131
        candidature for, 215

    Reason, irrational or enlightened, 13
      unstable condition of, 120
      and madness, 121
      the pure and compassionate, the Wisdom, the Christ in man, 160
      the pure and compassionate, shows itself in lower world as love, 161

    Reflexion, principle of, 108, 109, 110
      of the Great Will, 109
        Wisdom Love, 110
        Creative Spirit, 110
      the law of, and correspondences, 110

    Reformation, the, 250
      reaction from the (see Puritan Spirit, also Cromwell), 263
      the, and Occult mantras, 268

    Reincarnation and brotherhood, 78-80
        karma, 81
      necessary to theory of reflexions, 111, 112
      and unfolding consciousness, 191
      the fact widely accepted, 237
      belief in, 284

    Religion, difficulties of, in the west, 6-9
      and education, 12-16, 86, 238, 239
        brotherhood, 83, 237
      a search after God, 55
      in India (see also India), 83, 84
      universal text book of, 85, 86
      great teachers of, their spiritual qualities, 118
      coming race builder of a universal, 130
      founders of, 187
        and disciples, 263
      source of great spiritual impulses, 187, 188
      comparative (see Ancient Wisdom), 190
      doctrines taught by every, 190-192
      each, has its note and colour, 192
      in Egypt, India, Persia, Greece, Rome, 193
      each sub-race has a special, 235
      of the future, 235-236
      Christian Church broadening, 236
      mystical Christianity spreading, 237
      problem of, 265
      Protestantism and the body, 265
      spirituality and the lower world, 266
      all recognize a great world teacher, 308, 309
      draw together in the Supreme Teacher, 312

    Revelation and the Self, 319
        Buddhist, 319
      authoritative nature of, in Christian and Muhammadan faiths, 320
      defined, 320
      source, 320
      method of recording, 320
      attitude of Theosophical student toward, 321
      must be affirmed by the Spirit within, 322

    Roberts, Dr. (see Hibbert Journal), 298, 299
      view not sound and why, 299, 300, 301

    Rome, closing age of, 4, 5
      social conditions, 27
      mighty, 214
      religious note of, law, 193

    Roman, type of, and Goth, 117

    Roman Catholic Church and higher criticism, 7
        Ireland, 214
      the mystic spirit in, 236
      attitude toward Theosophy, 263
      use of mantra in, 268, 269
      Sacrament of Holy Orders in, 272
      use of sacramental oil, 273-274
      reference to its Priesthood, 263

    Röntgen rays (see Clairvoyance), 67


    S

    Sacraments, found in all great religions, 262
      their object, 262, 266
      in Hindūism, 262, 274
        Roman Catholic Church, 263
      definition of, 264
      and constitution of man, 264, 265
        Baptism, 266, 267
      Holy Communion, 269
      transubstantiation explained, 269, 270
      from material standpoint, 270, 271
      and materialism, 271
      and Apostolic Succession, 272
      Confirmation, 273
      Penance, 273
      Matrimony, 273
      Extreme Unction, 273
      and daily life, 274
      must be given by church, 277

    Sacrifice and discipleship (see Self-sacrifice), 179, 180

    Saint, where found, definition of, 274
      his Master and himself as disciple, 311

    Saint Clement of Alexandria, writings, 145
      “Mysteries of Jesus”, 146

    St. Paul, writings on the Mystic Christ, 147
        nature of man, 157, 158
          soul, 160
      definition of man, 162
      birth of Divine Spirit in the Soul, 304, 305

    Schuré, writings on mystical idea in Wagner (see Grail), 275

    Science, in west, 17, 18
      and ether, etheric sight, 63, 64, 65
      chemistry founded on direct observation, 66
      bounds of, extended, 66
      hypnotism and clairvoyance used by physicians, 67
      direct vision and vivisection, 67
      geology and evolution, 106
      and principle of correspondences, 104, 105, 106
      induction and deduction, 107, 108, 110, 112
      deduction and reincarnation, 111
      in coming civilization, 194, 195
      and Theosophy in coming civilization, 195, 196

    _Science of the Emotions_, by Bhagavān Dās, 168

    Scientific observation, 17, 18, 63, 331
      progress depends on correct observation, 331

    Scriptures, authoritative, back of all great religions, 318
      and the enlightened man, 319
      revealed, in Christianity, 320

    _Secret Doctrine, The_, by H. P. Blavatsky, 209
      possibility of errors in, 328
      record of teachings of Masters, 328, 329

    Self-sacrifice, keynote in Christianity, 193
      and social redemption, 203
      the basis of the coming civilization, 204
      religion and civilization, 205

    Senses, evolution of, in races, 49, 50, 51
      new organs of, in sixth sub-race, 51, 53, 57, 58
      artificially awakened by meditation, 59, 178, 179
      astral, effect of development, 60-63
      new, builders of new art, 70, 73

    Sex-inferiority (see Woman Labor), 11

    Sheffield, description of, 200

    Sir William Crookes, on vibrations, 63

    Social conditions, present, intolerable, 26
      contrast of luxury and misery, 27
      submerged classes, 28, 29, 30
      physique, its deterioration, 32, 33, 201
      multiplication of criminal population, 33, 34
      in America, 34, 35, 36
        Australia, 37-41
      unemployed, 39, 40
      trades unions in Melbourne, 41
      competition replaced by co-operation, 42
      woman labor, 29, 30, 31, 99, 100

    Socialism, H. P. B. on, 44

    Society and Theosophy, in coming civilization, 203
      its redemption through self-sacrifice, 203

    Soul, difference in age, the caste system, 79
      the old and the young, 79, 80, 89, 90
      lopsided development, 91
      the young, its treatment, 92, 93
      in relation to spirit, 160, 161
      represented by three attributes, 161, 162
      in temporary body, changed, 163

    Sound, the music of the future, 72
      and colour and emotion (see Senses, Vibration, Mantra, Tyndall), 73

    Spirit only can know Him, 55
      God in innermost depths of, 56
      architect of human body, 74
      higher qualities of, for coming race, 119
      of the Christ, develop in yourselves, 154
      definition of, 159
      triple nature of, 159
      in relation to soul, 158-160
        spiritual body, 163
      becoming master of matter, 164
      and matter, relation between, 165
      in man unfolds along three great lines, 302

    Spiritual realities belong to spiritual life, 54
      qualities of Great Teachers, 118, 119
      type of humanity, mark Brotherhood, 119
      body relatively permanent, 163
        and memories of past, 163
      greatness and the Theosophical Soc., 291
      work of the spiritual teacher, 302
      teacher sheds illumination, not control intellect, 303

    Spirituality mark of coming civilization, 184

    Subba Rao, tribute to, 287

    Submerged classes (see Social Conditions).

    Sun Myths, 141

    Superstition, definition, 249
      illustrated by Indian story, 249, 250
      in religious reformations, 250

    Supply and demand in America, 34-37, 41
      Melbourne, 41

    Swedenborg, 104


    T

    Telepathy and organization of the Astral body, 173
      how developed (see Senses), 173, 174

    Theosophy, name, 183
      what is it? Whence does it come?, 185, 186, 187
      its work in religion, 188
      and comparative mythology, 189
        religion, 190
      work of, in coming civilization, in religion, 194
        science, 195
      and Yoga of the East, 199, 200
      work of, in coming civilization, in art, 200, 201, 202
        society, 203
      its ideals in education must spread, 238
        influence on education in India, 239
        ideals rejected by men, 242
      must teach relationship of disciple to Teacher, 312

    Theosophical Society, considers causes rather than effects, 25
      teaching of, its advantage, 48, 209
      its members at different stages, 225
        drawn into swifter evolution, 225
      two masters related to, 226
      founders of, 227
      inner purpose of, 228
      brotherhood, only binding principle, 233, 234
      and scientific men, 232
      corner-stone of future religion, 234
      first work of, vitalising Religions, 235, 236
      checked skepticism in India, 239
      problem, how to preserve religion while letting dogmatism go, 239-240
      personality and principle in, 225, 243, 258
      nucleus of sixth root-race, beginning of sixth sub-race, 225, 242
      members not leaders of present race, 242
      shakings in, their use, 243, 260, 287, 295
      duties of, in respect to sacramental rites, 277, 278
      not bound by its officers, 244
      reasons for staying in, 258, 261, 295
      possibility of its death, 261
      Theosophical movement not confined to, 285
      its great difficulty, 287, 288
        immediate work, 288, 289
      members of must develop intuition, 290
        must recognize spiritual greatness, 291
      would hardly welcome a Master, 294
      the John the Baptist to prepare the way for the Christ, 295
      Mrs. Besant’s message to, 296
      should use books of observation as materials for study only, 332

    Theos. student should prepare to verify teachings, 317
      his attitude towards theoretical study, 317
      must discriminate between books he reads, 318
      his attitude towards books of observations, 328

    Thought and the treatment of diseases, 68
      human nature changed by, 81, 82
      and organization of the Astral body (see Mind), 124
      forms, 255

    Thought-image first, then its materialization, 46

    Transition periods, birth of Christ, (see Rome), 4, 5
      the present, 4, 149-150

    Transubstantiation (see Sacraments), 269, 270

    Trinity (see God), illustrated by organic chemistry, 270

    Truth, a sun, 332
      examination of, is best service, 333

    Tyndall, experiments of (see Mantra), 267

    Type, ideal, of the Aryan, 116
      of future nations, that of family, 46
      in mind of Logos, 116
      Roman, 117
      chosen by Manu, 115, 211
      intellectual, its work, 117, 118
      of coming race, 117, 119
      of spiritual man, 118, 119
      with delicate, highly developed nerves, 120-122
      of bodies of coming race, 222
      of new Teacher a new departure, 240
      next, new and strange, 240, 241

    Types, seven great human, 116
      reproduce themselves, 117


    V

    Veda, meaning of word, 318
      supreme authority of, 318
      held high place in early days of Buddhism, 319

    Vegetarianism, flesh food unsuited to coming race, 124
        and Pituitary Body, 125, 126
      pure body needed for unfolding consciousness, 178

    Vibrations, sound, in words of power (see Mantra), 267
      effect of, on consciousness of bodies, 168, 169
      of atoms and consciousness of Logos, 165

    Vicarious atonement, 148

    Vivisection, a fatal road, 19, 20
      done away with by direct vision, 67


    W

    White Lotus Day 1909, memorial services in India, 279
      all over the world, 280

    Will, self determined, 161
      and desire, 161
      highest characteristic of Spirit, 302
      must be developed from above, 302

    Wisdom, the, the Christ in man (see Ancient Wisdom), 160
      expresses itself as love, 161

    Woman, in labor market, 99, 100

    Woman labor, (see social conditions), 29, 30, 31

    Worlds, and human evolution, 191


    Y

    Yoga, false methods of developing consciousness (see Meditation),
        177, 178
      Theosophy brings Yoga of East, 199, 200
      the Mysteries and legend of Holy Grail (see Holy Grail), 275

    Yogi, the Indian, 199, 200


    Z

    Zarathustra or Zoroaster, leader of third sub-race (see
        Bodhisattva), 140




BOOKS BY ANNIE BESANT


Building of the Kosmos, and other Lectures. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

    Contents: Building of Kosmos, Sound, Fire, Yoga, Symbolism.

The Self and its Sheaths. Cloth, 8vo. 50c.

    Contents: The Self and its Sheaths; The Body of Action, The
    Body of Feeling; The Object of the Sheaths.

In the Outer Court. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

    Contents: Purification, Thought-Control, Building of Character,
    Spiritual Alchemy, On the Threshold.

The Path of Discipleship. Cloth, 8vo, 75c.

    Contents: First Steps (Karma-Yoga, Purification),
    Qualifications for Discipleship (Control of Mind, Meditation,
    Building of Character), The Life of the Disciple (The
    Probationary Path, the Four Initiations), The Future Progress
    of Humanity (Methods of Future Science, Man’s coming
    development).

The Ancient Wisdom, An Outline of Theosophical Teaching. With Index.
Cloth, 8vo. $1.50.

The Seven Principles of Man. Theosophical Manuals, No. I. Cloth, 12mo.
35c.

Reincarnation. Theosophical Manuals, No. II. Cloth, 12mo. 35c.

Death and After? Theosophical Manuals, No. III. Cloth, 12mo. A brief
account of post-mortem conditions. 35c.

Karma. Theosophical Manuals, No. IV. Cloth, 12mo. 35c.

    A very illuminating exposition of the Law of Karma.

Man and his Bodies. Theosophical Manuals, No. VII. Cloth, 12mo. 35c.

The Birth and Evolution of the Soul. Cloth, 8vo. 35c.

Four Great Religions: Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Christianity.
Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

The Religious Problem in India. Lectures on Islam, Jainism, Sikhism, and
Theosophy. Boards, 8vo. 50c.

Three Paths to Union with God; and Dharma, or the Meaning of Right and
Wrong. In one vol. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

The Evolution of Life and Form. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

    Contents: Ancient and Modern Science, Functions of the Gods,
    Evolution of Life, Evolution of Form.

The Changing World and Lectures to Theosophical Students, being the
London Lectures of 1909. Cloth, 8vo. $1.00.

Buddhist Popular Lectures. Delivered in Ceylon in 1907. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

The Story of the Great War. A condensed English Prose version of the
Mahabharata, the great epic of India. Cloth, 8vo. $1.25. Indispensable
to the student of the Bhagavad Gita, which is the central jewel of the
Mahabharata.

Esoteric Christianity, or the Lesser Mysteries. 387 pp. and Index. Cloth,
8vo. $1.50.

Thought Power, its Control and Culture. 137 pp. and Index. Cloth, 8vo.
Sixth Edition. 75c.

Ancient Ideals in Modern Life. Four Lectures delivered at Benares,
December, 1900. 145 pp. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

The Doctrine of the Heart: Extracts from Hindu Letters, with a foreword
by Mrs. Besant. 16mo. Leather, 75c net. Cloth, 50c net.

Some Problems of Life. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

    Contents: Problems of Ethics, Problems of Sociology, Problems
    of Religion and Prayer; Free-will and Necessity, etc.

Laws of the Higher Life. Benares Lectures, 1903. Boards, 8vo. 50c.

The Pedigree of Man. Adyar Lectures, 1903. (Revised Edition.) Cloth, 8vo.
75c.

Theosophy and the New Psychology. Six Lectures delivered in London, 1904.
Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

A Study in Consciousness, a Contribution to the Science of Psychology. A
much enlarged and revised issue of articles which have appeared as the
Evolution of Consciousness; Will, Desire, Emotion, etc. 450 pp., with
Index. Cloth, crown 8vo. $1.50.

Hindu Ideals. Six Lectures delivered at the Central Hindu College,
Benares, 167 pp. Boards, 8vo. 50c.

Theosophy and Human Life. Being the Convention Lectures of Christmas,
1904. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

Hints on the Study of the Bhagavad Gita. Being the Convention Lectures of
Christmas, 1905. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

Sri Rama Chandra, stories from the Ramayana. Boards, 8vo. 65c.

The Wisdom of the Upanishads. The Convention Lectures of December, 1906,
delivered at Adyar. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

London Lectures of 1907. Nine Lectures given at the Queen’s Hall and
Essex Hall, London. Cloth, 8vo. 197 pp. 75c.

Occult Chemistry. A reprint, with diagram, of the Lucifer article of
November, 1895. Paper covers. 25c.

An Introduction to Yoga. Convention Lectures of 1907. Cloth, 8vo. 75c.

An Autobiography. Illustrated. Third impression, with a new preface.
$1.75.

Lotus Calendar (perpetual). Compiled from the writings of Mrs. Annie
Besant. With designed cover. 35c.

Popular Lectures on Theosophy. Delivered at Adyar, India, 1910. 50c.


Books by Annie Besant and C. W. Leadbeater

Thought Forms. Richly illustrated and thirty full-page coloured plates of
forms, clairvoyantly seen and illustrative vibration figures. Cloth gilt,
royal 8vo. $3.50.

    The Contents include Introduction and sections on the method
    of representation; the two effects of Thought; the way in
    which vibration acts; the structure of the Thought Form and
    its effects; the meaning of the Colours; the three classes of
    Thought Forms; a large variety of illustrative Thought Forms
    and the nature of forms built by music.

Occult Chemistry. This book is profusely illustrated by twenty-four
diagrams and plates, showing the number of ultimate atoms in different
chemical elements known to science (and four unknown) their shape, modes
of motion and groupings to form the chemical atom of modern science,
including gold, silver, copper, radium and fifty others. Cloth, royal
8vo. $2.00.

    For Sale by

    THE THEOSOPHICAL BOOK CONCERN,
    Headquarters for Theosophical and Occult Literature in America,
    26 Van Buren Street.

THE CHICAGO THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY

maintains an auditorium where public lectures are given each Sunday
evening, and classes held during the week open to the public; and a
free reading room open every week day from 9 A. M. to 5 P. M.; and a
reference and circulating library for the benefit of all enquirers upon
Theosophical and Occult subjects at

26 Van Buren Street, Chicago.

    The Bulletin
    of
    THE CHICAGO THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
    A Monthly Journal of Theosophic Comment. Yearly, 50 cents.
    Single copies, 5 cents.
    26 Van Buren Street, Chicago, Ill.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The changing world and lectures to
theosophical students., by Annie Wood Besant

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LECTURES TO THEOSOPHICAL STUDENTS ***

***** This file should be named 57667-0.txt or 57667-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/6/6/57667/

Produced by Donald Cummings, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


