PART XI

HIGHER SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS


We frequently hear of, and witness manifestations of, what is called
"spirit psychometry," "spirit clairvoyance," and "spirit clairaudience."
In the earlier chapters of the present book we have spoken of the
psychic principles and laws underlying psychometry, clairvoyance, and
clairaudience. We have seen that all of these forms and phases of
psychic phenomena are capable of being produced independent of spirit
guidance, control, or influence. In fact, most of such manifestations
are so produced, even when they are considered to be phases of spirit
mediumship. But, outside of these manifestations, there are found cases
in which such phenomena are produced by the aid, influence, and
assistance, if not indeed the direct power of, the controlling spirits
of the medium.


Spirit Psychometry and Clairvoyance.

In those instances in which the controlling influence of such phenomena
is clearly that of disembodied spirits, we find two distinct classes of
the same, as follows: (1) cases in which the spirits aided in the
establishing of the psychic rapport, and thus rendered more efficient,
clear, and strong; (2) cases in which the spirits exerted their own
psychometric, clairvoyant or clairaudient power, and then communicated
the result through their mediums to the circle. In the first of above
classes, the psychic faculties of the medium really perform the work,
although greatly aided by the addition of the psychic power of the
spirit. In the second of the above classes, the work is performed solely
by the psychic powers of the spirits, and the medium acts merely as the
line of communication between spirit and the circle. It must be
remembered that the spirits who have passed out of the body are
possessed of the same order of psychic faculties as are those still in
the body, and that, likewise, on both planes there is a great variation
of the degree of such powers between different individuals.


Spirit Psychic Assistance.

From the above, it will be seen that a mediumistic person may practice
in psychometry, clairvoyance, and clairaudience, either with or without
the assistance of the spirits. In case the spirits are assisting in the
direction of performing the psychic work themselves, and then
communicating the result to the medium, the medium of course has but to
remain passive and receive the communication. In cases, however, in
which the spirits assist merely by strengthening the psychic power of
the medium by aiding in the production of the rapport conditions, or by
lending the psychic power to add to that of the medium, then the medium
has but to proceed just as we have pointed out in the earlier portions
of this book devoted to the subjects of psychometry, clairvoyance, etc.


Writing Mediumship.

In what is known as "writing mediumship" the medium's hand is controlled
by the spirit, and is caused to write messages to those present, or to
answer questions propounded by some of those present at the circle. In
some quarters such writing is called "automatic writing," but inasmuch
as this last term is also applied to cases in which the hand of the
person writes a message telepathed by a living person, it would seem
that the old term "writing mediumship" is still the best one to use in
the cases in which the spirit control is using the hand of the medium
for the purpose of communication. The following statements made by
different mediumistic writers on this particular subject will prove
interesting and instructive to the young mediums seeking development
along the lines of this special phase of mediumship.


Incidents of Writing Mediumship.

One writer says: "If the medium reaches the writing stage, he generally
passes into it in much the same manner that he does into the
inspirational speaking. That is, he becomes entranced, and in
entrancement of this kind he usually loses his conscious self, although
it is not essential that he should do so. He may remain partially
conscious, but he will be very pale and will have no control whatever
over the hand which does the writing. When the hand that writes is
generally the only part of him that becomes numb, one entire side may
become limp and inactive, and it is at this stage that a pencil must be
placed in his hand all ready for writing, and a large sheet of heavy
paper be put on the table before him. It is urged that the pencil be a
heavy one, and the paper tough and coarse, for the first writing of a
writing medium is not even a fair specimen of penmanship, being heavy
and very difficult to decipher. As his hand wanders here and there, his
body may sway and the pencil be brought in contact with the paper. When
he begins to write, the strokes are crude and jerky and uncertain. The
first notes that he delivers to the sitters are very often difficult to
make out, and sometimes it is impossible to tell what they are. But this
condition will be gradually overcome until the writing is very fair, and
finally it can be written on much finer paper and with an ordinary
pencil. When questions are to be asked, they may be put direct to the
medium, and the answers will be written out and signed by the spirit
sending them. As the medium develops, it will not be necessary for him
to have the questions put to him verbally. Write the questions on a
little slip of paper, and place these slips in his hands. The spirit
will read them, and then use his arm as before in writing out answers.
But this stage cannot be attained in a day or a week, and it is a sign
of the higher forms of development, and should be looked upon by the
members of the circle as evidence of the highest order establishing the
great success they have attained."


Developing Writing Mediumship.

Another writer on the subject of writing mediumship says to those
developing this phase of mediumship: "Your hands may be caused to shake
and move about as if you desired to write. You may be quite conscious,
or only semi-conscious, but you will feel that you are unable to prevent
the movements. In such a case, the sitters should provide pencil and
paper and await results. They should speak to the control and request
him to work quietly, and in all probability the rapid preliminary
scrawls will soon give place to slower and more legible writing. Many
persons have developed as writing mediums who have never sat in a
circle, and without being entranced. We should advise you, if you decide
to sit alone and make experiments in this direction, to avoid
excitement, expectancy, and preconceptions. Proceed as though you were
speaking to a visible friend, and request that someone will move your
hands to write. Provide yourself with a writing pad, or several sheets
of paper, and while holding a pencil in readiness, withdraw your
thoughts from your hand and arm, and assume a passive condition. If you
are strongly mediumistic, words and sentences may be written, but you
need hardly expect such results at first."


Stead's Method and Results.

W. T. Stead, the eminent English investigator, said: "I hold my pen in
the ordinary way, but when the writing is beginning I do not rest my
wrist or arm upon the paper, so as to avoid the friction, and to give
the influence, whatever it may be, more complete control of the pen. At
first, the pen is apt to wander into mere scrawling, but after a time it
writes legibly. Unlike many automatic writers who write as well
blindfolded as when they read what they write as they are writing it, I
can never write so well as when I see the words as they come. There is
danger in this, which is most clearly illustrated When my hand writes
verse--especially rhymed verse--for the last word in each line suggests
to my conscious mind a possible rhyme for the ending of the following
line; this rouses up my mind, my own ideas get mixed with those of the
communicating intelligence, and confusion is the result." The above
statement of Mr. Stead becomes doubly interesting and valuable when we
remember that through his hand, controlled by a spirit intelligence,
came that wonderful series of messages afterward published under the
title of "Letters from Julia," which book excited the attention and
interest of the civilized world at the time of its publication, and even
to this day enjoys a great popularity.


Automatic Writing vs. Inspirational Writing.

Another writer says: "Inspirational or impressional writing is
frequently mistaken for that which is more purely passive or automatic.
The medium or sensitive person experiences a strong impulse to write,
but does not receive any clear or consecutive train of thought. He sets
down one word, and then others follow as fast as he can indicate them,
but he must begin to write before the complete sentence is given to him.
In other cases, the thoughts flow into his consciousness faster than his
pen can record them; but in the truly 'automatic' form of communication
the mind of the sensitive is not consciously affected. He can read and
think about other and entirely different subjects, and need take no more
interest in the work than he would if his hand did not belong to him nor
than if a spirit laid hold of and guided the pencil. Some mediums who
write automatically have to be mentally quiet; they find that if the
mind is preoccupied the hand will not write, although, even in such
cases, it frequently happens that the amanuensis is ignorant of the
communication until he reads it afterwards."


Use and Abuse of Automatic Writing.

J. A. White, a trance and clairvoyant medium himself, says of the phase
of writing mediumship: "There is a great tendency, particularly in cases
of automatic writing, to do too much of it. No sooner do some people
find that the pencil will move, than they spend all their spare time in
this fascinating pursuit, which, in their undeveloped state, I believe
to be a dangerous and unwise practice. They are apt to exclaim, when any
question arises during the day: 'Let us see what the spirits have to
say.' This, carried to extremes, leads to one thing, and one thing
only--obsession. I believe in fixing a time, and, unless in exceptional
cases, refusing to sit at any other. Of course I am speaking of
mediumship when it is in its budding stage. A developed medium can judge
for himself, and knows from experience how far to go. It is a favorite
trick of a certain class of spirits when they find they have a sensitive
who can 'feel' them, to give them that pricking sensation in the arm
which denotes their presence. 'So-and-so wants to write,' and away
rushes the medium for the pencil, and sits down. This I do not believe
in. I have seen far more harm than good come from it. The proper way to
develop, in my opinion, is to sit at home in a small, carefully selected
circle, two or three times a week, at stated hours, and with a competent
conductor who knows what he is doing."


Advice to Writing Mediums.

A French medium says: "We urge beginners in their own interest not to
take up the pencil for automatic writing, or to sit at a table for
communications at any free moment, without rhyme or reason, for disorder
in experiment is one of the first and most serious dangers to be
avoided. An absolutely strict rule should be made not to attempt the
effort more than once every other day." Another writer says: "The
communications that are received by the various forms of passive,
impressional, automatic, and inspirational writing must not be regarded
as valuable merely because of the conditions under which they were
obtained, nor because of their spirit origin, real or supposed. Under
all circumstances receive with the utmost reserve and caution
long-winded communications from notable characters who claim to be
'Napoleon Bonaparte,' 'Lord Bacon,' 'Socrates,' or other great
personages; for in the majority of cases, the value of the communication
is exactly the reverse of the importance of the name attached. This
applies to automatic writings quite as much as to spoken messages. Judge
the statement made by the ordinary standards, apart from their claimed
exalted origin. If rational, beautiful, and spiritually helpful and
enlightening, they are worth having on their own merits; but if they
are unreasonable, wild or dogmatic, or pretentious and flattering, they
should be discarded; and, unless you change their character after
repeated experiments, your attention should be turned in some other
direction."


Drawing Mediumship.

What is known as "drawing mediumship" is but a variation of writing
mediumship, at least so far as is concerned the nature of the
manifestation. In both cases the spirit control moves the hand of the
medium, in one case forming letters and words, and in the other case
forming figures, designs, etc. In some rare instances, the spirit
control operating through the hand of the medium has produced crayon
drawings, water color sketches, and even oil paintings, although the
medium himself or herself, was unable to even draw a straight line, much
less to execute a finished drawing or painting. The principle governing
such mediumship, and the development, thereof, is precisely the same as
that governing the phase of writing mediumship previously described.


The Planchette.

From time to time, during the past fifty years, there have been invented
or arranged various forms of mechanical contrivances designed to assist
in the development of writing mediumship. The most popular of these has
been the Planchette, which has enjoyed great popularity for many years
past. The Planchette is a little heart-shaped board, having two legs,
with tiny wheels at the end, attached to the board. Near the pointed end
of the heart-shaped board is a hole, into which a pencil is inserted. A
sheet of paper of good size is spread upon a table, and the Planchette
is placed thereupon. Then the sitter, or two sitters, place their hand
or hands upon the board--generally resting only the tips of their
fingers lightly upon it. The sitter or sitters then await results.


How to Use the Planchette.

If the sitter is mediumistic the Planchette will begin to move about
slowly at first, gradually gathering force and definite direction. After
a few preliminary strokes, circles, or lines having been drawn, the
Planchette will seem to have been firmly taken hold of by some spirit
hand, and will begin to write words and sentences in a more or less
'scrawly' fashion. When the writing once begins, questions may be asked
of and answered by the spirits. Some persons report that to them the
Planchette seems to move by itself, pulling their hands with it; but
others report that they feel the movement of their arms and hands, as
the spirit propels the machine in the work of waiting. Some know what is
being written during the process, while others do not know what has been
written until they afterwards read it. Sometimes the writing begins Boon
after the sitting is commenced, while in other cases the sitters have to
wait a long time, or even to sit several times before the writing
actually begins. Sometimes the Planchette will refuse to write for
certain persons, but will write freely for others. The general advice is
to exercise patience in the Planchette sittings, and not to expect to
get the best results at once; and, particularly, not to begin asking
questions immediately after the writing begins.


Healing Mediumship.

Some mediums seem to be particularly adapted to the work of healing by
psychic force, and this phase of mediumship is known as "healing
mediumship." The healing medium is guided principally by the spirit
influence, so far as is concerned the choice of methods of procedure in
his healing work. The following directions, however, given by a
mediumistic writer, will give the young medium a very good, practical
general idea of the procedure to be followed in case his spirit control
does not indicate some other method. This writer says:


How to Heal by Spirit Power.

"If you are impressed with the idea that you possess healing power, you
can easily experiment upon your suffering friends or acquaintances. If
you are mediumistic, and spirits desire to develop you for the healing
work, you will readily feel that you are impressed what to do. Your
hands will be guided to the proper position, and you will spontaneously
make the requisite passes. Magnetic healing has really nothing to do
with massage, the induction of sleep, or with any form of mesmerism or
hypnotism. The healing medium should centre his thought and interest
solely and wholly with the idea of effecting a cure. He will need to be
sympathetic, but hopeful. Do not let your patient think about his
ailments, but arouse his thought and engage his attention upon some
outside subject. Make him feel comfortable, and lead him to expect good
results; to do this you must be affirmative and confident. Unless you
are impressed, or are controlled, to do otherwise, sit in front and take
hold of the hands of the sufferer for a time, then make gentle, short,
downward passes over the part affected, and conclude with long sweeping
passes from head to foot without contact. For local affections, point
your hands at or just touch the spot with your finger tips, or make
direct horizontal or slightly downward movements, as if you were
throwing something at him. A warm, comfortable room is favorable to
magnetizing, and a genial mental atmosphere, created by cheerful and
kindly minds in the operator and persons present, will contribute
largely to the success of the treatment. You will do well to act upon
your impressions and make the passes in whatever way you feel impelled
or compelled. If you operate under spirit guidance, you will be
impressed more or less clearly how to proceed in each case. In all
probability you may sympathetically 'take on,' and be affected by, the
symptoms of the disease from which the patient suffers, and in that way
be able to form an accurate diagnosis of the case; but you must guard
against exhaustion, and should always 'throw off' from yourself the
influence that you have received, and wash your hands thoroughly after
each treatment."


Materialization Mediumship.

One of the rarest, and at the same time the most eagerly sought after
phase of mediumship, is that known as "materialization mediumship." In
this phase of mediumship the decarnate spirit is able to draw upon the
vital forces of the medium, and those present at the seance, to such
effect that it may clothe itself with a tenuous, subtle form of matter,
and then exhibit itself to the sitters in the same form and appearance
that it had previously presented in its earth life. Many of the most
remarkable testimonies to the truth and validity of spiritualism have
been obtained through this phase of mediumship, and it is the aim of all
investigators to witness, and of most mediums to be the channel of the
production of, this remarkable phase of mediumistic phenomena.

In almost all instances of materialization phenomena in the record of
modern spiritualism we find that a cabinet was employed. There are two
main reasons advanced for the necessity of the cabinet in this phase of
mediumistic phenomena. The first of said reasons is that in many cases
darkness has been found necessary for the preliminary work of the
materialization, although absolute darkness is not necessary in the
general room in which the materialized spirit forms afterward appear.
The second of the said reasons is that there seems to be a psychic
atmosphere created by the blending of the spirit forces with those of
the medium, which atmosphere must be kept apart from and unmixed with
the auras of the members of the outside circle or the general visitors
at the seance.


Why the Cabinet Is Necessary.

Just what is the technical reason for this necessity is a source of
argument and dispute among the different authorities on the subject,
and it may be said that the matter is not as yet definitely settled. But
whatever may be such technical explanation, the fact remains that the
seclusion of the medium has been found almost absolutely necessary for
the production of the phenomena of spirit materialization. The few
exceptions noted in the history of modern spiritualism only go to
establish the general rule. For the purpose of a general study of the
subject, it may be accepted as a general fact that the production of
spirit materialization has as one of its necessary conditions the
presence and use of a dark cabinet in which the medium is secluded from
the circle or assemblage of persons attending the seance.


How to Make the Spirit Cabinet.

One of the best kind of cabinets for this purpose is a small alcove
room, or other small room adjoining the room in which the visitors sit
at the seance. A large closet will also answer the purpose very well, in
fact many mediums prefer the closet to any other form of cabinet. If
neither small room or closet is available, then it becomes necessary to
build or erect a cabinet for the medium. One of the simplest and least
expensive methods of building or erecting a cabinet for the medium is as
follows: Take a large piece of dark cloth, cotton or woolen, or else a
large shawl, and fasten it by stout twine or cord across a corner of the
room. It will be better if the curtain is made in two pieces, so as to
allow it to part in the middle for the purpose of the entry and exit of
the medium, and for the purpose of allowing the materialized spirit form
to show itself to the circle. It is not necessary that all light be
excluded from the cabinet, and therefore it need cause no worriment if a
little light filters in over the top of the curtain; but the lights in
the main room should be kept burning "dim and low," not only for the
purpose of aiding in the actual work or materialization, but also in
order to preserve the proper conditions when the materialized spirit
presents itself between the opened curtains.


How to Use the Spirit Cabinet.

When the cabinet is properly arranged the medium enters it and sits down
on a chair provided for that purpose. He should not be disturbed
thereafter, but should be encouraged and aided in his work by the
maintenance of a quite, reverent mental attitude on the part of the
members of the circle. It will be found helpful if a few hymns are sung
while waiting for manifestations from the cabinet. The best way to
encourage materialization at a regular circle is for gradual steps to be
taken leading up to this high phase of phenomena. For example, the
circle should sit in the ordinary way at its regular meetings, and
devote itself to the production of the lesser forms of phenomena. Then,
before adjournment, the medium may go into the cabinet while the circle
sits for materialization phenomena. This practice may be made to form a
regular part of the proceedings of the circle. But the circle must be
very patient concerning the production of this class of phenomena, for
the necessary conditions are very difficult to develop, even when aided
by the most powerful spirits. Many sittings may be required before even
the slightest sign of materialization is obtained--but the final result
will repay much waiting and watching, much patience and much
perseverance. But sooner or later the phenomena will come if the proper
conditions are provided for them.


Spirit Phosphorescence.

The first evidence of the presence and activity of the spirit forces
striving to produce the phenomena and materialization will probably be
the appearance of peculiar hazy phosphorescent lights playing in front
of the curtain forming the front of the cabinet. These lights will
consist of small globules or balls of phosphorescent light that will
dance about, like the familiar will-o'-the-wisp seen over swamps and in
damp, woody places. These lights will flit here and there, will
alternately appear and disappear. Sometimes they will appear as if a
multitude of fire-flies were clustered in front of the curtain. When
these fire balls appear the circle may know that it is well on the way
to perfect materializations.


Appearance of Materialized Substance.

As the power increases, and the conditions become stabilized and
perfected, the manifestations will become more pronounced. It often
happens that cloudy nebulous bodies of psychic substance are formed and
float around in front of the cabinet, like clouds of steam or vapor
illumined by a dim phosphorescent light. Sometimes attempts will seem to
have been made to form these clouds into the semblance of the human
body, and often these bodies are more or less incomplete, as for
instance the arms may be missing, or else there may be dark holes where
the eyes, nose, and mouth should be. It may be stated here that the
sitters should not be frightened by these sights, nor should mental
agitation be permitted to manifest too strongly, as such conditions act
to retard further developments. Sometimes perfect hands and arms
materialize, but apparently not attached to a body. These hands may
float out over the circle, and may touch the members thereof. In rare
cases these hands take articles handed them by members of the circle,
which articles are then "dematerialized" and vanish from sight,
afterward appearing in other parts of the house. Large articles of
furniture have been known to be dematerialized in this way.


Materialized Spirit Forms.

Later on, the nebulous spirit forms will take on more definite lines and
form, and will become more plainly visible, and will also assume a far
more "solid" appearance. When the phenomena reaches its highest phases,
the materialized spirit forms can be plainly seen and actually
recognized by their friends in earth life. In some cases they will
actually leave the front of the curtain and will walk down among the
sitters, shaking hands with them, touching them on the cheek, or even
embracing some loved one. In rare cases these materialized forms are
able to converse with the sitters in the circle, just as plainly as when
in earth life.


Scientific Proof of Materialization.

It is not the purpose of this book to prove the existence of mediumistic
phenomena--rather it points out the means and methods whereby the
student may obtain such proof for himself or herself. But it may be
suggested here that the sceptic may find an abundance of proof of the
genuineness of materialization phenomena in the records and reports made
by eminent scientists, statesmen, and others. Particularly, the report
of Sir William Crookes, the eminent English scientist, will furnish such
proof to the inquirer who demands "scientific proof" before he will
believe anything out of the usual. Sir William Crookes has given
convincing evidence of the genuineness of spirit materialization, even
going so far to offer records of the weight of materialized spirits, and
their photographs taken by him--in some instances the photographs
showing the forms of both medium and spirit materialization.


How to Conduct a Materializing Seance.

In sitting for materialization, the circle should maintain the same
general demeanor that it observes at other times. Silence or dignified
conversation may be indulged in, but joking or levity should be
forbidden. Hands should be held, and reverent singing indulged in. It
should be remembered that this phase of mediumistic phenomena is not
something apart and distinct from the lesser phases which have been
described in detail in this book. On the contrary, it is simply a matter
of degree, and the same general principles underlie all phases of
mediumistic phenomena. Therefore, it is not necessary to repeat the
instructions regarding the conduct of the circle, or the rules for the
development of the medium. Read the earlier chapters for the same, which
are equally applicable in this place as in the places in which they
originally appeared.


Trumpet Mediumship.

In what is known as "trumpet mediumship," the sound of the voice of the
communicating spirit is increased in power by the use of a trumpet
shaped arrangement of paper, card-board, tin, or aluminum. There is no
particular virtue in the material used, and anyone may make a
serviceable trumpet out of heavy paper or thin card-board. The principle
of the use of the "spirit trumpet" is precisely that of the well-known
megaphone, i.e., it MAGNIFIES the sound, and increases its carrying
power. A spirit speaking in the faintest whisper through the trumpet is
enabled to have its voice heard plainly by those present in the circle,
where otherwise nothing would be heard. Often the spirit force is so
strong that it will pick up the trumpet and carry it around the circle,
tapping the various members thereof, and whispering through it into the
ear of some particular members. Weak spirits, therefore, who are unable
to make themselves heard in the ordinary way, often employ the trumpet
with effect in seances. When the trumpet is used, it should be placed on
the table, awaiting the use of the spirits.


Spirit Playing on Musical Instruments, Etc.

The spirit forces also sometimes will see fit to play upon musical
instruments placed in the cabinet with the medium, the guitar, mandolin,
concertina, accordion, etc., being the instruments preferred in such
cases. Of course the sceptics will claim that the medium may play the
instruments himself or herself, and thus give ground for the claim of
fraud; consequently in the case of public seances, and many private
ones as well, the medium will insist upon having his or her hands tied,
and other precautions taken to eliminate the possibility of fraud and
deception. Such precautions are in no way a reflection upon the medium,
and are, in fact, demanded by many mediums as a matter of self-respect,
self-protection, and the cause of truth. In many cases in which the
mediums were entirely lacking in musical education, knowledge, or
training, the spirits have performed skilled selections of music upon
the instruments in the cabinet.


Independent Slate Writing.

What is generally known as "independent slate writing" is a very
interesting phase of mediumship, and one of the peculiarities thereof is
that such phenomena is sometimes produced through mediums who seem to
possess little or no mediumistic powers in other directions. In
independent slate writing there is no employment of the hands of the
medium by the spirit to form the letters, words, and sentences of the
communication. On the contrary, the writing is done directly by the
spirit forces, independent of the organism of the medium. Of course the
psychic power of the medium and his vital energy as well is drawn upon
by the spirits in producing this form of manifestation, but the medium
is sometimes seated out of reach of the slates and in no case actually
touches the pencil.


The Slate Writing Circle.

Independent slate writing is performed as follows: The circle selects
two common slates, or else one folding slate. A small bit of chalk, or a
tiny piece of slate pencil is placed between the two slates, the latter
being then placed tightly together, and then bound with thick, strong
twine--in some cases the ends of the twine are fastened with sealing
wax. This trying and sealing is for the purpose of eliminating the
suspicion of fraud or deceit, and for the purpose of scientifically
establishing the genuineness of the phenomena. The bound slates are then
placed on the table in the middle of the circle. In some cases the
medium rests his hands on the slate, and in other cases he keeps his
hands entirely away from them--the phenomena itself evidently being
produced with equal facility in either case. A written question may
either be placed inside the slate on a small bit of paper, or else
sealed and placed on top of the tied slates. In some cases the
scratching sound of the pencil may be heard proceeding from the tied
slates, while on others no sound is heard while the writing is being
done. When the slates are opened, at the end of the seance, the slates
will be found to contain writing--the answer to the question, or else a
general message to the circle--the writing sometimes consisting of but a
word or two, while in other cases both of the inside surfaces of the
slate will be found to be covered with writing. It often requires quite
a number of sittings before this phase of phenomena is secured; in many
cases it is never actually secured in a satisfactory form.


Spirit Paintings.

There are cases of record in which crayon drawings have been produced on
the slates by enclosing small bits of various colored crayons therein
when the slates are tied together. Again, oil paintings have been
secured on the slates, after small dabs of oil paint of various colors
have been placed on the inside surface of the slates, a little linseed
oil being poured on each.


Fraudulent Slate Writing.

Slate phenomena has been brought into some degree of discredit and
disrepute during the past ten years or more, by reason of the fact that
a number of unscrupulous "fakers," or bogus-mediums, employed a system
where this class of phenomena was counterfeited by trick methods. But,
as all careful investigators of mediumistic phenomena well know, some
wonderful results are still obtained, quietly and without publicity or
notoriety, in many family or private circles. In this case, and in many
others, the very best mediumistic phenomena is often produced in those
family or private circles, where mutual sympathy, harmony, and spiritual
understanding prevail, and where there is an absence of the sceptical,
cavilling, negative mental attitudes, which tend to interfere with the
free flow of spirit power and the degree of manifestation. The tiny
flame burning on the family altars and in the private shrines serve to
keep alive the Light of the Spirit, which is too often dimmed by the
public glare of counterfeit and sensational exhibitions of so-called
spirit power.


Practical Advice to Developing Mediums.

The young developing medium who has read the foregoing pages of this
book will in all probability soon discover just what phase of mediumship
is best suited for his natural powers, temperament and psychic
constitution. As his innate psychic powers unfold and develop he will be
almost instinctively led in the particular directions in which these
powers may find the opportunity for the best form of expression and
manifestation. And, at the same time, the spirit friends which the young
medium will have drawn to himself will have discovered, by means of
experimentation, just what phase of mediumship the young medium would
best develop in order to convey the messages and communications from the
spirit side of life. The following bits of advice from mediumistic
writers of good standing will, however, perhaps serve to make the path
clearer for the young medium who is reaching out toward the best and
most efficient form of manifestation of the powers which he has found
are within himself.


Need of Special Development.

A writer says: "As a general rule, the best results of mediumship are
secured by special development along the lines of natural aptitude. A
'Jack of all trades is master of none,' and such a one is a failure in
mediumship as in anything else. You may find it helpful to visit a
public medium who is already developed, and who can examine you and give
you insight into your natural psychic powers, and counsel you regarding
your qualifications and aptitudes, and tell you what to do. But do not
attach too much importance to directions received in that way, because
so much depends upon the knowledge and power of the operator. One spirit
might use you with success in one direction, and another in some other
phase; just as one mesmerist may make a subject clairvoyant when
another has previously attempted to do so and failed. Nothing but actual
experience will settle that point. If, however, after a reasonable
amount of patient devotion to the experiment you do not succeed, or are
disappointed with what has been done, it will be advisable to effect a
change in the conditions. A dissatisfied state of mind is a dangerous
one. You may, if you choose, sit by yourself, and try to obtain table
movements, or to get 'automatic' or passive writing. You can make
experiments in psychometry or try crystal gazing, or endeavor to
visualize and to become clairaudient, but we should not advise you to
sit alone and invite spirits to put you into the trance. It is better to
join some good private circle."


Advice to Discouraged Mediums.

A writer gives the following excellent advice to young mediums who have
become somewhat discouraged at their lack of success, and slowness of
progress: "You have been already informed that you are a medium, and
that if you sit you will develop special gifts. But you may say: 'I have
sat, and have not developed as I was assured I should.' That is quite
probable. The medium whom you consulted may have misjudged your
capabilities; the spirit may have estimated what he could have done with
or through you, and, from his point of view, may have been perfectly
accurate; but possibly the spirits who have endeavored to develop you
were unable to succeed. People often say: 'I have been told many times
that I should make a good medium, but I have not had satisfactory
results.' When we hear such statements we are prompt to ask: 'Have you
sat for development for any length of time in a harmonious and congenial
circle? You cannot expect growth unless you give the requisite
conditions. You might as well anticipate a harvest without sowing the
seed--just because you bought a sack of wheat! The marvelous results
achieved by expert acrobats and athletes are due to their indomitable
determination to succeed, and their steady and continuous training of
eye, and muscle, and nerve. They concentrate their attention and focus
all their powers, and are at once temperate, patient, and persevering in
their experiments. The same spirit of devotion; the same firm attitude
and watchful attention to all the details; and the same observance of
the conditions, physical, mental, moral, and spiritual, are needed if
you would educate yourself and become a fit and serviceable instrument
for exalted spirit intelligence to afford humanity the benefit of their
experiences "over there."'"


Avoid Cross-Magnetism.

A popular mediumistic writer has given the following excellent words of
warning to young mediums: "Do not go into public promiscuous 'developing
circles.' There is always a danger of 'cross magnetism' and disorderly
manifestations in such gatherings. Owing to the mixed and inharmonious
mental, moral, and physical conditions which necessarily exist where a
number of strangers and curiosity seekers are attracted, you run the
risk of being affected by undeveloped, unprincipled, frivolous,
mercenary, self-assertive, or even immoral spirits, who, being attracted
to such assemblies, seek to influence incautious and susceptible people
who ignorantly render themselves liable to their control. The people
'on the other side' are human beings of all grades; they are not morally
purified by passing through the death-change; and as we are constantly
sending into their other state 'all sorts and conditions of people,' you
need not be at all surprised if you get into intercourse with the vain
and foolish, the unreliable and pretentious, or the selfish and sinful,
if you indiscriminately open the doors of your psychic self and give a
free invitation to any spirit 'passer by.'"


Avoid Psychic Absorption.

"You can waste your time, and you can sit in circles, absorb all kinds
of psychological influences, exhaust your own, and in many cases become
so filled up with contending influences that you are in a state of
psychological fever all the time, or so exhaust yourself that you will
become as limp and useless as a rag. This is not the way to use the
opportunities you have; and you should avoid the injudicious,
promiscuous, and insane methods of development of many who are extremely
anxious to develop you as a medium, and who often bring discredit upon
the subject of mediumship, and do no one the slightest practical
good--not even themselves. We admit that the motives of those who
conduct public promiscuous developing circles are good in most cases,
but their methods are frequently 'injudicious'--to put it mildly. Under
ordinary circumstances, your own pure purpose and the spirits who are in
sympathy with your exalted desires and intentions, are sufficient
safeguards against the intrusion of low, mischievous or malicious
spirits, but you should not venture into conditions which require the
trained and disciplined will, and the influence of wise and powerful
spirits to protect you against danger, until you have acquired the
ability to render yourself positive to the psychic spheres of
undesirable people, both in or out of the physical body, and can
voluntarily become passive and responsive to the true and trustworthy
friends whom you know and love."


The Stewardship of Great Powers.

We can not hope to more fitly close this book devoted to the brief
presentation of the facts of the psychic world, and the world of spirit,
than by quoting the following words uttered by a faithful laborer in the
vineyard of spiritualism: "Spiritualism helps us to understand the
'unity of spirit' and 'the brotherhood of man' in the divine
relationship wherein the greatest among us is the servant of all. The
possession of great gifts is an added responsibility. We are only
stewards of our powers on behalf or others, and our desire to gain
knowledge and influence should be vitalized and dignified by the
intention to use them to help, teach, and serve our fellows, and in such
service we shall ourselves be blest."

FINIS.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Notes:                                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Page 3: Interpretating amended to Interpenetrating;          |
  | Tranformation amended to Transformation. "Unchartered        |
  | Seas" _sic_                                                  |
  | Page 4: Varities amended to Varieties                        |
  | Page 5: Full stop added after VII; Temperment amended to     |
  | Temperament; It amended to Is                                |
  | Page 6: Phosphoresece amended to Phosphorescence             |
  | Page 7: preceived amended to perceived                       |
  | Page 9: "Subnormal" _sic_; Byond amended to Beyond;          |
  | opening quote marks added to "supernormal"                   |
  | Page 19: "subdivisions, and sub-divisions" _sic_             |
  | Page 20: occulists amended to occultists; terrestial         |
  | amended to terrestrial. Missing closing quotes for           |
  | quotation addedafter 'radiant energy.' "Several great        |
  | class" _sic_                                                 |
  | Page 23: Kellar amended to Keller; duplicate "have"          |
  | removed                                                      |
  | Page 24: Kellar amended to Keller                            |
  | Page 28: interpretating amended to interpreting; pagaent     |
  | amended to pageant                                           |
  | Page 29: preception amended to perception                    |
  | Page 30: duplicate word "of" removed                         |
  | Page 34: One instance of Ochorowicz, one instance of         |
  | Ochoriwicz. Left as is                                       |
  | Page 37: second comma in 400,000,000,000,000 removed;        |
  | beyound amended to beyond; tremblngs amended to              |
  | tremblings; eough amended to enough                          |
  | Page 40: wthout amended to without; phenoment amended        |
  | to phenomena                                                 |
  | Page 41: Roetgen amended to Roentgen                         |
  | Page 42: senes amended to senses                             |
  | Page 45: duplicate line of text removed                      |
  | Page 50: menium amended to medium                            |
  | Page 51: transfrence amended to transference                 |
  | Page 54: thought-wives amended to thought-waves              |
  | Page 57: coldenss amended to coldness                        |
  | Page 61: pheonmena amended to phenomena; beenficial          |
  | amended to beneficial                                        |
  | Page 63: a amended to at                                     |
  | Page 66: resistence amended to resistance                    |
  | Page 68: implicity amended to implicitly                     |
  | Page 84: infinitessimal amended to infinitesimal             |
  | Page 85: antedeluvian amended to antediluvian                |
  | Page 92: Certain amended to Certainly; ont amended to not    |
  | Page 94: mainfested amended to manifested                    |
  | Page 99: Symbollic amended to Symbolic; symbollically        |
  | amended to symbolically; sudent amended to student           |
  | Page 101: rendiiton amended to rendition                     |
  | Page 103: self-stupefication _sic_                           |
  | Page 105: very amended to vary                               |
  | Page 109: occultist amended to occultists                    |
  | Page 120: "There is ... many degrees" _sic_                  |
  | Page 123: unforseen amended to unforeseen                    |
  | Page 126: Section heading Absolute Time relocated from       |
  | middle of paragraph; unescapable _sic_                       |
  | Page 135: being amended to beings                            |
  | Page 136: Spritualism amended to Spiritualism                |
  | Page 137: enlighted amended to enlightened                   |
  | Page 138: adherance amended to adherence                     |
  | Page 145: perseverence amended to perseverance;              |
  | unconciously amended to unconsciously                        |
  | Page 155: occulists amended to occultists                    |
  | Page 160: produtcion amended to production                   |
  | Page 170: genearly amended to generally                      |
  | Page 174: Missing full stop added                            |
  | Page 174: fundmental amended to fundamental                  |
  | Page 182: "Materializations follows" _sic_                   |
  | Page 185: parthway amended to pathway                        |
  | Page 186: "modus operana" _sic_                              |
  | Page 187: apostrophe added to others                         |
  | Page 190: "personal composition" _sic_                       |
  | Page 203: uninterupted amended to uninterrupted;             |
  | Psyschic amended to Psychic                                  |
  | Page 210: meduim amended to medium; coures amended to        |
  | course                                                       |
  | Page 213: "finnicky" and "finnickiness" _sic_                |
  | Page 215: senuous amended to sensuous                        |
  | Page 219: healings amended to healing                        |
  | Page 223: phychic amended to psychic; "subject is"           |
  | amended to "subject if"                                      |
  | Page 225: comma after auto replaced with hyphen              |
  | Page 232: showe amended to show                              |
  | Page 235: super-senous amended to super-sensuous             |
  | Page 236: Condtiion amended to Condition                     |
  | Page 243: himeslf amended to himself                         |
  | Page 249: how amended to now                                 |
  | Page 252: "clear and," amended to "clear, and"               |
  | Page 256: indicte amended to indicate                        |
  | Page 260: showly amended to slowly                           |
  | Page 265: materilaization amended to materialization         |
  | Page 267: mediumsistic amended to mediumistic                |
  | Page 268: phemonea amended to phenomena                      |
  | Page 269: accordian amended to accordion                     |
  | Page 270: State amended to Slate                             |
  | Page 276: ignoranty amended to ignorantly                    |
  |                                                              |
  | Small inconsistencies between the Table of Contents and      |
  | the section titles, such as spelling, capitalization and     |
  | hyphenation have been retained. In addition to these the     |
  | following discrepancies are here noted, but have been        |
  | retained:                                                    |
  | Page 3     Part I      In the Table of Contents              |
  |                        Super-sensible Vibrations should      |
  |                        be followed by The Higher Vibrations. |
  |                        The Higher Senses of Man is The       |
  |                        Higher Senses of Men on page 21.      |
  |                        In the Table of Contents Discovery    |
  |                        of New Worlds should be followed by   |
  |                        Transcendental Senses.                |
  |            Part III    The Categories of Thought is titled   |
  |                        The Contagion of Thought on page 56.  |
  | Page 4                 In the Table of Contents Repelling    |
  |                        Adverse Influences should be followed |
  |                        by Neutralizing Psychic Influences.   |
  |            Part IV     Classification of Clairvoyant         |
  |                        Phenomena is Classification According |
  |                        to General Distinctions on page 81.   |
  |            Part V      In the Table of Contents Absolute     |
  |                        Time should be followed by:  The      |
  |                        Occult Hypothesis. "The Prophecy of   |
  |                        Cazotte." The Dinner of the Elect.    |
  |                        The Illuminatus. The Beginning of the |
  |                        Prophecy. The Shadow of the           |
  |                        Guillotine. The Fall of the Great.    |
  |                        The Fate of Royalty. The Fulfillment  |
  |                        of the Prophecy. Other Historical     |
  |                        Instances. The Eternal Verities.      |
  | Page 5     Part VII    Spirit Impersonation is titled Spirit |
  |                        Inspiration on page 165.              |
  |                        Inspirational Speaking is titled      |
  |                        Inspirational Writing on page 168.    |
  |            Part VIII   In the Table of Contents The Jacob's  |
  |                        Ladder of Communion should be         |
  |                        followed by The Attainment of         |
  |                        Excellence.                           |
  | Page 6     Part IX     Difficulties Among Spirits is         |
  |                        Differences Among Spirits on page     |
  |                        215. In the Table of Contents         |
  |                        Self-Protection for Mediums should be |
  |                        followed by: Danger in Indiscriminate |
  |                        Magnetizing. Detrimental Magnetic     |
  |                        Influence. Mediumistic                |
  |                        Auto-Suggestion. "Psychic Sponges."   |
  |                        Investigate Your Spirits. Spirits Are |
  |                        Still Human Beings. Beware of         |
  |                        Domineering Spirits.                  |
  |             Part X     Impersonating Manifestations does not |
  |                        appear in the text.                   |
  |             Part XI    In the Table of Contents Spirit       |
  |                        Paintings should be followed by:      |
  |                        Fraudulent Slate Writing.             |
  |                        Practical Advice to Developing        |
  |                        Mediums should be followed by: Need   |
  |                        of Special Development. Advice to     |
  |                        Discouraged Mediums. Avoid            |
  |                        Cross-Magnetism. Avoid Psychic        |
  |                        Absorption. The Stewardship of Great  |
  |                        Powers.                               |
  |                                                              |
  | Section titles sometimes end with a full stop, and other     |
  | times not: left as is.                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Quotation marks and hyphenation have generally been          |
  | standardised. Where a word occurs an equal number of times   |
  | as hyphenated and unhyphenated, both forms have been         |
  | retained. Where two spellings of a word have been used (for  |
  | example, magnetiser/magnetizer; skeptic/sceptic) both have   |
  | been retained.                                               |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+







