letter is indicated; and so on until the message is completed. For
instance, the name "John" would be spelt out as J-O-H-N, four callings
of the alphabet being necessary to obtain the same.


The Matter of Time Conditions.

The time at which the seances are held is not in itself important, but
it will be found best to fix such time at such an hour that will be most
convenient for the sitters, and at which their minds will not be
distracted by thoughts that they should return home, or should be
attending to certain household or business duties, etc. The seances
should be held not oftener than, say, twice a week, or at the most three
times a week. Each seance should be continued for about an hour or a
little over--certainly not over two hours at a time. The sitters should
be punctual in attendance, so that no time may be lost or wasted. The
idea should be that the spirit friends are awaiting your coming to
fulfill your engagement with them, and one should be as careful to keep
such an engagement as he would were the engagement with his most valued
friend or esteemed acquaintance. Regularity in attendance is also
important, as it is important that so far as possible the same general
conditions be maintained at each and every seance. The seance should be
started at the same hour on each occasion, at least so far as is
possible, so as to preserve the same time rhythm.


Opening of the Seance.

It will be well to open the seance with a few moments of earnest, silent
meditation--a few moments of dwelling "in the silence," as some have
well called it; and these moments should be observed in a religious and
devotional state of mind, all frivolity and flippancy being carefully
avoided. If some present feel moved to prayer, then by all means let the
prayer be made, for there can scarcely be a more fitting occasion for
reverent prayer than a properly conducted seance. A few moments of
hymn-singing may also be found advantageous in the direction of
producing the devotional state of mind on the part of the sitters. The
sitters should preserve a solemn frame of mind and reverent general
demeanor during the seance--perhaps the best model is that of an old
time Quaker Meeting in which the silent devout spiritual feeling was so
plainly manifest that it could almost be felt physically. Patience is
necessary in conducting a seance, and perseverance is essential. The
manifestations cannot be unduly forced, and there is often required a
great deal of psychical adjustment before the lines of the spiritual
communication between the two great planes of life are fully
established.


Developing a Medium.

If the circle be one devoted chiefly to the development of mediumistic
powers in some one of its members, then it will perhaps be best to have
only that particular medium present. The remainder of the sitters should
be highly sympathetic toward the developing medium, and should assume
the mental attitude of help and aid toward him. While the early results
of such a circle may not be so interesting as those at which a fully
developed medium is present, nevertheless the gradual unfoldment of the
powers of the medium will be found highly interesting, and the gradual
evolution of the character of the phenomena produced will be a liberal
education in itself. In case that in the circle there are no particular
persons regarded as being mediums, and where there is a general desire
to develop mediumistic powers among many or all of the sitters, there
must be carefully avoided anything approaching a rivalry between the
members of the circle; and at the same time a strong desire and perfect
willingness for the spirit power to manifest through whomsoever it may
prefer, without regard to the personal ambitions of the individual
sitters. Most certainly there must be no spirit of "competition" among
the sitters in the circle.


The Personnel of the Circle.

The personal composition of the spiritualistic circle is a very
important matter, and those entering into circle work should pay
careful attention to the personal and psychical character of those
composing the circle; and it may be added here that such work requires
very nice powers of discrimination, and a great degree of tact, in order
to preserve the proper character of the circle, and at the same time to
avoid wounding the pride of those who are to be rejected. Regarding the
character of those composing the circle, the following statement of a
practical medium will be found of importance. "There are some people who
are so sensitive that they should not sit in circles, because they are
liable to become charged with the psychic emanations from, and dominated
by the expectancy of, the sitters, but who are not influenced by spirit
power to any great extent. Or probably there may exist 'cross
magnetism,' that is to say the inharmonious magnetism of different
members who are antagonistic to each other. Some sitters may be
sarcastic, merely curious, or selfish, or mercenary, or not over clean,
sober or scrupulous, and all such surroundings act and react upon the
highly sensitive organization of the undeveloped medium, and, above all,
provide conditions favorable for the manifestations of mischievous or
malicious spirits, unless the medium is sufficiently developed, or is
protected by wise spirits powerful enough to resist or control such
influences. Like attracts like, as a general rule; but there are
exceptions to this, as to most rules, as, for instance, where
unfortunate or unhappy spirits are permitted to manifest, and are even
brought to the seance by other and more experienced spirit people, so
that they may be helped. The influence of the sitters in moulding the
conditions is too little realized. If they introduce an atmosphere of
suspicion, doubt, distrust, or detraction, they break the continuity of
the flow of psychic energy that has to be employed. By thus severing the
current and dissipating the power, they mar the conditions essential to
success; and, as all such disturbances of necessity center upon and
injuriously affect the sensitive medium, they render soul-satisfying and
uplifting communion impossible. To all sitters, we would say, 'You get
to a very great extent what you make conditions for, therefore open the
doors of the heavens by love and purity.'"


Changing the Sitters.

Changes in the membership of a circle is sometimes found to be quite
beneficial. If a circle meets night after night with the same
membership, but without obtaining any perceptible results, then it may
be well to consider the desirability of adding some new elements to the
membership in the hope of improving the conditions. Sometimes the
addition of a new sitter of the right physical and psychical temperament
works a most remarkable improvement, and in many of such cases
noteworthy phenomena are then produced almost from the time of the
change. We have seen circles in which the condition of non-success was
changed in a few moments to one of great and marked success by the
introduction of a new element among the sitters.


Adding a Medium.

Sometimes there may result certain physical phenomena such as table
tippings and movements of furniture, in cases in which there is a
sufficient amount of psychic force generated among the sitters; but in
such cases there may be an absolute failure to produce some of the
higher forms of mediumistic phenomena, such as, for instance, clear
spirit messages by raps or otherwise, the failure being caused by the
fact that the circle did not include in its membership any person of
sufficiently developed mediumistic powers to be considered a "medium."
In such cases the introduction into the circle of a person possessing
fairly developed mediumistic powers of the higher order may change the
condition of affairs at once, and almost immediately the higher
manifestations may present themselves. In such cases the soil is richly
fertilized and highly cultivated, and all that has been lacking is the
strong, vigorous seed of true mediumship. In such cases when a true
medium is discovered by means of his or her introduction into the circle
(for such discovery is often made in this way), it may be well for the
circle afterwards to devote itself to the development of that particular
medium. And it must not be forgotten that such development of the
particular medium frequently also results in the development of the
other members sitting in the circle.


Reasons for Changes.

In cases in which the spirits suggest changes in the order of sitting of
the members of the circle, or suggest other changes in the personnel of
the circle, such suggestions should be heeded, and those who are asked
to withdraw from the table should not feel hurt or offended, for there
is usually nothing personal in the matter, and no personal reflection
intended by the spirits; the whole matter is one connected with
psychical or magnetic requirements, and all should so accept it. A
writer on this subject has well said: "If you are requested, either by
the controlling intelligence or by the manager of the circle, to take
another place, or even if your room is desired for some unknown cause,
do not get angry and create a disturbance, but get with those with whom
you are in spiritual harmony and try it again. All who have succeeded
have passed through great trials and failures, and when success is
gained, think of what you have gained. A knowledge of immortality,
possibly, or you have assisted in producing an instrument through which
proofs of immortality may be given."


Psychic Attunement.

One of the most common faults of the sitters at a circle is to become
unduly impatient, and to try to force matters to a clear manifestation
of phenomena almost from the moment of the start. This is all wrong, and
is frequently the cause of many failures to obtain the higher phases of
mediumistic phenomena. Sitters should remember this important point,
i.e., that the first requisite of the circle should be to secure perfect
and free communication and flow of spiritual power--after this the more
elaborate phases of phenomena may be obtained with comparative ease. One
should hold in mind the illustration of a great wireless telegraph
system, in which the sending and receiving instruments have not as yet
been placed in perfect attunement. In such a case it is of course
necessary for the two respective sets of instruments to be adjusted so
that they may be in perfect attunement with each other; and until this
is accomplished, there can be messages sent or received
properly--certainly none received in this way. If this idea be held in
mind, their circle will probably secure the psychic attunement in a much
shorter time than otherwise.


Pre-Test Manifestations.

Do not be in too much of a hurry to obtain "test" messages. Let the
communications flow on in a somewhat rambling manner at first, until the
lines of communication are fully and firmly established, and then you
may begin to think about asking test questions of the spirits in order
to establish their identity. A writer says on this point: "Should table
movements occur, or raps be heard, let them go on for a little. Do not
ask test questions just yet. Request repetitions, or ask for them to be
clearer or louder, so that they may be sharp and decisive. You may also
ask for a certain number of movements or raps. After that, you may
proceed to ask questions as to whether the circle is sitting in the best
arrangement for success. If changes are desired, these should be made as
suggested. It may happen that one or more of the sitters may be
requested to change places, or to withdraw from the table altogether. In
such a case the sitter should not take umbrage for it merely means that
their psychical conditions do not blend with those of the rest of the
circle."


Premature Tests.

Regarding the matter of premature tests, or unreasonable demands, the
same writer further says: "Remember that the first requisite is to
establish the channel of communication; and all personal questions as to
who and what the spirit is should be reserved until the initial
difficulties are overcome. It is at first most probable that the spirit
operators will not be fully aware just what effect they are producing,
and the mind of the medium may not as yet be sufficiently passive, in
fact it may be in a sort of state of protest against being acted upon in
this particular way; accordingly, it is extremely unwise to attempt to
obtain responses to test questions or to secure evidences of the
identity of the spirit under these imperfect conditions. Many mediums
and inquirers have been deterred from further development or
investigation because such questions have been prematurely put and the
answers pressed for, with the result that confusing and contradictory
responses were given, and the conclusion was hastily drawn that it was
all fraud, delusion, of the devil."


Forcing Tests.

Another writer has said on this point: "I then, in my anxiety, made a
mistake which anxious inquirers sometimes make. I wanted more--I pressed
for another test, forgetting the difficulties of mediumship, and the
supreme effort which must have been made to give me what I had obtained.
And this resulted in failure after remarkable tests had been given."
Another writer, commenting upon the last quoted statement, says: "This
is exactly how mediums are used; they give test after test, not to
satisfy, but only to produce the desire for more. Then when the power is
weakened, comes the inability--or 'fraud,' as the imperfection in
mediumship is often called. This will be the case until they can have
the only condition which is suitable for spiritual communion--passive
trust and confidence. Real tests cannot come when sought with
materialistic conditions. The tests come unsought, unasked for."


Spirit Directions.

Another point which should be borne in mind by the sitters in the circle
is that the spirits should be consulted as to just what they wish to
manifest at the seance. They should be asked to state plainly just what
order of phenomena they desire to manifest and demonstrate, and just
what they wish the circle to do in order to create the best conditions
for the manifestation. And it will be found advisable to heed the wishes
and instructions of the spirits in such cases, and to conform as far as
possible with the same. In this way the intelligent co-operation of
spirits and the circle may be obtained, and the most desirable results
be obtained. However, there is a limit to this acceptance and course,
and in no case should the limits of reasonableness be exceeded in the
matter. As a writer has well said: "It may happen that the conditions
asked for by the communicating intelligence may seem to be ludicrous or
impracticable; and in such case representations to that effect should be
made to the spirit, and if such instructions are persisted in, except
where, through long association, confidence is felt in the spirit, or
very clear evidence of knowledge has been manifested, the medium and
sitters, exercising their own reasoning powers, should quietly and
firmly decline to do what is asked of them, and some other course should
be suggested. We do not advise either medium or sitters to blindly
accept or follow what is given to or through them. Reason should ever
reign, but even reason will show that in experimental work it is
sometimes advisable to tentatively adopt and follow some course that may
not, at first sight, appear quite reasonable."


Questioning the Spirits.

After a satisfactory arrangement of the sitters is obtained, and the
table tiltings or rappings have assumed a clear, definite character,
then the sitters may proceed to ascertain the identity of the spirit
seeking to communicate to the circle; or else to ascertain whether the
spirit wishes to deliver a message directed specially to some particular
one of the sitters. In the latter case, the person indicated should
prepare to question the spirit direct, either verbally or else silently
and mentally. In either case the question should be stated clearly and
to the point, so that the spirit may give a simple definite answer.
Questions which may be answered by a simple "Yes" or "No" are of course
preferable. If the spirit agrees to move the table, or else produce
raps, as the alphabet is called over letter by letter, the communication
and answers may of course be given in much fuller detail. In such case
the spirit may be called on to spell out its name, and to designate its
relationship to any of the sitters; or even to spell out a complete
message. In addressing the spirit one should pursue the same general
course employed in addressing questions to a friend in the flesh; and
care should be taken to address the spirit politely and in a kindly
tone. Some spirits are very sensitive concerning these details, and will
resent any impoliteness or discourtesy, or flippancy from strangers.


Substance and Shadow.

Moreover, the earnest investigator of spiritualistic phenomena must
always bear in mind that the mere production of mediumistic phenomena of
the physical phase is not the real object of the investigation and
sittings. These things, interesting as they may be in themselves, should
be regarded as merely the incidents of the intelligent communication and
reception of messages from the inhabitants of the higher planes of life
and existence. The spiritualistic circle should be more than a mere
"wonder shop" in which are exhibited strange and unusual physical
phenomena; rather should it be regarded as the receiving end of the
wireless system over which we may and do receive valuable communications
from those who have passed on before us.

As a writer has said: "It is not so much that the table moves with or
without contact, or that strange rappings are heard, that is of
paramount importance, but that by these means of communication actual
and intelligent communication can be obtained and maintained with
so-called dead people; and evidences of spirit identity, as well as
loving and cheering messages may be obtained in that way from loved ones
who were supposed to be gone forever. This is the important point to be
established beyond all peradventure."




