PART III

THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE


The most elementary and simple form in which mental vibrations are
transmitted is that which may be called Thought Transference. In the
category of Thought Transference may be included two quite general
classes, as follows: (1) Involuntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations,
and (2) Voluntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations, commonly known as
Telepathy. In this part of this book both of these general classes of
Thought Transference shall be considered in some detail.


Involuntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations.

Mental vibrations emanating from the brain of the individual take on the
form of wave-like movements in the ether, which are accordingly known as
"thought-waves." These thought-waves are constantly being sent forth
from the brains of all persons, and after being sent forth they spread
in space from the immediate neighborhood of the person originating them,
to a distance proportioned to the strength and power energizing the
original mental state. These thought-waves have the power of awakening
and arousing into activity corresponding mental states in other persons
coming within their field of force, according to the laws of Mental
Induction. It should be noted here that the activity aroused in the mind
of the receiving person is accomplished by the setting into vibratory
motion the Chitta or Mind-substance of that person, just as the
receiving diaphragm of the telephone is set vibrating at the same rate
as that of the sending instrument, and thus the original sound-waves are
reproduced.


Thought Waves

Thought-waves are manifested in various forms, modes, and phases, and in
different degrees of power. Some are emanated without any clearly
defined desire or intent to accomplish certain ends, while others are
charged with strong desire focused to a definite point by clear-cut
ideas of ends sought to be accomplished. The latter, however, are
usually entitled to be classed among the "involuntary" phases of Thought
Transference, because the senders are generally unaware that
thought-waves have an actual effect upon the minds of other persons;
their thoughts and mental states arising in accordance with their
feelings, desires, and general aims. Where the individual has learned
that thought is an active power, he may deliberately send forth his
thought-waves directed toward the person or persons whom he wishes to
affect and influence.

The student must remember, however, that there is a great difference in
the power and effective activity between thought-waves sent forth under
different circumstances. Some are sent forth idly, and with no focused
power or energy of desire and feeling, and such naturally are weak in
effect upon others. Others are sent forth vitalized with strong desire
and feeling, and focused with a clear ideal and mental picture, and,
consequently, exert a far greater degree of effect upon the minds of
others with whom they come in contact. The analogy of the waves of
electricity holds good here, for just as the electric power may be
strong or weak, as the case may be, so may the mental force be strong or
weak under different circumstances, and in different individuals.


Vibratory Thought Force

The vibratory force of thought-waves persist for some time after their
original emanation. Here, also we have analogies on the physical plane,
as follows: The heat of a room continues for some time after the fire
which originally caused it has ceased to burn. Likewise, the air of a
room may manifest the perfume of a flower, or extract, long after the
latter has been removed from the room. Again, rays of light persist in
existence long after the star manifesting them has been blotted out of
existence. In the same way thought-vibrations continue to manifest in a
place, large or small though its space may be, long after the original
sender has passed from that plane--perhaps even long after he has passed
from earth life.


Mental Atmospheres

A well known American writer on this subject has said concerning this
point: "There are many places today filled with the thought-vibrations
of minds long since passed out of the body. There are places filled with
the strong vibrations of tragedies long since enacted there. Every place
has a mental atmosphere of its own, the same arising from the
thought-vibrations set in motion by the various persons who have
inhabited or occupied them. Every city has its own mental atmosphere
which has its effect upon persons moving into them. Some are lively,
some dull, some progressive, some old-fogyish, some moral, some
immoral--the result of the character of the early settlers and leading
spirits, of the place in question. Persons moving into these towns are
affected by the mental atmospheres thereof, and either sink to the
general level, or else, if strong enough, help to change the mental tone
of the place. Sometimes a change in conditions bring a large influx of
new people, to a town, and the mental waves of the newcomers tend to
bring about a marked change in the local mental atmosphere. These facts
have been noticed by many observing people who often have not been
familiar with the principles underlying and producing the facts which
the observers have so clearly discerned."


The Contagion of Thought.

The same writer says, along the same general lines: "Many have of course
noticed the differing mental atmospheres of stores, offices, and other
places of business. Some of such places give one an air of confidence
and trust; others create a feeling of suspicion and distrust; some
convey an impression of active, wideawake management, while others
impress one as being behind the times, and suffering from a want of
alert, active management. These differing mental atmospheres are caused
by the different prevailing mental attitudes of the owners of the
respective establishments. The managers of business places send forth
thought-waves of their own, and their employees naturally falling into
the pace set for them also send forth similar vibrations, and before
long the whole place is vibrating on a certain scale. A change of
management soon produces a marked change in the entire mental atmosphere
of the place. In the same way, we notice the mental atmospheres of the
houses we happen to visit; in this way we become conscious of an entire
mental scale of many notes, the notes being sounded unconsciously by the
minds of the occupants of the houses. From some thresholds radiate
harmony, while others breathe the spirit of inharmony. Some radiate
emotional warmth, while others chill one like an iceberg, by reason of
the emotional coldness of the dwellers therein. Likewise, the low
quarters of our cities, the dens of vice, and the haunts of dissipation
vibrate with the character of the thought and feeling of those
inhabiting them. And, often, the weak-willed visitor is thus tempted. In
the same way, certain other places are charged with the vibrations of
strong, helpful, elevating mental states, which tend to lift up and
elevate, energize and stimulate the minds and feelings of those visiting
these places. Thought and feeling are contagious, by reason of the laws
of mental vibration and mental induction."


Mental Whirlpools.

The contagion of thought-vibrations is manifested by such vibrations
coming into contact with the minds of other persons within the field of
mental induction of the first person, and there setting up similar
vibrations. We know that orators, actors, preachers and others
addressing audiences of persons, send forth strong mental currents
which tend to awaken corresponding vibrations in the minds of their
hearers. We weep, smile, grow angry, feel happy, according to the
character of the thought-waves, of the person on the platform or the
stage, providing that we accept the same. And, according to the same
principle, persons scattered over large areas are influenced and
affected in the same way by whirlpools of mental vibrations set into
original motion by some strong, masterful public man. A writer has said
concerning this point:


Mental Tidal Waves

"We know how great waves of feeling spread over a town, city, or county,
sweeping people off their feet, and causing them to lose their balance.
Great waves of political enthusiasm, or war-spirit or prejudice for or
against certain people, or groups of people, sweep over places and cause
men to act in a manner which they afterward often regret when they come
to themselves and consider the matter in the light of cold reason.
People are swayed by demagogues or magnetic leaders who wish to capture
their votes or patronage; and they are often led into acts of mob
violence, or similar atrocities, by yielding to these waves of
contagious thought. On the other hand, we know equally well how great
waves of religious emotion spread out over the community upon the
occasion of some great 'revival' excitement or religious fervor."


Immunity to Thought Influences

Persons becoming acquainted for the first time with the above recited
facts of mental vibrations, mental currents, mental waves, and mental
contagion, frequently raise the objection that if all this be true, why
are we not constantly swept off of our feet by these great waves of
mental vibrations, whereas, in fact, we are seldom or never aware of
them? The question is a natural one, and is capable of a satisfactory
answer. In the first place, many of these mental currents NEUTRALIZE
each other, and thus both cease to exert any marked effect. And again,
most persons are really "immune" to most of the thought waves reaching
them, this by reason of the protective resistive power bestowed by
Nature, and acquired during the evolution of the race.

To understand this, we have but to think of our immunity to the great
majority of sounds and sights on the streets of a busy city. On a busy
street corner, we are assailed by an infinitude of sounds and
sights--but we hear but few of these, and see still fewer. The rest of
these impressions are lost to us, although we have ears to hear and eyes
to see. We hear and see only those impressions which are strong enough
to awaken our ATTENTION. In the same way we fail to perceive the
numerous thought vibrations and mental currents constantly surrounding
us, and our attention is attracted and awakened by those sufficiently
strong and vigorous to awaken our attention. The analogy is a very close
one, and the understanding of one set of phenomena gives us the key to
the other.


Mental Attunement

It should not fail to be noticed, moreover, that we habitually receive
and accept more readily those thought vibrations which are in harmony
with our own average habitual mental states; and, according to the same
general principle, we tend to habitually reject and fail to receive
those vibrations which are INHARMONIOUS to us for the same reason. Here,
you will notice, we have an illustration of the principle of
"attunement" which, as we have informed you, is operative on the plane
of thought and mental vibrations as well as on that of wireless
telegraphy. Just as it is a psychological fact that we tend to see and
to hear those things which are in harmony with our beliefs and opinions,
and our interest, so is it a metaphysical fact that we tend to accept
and absorb the mental vibrations which are in harmony with our opinions,
beliefs, and interest, and to reject those which are opposed thereto.

Moreover, the person who acquaints himself with the law of mental
vibrations and thought-transference acquires a practical knowledge which
enables him to render himself immune to objectionable and undesirable
mental currents or thought-waves. We are not necessarily open to the
influence of every stray current of thought or feeling that happens to
be in our immediate vicinity. Instead, by the proper methods,
consciously or unconsciously practiced and manifested, we may, and often
do, insulate ourselves so that these undesirable mental influences fail
utterly to affect us; and, likewise, we may actually attract to
ourselves the desirable mental currents. These principles and methods
will be given later in this part of this book; they are mentioned here
merely to acquaint you with the fact that they are existent and known to
those familiar with this subject.


Voluntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations.

Under the head of Voluntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations may be
placed the following two general classes of phenomena, viz., (1)
Voluntary Efforts to Exert Mental Influence upon Others; and (2)
Voluntary Efforts to Produce the Phenomena of Telepathy, along
Scientific Lines. Each of these general classes of phenomena will now be
presented for your inspection and consideration.


Voluntary Mental Influence.

Under the category of Voluntary Mental Influence we find much of the
phenomena formerly classed as "Magic"--and by this we mean both White
Magic, or efforts to produce results beneficial to the person
influenced, and Black Magic, or efforts to produce results beneficial to
the person exerting the influence, and often to the positive detriment
of the person influenced.

WHITE MAGIC. Under the category of White Magic may be placed all those
efforts of mental healing, and similar phases of metaphysical
therapeutics; and the accompanying efforts directed toward the general
happiness and welfare of the person "treated." The word "treatment" has
sprung into use in this connection, in America and Europe, by reason of
its employment by the numerous metaphysical cults and schools
flourishing there. We hear on all hands of persons being "treated" for
Health, Happiness, and Prosperity in this way. While in some cases, the
"magic" is worked on higher planes than those of thought-vibrations, it
is nevertheless true that in most instances the entire process is that
of mental induction, along the lines described in the preceding pages
of this book. In such cases the person influenced opens himself to the
helpful thought of the person "treating" him, and thus a co-operation
and mental "team work" is secured, often with the most beneficial
results. This phase of the subject is too well known to require lengthy
consideration in this book, and is more properly the subject of the many
books devoted to this special phase of mental power.

     *     *     *     *     *

BLACK MAGIC. It has well been said that there are always two poles to
everything in Nature, and continued experience and investigation seems
to substantiate this statement. Whenever we find a force or power
producing beneficial results, we may usually feel assured that the same
force or power, turned in another direction, or possibly reversed in its
action, will produce results of an opposite character. And so it is with
this subject of "Magic" which we are now considering. While we would be
very glad to pass over this phase of the subject, truth and duty to our
readers compel us to state that White Magic has its opposite pole--that
opposite pole known as Black Magic, or the use of psychic force for
selfish and unworthy ends. There is no use trying to pursue the ostrich
policy regarding these things--it is always better to face them boldly,
and then to take means to avoid the evil contained in them.

     *     *     *     *     *

We prefer to quote from other writers on this subject, who have given
this particular matter the most careful attention and investigation, and
who have set forth simply and plainly the result of their investigations
and discoveries. Here follow several quotations from authorities of this
kind:


Base Use of Mind Power

One writer says: "It is a fact known to all students of occultism that
Black Magic has been frequently employed in all times to further the
selfish, base ends of some people. And it is also known to advanced
thinkers today that even in this enlightened age there are many who do
not scruple to stoop to the use of this hateful practice in order to
serve their own ends, notwithstanding the punishment that all true
occultists know awaits such persons. The annals of history are full of
records of various forms of witchcraft, conjuration, and similar forms
of Black Magic. All the much talked of practice of 'putting spells' upon
people are really forms of Black Magic, heightened by the fear and
superstition of those affected. One has but to read the history of
witchcraft to see that there was undoubtedly some force at work behind
all of the appalling superstitions and ignorance shown by the people of
those times. What they attributed to the influence of people 'in league
with the devil' really arose from the use of Black Magic, or an unworthy
use of Mental Influence, the two things being one at the last.


The Secret of Witchcraft

"An examination of the methods employed by these 'witches,' as shown by
their confessions, give us a key to the mystery. These 'witches' would
fix their minds upon other people, or their animals, and by holding a
concentrated mental picture there, would send forth thought-waves
affecting the welfare of the persons being 'adversely treated,' which
would influence and disturb them, and often bring on sicknesses. Of
course, the effect of those 'treatments' were greatly heightened by the
extreme fear and superstition held by the masses of people at the time,
for fear is ever a weakening factor in mental influence, and the
superstitions and credulity of the people caused their minds to vibrate
in such a manner as to render them extremely passive to the adverse
influences being directed against them. It is well known that the
Voodoos of Africa, and similar cults among other savage races, practice
Black Magic among their people with great effect. Among the native of
Hawaii there are certain men known as 'Kahunas' who pray people sick, or
well, whichever way they are paid to do. These instances could be
multiplied almost indefinitely, but the basic principle is ever the same
in such cases.


Modern Black Magic.

"In our own civilized lands there are many people who have learned the
principles of mental influence, and who are using the same for unworthy
purposes, seeking to injure others and to defeat their undertakings, or
else trying to bring them around to their own (the treators') point of
view and inclinations. The modern revival of occult knowledge has
operated along two lines, and in opposite directions. On the one hand,
we see and hear of the mighty power for good that mental influence is
exerting over the race today, raising up the sick, strengthening the
weak, putting courage into the despondent, and transforming failures
into successes. But, on the other hand, the hateful selfishness and
greed of unprincipled persons is taking advantage of this mighty force
of nature, and prostituting it to the hateful ends of such persons,
without heed to the dictates of conscience or the teaching of religion
or of ordinary morality. These people are sowing a baleful wind, which
will result in their reaping a frightful whirlwind on the mental plane.
They are bringing down upon themselves pain and misery in the future."


The Explanation of Sorcery.

Another writer says: "In various stages of history we find the records
of persons having been affected by the influences of witches, sorcerers,
and other evil-minded, unprincipled persons. In most cases these
so-called witches and sorcerers themselves were under the delusion that
they were being assisted by the devil or some other supernatural being.
They did not realize that they were simply using natural forces.
Studying the history of witchcraft, sorcery, black magic, and the like,
you will find that the devotees thereof usually employed some
psychometric method. In other cases they would mould little figures of
clay, or of wax, in the general shape and appearance of the person whom
they wished to affect. It was thought that these little figures were
endowed with some supernatural powers or attributes, but of course this
was mere superstition. The whole power of the little figures arose from
the fact that they aided the imagination of the spell-worker in forming
a mental image of the person sought to be influenced; and thus
established a strong mental rapport condition. Added to this, you must
remember that the fear and belief of the public greatly aided the
spell-worker, and increased his power and influence over these poor
persons."


The Power of Fearthought.

The last-named writer explains the reference to "fear and belief" in the
last sentence above quoted by the following very important statements,
and these we ask every student of this book to firmly impress upon his
mind, for a mighty truth is therein conveyed. The statements in question
are as follows:

"Your attention is hereby called to a very important psychic principle
involved in the manifestation of that class of phenomena in which is
embraced the cases of witchcraft, sorcery, etc., with which the pages of
history are filled. It is a well established fact that by denying the
psychic power over you exerted by any person whatsoever, you practically
neutralize the psychic power of such person, at least so far as its
effect upon and power over yourself is concerned. The stronger and more
positive is your mental attitude of immunity to such power, and your
assertion and affirmation of that immunity, the greater is your own
power of psychic resistance, and the less does his possible power over
you become. The average person, not knowing this, is more or less
passive to psychic influences of other persons, and may be affected by
them to a greater or less extent, the degree depending upon the psychic
development of the person seeking to influence him.


The Negative Pole.

"At the extreme negative pole of susceptibility we find persons who
believe firmly that other persons have psychic power over them, and who
are consequently more or less afraid of such persons and of their
influence. This belief and fear operates in the direction of making such
persons peculiarly sensitive and impressionable to such influence, and
thus easily affected by psychic induction. This is the reason that the
so-called witches and sorcerers and others of evil repute have been
often able to acquire such a power over their victims, and to cause them
so much trouble. The secret is that THE VICTIMS BELIEVED IN THE POWER OF
THE OTHER PERSONS, AND FEARED THEIR POWER. The greater the belief in,
and fear of, the power of the other persons, the greater the
susceptibility to their influence; the greater the disbelief in such
power, and the firm belief in one's own power of immunity and that of
neutralizing the effect of the psychic influence of other persons, the
less is one's degree of susceptibility, and the greater is one's degree
of immunity and power. This is the rule in the case--keep it in mind!


Voodooism Explained.

"Among the negroes of the South, in America, and among the Hawaiians, we
find marked instances of this kind. The negro Voodoo men and women work
Black Magic on those of their race who are superstitious and credulous,
and who have a mortal fear of the Voodoo. Travelers who have visited the
countries in which there is a large negro population have many
interesting tales to recite of the terrible workings of these Voodoo
black magicians. In some cases, sickness and even death is the result.
But, mark you this! It is only those who believe in, and fear, the power
of the Voodoos that are so affected. In Hawaii, the Kahunas or native
magicians are renowned for their power to cause sickness and death to
those who have offended them; or to those who have offended some client
of the Kahuna, and who have hired the latter to 'pray' the enemy to
sickness or death. The poor, ignorant Hawaiians, believing implicitly in
the power of the Kahunas, and being in deadly fear of them, are very
susceptible to their psychic influence, and naturally fall easy victims
to their vile arts, unless they buy off the Kahuna, or make peace with
his client. White persons living in Hawaii are not affected by the
Kahunas, for they do not believe in them, neither do they fear them.
Unconsciously, but yet strongly, they 'deny' the power, and are immune.
So you see the principle working out here, too. Once you have the
master-key, you may unlock many doors of mystery which have heretofore
been closed to you."


Self-Protection.

The following quotations from writers on this special subject contain
detailed directions for the use of those who may have reason to believe
that some other person or persons are trying to use psychic force, or
mental currents, upon them for selfish purposes, or otherwise. Of course
the general mental attitude of disbelief, and assertion of one's one
immunity is sufficient for the purposes of general psychic protection;
but we have thought it proper to include the following special
directions given by those who have made a close study of this subject.

One writer says: "When you come in contact with people who are seeking
to influence you by psychic methods, either direct or indirect, you will
find yourself able to defy their mental attacks by simply remembering
the strength immanent in your Ego, or Spirit, aided by the statement or
affirmation (made silently to yourself) 'I am an Immortal Spirit, using
the power of my Ego, which renders me immune from all base psychic
attacks or power.' With this mental attitude you may make powerful even
the slightest mental effort in the direction of sending forth your own
mental vibrations, and these will scatter the adverse influences in all
directions; it will often be found that the other person will show signs
of confusion in such a case, and will seek to get away from your
presence. With this consciousness held in mind, your mental command to
another, 'Let me alone--I cast off your influence by the power of my
Spirit,' will operate so strongly that you will often actually see the
effect at once. If the other person be stubborn, and determined to
influence you by words of suggestion, coaxing, threatening, or similar
methods, look him or her straight in the eye, saying mentally: 'I defy
you--my inner power casts off your influence.' Try this the next time
that any one attempts to influence you either verbally or by means of
thought-waves, and see how strong and positive you will feel, and how
the efforts of the other person will fail. This sounds simple, but the
little secret is worth thousands of dollars to every individual who will
put it into practice."


Repelling Adverse Influences.

This writer continues: "Not only in the case of personal influence in
the actual presence of the other person may be defeated in this way, but
the same method will act equally well in the matter of repelling the
mental influence of others directed against you in the form of 'absent
treatments,' etc. If you feel yourself inclining toward doing something
which in your heart you feel is not to your best interests, judged from
a true viewpoint, you may know that, consciously or unconsciously,
someone is seeking in influence you in this way. Then smile to yourself,
and make the statements mentioned above, or some similar one, and
holding the power of the Spirit within your soul, send forth a mental
command just as you would in case the person were actually before you in
person. You may also deny out of existence the influencing power, by
asserting mentally: 'I DENY your power to influence me; you have no such
power over me; I am resting securely upon the Spirit within me; I deny
out of existence any power over me asserted by you.' After repelling
these absent influences you will at once experience a feeling of relief
and strength, and will be able to smile at the thought of any such
adverse influence affecting you in the slightest."


Neutralizing Psychic Influences.

Another writer gives us the following most interesting information and
advice for use in cases of this kind: "I wish to point out to you a
means of protection against the use of psychic influence against
yourself on the part of unscrupulous persons, or any other persons
whomsoever, for that matter. One is fully justified in employing this
method of protection against even the meddling influence of other
persons, who are trying to influence you without your permission or
consent. The following is the method of self-protection or defense
against this class of psychic influence: In the first place, you must,
of course, refuse to admit to your mind any feeling of fear regarding
the influence of other persons, for such fear opens the door to their
influence, as all students of this subject know. If you have been, or
are fearful of the psychic influence of any person, you must get to work
and drive out that feeling by positive and vigorous denials. The DENIAL,
as all students know, is the positive neutralizer of the psychic
influence of another person, providing you make it in full belief in its
truth. You must take the mental position (which is really the true one)
that you are absolutely immune to the psychic attack or influence. You
should say, mentally, 'deny to any person the power to influence me
psychically without my consent; I am positive to all such influences,
and they are negative to me; I neutralize all such influences by this
positive denial!' It should encourage you to know that it requires far
less force and power to repel and neutralize psychic influences of this
kind, than is required to send forth the power; an ounce of denial and
protection overcomes a pound of psychic attacking power. Nature gives
you the means of protection, and gives you the 'best end of the stick';
and it is your own fault if you do not use it effectively. A word to the
wise is sufficient."


Telepathic Phenomena.

The second general class of phenomena in the general category of
Voluntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations is that known as "Telepathic
Phenomena." In a sense, of course, all phases of Thought Transmission,
and particularly that of Voluntary Thought Transmission, may be
considered as forms of Telepathy; but for the purpose of classification
and distinction we have in this book classed as Telepathic Phenomena
merely those forms and phases of Thought Transference in which there is
an agreement between the telepathic sender and the telepathic receiver,
and in which the experiments are conducted more or less along the lines
of scientific investigation.


Scientific Investigators.

Scientific observers, for a number of years past, have been conducting
careful series of experiments in Telepathy, and many volumes of the
reports of such investigations have been published by various psychic
research societies. Among the eminent scientists who have devoted much
attention to this subject are the following: Professor Henry Sidgewick,
of Cambridge University; Professor Balfour Stewart, of the Royal Society
of England; Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour, the eminent English statesman and
scientist; Professor William James, the eminent American psychologist;
Sir William Crookes, the great English chemist, physicist, who invented
the celebrated "Crookes' Tubes," without which the discovery of the
X-Rays, Radio Activity, etc., would have been impossible; Frederick W.
H. Myers, the celebrated investigator of Psychic Phenomena; and Sir
Oliver Lodge, the eminent English scientist. All these men are of the
highest international standing and reputation, and their acceptance of
the phenomena of Telepathy places the same on a firm scientific basis.


How Experiments Are Conducted.

The scientific experiments involving Telepathy, which have been
conducted by numerous societies for psychical research and other bodies,
have ranged from quite simple tests to those very complex. In all of
these experiments there has been one person called the "sender," and
another called the "receiver"--or names corresponding to these. The
sender fixes in his mind a strong impression of the name or picture to
be transmitted, and then makes a positive effort of the will to transmit
the same to the receiver. The receiver assumes a passive receptive
mental attitude, and then reports the word or image that comes into his
mind. The more complex tests embody these same simple features.

Some of the early reports of the Society for Psychical Research, of
London, England, show results most amazing to those who have not made a
personal investigation of these matters. In some of the tests, the
receiver correctly reported seventeen cards in succession, the said
cards having been shown the sender, but kept out of sight of the
receiver, and no possible communication between the two being allowed.
In tests of naming small objects held by the sender, the receiver
correctly named five out of six. In one complicated test, in which
various objects, names, etc., were transmitted, the report shows a
successful report of 202 out of a possible 382. Such results, of course,
took the results entirely out of the operation of the law of averages.
Other successful experiments showed a high percentage of results
obtained from the reproduction by the sender of geometrical and other
figures and designs exhibited to the sender.


Private Experiments.

But, after all, the most convincing evidences of Telepathy are those
which most of us have met with in our own experience. There are but few
intelligent, observing persons who have not, at some time in their life,
had experiences of this kind, in which the thoughts of others were
perceived plainly by themselves. Many persons have established such a
close rapport condition between themselves and friends or relatives that
instances of remarkable thought-transmission between them are quite
common and ordinary.


Development of Telepathic Power.

Practically every person may develop a certain degree of telepathic
power, sending, receiving, or both, by means of a moderate amount of
regular and earnest practice and experiments. In developing sending
power, the person should cultivate concentration, and the use of the
will in the direction of projecting mental states; in the case of the
desired development of the receiving power, the person should develop
receptiveness and passivity, and a certain recognition of an actual
telepathic impulse which is impossible to describe in words but which
comes to every investigator, and which when once experienced is always
recognized thereafter.


"Mind Reading."

Perhaps the best plan for the beginner is to practice the popular "mind
reading" experiment or game, which is quite popular in some localities,
and among persons interested in this line of thought. The experiments of
this kind are performed, generally, about as follows: The receiver
leaves the room, and during his or her absence the company in the room
select some object, large or small, such as a chair or a small penknife,
etc., and the same is shown and named to the sender. Then the receiver
is called back into the room for the experiment, and is blindfolded
securely. Then the receiver takes the right hand of the sender and
places it in his (the receiver's) left hand, holding it firmly there.
The sender then concentrates his mind upon the object to be "found," and
mentally wills that the receiver move toward it. The receiver then
experiences a peculiar faint impulse in the direction of the object, and
accordingly moves toward it. After considerable practice, the receiver
acquires the faculty of not only finding large objects, but also is able
to locate small objects, such as concealed rings, pins, etc.


Development Practices.

This class of experiments, while open to the objection that there may be
more or less muscular direction consciously or unconsciously given by
the sender, nevertheless tend to develop proficiency in both sender and
receiver. In fact, such experiments are perhaps one of the very best
methods of developing projecting or receiving power along the lines of
occult or psychic forces. This because the persons become familiar with
the psychic processes involved, and their efficiency becomes increased
by practice and experiment. This plan is like that of teaching a child
how to walk by means of holding its hand, allowing it to rest on chairs,
etc. In practicing such experiments, the receiver will soon become
conscious of receiving the thought message in what may be called a
"wireless flash," instead of by the slower, and less clear process of
transmission through the physical body of the sender, and thence through
his own nerves. When the sender begins to experience these flashes of
consciousness, he is ready to proceed to the next stage.


The "Willing Game."

The second stage on telepathic development is much akin to that just
described, with the difference that there is no physical contact between
the sender and the receiver--no holding of hands, etc. A variation of
this is found in the familiar "willing game" in which the whole roomful
of persons concentrates upon the receiver, and "wills" that he find a
selected object. On the whole, however, the private experiments
conducted by the sender and the receiver, with perhaps a few intelligent
and sympathetic spectators, are far better than the "willing game" plan,
in which there are usually many triflers present ready to make a joke of
the whole thing, and thus taking away that true concentration under
which the best results may be obtained.


Formal Tests.

The third step in telepathic development is that of conducting
experiments similar to those originally conducted by the Society for
Psychical Research, previously mentioned. That is to say, the sender may
select cards from a pack, coins from a pile, small objects from a
collection, etc., and then endeavor to transmit the impression of the
same to the receiver--the latter then reporting his flashes of
impression received. This may be rendered more complicated by having the
sender in one place, and the receiver at another, the time having
previously been agreed upon between them. In experiments conducted at
long range, it has been generally found better for the receiver to write
down the word, thought, or mental, picture which has been transmitted to
him by the sender; and for the sender to write down the name or picture
of the thing the idea of which he has transmitted. These memoranda serve
not only as scientific proof of the experiment, but also serve as a
barometer of progress being made during the experiments.


Automatic Writing.

In this connection it may be stated that many investigators and
experimentors along the lines of telepathic phenomena have met with
considerable success in the direction of Automatic Writing from living
persons, which of course is merely a special form of Telepathy. In some
cases the communications received in this way were at first thought to
be from disembodied entities, until later it was discovered that the
thoughts were actually transmitted (in some cases unintentionally) by
living persons. The late W. T. Stead, the London editor and famous
investigator of psychic phenomena, who was lost on the "Titanic" several
years ago, was remarkably successful along this special line of
telepathic transmission, he being one of the most efficient receivers of
this kind of which those familiar with the subject have any knowledge.
His written records of these experiments are very interesting, and form
a valuable contribution to this subject. In this class of experiments,
the sender concentrates fixedly upon the thought--word for word--and
wills that the recipient write down the word so transmitted; the
receiver sit passively at the time agreed upon, and allows his arm and
hand to be moved by means of the psychic currents beating upon him, and
which are then unconsciously transformed into muscular action--the
process being similar to that of ordinary writing, except that instead
of the activity of the brain of the writer being behind the muscular
motion, that of the sender performs that task.


Psychic Sensitiveness.

The student of this book will find in the succeeding portions thereof,
from time to time, certain general instructions regarding the
cultivation of psychic receptivity and sensitiveness. These general
instructions are also applicable to the cultivation of telepathic power,
and may be properly applied to that end. There is really but one general
principle involved in all the many forms of psychic receptivity, namely
that of (1) shutting the senses to the ordinary impressions of the
outside world, and (2) opening the higher channels of sense to the
impressions coming in the form of vibrations of the higher forces and
finer powers of Nature. At the last, it is simply a matter of "getting
in tune," just as truly as in the case of the wireless telegraphy. These
things are difficult to explain in ordinary words to one who has had no
experience along these lines; but when one begins to actually experiment
and practice, the way opens out gradually and steadily, and then the
person can grasp the meaning of the little "hints" dropped by others who
have traveled the same path. So, after all, it comes down to the matter
of Practice, Experiment, and Learning by Trying!




