PART II

Mental Vibrations and Transmissions


In the category of Nature's Finer Forces must be included that class of
manifestations which are generally known as Telepathy, Thought
Transference, Thought Force, etc., all of which are based upon the fact
that there is present in all such mental states as Thought, Emotion,
Desire, etc., a certain rate of vibratory motion, which motion is
capable of being radiated from the mind of the person manifesting them
in such power and force that they may be registered with more or less
distinctness upon the minds of other persons are at a greater or less
distance from the first person. In the more common forms of its
manifestation, such mental force or power is known as Thought Force,
Mental Influence, etc., and in its more pronounced and less common
phases it is known as Telepathy, Thought Transference, etc., but the
basic principle is precisely the same in all of such cases, simple or
complex though their manifestations may be.


The Higher Forces.

We may say here, frankly and plainly, however, that the advanced
occultists regard this class of phenomena as comparatively simple and
elementary, and therefore not fully entitled to be included in the same
category with the higher phases of Nature's Finer Forces, such as, for
instance, Clairvoyance, Psychometry, Communication with the Higher
Planes, etc. But notwithstanding this, we are of the opinion that any
and every one of the finer forces of nature, i.e., any of the forces
which are over and above the plane upon which the ordinary senses of
man, normally developed, ordinarily function and operate, should be
placed in one general category of the Higher Forces of Nature,
particularly in a work of this kind designed for the instruction of the
general public upon these important subjects. Accordingly, these lesser
manifestations of the finer forces in the natural world shall be
carefully considered in this part of this book, so that the student may
become acquainted with the scientific principles upon which they are
based, and may be enabled to develop the power of manifesting such
powers if he choose to do so; and that he may understand the nature of
such forces and powers when they are manifested by other persons.


Chitta, or Mind Substance.

The Hindu Teachings hold that that which we call "Mind" is not an
intangible something different from anything else in Nature, but that,
on the contrary, it forms a part of Nature's general manifestation, and
is a substantial thing. The Hindus have given to this Mind Substance the
name of Chitta. Without going into metaphysical discussion, or entering
into technical details concerning this Mind Substance or Chitta, we may
say that the Hindus believe it to be one phase of the great
Manifestation which we call Nature--just as that which we call Matter
is another phase of Manifestation--and, like Matter, having its own
particular kind of force, or energy, its own rates of vibrations, and
its own attribute of radiating its vibratory force or energy over space.
Chitta manifests its activity in creating Thought, Emotions, etc., and
also in receiving impressions from the outside world which it translates
into perceptions and ideals. Chitta, or Mind Substance, is not regarded
by the Hindus as being identical with the Soul, or the Ego; but, on the
contrary, they regard it as being an instrument for the expression of
the activity of the Ego, or Soul, just as the Body is another kind of
instrument. Both Body and Mind are regarded as being intended for the
use of the Ego or Soul, and not as identical with the latter. We shall
not discuss these distinctions further in this book, this subject being
apart from the general field and scope of the present work.


What Modern Science Says.

There are many to whom this conception of the vibration energy of Chitta
or Mind Substance may seem strange. But such persons will be still more
surprised, perhaps, when they are told that modern science has
practically admitted the general truth contained in the Hindu teachings
concerning the same, though modern science seems to cloak the facts of
the case in technical terms so that the ordinary person is unable to
comprehend the real facts dwelling beneath these terms. To this latter
class we specially commend the following statement made by Professor
Ochorowicz, the eminent European scientist, a few years ago. Professor
Ochoriwicz says:


A Living Dynamic Focus.

"Every living being is a dynamic focus. A dynamic focus tends ever to
propagate the motion that is proper to it. Propagated motion becomes
transformed according to the medium it traverses. Motion always tends to
propagate itself. Therefore, when we see work of any kind--mechanical,
electrical, nervic, or psychic--disappear without visible effort, then
of two things, one happens, namely, either a transmission or a
transformation. Where does the first end, and where does the second
begin? In an identical medium there is only TRANSMISSION; in a different
medium there is TRANSFORMATION.

"You send an electric current through a thick wire. You have the
current, but you do not perceive any other force. But cut that thick
wire, and connect the ends by means of a fine wire, and this fine wire
will grow hot--there will be a TRANSFORMATION of a part of the current
into HEAT. Take a pretty strong current, and interpose a wire still more
resistant, or a very thin carbon rod, and the carbon will emit LIGHT. A
part of the current, then, is transformed into heat and light. The light
acts in every direction around about, first visibly as light, then
invisibly as heat and electric current. Hold a magnet near it. If the
magnet is weak and movable, in the form of a magnetic needle, the beam
of light will cause it to deviate; if it is strong and immovable, it
will in turn cause the beam of light to deviate. AND ALL THIS FROM A
DISTANCE, WITHOUT CONTACT, WITHOUT SPECIAL CONDUCTORS.


Dynamic Correlate of Thought.

"A process that is at once chemical, physical and psychical, goes on in
the brain. A complex action of this kind is propagated through the gray
brain matter, as waves are propagated in water. Regarded on its
physiological side, an idea is only a vibration, a vibration that is
propagated, yet which does not pass out of the medium in which it can
exist as such. It is propagated only as far as other vibrations allow.
It is propagated more widely if it assumes the character which
subjectively we call emotive. But it cannot go beyond without being
transformed. Nevertheless, like force in general, it cannot remain in
isolation, and it escapes in disguise.

"Thought stays at home, as the chemical action of a battery remains in
the battery; it is represented by its dynamic correlate, called in the
case of the battery a 'current,' and in the case of the brain, I know
not what; but whatever its name may be, it is THE DYNAMIC CORRELATE OF
THOUGHT. I have chosen the name 'dynamic correlate.' There is something
more than that; the universe is neither dead nor void.

"A force that is transmitted meets other forces, and if it is
transformed only little by little it usually limits itself to modifying
another force at its own cost, though without suffering materially
thereby. This is the case particularly with forces that are persistent,
concentrated, well seconded by their medium. It is the case with the
physiological equilibrium, nervic force, psychic force, ideas, emotions,
tendencies. These modify environing forces, without themselves
disappearing. They are imperceptibly transformed, AND IF THE NEXT MAN IS
OF A NATURE EXCEPTIONALLY WELL ADAPTED TO THEM, THEY GAIN IN INDUCTIVE
ACTION."


Answer to Skeptical Critics

The two most likely objections advanced against this conception by
sceptical critics are as follows: "(1) The mental vibratory motion, or
vibratory waves, are not known to science, nor recorded on scientific
instruments such as the galvanometer. What is the rate of such
vibrations, and what is their general character? (2) Granted the
existence of such vibratory energy, or thought-waves, how and by means
of what channel does the second person receive them from the first
person? How are they registered or recorded?" These objections are
capable of being met in a scientific manner, to the satisfaction of any
fair-minded critic or investigator. We shall now give you, briefly, the
gist of the answer of science to the aforesaid objections.


The World of Vibrations

It is true that the scientific instruments of the laboratory, such as
the galvanometer, do not record thought vibrations. This, because such
instruments are capable of registering and recording on certain rates
and modes of vibratory energy. Thought vibrations are registered only by
their appropriate instruments, namely, the Chitta of Mind substance of
living persons. As to the "general character and rate of vibration" of
these waves of mental force, we can only say that their general
character is that of "mental force" as opposed to "physical force."

As to their rate of vibration, we can only say that this is not
precisely known, not having as yet been definitely ascertained; but it
should be added that THERE IS PLENTY ROOM FOR THESE VIBRATIONS in the
great field of vibratory energy. Read the following paragraphs, and
decide this last matter for yourself.


Uncharted Seas of Vibration.

The following quotations from eminent scientists will serve to give the
student a general idea of the views of science upon the question of the
possibility of the existence and presence of vibratory energy of kinds
and characters as yet unknown to science:

The first scientist says: "There is much food for speculation in the
thought that there exists sound waves that no human ear can hear, and
color waves that no eye can see. The long, dark, soundless space between
40,000 and 400,000,000,000,000 vibrations per second, and the infinity
of range beyond 700,000,000,000,000 vibrations per second, where light
ceases, in the universe of motion, makes it possible to indulge in
speculation." The second scientist says: "There is no gradation between
the most rapid undulations or tremblings that produce our sensation of
sound, and the lowest of those which give rise to our sensations of
gentlest warmth. There is a huge gap between them, wide enough to
include another world of motion, all lying between our world of sound
and our world of heat and light. And there is no good reason whatever
for supposing that matter is incapable of such intermediate activity, or
that such activity may not give rise to intermediate sensations,
provided that there are organs for taking up and sensifying these
movements."

The third scientist says: "The knowledge we gain by experiment brings
home to us what a miserably imperfect piece of mechanism our bodies are.
The ear can detect the slow-footed sound vibrations that come to us at
the rate of between 40 and 40,000 a second. But the whole of space may
be quivering and palpitating with waves at all sorts of varying speeds,
and our senses will tell us nothing of them until we get them coming to
us at the inconceivable speed of 400,000,000,000,000 a second, when
again we respond to them and appreciate them in the form of light."

The fourth scientist says: "The first indications of warmth come to us
when the vibrations reach the rate of 35,000,000,000,000 per second.
When the vibrations reach 450,000,000,000,000 the lowest visible light
rays manifest. Then come the orange rays, the golden yellow, the pure
yellow, the greenish yellow, the pure green, the greenish blue, the
ocean blue, the cyanic blue, the indigo, and finally the violet, the
highest degree of light which the human eye can register, and which
occurs when the vibrations reach the rate of 750,000,000,000 per second.
Then come the ultra-violet rays, invisible to human sight but registered
by chemical media. In this ultra-violet region lie the X-Rays, and the
other recently discovered high degree rays; also the actinic rays which,
while invisible to the eye, register on the photographic plate, sunburn
one's face, blister one's nose, and even cause violent explosions in
chemical substances exposed to them, as well as act upon the green
leaves of plants, causing the chemical transformation of carbonic acid
and water into sugar and starches. These forms of 'dark light,' that
is, light too high in degree to be perceived by the human eye, are but
faint indications of the existence of still higher and still finer
vibrations of substance and energy."


The Human Wireless Telegraph Instrument.

Having seen that the first question of the sceptical critics is capable
of being answered in the scientific spirit, and by ideas based upon
scientific investigation, we now turn to the second question of the same
critics, viz.: "Granted the existence of such vibratory energy, or
thought-waves, how and by means of what channel does the second person
receive these from the first person? How are they registered or
recorded?" This same question is also implied in the concluding sentence
of one of the scientists above quoted, viz.: "There is no good reason
whatever for supposing that matter is incapable of such intermediate
activity, or that such activity may not give rise to intermediate
sensations, provided that there are organs for taking up and sensifying
these movements." Let us see what science has to tell us regarding the
provision of Nature for the reception and "sensing" of this class of
vibratory energy. And the easiest way to ascertain the report of science
regarding this important matter is to consider carefully what
representative leading scientists have said concerning the same in their
writings or public addresses. We call your attention to the following
quotations from such sources.


A Great Scientist's Theory.

Let us begin with that great master of modern science, Sir William
Crookes, the inventor of the celebrated "Crookes' Tubes," without which
the discovery of the X-Ray and Radio-Activity would have been
impossible. Several years ago, this eminent scientist, addressing the
Royal Society, at Bristol, England,--a gathering made up of
distinguished scientists from all over the world, most of the members
being extremely sceptical concerning occult phenomena--said to the
brilliant gathering: "Were I now introducing for the first time these
inquiries in the world of science, I should choose a starting point
different from that of old (where we formerly began). It would be well
to begin with Telepathy; with that fundamental law, as I believe it to
be, that thoughts and images may be transferred from one mind to another
without the agency of the recognized organs of sense--that knowledge may
enter the human mind without being communicated in any hitherto known or
recognized ways. * * * If Telepathy takes place we have two physical
facts, viz., (a) the physical change in the brain of A, the transmitter,
and the analogous physical change in the brain of B, the recipient of
the transmitted impression. Between these two physical events there must
exist a train of physical causes. * * * It is unscientific to call in
the aid of mysterious agencies, when with every fresh advance in
knowledge it is shown that ether vibrations have powers and attributes
abundantly able to meet any demand--even the transmission of thought.

"It is supposed by some physiologists that the essential cells of nerves
do not actually touch, but are separated by a narrow gap which widens in
sleep while it narrows almost to extinction during mental activity.
THIS CONDITION IS SO SINGULARLY LIKE A BRANLY OR LODGE COHERER [a
device which led to the discovery of wireless telegraphy] AS TO SUGGEST
A FURTHER ANALOGY. The structure of brain and nerve being similar, it is
conceivable that there may be present masses of such nerve coherers in
the brain, whose special function it may be to receive impulses brought
from without, through the connecting sequence of ether waves of
appropriate order of magnitude. Roentgen has familiarized us with an
order of vibrations of extreme minuteness as compared with the smallest
waves with which we have hitherto been acquainted; and there is no
reason to suppose that we have here reached the limit of frequency. It
is known that the action of thought is accompanied by certain molecular
movements in the brain, and here we have physical vibrations capable
from their extreme minuteness of acting direct upon individual
molecules, while their rapidity approaches that of internal and external
movements of the atoms themselves. A formidable range of phenomena must
be scientifically sifted before we effectually grasp a faculty so
strange, so bewildering, and for ages so inscrutable, as the direct
action of mind upon mind."


Human Electro-Magnetism

Professor Bain, another eminent authority, tells us: "The structure of
the nervous substances, and the experiments made upon the nerves and
nerve-centres, establish beyond a doubt certain peculiarities as
belonging to the force that is exercised by the brain. This force is of
a current nature; that is to say, a power generated at one part of the
structure is conveyed along an intervening substance and discharged at
some other part. The different forms of electricity and magnetism have
made us familiar with this kind of action."

Professor Draper, another eminent authority, says: "I find that the
cerebrum is absolutely analogous to in construction to any other nervous
arc. It is composed of centripetal and centrifugal fibres, having also
registering ganglia. If in other nervous arcs the structure is merely
automatic, and can display no phenomena of itself, but requires the
influence of an external agent--the optical apparatus inert save under
the influence of light, the auditory save under the impression of
sound--the cerebrum, being precisely analogous in its elementary
structure, presupposes the existence of some agent to act through it."

Prof. M. P. Hatfield has said: "The arrangement of the nerve-envelopes
is so like that of the best constructed electrical cables that we cannot
help thinking that both were constructed to conduct something very much
alike. I know that there are those who stoutly maintain that nerve force
is not electricity, and it is not in the senses that an electrical
battery is not the same thing as a live man; but, nevertheless,
nerve-force is closely allied to that wonderful thing that for want of a
better and clearer understanding we agree to call 'electricity.'"


Human Etheric Force.

Professor Haddock, a popular writer along the lines of scientific
psychology and kindred subjects, in a part of his work in which he was
considering the idea that thought may be communicated by means of
ether-vibrations, forcibly says: "The ether is accepted by science as a
reality, and as a medium for light, heat, electricity, magnetism, etc.
The nervous system is certainly comparable to an electric battery with
connecting wires. Communications of thought and feeling without the
mediation of sense-perceptions as commonly understood, is now
established. Inanimate objects exert, now and then, 'strange
influences.' People certainly carry with them a personal atmosphere. The
representation of the condition of these facts by a psychic field,
compared to the magnetic or electric field, becomes, therefore, if not
plausible, at least convenient. As such a 'field' exists surrounding the
sun, so may a 'field' be assumed as surrounding each human individual.
'We have already strong grounds for believing that we live in a medium
which conveys to-and-fro movements to us from the sun, and that these
movements are electro-magnetic, and that all the transformation of light
and heat, and indeed the phenomena of life, are due to the electrical
energy which comes to us across the vacuum which exists between us and
the sun--a vacuum which is pervaded by the ether, which is a fit medium
for the transmission of electro-magnetic waves.' By means, then, of a
similar theory applied to mind and brain and body, we may find
reasonable explanations of many otherwise insoluble mysteries of life,
and, which is of more importance, deduce certain suggestions for the
practical regulation of life in the greatest individual interest."


The Brain-Battery.

The same writer says: "All states of body and mind involve constant
molecular and chemical change. The suggestion arises that the brain,
with its millions of cells and its inconceivable changes in substance,
may be regarded as a transmitting and receiving battery. The brain being
a kind of battery, and the nerves being conductors of released stored-up
energy to different parts of the body, by a kind of action similar to
the actions of electricity and magnetism, it is suggested that, either
by means of the ether, or of some still finer form of matter, discharges
of brain energy may be conducted beyond the limits of the body. If the
nerve-track corresponds to wires, this refined medium may correspond to
the ether-field supposed to be employed in wireless telegraphy. As
electrical movements are conducted without wires, or other visible
media, so may brain-discharges be conveyed beyond the mechanism of the
battery, without the intervention of nerves--except as they may
constitute a part of the battery. Generally speaking, such discharges
would originate in two ways, viz., by direct mental action, or by mental
or physical states--perhaps by a combination."


A Peculiar Organ

So much for the conceptions of modern western science, which agree in
the main with those of the ancient oriental occultists, although of
course different names and terms are employed. But, we think it worth
while to call your attention to the fact that the western scientists
have failed to note the significant presence of a peculiar organ in the
human body, which is regarded as most important in its functions and
offices by the oriental teachers, and which we believe has a very close
connection to the subject just discussed by the western scientists. We
refer to that strange organ or gland known to western science as the
Pineal Gland. Let us see just what this is.


The Pineal Gland

The Pineal Gland is a mass of nervous substance which is found located
in the human brain in a position near the middle of the skull, almost
directly above the extreme top of the spinal column. It is shaped like a
small cone, and is of a reddish-gray color. It lies in front of the
cerebellum, and is attached to the third ventricle of the brain. It
contains a small quantity of peculiar particles of a gritty, sand-like
substance, which is commonly known as "brain sand." It derives its
scientific name from its shape, which resembles a pine-cone. Western
physiologists are at sea regarding the function and office of this
interesting organ, or gland, and the text books generally content
themselves with stating that "the functions of the Pineal Gland are not
understood." The oriental occultists, on the other hand, claim that the
Pineal Gland, with its peculiar arrangement of nerve-cell corpuscles,
and its tiny grains of "brain-sand," is intimately associated with
certain forms of the transmission and reception of waves of mental
vibrations. Western students of occultism have been struck with the
remarkable resemblance between the Pineal Gland and a certain part of
the receiving apparatus employed in wireless telegraphy, the latter also
containing small particles which bear a close resemblance to the
"brain-sand" of the Pineal Gland; and this fact is often urged by them
to substantiate the theory of the oriental occultists concerning the
function and office of this interesting organ of the human body which is
located in the brain of man.


Transmission of Thought.

Many other facts set forth by modern western science could be cited in
our consideration of the question of the existence of any possible organ
for the reception of thought vibrations, but it is thought that
sufficient evidence of this kind has already been submitted to your
attention--sufficient to remove any reasonable doubts, and to give the
student at least a clear and open mind on the subject. Summing up such
evidence, we may say that modern science is fast approaching the
position which is so well expressed by Camille Flammarion, the eminent
French scientist, as follows: "The action of one mind upon another at a
distance--the transmission of thought, mental suggestion, communication
at a distance--all these are not more extraordinary than the action of
the magnet on iron, the influence of the moon on the sea, the
transportation of the human voice by electricity, the revolution of the
chemical constituents of a star by the analysis of its light, or,
indeed, all the wonders of contemporary science. Only these psychic
communications are of a more elevated kind, and may serve to put us on
the track of a knowledge of human nature. What is certain is this: That
Telepathy can and ought to be henceforth considered by Science as an
incontestible reality; that minds are able to act upon each other
without the intervention of the senses; that psychic force exists,
though its nature is yet unknown."


A General Principle.

At this point we wish to impress upon the minds of the students of this
book that what has been above said regarding that class of mental
communications generally classed under the head of Telepathy also
applies to many much higher phases of occult phenomena and psychic
manifestations. In fact, this is one of the reasons why we have paid
such close attention to the scientific evidence substantiating this
class of phenomena. It is not too much to say that in what has been said
in the foregoing pages there is to be found a scientific basis for the
phenomenon of "spirit communication," at least in many of its phases. It
is but a step in thought--and a natural and easy step at that--from the
matter of the communication of thought from the mind of one person or
the material plane of life to another person on the same plane, on to
the matter of the communication of thought from the mind of an
individual entity on a higher plane of life to a second person who is
abiding on the lower material plane occupied by us at this stage of our
existence. It is seen that the difference consists largely in the matter
of the degree and rate of vibratory energy employed, and the preparation
of a proper receiving instrument for the reception and translation of
such messages. This phase of the subject will be considered in fuller
detail in a subsequent portion of this book.


Transformation of Vibrations.

One of the things which seem to greatly puzzle the average student of
the subject of mental vibrations, and thought-transference, is that
which may be called "thought waves." The student is unable to conceive
of a wave of "thought" being projected into the air, and then traveling
along until it reaches the mind of other persons. The difficulty, upon
analysis, is seen to consist of the inability to conceive of "thought"
as being a material substance capable of traveling in "waves." It is no
wonder that the student finds this conception difficult, for there is no
such thing as "thought" traveling in this way. The phenomenon of thought
transference is accounted for scientifically in quite another manner, as
we shall see in a moment. The student is advised to carefully note this
distinction, for upon its understanding depends greatly the intelligent
comprehension of the entire subject of thought vibrations and
thought-transference.


Example of Electric Light

Perhaps this matter may be best explained by means of illustrations of
the operation of electricity and light--electric vibrations and light
vibrations. In both cases the secret of the transmission of the
vibrations or waves of vibratory energy may be summed up in the word
"TRANSFORMATION." For instance: When we transmit electric vibrations
over a fine wire or thread of carbon, the electric vibrations are
transformed into light vibrations and manifest as "electric light." In
another form of transmission the electric vibrations are transformed
into "electric heat." But this is merely one phase of the
transformation; consider carefully the more complex phases, as follows:
We speak into the receiver of a telephone and the sound vibrations
produced by our voice are transformed into electrical vibrations and in
that form travel over the telephone wire; arriving at the other end of
the wire, these electric vibrations enter into the receiver, and are
there transformed into sound vibrations, and as such are heard by the
person holding the receiver. Now note this: the sound vibrations do not
travel at all; instead, they are transformed into electric waves, which
in turn are transformed at the receiving end of the line into sound
vibrations once more. And unless the receiving apparatus be present, and
properly adjusted, there is no second transformation at all; and in such
case the electric vibrations remain such.


Example of Wireless Telegraphy.

Likewise, in the case of the wireless telegraphy, the electric energy
produced by the sending instrument is transformed into subtle and finer
etheric waves, which travel to the receiving instrument, and are there
transformed into electric waves, the latter producing physical changes
in the receiving apparatus which enable them to be read by the observer.
In the case of wireless telephony there is still more complex process of
transformation, as follows: the speaker conveys sound vibrations into
the instrument; these are transformed into electric vibrations; and the
latter into the etheric vibrations which travel through space to the
receiver. Reaching the receiver, the etheric vibrations are transformed
into ordinary electric vibrations, and these in turn into sound waves
capable of being sensed by the listener.


Example of Light Waves.

The same process is detected in the transmission of what we call light
waves. The activities manifested by the substance of the sun set up
certain vibrations which we call "light vibrations." These are
communicated to the ether in the form of so-called "light waves" but
which are merely etheric waves of a certain rate of vibration. These
waves travel through space and are transformed into "light" only when
they reach some material substance capable of receiving and reflecting
their vibrations. Science tells us that empty space is perfectly DARK,
and that light manifests only when the etheric light vibrations come in
contact with material substance and are there transformed into "light."
Light, as "light" does not travel from the sun--what we know as "light"
is simply the result of the transformation of certain etheric waves into
"light" by reason of their contact with material substances.


Transformation of Mental Vibrations

Now for the analogy. Mental vibrations are so only when they remain in
their own uninterrupted medium of channel of activity, i.e., the brain
and the nervous system of the individual. Many hold that they are able
to leap over the barrier of flesh separating two persons when such
persons are in immediate physical contact, and the conditions are of a
certain kind; but as a rule they do not do so. But, as all investigators
know, mental vibrations are capable of being transformed into some
subtle form of etheric vibrations, and the latter when coming in contact
with the nervous system of other persons may be again transformed, this
time into mental vibrations which produced thoughts, feelings and mental
images in the minds of the second persons or persons, corresponding with
these mental states in the first person. Think over this carefully,
until you grasp the idea fully.


Vibrational Attunement

And here we find another startling correspondence between the phenomena
of wireless telegraphy and that of thought transference or transmission
of mental vibrations. We allude to the fact that while a wireless
telegraphic sending instrument may be sending forth vibrations of the
strongest power, its messages are capable of being received or "picked
up" only by those instruments which are "in tune" with the sending
instrument to at least a certain degree; to all other instruments, those
which are not "in tune" with the sending instrument, there is no message
perceptible. Precisely this same state of affairs is found to prevail in
the realm of mental vibrations and thought transmission. The individual
receives only such messages as emanate from instruments with which he is
"in tune"--to all the rest he is deaf and unconscious. But once "in
tune" with the higher vibrations of the mental realm, he will receive
every message traveling on that particular plane at that particular
time, unless he deliberately shut them out. We shall see how this works
out in ordinary life, when we consider the general subject of Telepathy
and Thought Transference in the succeeding Chapter.


In Tune With Higher Planes

But, in connection with the above statement of the "in tune" law or rule
of manifestation, we wish to call to the attention of the student the
important fact that the same law prevails in the case of communications
from the higher planes of existence--the so-called "spirit
communications" and other messages of this kind reaching individuals on
our own plane of existence. It is only when the individual on the
"earth plane" becomes "in tune" with the sending mental instrument of
the entity abiding on a higher plane of existence, that it is able to
"pick up" the message being sent to earth. Even the same individual is
often unable to "catch" the messages at one time, while at other times
he experiences no difficulty whatsoever. An understanding of this
fact--this law or rule of manifestation--will throw a great light over
many dark places of misunderstanding and perplexity concerning certain
phases of occult and psychic phenomena. This feature of such phenomena
will be considered in detail in subsequent parts of this book.


The Two Key-Words.

Concluding our consideration of the "just how" of the transmission of
thoughts, messages, and "psychograms" between two minds, be they both on
earth plane, or one of the two on the higher planes, we would say:
"Always remember the two Key-Words, namely TRANSFORMATION and
ATTUNEMENT." These two Key-Words will enable you to unlock many doors of
thought on these subjects--doors which otherwise will remain closed to
you.




