PART VI

MEDIUMSHIP


Among the higher categories of Nature's Finer Forces is included that
which is popularly known as "mediumship." Although this term has
suffered more or less by reason of its misappropriation by certain
charlatans and the unprincipled exploiters of sincere investigators of
the phenomena of the higher planes of existence, and also by reason of a
certain prejudice against the term arising from misrepresentation and
general misunderstanding, the term still remains a perfectly legitimate
one and one clearly indicating the nature of the general class of
phenomena sought to be embraced within its limits. Therefore there is no
valid reason for its rejection in our consideration of the subject of
Nature's Finer Forces in this book; and, accordingly, it is used here in
a general way, although the more scientific term "higher plane
communication," or similar terms, are employed herein in some cases.


What Is Mediumship?

Let us see just what is meant by the term "mediumship." The term
"medium" is defined as: "That which lies in the middle, or between other
things: hence, that through which anything is conveyed from one thing
to another." In a special sense, a "medium" is "a person serving as the
channel of communication between decarnate entities and human being
still in the flesh," in "spiritualistic phenomena." The suffix "ship,"
of course, denotes state or office; and in the case of "mediumship" it
indicates that the designated person possesses the state or office of a
"medium," the latter term being used in the special meaning above
defined.

Of course, the term "mediumship," as above defined, lacks a clear
meaning unless the term "spiritualistic," or "spiritualism" be defined.
The term "spiritualism" (or as many of the best authorities prefer to
state it, "spiritism") is applied to "a system of communication with the
unseen world, or with the inhabitants thereof, the latter being usually
known as 'spirits,' through persons called 'mediums,' which has attained
popular favor in Europe and America since about 1850." Or, as another
authority states it, "Spiritualism is a term employed to indicate the
belief that departed spirits hold intercourse with mortals by means of
psychical phenomena, commonly through a person of special susceptibility
called a 'medium.'"


Ancient Mediumship.

It is, of course, unnecessary to state in detail the fact that
communication with decarnate entities has been known and practiced by
the human race from the earliest days of recorded history, and
probably long before that time, and is far from being a modern
discovery. Moreover, such communication has been known and practiced
by races of human beings other than those inhabiting Europe and
America--particularly in the oriental countries. In the oriental lands
such communication has been well established for many thousand years,
and the most ancient records give evidences of it. The Hebrew
Scriptures contain many instances of such communication, showing that
the same was an accepted fact of the life of the race at the time and
in the places at which these records were written.


Mediumship and Religious Belief.

The careful student will of course notice that this communication with
the higher planes of life and being--this so-called "mediumship"--does
not depend upon any particular form of religious belief, or teaching,
concerning the nature of the state or place of abode of the departed
spirits of men; but, on the contrary, is common to all form of religion
and to all phases of belief in the survival of the human soul.
Therefore, a scientific consideration of the general subject does not
necessitate the acceptance of any one particular phase of religious
belief, or of any particular system of teaching concerning the nature or
state of "life after death." All that is required of the person
accepting the general fact of "higher plane communication" may be stated
as follows: (1) Acceptance of the fact that the human soul persists
after the death of the body, and independent of and removed from the
dead body; (2) acceptance of the fact that the decarnate souls of human
beings may, and do, establish communication with human beings still
dwelling upon the earth-plane of existence.

We may state here that the term "decarnate" means "away from the
physical body," or "out of the flesh;" the term being the opposite of
"incarnate," meaning "clothed with flesh, or embodied in flesh." We may
also state here that the teachings of most philosophies of the life
after death hold that the decarnate human soul is not entirely devoid of
a body, but rather occupies a body composed of some ethereal substance;
this ethereal body being called the "astral body," or the "spiritual
body."


The Ideals of Modern Spiritualism.

A writer well expresses the ideals of modern western spiritualism as
follows: "Through the gateway of mediumship for upwards of fifty years
the world has been catching glimpses of the glory of the land immortal,
and visitants from that 'bourne' from whence it has been erroneously
said that 'no traveler returns' have made their presence known beyond
all doubt or denial, thus proving the continued conscious existence of
human beings and the sequential chapter of the life hereafter. Though
the messages from the unseen have at times been imperfect and
fragmentary, still they have been MESSAGES. If but telegraphic
dispatches, so to speak, instead of voluminous letters; or like
telephonic snatches of conversation rather than face-to-face outpourings
of thought and feeling, still they have been greetings and comforting
assurances of undying affection from the people living in the land
'beyond the veil.' Although many a sorrowing soul has longed for further
revelation, and regretted the inability of the spirits to comply with
the requests for fuller information, still the gates have been ajar, and
sometimes it has truly seemed as though they had been flung wide
open--so clear and consoling were the messages from the loved ones on
the other side of death's valley of shadow. The manifestations of the
presence of spirits and the evidences of their identity, which have been
accumulating during all these years, have solved the 'great secret,' and
we know that death is not a CUL-DE-SAC, but a thoroughfare. The dread of
death disappeared altogether with the mists of ignorance, as, through
the gateway of mediumship, the shining presence of ministering spirits,
'our very own dear departed,' illumined the pathway which we must all
tread to our great promotion.


Immortality Demonstrated Through Mediumship.

"'Immortality demonstrated through mediumship' should be inscribed upon
the banner of spiritualism, for the fact of life beyond the incident of
death has been proved beyond all peradventure to millions of intelligent
and enlightened people since the new spiritual era was inaugurated. To
mediums--the modern mediators--therefore belong the office and honor of
rolling back the stone from the tomb and establishing faith upon the
firm basis of knowledge (scientifically ascertained and proven) of the
continued intelligent existence in the spiritual realms of those who
went forth through the death change into light and liberty 'over there.'
Mediums, as intermediaries, have enabled spirit people to comfort the
sad and encourage the weak; to relieve the doubter and console the
bereaved; to confirm the old-world traditions regarding bygone spirit
intervention and revelation, and supplement our hopes and intuitions
with proof palpable. Present day experiences of inspiration and spirit
manifestation make credible and acceptable many things in ancient
records which must otherwise have been discarded as superstitious and
false. Spiritualism redeems the so-called 'supernatural' and
'miraculous' occurrences of the Bible, by explaining them and proving
the naturalness. The capability claimed for old-time seers and prophets
to see angels and hear voices is now known to be a natural faculty,
which, in certain people, is perfectly normal while it can be induced in
others by the influence of operators in or out of the body. IT CAN ALSO
BE CULTIVATED TO SOME DEGREE BY MOST PEOPLE WHO CARE TO STUDY THE
NECESSARY CONDITIONS FOR ITS DEVELOPMENT AND EXERCISE. The famine, 'not
of bread, nor of water, but of hearing words from the Lord,' and the
loss of 'open vision' of the spirit, which afflicted Christendom for so
many years (because of the blind intolerance of zealots who, in their
adherence to the 'letter,' crushed out the sensitives through whom the
'spirit' might have been revealed), that famine is rapidly passing away,
and we are being fed with the living bread of spiritual inspiration, and
are growing strong enough to welcome the messengers who come to us
through the gateway of mediumship from their after-death home.


The Truth of Personal Survival.

"When once there is established the conviction of the truth of personal
survival of our loved ones, and the actual and satisfactory
demonstrations thereof through mediumship (and we know of no means
whereby such evidences can be obtained save through mediumship), we are
thrilled and delighted; and when this conviction is borne upon us and
driven home by the evidences, and the truth of spirit ministry has been
realized, nothing can destroy it. The spiritualist stands upon firm
ground--the impregnable rock of ascertained fact. He knows that
intercourse between the two worlds is real, continuous; therefore he is
proof against all speculations, denunciations, and adverse theories.
Dogmatic condemnations, 'bogey' cries, charges of fraud against mediums,
fail to move or frighten him. He can 'speak what he knows and testify to
what he has seen;' his positive and affirmative experience and testimony
outweigh all the opposition of 'doubting Thomases' who do not know.


The Gateway of Mediumship.

"Through the gateway of mediumship the spirits make themselves known in
a variety of ways. There are many phases of mediumistic phenomena, and
the student will find that he must be patient, painstaking, and
persevering if he would make sure of his facts. Careful investigation,
possibly prolonged research, under many difficulties and with many
discouragements, will be required, but 'success is certain if energy
fail not,' and the results will adequately recompense him for all
sacrifice and struggle! For in the light of the demonstrated fact of
continued existence after death, it is clear that man is even now 'a
spirit served by organs'--that consequently the basis of all religious
experience and affirmation is the spiritual consciousness of mankind.
There could be no revelation to man of spiritual truth or moral duty if
he were not a spirit possessing the capabilities of receiving and
comprehending, of interpreting and applying, the revelations and
inspirations which appeal to and quicken the inner (and higher) self."


The Mediumistic Character.

The following quotations from eminent modern spiritualists will further
serve to illustrate the accepted general principles of "spirit
communication" on the part of western spiritualism. E. W. Wallis says:
"Spiritualism deals with a higher range and a wider field of
supersensuous phenomena than mesmerism, hypnotism, telepathic
psychometry, clairvoyance, etc., because the natural susceptibility of
man in these directions is increased and intensified, and exercised upon
a superior plane, when it is utilized by intelligent spirit operators.
It is not true that sensitiveness is confined to those who are diseased,
weak of will, neurotic, or hysterical. Those who are susceptible to
psychic influence may be impulsive, warm-hearted, spontaneous, sociable,
and not by any means, or of necessity, weak-minded or vicious." Dr. Dean
Clake says: "The word mediumship, as understood and used by
spiritualists, technically speaking, means a susceptibility to the
influence, and more or less control, of decarnated spirits.
Physiologically, it means a peculiar nervous susceptibility to what may
be termed the 'psychic force,' which spirits use to move the mind or
body or both, of their mortal instrument. Psychologically, it signifies
a passive or negative state of mind and body which renders a person
subject to the positive will-power of spirits who influence him or her."
The spirit control who employed the hand of Stainton Moses, M.A., to
write his thoughts, said: "The mediumistic peculiarity is one of spirit
solely, and not of body, seeing that it occurs in all varieties of
physical frames, in the male and in the female; in the magnetic and in
the electric; in the stout and robust as well as in the puny and thin of
body; in the old and in the young; in all conditions and under all
circumstances. This alone would lead you to see that it is not a
physical matter; and that conclusion is strengthened for you by the fact
that the gift is perpetuated even after death of the earth body. Those
who on your earth have been mediums retain the gift and use it with us.
They are the most frequent visitors to your world; they communicate most
readily; and it is through them that spirits who have not the gift are
enabled to communicate with your earth."


Mediumistic Sensitivity.

Emma Hardinge Britten said: "Whatever that force may be which
constitutes the difference between a 'medium' and a non-medium, it is
certainly of a mental and magnetic character--that is, a combination of
the subtle elements of mind and magnetism, and therefore of a
psychological and not of a purely physical character. Whilst the
spiritualists of this generation have had no one to teach them either
what spiritual gifts are, or how to use, or how to abuse them,
experience has shown that the conditions under which spiritual phenomena
are produced through mediums are not only helped or hindered by their
mental states, but also by the will, magnetism, and mental states of
those who surround them." E. W. Wallis says: "The same laws govern the
relations between the sensitive and the spirit operator as between the
hypnotist and his subject. Therefore, mediumship is not necessarily
spiritual; it may be of all kinds; there may be psychical relationship
of a high grade and of a low one. There may be messages from beyond that
prove the identity of spirits, and give evidence of the continuity of
life, of the survival of mind, and yet they may not minister to
spiritual growth, nor awaken any exalted desire to be of service to God
and man. There may be psychical sympathy and not spiritual fellowship;
there may be spirit intercourse and not that sweet spiritual communion
which should be the goal of all who seek for evidences of life beyond
the valley of death. It is no longer possible to regard mediumship as a
supernatural endowment. It is, as regards the psychic susceptibility
upon which it depends, the common property of the race, and is therefore
as natural as are the 'gifts' of song or oratory, or the ability to
paint or construct. But as certain gifts and graces are more developed
in some individuals than in others, in like manner the sensitiveness
which is called mediumship is more highly developed (or is capable of
such development) in certain peculiarly constituted persons who may be
regarded as supernormally gifted, yet as naturally so as are geniuses in
other directions."


The Higher Vibratory Forces.

The student who has carefully read what we have said in the earlier
portions of the present book regarding the subject of Nature's Finer
Forces, and those concerned with "vibrations," and "planes of being,"
will be able to harmonize the apparently somewhat conflicting opinions
of those authorities above quoted concerning the nature of mediumship
and spirit communication. In the first place, the student will remember
that there exist planes of being higher and other than our own
earth-plane, and that the rate of normal vibration on such planes is
much higher than are those upon our own earth-plane. In the second
place, he will remember that beings dwelling and manifesting on these
higher planes are able to communicate only by means of their higher
vibratory rate of manifestation. And, in the third place, he will
remember that a person dwelling on the earth-plane will not ordinarily
register and interpret these higher vibrations of communication; and
that it is necessary for such a person to have originally, or else have
developed, the capacity to raise his or her own vibrations to the key
necessary to "catch" these higher vibrations. In short, we have here
once more another instance of that "attunement" between sender and
receiver the most common instance of which is the wireless telegraph.


Psychic Attunement.

The entity, or spirit, dwelling on one of the many higher planes of
being who wishes to communicate with persons on earth through a medium,
must first select some person capable of raising his or her own
vibratory rate of consciousness to become "in tune" with that of the
spirit himself. Then he must learn to project his own mental vibrations
with sufficient intensity and force to be "caught" by the sensitive
perceptive organism of the medium. These things are beyond the
understanding and accomplishment of many decarnate spirits, and unless
they are taught by some one on their own plane of existence they are
likely to fail in their attempts to communicate through a medium on the
earth-plane. But at the present time, in view of the great interest
being manifested "over there" in the communication with the earth-plane,
an earnest, persevering spirit will usually have comparatively little
difficulty in finding a proper instructor, and in acquiring the art of
"earth-plane communication," as it is called on the spirit plane.


The Development of Mediumship.

As regards the acquirement of mediumship qualities, information and
scientific instruction is much needed, particularly at the present time.
In this book we shall endeavor to throw much light upon this particular
matter, and to give such instruction and information in a plain,
practical form. We may begin by reminding the candidate for mediumship
that the methods of development of mediumship are entirely different
from those designed to develop ordinary psychic powers. In the case of
development for ordinary psychic power, the person must acquire the
power of concentration in the direction of sensing in his inner
consciousness the impressions coming to him from the outside world, such
impressions not being consciously directed to him. He must be able to so
concentrate that he will be keenly sensitive to these impressions, and
to interpret them intelligently. On the contrary, the person wishing to
develop the power of mediumship must learn to develop the power of
negative receptivity to the vibrations coming from the spirit planes. As
has well been said, he is the acted upon, and not the actor. While he
requires concentration, patience, and perseverance in developing the
power to raise himself to the proper vibratory key, when the actual work
of communication begins he must passively allow himself to speak and
act, more or less unconsciously, under the guidance, direction, and
control of the communicating spirit.


Unconscious Mediumship.

The student will do well, however, to remember that as a popular writer
has said: "It must not, however, be supposed that spirit influence is
limited to, and exerted solely upon, those who are known to be mediums;
or that the spirits do not assist those who use their own psychic
faculties. It is probable that all people who are psychically sensitive
and open to impressions are indebted to spirit helpers, whether they are
conscious of the fact or not. There is undoubtedly a greater degree of
influx from the spirit side than even spiritualists are aware. Many
persons are indebted to spirit friends for spontaneous impulses, which,
while those persons act upon them and reap the consequences, they can
neither explain nor trace to their source. Spirits frequently associate
with and serve their earth friends, although the recipients of their
benefactions are unaware of the fact. There would be very much more of
this kind of guidance from the unseen, if, instead of being frightened,
or repellant in their mental attitude toward the spirits, the great bulk
of people were prepared to accept such assistance from the other side as
perfectly natural and to be expected."


Mediumship and Individuality.

The student will find it desirable to acquaint himself with the best
opinions concerning the possible or probable effects of the practice of
mediumistic powers upon the medium himself. There is evidenced a
disposition in certain quarters to hold to the idea that mediumship, or
control by spirits, is more or less injurious, mentally or physically or
both, to the medium. It is also frequently asserted that the medium
tends to lose his individuality and personal strength of character.
Again, there are some who would teach that the medium should be of a low
order of intelligence, and should beware of exercising his intellect,
the idea seeming to be that under these conditions the mental path will
be freer and clearer for the spirit control. All of the aforesaid
notions are erroneous, as will appear as we progress in the statements
in this book concerning true and efficient mediumship.


Co-operation of Medium and Spirits.

The medium who observes certain simple and plain rules and habits of
conduct will not suffer any loss of strength of character or
individuality from his exercise of his mediumistic power; on the
contrary, an intelligent exercise of the power of mediumship often tends
to develop the intellectual power of the medium. As to the idea that the
medium must be ignorant, we have but to call your attention to the fact
that many of the most efficient mediums are intelligent, and even
brilliant individuals. As a writer has said: "There may be some mediums
who are ignoramuses, but it is doubtful if there will be any great
degree of intelligence or great spiritual illumination presented through
their agency. It is possible that some mediums act foolishly when in
their normal state, for the purpose of accentuating the difference
between their ordinary and supernormal conditions of mental activity;
but there is a more rational, intelligent, and, indeed, a more spiritual
conception of the relations which should exist between mediums and their
spirit guides, which is rapidly finding favor with thoughtful mediums
and spiritualists alike. The proper method of communing with the spirits
of the unseen realm is conducive to good, and not evil, to the medium.
The co-operative association of medium and spirit on the plane of
thought and purpose, emotion and motive, ethics and inspiration, results
in the education and elevation of the medium."


Mediumship Not Dangerous.

The following additional quotations from spiritualistic writers on this
point, serve to throw important light on this subject. J. J. Morse says:
"Andrew Jackson Davis, Hudson Tuttle, and other writers, if I correctly
understand them, claim that mediumship is a constitutional condition,
and depends upon nervous adaptation, i.e., 'sensitiveness' and the
quickening of the subjective (psychical) faculties; and, personally, my
own firm conviction is that there is nothing dangerous in mediumship.
The mere dabbling in mediumship, as either the means of a new sensation,
or for the gratification of personal vanity, is to be thoroughly
deprecated, as a perversion of some of the most wonderful possibilities
of our natures; while the prosecution of mediumship, or anything else,
to the detriment of mind, nerves, or health, in any direction, is a sin
against oneself, and will inevitably call down the resultant penalties
of physical and mental deterioration. I have many times advised
inquirers who wished to know how to develop mediumship, unless they
desired to do so for serious use, and within proper limits, not to seek
its development at all. And in cases where I could see it would prove
personally detrimental, I have strongly advised the inquirer to let the
matter entirely alone."

Wallis says: "Very much depends upon the objects entertained by the
medium and the sitters, as also upon the character and intentions of the
spirit who seeks to manifest his presence; but, on general lines, where
people of average intelligence and rectitude seek communion with those
they have known and esteemed, or loved, the results are almost
invariably beneficial. There is every reason why this should be so if
the common-sense precautions are observed of keeping a level head,
exercising patience, exhibiting unselfishness and sincerity, and
desiring good spiritual counsel and fellowship."

A. Morton says: "Elevated spirits do not require mediums to surrender
their reason; on the contrary, they advise that every new thought should
be tested in the crucible of reason, and that it be rejected if not in
accordance therewith; but the control of domineering spirits, claiming
the name of celebrities, who present unreasonable theories, and in a
dictatorial 'thus saith the spirit' manner, demanding unquestioning
compliance with their commands, must be rejected by all mediums as
debasing and inconsistent with self respect. Any associations or
concessions which have a tendency to lower the spiritual standard must
be carefully avoided, for there is no growth in any relations which can
only be maintained by the sacrifice of self-respect and self-justice."


Rational Mediumship.

Wallis says: "The rational course for mediums and inquirers to follow is
assuredly that of avoiding the extremes alike of credulity and sceptical
incredulity, by letting the spirits do their best and then collating the
facts observed and drawing conclusions. Care, patience, and perseverance
will save both mediums and inquirers from many misconceptions and enable
them to avoid the errors of others. Above all, mediums should observe
their own feelings, study their own experiences, try to understand and
co-operate with the spirits, but never yield servile or slavish service,
nor permit themselves to be swayed by flattery nor dominated by any
spirit (in the circle or on the spirit side) who claims obedience, poses
as an 'authority,' or refuses to recognize the rights of others. No
medium should remain ignorant, or refrain from giving effect to his (or
her) natural desire for knowledge and self-improvement under the
erroneous idea that he does not need to think, study, or learn, because
he is a medium; and that the spirits will provide and teach through him
all that is required. On the other hand, while thoughtfully observant of
favorable conditions, and intelligent in self-study and culture, the
medium should avoid 'getting up' certain subjects, or thinking along
certain lines with the purpose and expectation that such information
will be employed while under control. Such action, proceeding from a
wrong motive, cannot fail to injure the psychic relations between the
spirit and the medium, and will render the work of control doubly hard,
because such thoughts will have to be cleared away before those of the
spirit can be transferred to, and have free course through, the medium."


The "Home Circle."

Mediums are born or made. That is to say, many persons are born with the
gift of mediumship, while others, lacking this natural power, are able
to develop the power by practice and gradual unfoldment. Some of the
world's best mediums have been developed, while others in the same class
have been born with the gift. At the same time, it must be remembered
that there is a wide range of power existing between different
individual mediums of both of these classes. In the opinion of the
present writer, perhaps the very best way of developing mediumistic
powers is that of actually participating in "circle work." The wonderful
results of earlier spiritualism in America and in Europe were
undoubtedly due to the casual and general practice of holding "home
circles." These home circles were the nursery of some of the world's
greatest mediums. Here the born medium was made aware of his or her
natural powers; and, likewise, here others were enabled to gradually
unfold and develop their latent mediumistic power.


The Cure for Fraudulent Mediumship.

At the present time we have too few mediums, and this fact is
attributable largely to the gradual discontinuance of the home circles.
Present time folks are too fond of having everything worked out and
presented to them, and they flock to the sensational public
demonstrations, some of which are undoubtedly "faked" in order to meet
the public demand for sensational features; and at the same time the
honest, careful, conscientious mediums are often overlooked, and the
home circles almost unknown. Many so-called investigators of
spiritualism are feverishly anxious to "see something," and are
impatient and the comparatively slow order of developments at the home
circle or at the careful mediumistic circles. Many earnest spiritualists
lament the present tendency, and predict that in time there will be an
almost complete dearth of honest, careful mediums, owing to the demand
for "quick action" and the temptation to furnish fraudulent counterfeits
of the genuine phenomena resulting from this feverish public demand.


Warning to Young Mediums.

Wallis says concerning this point: "After a time, as the development
progresses, the medium and his spirit friends may be strong enough to
undertake public work without the assistance and protection of a circle,
in the same manner as did D. Home, Slade, Eglinton, and other noted
public mediums; but they should be in no hurry about doing so, and they
need to be very self-possessed and level-headed to hold their own
against the 'phenomena hunters' on the one side (who sap the very life
of the sensitive), and the know-all, conceited sceptics on the other
side (who freeze up all the psychic conditions), and before whom it is
worse than foolish to cast these pearls of great price.

"The lot of the public 'physical,' 'test,' and 'clairvoyant' medium is
not to be envied or lightly chosen. Such sensitives frequently suffer a
martyrdom that none but sensitives can realize. What with foolish
flatterers; the sitters who are never content, but cry 'give, give,
give;' the injudicious friends, who seeing the exhaustion of the
worn-out mediums, in mistaken sympathy urge them to take stimulants
(instead of securing them rest and change of surroundings), they have a
hard road to travel, and our sincerest sympathy goes out to them all. We
plead for them. We bespeak kindly and human consideration. Too
frequently they are tried and condemned unheard. They are expected to
prove that they are NOT frauds, instead of, as in other cases, being
accepted as reputable people. So much has this been the case that some
mediums of unquestioned power have retired into private life and
business pursuits, where they meet with the respect and recognition
which were denied them while they were public workers in the ranks of
spiritualism.

"Let us not be misunderstood. In saying this we are not apologizing for,
or palliating fraud or wrong doing, but merely asking for fair and
considerate treatment--not hasty, unreasoning condemnation. While it is
true that mediumship has many compensations, and the medium who takes
pleasure in his work has many pleasant experiences, it is also true that
the professional medium is too frequently subjected to treatment which
makes his task more difficult and thankless than it need be. The kindly
and appreciative treatment which he receives from some sitters is a
welcome stimulus, and affords good conditions for the spirits, who are
thus enabled to operate to the best advantage."




