PART VII

MEDIUMISTIC CONDITIONS


Mediumistic phenomena, i.e., the phenomena by and through which spirits
manifest their presence and demonstrate their power, may be broadly
classified under two heads, as follows, (1) physical phenomena, and (2)
mental phenomena.


Physical Phenomena.

PHYSICAL PHENOMENA cover a wide range of mediumistic manifestations,
among which are movements of tables, the production of "raps," the
manifestation of spirit lights, freedom from the effects of fire, the
passage of matter through matter, direct writing upon paper or upon
slates, direct voices, levitation of the medium, spirit photographs, and
the production of the materialized form of the spirit. While in rare
cases the spirits may manifest these forms of physical phenomena without
the assistance of the medium and the circle, nevertheless as a rule such
phenomena are produced by the spirits only through the assistance of a
medium, and usually only when there is gathered together a circle.


"Psychic Force."

Various explanations of the power employed by the spirits, assisted by
the medium and by the circle, have been offered by the scientific
investigators of the subject. The most generally accepted theory of the
western scientists is that the spirits employ what is called the
"psychic force" of the medium, often assisted by that drawn from the
circle and focused in the medium. The medium is regarded as a psychic
storage battery which is freely drawn upon by the manifesting spirit.
The degree and character of the manifestations are determined largely by
the peculiar quality of the psychic force, the capabilities of the
medium, the knowledge and powers of the spirits, and the influence of
the sitters.


Human Magnetism.

Dr. Dean Clarke says: "Human magnetism, or nerve aura, is probably the
most sublimated form of ethereal matter, hence nearest in refinement to
spirit substance, and therefore spirits use it as the vehicle of their
vibrating forces. Those persons who have an excess of magnetism, of the
proper quality to unite with both the psychic force of spirits and the
forces inherent in natural objects, and thus form an electro-magnetic
connection of spirits with the objects they wish to act upon, are the
persons chosen by the spirits for physical mediums. The mind and brain
of the medium are not often nor necessarily controlled, and only his
magnetism and psychic forces are used, through which the spirits
transmit the vibrations of their own power to mechanically produce
concussions, or movements of material objects."


"Zoether."

Hudson Tuttle (writing under control) gives the following statement of a
spirit concerning the manner in which physical phenomena are produced:
"Zoether (psychic force) emanating from the medium charges the object to
be moved, and a band of spirits directs a current of their own zoethic
emanation in the direction they desire the article to move, and it
passes along the current thus produced. The charging of the object by
the medium is necessary in order that it may be in a state of vibration
harmonious to the spirit current. If this current be directed against
the table or other charged body, raps or concussions are produced, as a
positive and negative relation exists between the spirits and the
medium's zoether. One spirit alone cannot produce physical
manifestations. If one purports to communicate, assistance will be
rendered by many others, who combine their influence."


"Prana."

The orientals account for physical mediumistic phenomena in a similar
way, though their terms are different. Instead of speaking of zoether,
or psychic force, they always employ the term "prana." In the oriental
philosophies "prana" is explained as a subtle form of energy permeating
the universe, but manifesting in a special form in the organism of the
human being. This subtle force, or prana, is held to be capable of being
transmitted from one organism to another, and is held to be the
energizing power by means of which many forms of occult or magic
phenomena are produced. Prana is very much akin to the "human magnetism"
of the western occultists, and the properties attributed to the latter
are really those which the orientals for centuries past have held to be
among the essential properties of prana; so, at the last, there is found
to be a practical agreement here between the oriental and the western
schools of occultism, respectively, in spite of their differing
terminology.


Mental Phenomena.

MENTAL PHENOMENA cover another wide range of mediumistic phenomena,
among which may be mentioned the following, viz., involuntary or
automatic writing and drawing, writing by means of the planchette or
"ouija" board or similar mechanical aid to writing, clairvoyant
perception of spirits, clairaudient hearing of spirit voices, prophetic
utterances of spirits, impersonating and inspirational control of the
medium. Mediums are frequently so thoroughly "under the influence or
control," especially in private circle seances, that they seem to have
been transformed into another personality. Sometimes the medium through
which the spirit is manifesting will have his facial appearance changed
so completely that persons present will recognize in the changed
appearance the looks of the spirit as known when it was in earth life.


The Value of Phenomena.

The chief value of physical mediumistic manifestations is not, as
generally supposed, that of affording entertainment or food for thought
for those witnessing them, but rather that of affording proof of the
possibility of spirit communication, particularly when spirit identity
is established through the manifestation of the phenomena. A writer
says of this class of phenomena: "A good psychographic medium will
usually obtain writing between closed slates, which may be brought by
the investigator, who can insist upon their not leaving his sight, and
not even leaving his hand. We have obtained writing on paper that we had
previously marked, which was then covered by our own hand, and a
friend's and was untouched by the medium. On another occasion, a slate
which we had personally cleaned was laid on the floor (fully six feet
from the medium) with a small piece of pencil under it (in broad
daylight), and on taking it up shortly afterwards there was found
written on the under side a long message of a private nature from a
deceased friend, of whom we were not thinking. Such phenomena as these
are still good and impressive, they cannot be counterfeited under like
conditions, and even when no proof of identity is given in connection
with the writings, they point so distinctly to the action of a discrete,
disembodied intelligence as to compel the recognition of their spiritual
origin. The evidential utility of physical phenomena lies in their being
inimitable by fraud. Imitations can of course be made which might
satisfy the credible and the gullible, but the conditions for testing
the phenomena we have specially referred to are so simple that no
rational investigator need be deceived; first, to be sure that the
slate, paper, or panel to be used is perfectly blank; second, that it
does not leave the hand of the inquirer, or if it does, that it is
marked in such a way that there can be no doubt of its identification
when it is returned to him; and thirdly (with paintings), to observe if
the paint be wet, and note the time occupied in their production."


Trance Condition Not Essential.

Many persons are under the impression that it is necessary for a medium
to go into the trance condition in order to manifest physical
mediumistic phenomena, but such is not the case. While many mediums do
lapse into the trance conditions at such time, it is equally true that
many others do not do so. Some of the very best mediums produce some of
the most striking manifestations while in a perfectly normal, waking
condition. A writer says of a well-known medium: "She constantly
receives evidences of the presence of her spirit friends while she is
perfectly normal. We have heard rappings and witnessed movements of
physical objects in her presence, while holding friendly conversation
with her, when we have been in a good light. Frequently, at meal times,
the spirits announce their presence by raps, and respond to the
salutations and questions of their medium and other members of the
family."

Professor Loveland says: "Many of the best mediums in the world were
never entranced in the sense of being in an unconscious sleep. And it is
doubted whether that condition is desirable. The Fox girls, and most, if
not all of the original rapping mediums, were never in the deep sleep
trance. It is not necessary for any of the physical manifestations, and
that includes a very large percentage of all the spirit phenomena. The
rappings, tippings, movings, slate writings, automatic writings,
paintings, telegraphing, voices, materializing, etc., can all occur
without the sleep trance, the reason for which is very apparent, as in
the production of such phenomena the spirits simply use the surplus
radiated nerve-force of the medium."


Scientific Reports on Phenomena.

Sir William Crookes, in speaking of D. D. Home and Euspasia Paladino,
said: "Most, if not all, of the occurrences with Euspasia seem to have
taken place when she was in a trance, and the more complete the trance
the more striking the phenomena. This was not always so with Home.
Certainly the two most striking things I ever saw with him, the fire
test and the visible forms, were to be observed while he was entranced,
but it was not always easy to tell when he was in that state, for he
spoke and moved about almost as if he were in his normal condition; the
chief differences being that his actions were more deliberate, and his
manner and expressions more solemn, and he always spoke of himself in
the third person, as 'Dan.' When he was not in a trance we frequently
had movements of objects in different parts of the room, with visible
hands carrying flowers about and playing the accordion. On one occasion
I was asked by Home to look at the accordion as it was playing in the
semi-darkness beneath the table. I saw a delicate looking female hand
holding it by the handle, and the keys at the lower end rising and
falling as if fingers were playing on them, although I could not see
them. So lifelike was the hand that at first I said it was my
sister-in-law's, but was assured by all present that both her hands were
on the table, a fact which I then verified for myself."


Phenomena Without Darkness.

"Home always refused to sit in the dark. He said that, with firmness and
perseverance, the phenomena could be got just as well in the light, and
even if some of the things were not so strong, the evidence of one's
eyesight was worth making same sacrifices for. In almost all the seances
I had with Home there was plenty of light to see all that occurred, and
not only to enable me to write down notes of what was taking place, but
to read my notes without difficulty. Home was very anxious to let
everyone present be satisfied that he was not doing any of the things
himself--too anxious, I sometimes thought, for frequently he would
interfere with the progress and development of what was going on by
insisting that some sceptic or other should come around and take hold of
his hands and feet to be sure he was not doing anything himself. At
times, he would push his chair back and move right away from the table
when things were moving on it, and ask those furthest from him to come
round and satisfy themselves that he had nothing to do with the
movements. I used frequently to beg him to be quiet, knowing that, if he
would not move about in his eagerness to convince us of his genuineness,
the strength of the phenomena would probably increase to such a degree
that no further evidence would be needed that their production was
beyond the powers of the medium.


Test Conditions.

"During the whole of my knowledge of D. D. Home, extending for several
years, I never once saw the slightest occurrence that would make me
suspicious that he was attempting to play tricks. He was scrupulously
sensitive on this point, and never felt hurt at anyone taking
precautions against deception. He sometimes, in the early days of our
acquaintance, used to say to me before a seance, 'Now, William, I want
you to act as if I were a recognized conjurer, and was going to cheat
you and play all the tricks I could. Take every precaution you can
devise against me, and move about and look under the table or where else
you like. Don't consider my feelings. I shall not be offended. I know
that the more carefully I am tested the more convinced will everyone be
that these abnormal occurrences are not of my own doings.' Latterly, I
used jokingly to say to him, 'Let us sit round the fire and have a quiet
chat, and see if our friends are here and will do anything for us. We
won't have any tests or precautions.' On these occasions, when only my
family were present with him, some of the most convincing phenomena took
place."


Is Darkness Necessary?

From the above it is seen that not only is the trance condition not
absolutely necessary for the production of striking mediumistic
phenomena, but that, also, there is no absolute necessity for the
condition of darkness to be maintained as an essential feature of such
phenomena. While many mediums insist upon the condition of darkness at
seances, it is thought by some careful thinkers that this arises from
the fact that such mediums have been accustomed to such conditions from
their earliest days of mediumship, and have grown to believe that the
same are absolutely necessary. It is thought that if such mediums would
begin over again, practicing in full light in the company of a few
sympathetic friends, they would before long grow accustomed to the new
conditions, and would then be able to reproduce all of their most
important phenomena in full light. Using the terms of modern psychology,
it would seem that such mediums are the victims of their own
"auto-suggestion," and fixed beliefs; and, as all students of the
subject well know, the mental states of the medium have a most important
bearing of the quality of the phenomena produced, and form a very
important factor of the conditions governing the success of the seance.


Developing Circles.

The person who is developing mediumship will do well to surround himself
with persons of a certain type of psychical power, and to form circles
of such persons. Such persons are invaluable in constituting a
"developing circle." Such persons need not be mediumistic themselves,
nor are they required to actually do anything. Instead, their service is
that of being present as psychical reservoirs of force upon which the
spirits can draw for manifesting power. The medium, being sensitive to
helpful influences, and the reverse, will recognize such persons by the
congenial and harmonious influence they exercise upon him; and he will
do well to encourage such persons to sit in his developing circles.


Impersonating Mediumship.

What is known as "impersonating mediumship" occurs where the medium is
so completely under the control of the manifesting spirit that he will
exhibit, often in a marvelously accurate manner, the personal
characteristics and mannerisms of the spirit, and which are readily
recognized as such by the spirit's surviving friends in earth-life.
Sometimes the medium will actually re-enact the dying moments of the
controlling spirit. In many cases such impersonations have been so
nearly photographically and phonographically correct that they have
afforded the most convincing proof to investigators, and in other cases
have been a great consolation to relatives of the spirit who have been
thus assured that their loved one was still in actual existence on a
higher plane of being. These results, however, are possible only when a
very close rapport condition has been established between the spirit and
the medium. In cases in which such a close rapport condition is
obtained, and a high degree of harmony developed, the spirit will be
able to positively establish his identity by causing the medium to utter
his exact words, and to give names, dates, and close details of
incidents occurring in his earth life, and often to employ his exact set
phrases and verbal tricks of speech, so as to bring to the consciousness
of the sitters the realization that they are in the actual presence of
the decarnate spirit friend.


The Proper Mental Condition.

The young medium, however, should beware against striving too hard to be
the instrument of the phenomena of spirit impersonation. For a too
intense anxiety, and desire to please sitters, frequently tends to
produce a cloudy mental state in which the ideas in the mind of the
medium blend with the spirit communication, and thus produces a most
unsatisfactory result, and one which is apt to confuse the minds of the
sitters and sometimes actual arouse suspicion that the medium is trying
to practice deception. For this reason the young medium should not seek
the attendance of persons desiring "test seances;" at least, such should
be his course until he has learned not to be carried away with his
desire to please or to satisfy such persons attending his circles. He
should endeavor to cultivate a mental condition of calmness, and a
determination not to influence or to interfere with the spirit
communications in any way whatsoever, but, instead, to allow himself to
become a passive instrument for the communication. The medium should
remember that he is not a dealer in merchandise "warranted to please,"
but is, instead, a medium of communication between the spirit and those
still in earth-life.


Demand Proof of Spirit Identity.

A certain degree of care and caution, and the employment of honest
powers of discrimination, is necessary on the part of the sitters in
cases of spirit impersonation. This not because of any lack of honesty
on the part of the medium, but because of the habit of a mischievous
class of dwellers on the planes of spirit life to falsely impersonate
other spirits as such seances. As all investigators of the subject know
very well, it is not an infrequent thing for such mischievous and
meddlesome spirits to endeavor to pass themselves off as the relative or
friends of those in the circle, or even to falsely impersonate some
great historical personages. In such cases the sitters should insist
upon the spirit positively identifying himself, just as they would in
case of doubt regarding a person speaking to them over the telephone and
claiming to be such-and-such a person. And the proof demanded should be
similar to that which would be sought from the suspected telephone
talker. An honest spirit communicator does not object to such demands,
and is only too ready to do his best to furnish the right kind of proofs
concerning his identity.


The "Trance Condition."

The psychic condition frequently attending the demonstration of
mediumship powers is usually spoken of as a "trance," but this term is
quite misleading, for it carries with it the suggestion of an entire
loss of consciousness and of a condition of more or less deep sleep. But
the mediumistic trance is seldom a deep sleep condition. Instead, it is
the condition similar to that of a profound "day dream," in which the
person is fully awake but in which the consciousness has been almost
entirely taken off the sights and sounds of the outside world. As a
writer has well said: "What is called 'trance mediumship' is seldom of
the nature of the deep sleep of entire unconsciousness. It is more
frequently the suspension of the ordinary consciousness of external
surroundings, a temporary oblivion on the outer plane--a semi-conscious
state, in fact--in which the subject does not retain the volitional
ability to employ his thinking powers, the latter having been 'switched
off,' so to speak, and the subject responds to the will of the spirit
control."


Spirit Inspiration.

Wallis says, concerning the nature of a certain phase of spirit control:
"In the case of speaking mediumship, where general and philosophical
ideas are to be transmitted, the control is of a different order from
that exercised for test manifestations. It is more frequently of the
nature of 'suggestion.' The spirit suggestionist suggests to the medium
a certain train of ideas, and then stimulates the brain and the organs
of expression to do the work of dressing up the thoughts and giving them
utterance. Unless the subject is a scientific or a biographical one, in
which specific terms are required and accurate data are to be imparted,
the relationship between the 'inspired' speaker and the spirit control
partakes more of the character of the engineer who feeds the fire and
directs the movements of his engine, while the machine does the work,
than it does of the actual voicing of the exact words, embodying in a
full and complete fashion the ideas the spirit wishes to have expressed.


Spirit Suggestion.

"At first the operator may succeed by very imperfectly stimulating the
brain of the sensitive and causing the cerebration and expression of his
thoughts. The utterances may bear but a slight resemblance to what the
spirit intended to express. The vocabulary is that of the medium, and
the form in which the speech is cast of necessity partakes of the mold
familiar to the sensitive--but, by continued close association and
frequent control of the medium, the operator gains experience which
enables him to exert a more decided influence; and the sensitive,
becoming attuned, responds to and expresses the thoughts of the spirit
with greater clearness and precision. Just as those who dwell together
unconsciously approach nearer to each other and acquire a similarity in
their mode of thought and of expressing their ideas (the more dominant
personality impressing itself upon the less positive), so the medium
imperceptibly, and very often unconsciously, acquires facility and
proficiency in thought and elocutionary expression as the result of the
co-operation between himself and his spirit guide."


Psychic Attunement.

Those who have read the above carefully stated opinion, will begin to
see the reason why certain mediums who have attained the greatest
proficiency in certain forms of mediumship, and who have become what are
known as "reliable mediums," almost always have some particular spirit
guide or guides with whom they have become in almost perfect psychic
harmony and attunement. These harmonious spirits are not only enabled to
express themselves with a high degree of clearness and power through
their favorite medium, but are also enabled to assist in the production
of the best rapport conditions between other spirits wishing to
communicate and the said medium. There is a certain amount of spiritual
and psychic co-operation between spirit and medium which is attained
only by practice and continued association, which results in a psychic
attunement between them. The closer and more harmonious the relationship
existing between a spirit and his medium, the thinner is the veil
separating the two planes upon which they dwell.


Automatic Writing.

In that phase of mediumship known as "automatic or inspirational
writing," there is manifested two distinct forms of spirit control of
the organism of the medium. In cases of pure automatic writing the
spirit controls the arm and hand muscles of the medium, and uses them to
write out the message under the direct and absolute control of the mind
and will of the spirit. Cases have been known in which both hands of the
medium have been so used by the spirit control, each hand writing a
distinct and separate message, and both being performed without any
consciousness of the nature of the message on the part of the medium. In
some cases of automatic writing the medium was engaged in thought about
other subjects, or even in reading or study from a book. This is true
not only in cases of automatic writing in which the hand is directly
employed, but also in those in which some mechanical device such as the
planchette or the ouija board intervenes.


Inspirational Writing.

In inspirational writing, on the other hand, the spirit impresses the
message upon the mind of the medium, either as a whole, or else sentence
by sentence or even word by word--in all of such cases, be it noted, the
medium is aware of the substance of what he is about to write, either
the word, the sentence, or perhaps the entire message. In such cases, of
course, the medium retains control of his writing muscles and their
action, and the spirit control is merely a phase of higher telepathy, as
it were. When the message is impressed upon the mind of the medium word
by word, or sentence by sentence, the style is of course that of the
spirit exerting the control; but where the entire message is impressed
upon the mind of the medium, the style is usually a blending of that of
the spirit and that of the medium, for the medium is not likely to
remember the literal message as given him, but merely is conscious of
the general purport and meaning thereof, together with a few phrases or
expressions formed by the spirit mind. In such cases, of course, the
personality of the medium enters largely into the message, while in the
case of pure automatic writing the personality of the medium plays no
part whatsoever, and the personality of the spirit is present in its
entirety. This important distinction should be noted and remembered.


Gradual Development of Powers.

Most mediums develop their powers of mediumship gradually, and pass
through a number of stages in their development of power. At first
they may obtain only raps, or possibly the tilting or movement of
tables. Then, very likely, they are moved to write, either
automatically or else inspirationally. Later they experience the
impulse to allow the spirit control to speak through their vocal
organism, but it is seldom that the spirit is able to do this at first
trial, as the medium is not as yet sufficiently sensitized or attuned
to the spirit, and, instead, they can but gurgle, gasp, and make
inarticulate sounds, or else shout, laugh, cry, or sing, and possibly
jabber some strange jargon or unknown tongue, or else simply utter a
series of sounds lacking in definite meaning. Later, the inarticulate
sound is succeeded by definite sentences--perhaps a message, or a
short address. Sometimes the spirit control will endeavor to relate
some of his earth-life experiences, or perhaps even to give an
impersonation manifestation. Often several different spirits strive to
manifest through the developing medium, taking turns as manifestation,
holding the control for only a few minutes and then giving place to
his successor.


Spirit Guides.

As the development proceeds, it will be found that one or two particular
spirits will manifest a greater power than the others, and after
establishing a strong degree of harmony and attunement they will assume
the position of "guides" to the medium, and will accordingly begin to
work in his interests on their side of life, and to accept or reject
other spirits who seek to manifest through their medium. At this stage,
the medium is often sufficiently advanced to be used as the channel for
fuller and more complete manifestations, particularly in the direction
of inspirational speaking. Often the medium in this stage of development
is also able to manifest psychic powers which were formerly beyond his
ability, as for instance psychometry, clairvoyance, etc. Then if his
spirit guides be sufficiently advanced and powerful, and the medium be
sufficiently receptive and harmonious to their influences, they will
educate him to such an extent that he will be able, with their
assistance, to become an instrument for the production of still higher
forms of mediumistic phenomena. But the development is almost always
gradual and proceeds by successive and well-defined steps and stages.


No Loss of Individuality.

In concluding this part of our book, we would call your attention to the
following statements made by writers along the lines of spiritualism in
the leading journals of that school of modern thought. The first writer
says: "There is no need for the medium to decline to be influenced or
controlled, by spirit friends for fear of losing his 'individuality,'
any more than he should insist upon asserting his freedom and refuse the
aid of tutors, lest they should infringe upon his sacred
'individuality.' What are called the unconscious phases of mediumship
generally lead up to loving co-operation with the wise and kindly souls
of the higher life in efforts to establish the fellowship of man; to
bring knowledge where ignorance now reigns; to banish the darkness by
the light of that spiritual communion which shall yet be a blessing to
the race; and reliance upon higher powers in or out of the body does not
mean that we sacrifice our own abilities, nor do we thus become exempt
from responsibility. Quite the reverse. It is the arrogance of
individualism against which we protest. In fact, there is no abiding
strength of purpose apart from the dependence every well-ordered mind
should accord to the Infinite Light and Wisdom and the beneficial
services which His wise and loving ministering spirits can render to us
if we are desirous and responsive."


Mediumship Beneficial.

A second writer says: "There is no reason why the reactive consequences
of frequent control by enlightened and earnest spirits, even in the case
of the 'trance' medium, should not prove extremely beneficial to the
sensitive, and this, we believe, has been the case with many of the
speakers in the spiritualistic movement. Where the medium is
inspirational and ready to respond to the thought impulsations of the
control, it stands to reason that the transmitted ideas, and the
stimulation of the thought-faculties caused by the transference and
expression of the spirits' opinions, will not be lost to the medium. 'If
you will take one step we can more easily help you to take a second than
we could compel you to take the first if you were unprepared,' said a
spirit teacher to Mrs. Emma Hardinge Britten, and there need be no loss
of dignity or individuality, no injury to body or mind, but a gain of
strength and spiritual vigor, education of mind and stimulation of moral
purpose, by intelligent co-operation and temporary surrender on the
part of the medium to wise and loving spirit helpers and teachers."


Mediumship and The Bible.

A third writer, Rev. H. E. Haweis, says in connection with the relation
of spiritualism with religion: "People now believe in the Bible because
of spiritualism; they do not believe in spiritualism because of the
Bible. Take up your Bible and you will find that there is not a single
phenomenon which is recorded there which does not occur at seances
today. Whether it be lights, sounds, the shaking of the house, the
coming through closed doors, the mighty rushing winds, levitation,
automatic writing, the speaking in tongues, we are acquainted with all
these phenomena; they occur every day in London as well as in the Acts
of the Apostles. It is incontestable that such things do occur, that in
the main the phenomena of spiritualism are reliable, and happen over and
over again, under test conditions, in the presence of witnesses; and
that similar phenomena are recorded in the Bible, which is written for
our learning. It is not an opinion, not a theory, but a fact. There is
chapter and verse for it, and this is what has rehabilitated the Bible.
The clergy ought to be very grateful to spiritualism for this, for they
could not have done it themselves. They tried, but they failed."




