PART IV

CLAIRVOYANCE AND KINDRED PHENOMENA


A very large and very interesting class of occult or psychic phenomena
is that known under the very general classification of "Clairvoyance,"
which term we have thought it advisable to employ in this sense in this
book, notwithstanding the technical objections urged by some against
such a general usage. The term "Clairvoyance" really means "clear
seeing," or "clear sight," but its special meaning, established by long
usage, is "A power of discerning objects not perceptible to the normal
senses." When it comes to the technical use of the term by students and
teachers of psychic research and occultism, however, there is found a
confused meaning of the term, some employing it in one sense, and others
in another one. Accordingly, it is perhaps as well to explain the
particular usage adopted and followed in this book.


Clairvoyance Defined.

The English Society for Psychical Research, in its glossary, defines the
term as follows: "The faculty or act of perceiving, as though visually,
with some coincidental truth, some distant scene; it is used sometimes,
but hardly properly, for transcendental vision, or the perception of
beings regarded as on another plane of existence." A distinguished
investigator along psychic lines, in one of her reports to the English
Society for Psychical Research, has given the following definition of
this term as employed by her in her reports, viz., "The word
'clairvoyant' is often used very loosely, and with widely different
meanings. I denote by it a faculty of acquiring supernormally, BUT NOT
BY READING THE MINDS OF PERSONS PRESENT, a knowledge of facts such as we
normally acquire by the use of our senses. I do not limit it to
knowledge that would normally be acquired by the sense of sight, nor do
I limit it to a knowledge of present facts. A similar knowledge of the
past, and if necessary, of future events, may be included. On the other
hand, I exclude the mere faculty of seeing apparitions, which is
sometimes called clairvoyance."

The last stated definition agrees almost perfectly with the views of the
writer of the present book, and the term "Clairvoyance" is used here in
the particular sense indicated by such definition. The student of this
book, therefore, is asked to distinguish Clairvoyance, on the one hand,
from the phenomena of Telepathy or Thought Transference, and, on the
other hand, from the phenomena of communication with entities on other
planes of existence, including the perception of apparitions.


The Phenomena of Clairvoyance.

The phenomena of Clairvoyance may be subdivided (a) according to methods
employed, and also (b) according to general distinctions. The said
classifications follow:

CLASSIFICATION ACCORDING TO METHODS. The classification of Clairvoyant
Phenomena according to methods employed, proceeds as follows: (1)
PSYCHOMETRY, in which the clairvoyant becomes en rapport through the
medium of some physical object connected with the person or scene which
is the object of the en rapport connection; (2) CRYSTAL GAZING, etc., in
which the en rapport connection is established by means of a crystal,
magic mirror, etc., into which the clairvoyant gazes; (3) DIRECT
CLAIRVOYANCE, in which the clairvoyant directly establishes the en
rapport connection by means of raising his or her psychic vibrations so
as to become "in tune" with the finer vibrations of Nature, without the
aid of physical objects.


Classification According to General Distinctions.

The classification of Clairvoyant Phenomena according to general
distinctions, proceeds as follows: (1) PRESENT CLAIRVOYANCE, in which
the objects perceived by the clairvoyant are present in Space and Time,
although invisible to normal sight; (2) SPACE CLAIRVOYANCE, in which the
clairvoyant vision includes objects and scenes removed in space from the
immediate normal perception of the clairvoyant; (3) TIME CLAIRVOYANCE,
in which the clairvoyant perceives objects or scenes removed from him in
past time, or future time.

In order that the student may obtain a comprehensive understanding of
the phenomena of Clairvoyance, we have thought it well to give you a
brief, general outline of the particular phenomena fitting into these
several classes, and to give you, also, a general idea of the principal
methods employed to obtain the phenomenal manifestations in question.
We begin by calling your attention to the three general classes of
method employed to obtain the manifestation of clairvoyant phenomena,
namely: Psychometry, Crystal Gazing, and Clairvoyant Psychic States,
respectively.


Psychometry.

In Psychometry, the clairvoyant establishes the en rapport connection
with objects, persons or scenes, removed in space or in time, by means
of some physical object associated with the distant object, person or
scene; for instance, the physical objects may be a piece of clothing, a
bit of stone, a coin, a bit of jewelry, etc., which has been closely
associated with that which the clairvoyant desires to sense psychically.
The distinctive feature of this class of clairvoyant phenomena is this
CONNECTING LINK of physical objects. A writer has cleverly compared this
connecting link with the bit of clothing which the keen-scented
bloodhound is given to sniff in order that he may then discover by scent
the person sought, the latter having previously worn the bit of clothing
presented to the dog's sense of smell.


The "Psychic Scent."

Occultists have elaborated a technical theory to account for the
phenomena of Psychometry, or rather to account for the action of the
"connecting link" of the physical object employed to establish the
connection between clairvoyant and distant object, person, or scene. But
we do not think it advisable to enter into a discussion of these
elaborate, technical theories, which are apt to confuse the beginner,
and to distract his attention from the important facts of the case. We
think it is sufficient to say that the "connecting link," or physical
object, seems to carry along with it, in its inner substance or nature,
the vibrations of its past environment; and that the clairvoyant, coming
into receptive contact with such vibrations, is enabled with comparative
ease to follow up the psychic "scent" until he establishes clairvoyant
en rapport connection with the distant object, person, or scene
associated with the physical object. When it is remembered that the
physical "scent" of anything is merely a matter of the detection of
certain vibrations, the illustration is seen to be not so very far out
of the way after all.


Magnetic Affinity.

A somewhat celebrated investigator of psychic and occult phenomena has
said concerning this phases of Clairvoyance: "The untrained clairvoyant
usually cannot find any particular astral picture when it is wanted,
without some special link to put him en rapport with the subject
required. Psychometry is an instance in point. It seems as though there
were a sort of magnetic attachment or affinity between any particle of
matter and the record which contains its history--an affinity which
enables it to act as a kind of conductor between that record and the
faculties of anyone who can read it. For instance, I once brought from
Stonehenge a tiny fragment of stone, not larger than a pin's head, and
on putting this into an envelope and handing it to a psychometrist who
had no idea what it was, she at once began to describe that wonderful
ruin and the desolate country surrounding it, and then went on to
picture vividly what were evidently scenes from its early history,
showing that the infinitesimal fragment had been sufficient to put her
into communication with the records connected with the spot from which
it came. The scenes through which we pass in the course of our life seem
to act in the same way upon the cells of our brain as did the history of
Stonehenge upon that particle of stone. They establish a connection with
those cells by means of which our mind is put en rapport with that
particular portion of the records, and so we 'remember' what we have
seen."


Distant En Rapport.

One of the most familiar instances of the production of clairvoyant
phenomena by means of Psychometry is that illustrated in the above
quotation, namely the production of the en rapport relation with distant
scenes by means of the connecting link of some small object which had at
some time in the past been located at that point. In such cases the
psychometrist usually presses the small object up to his or her head,
and then induces a passive, receptive psychical condition; then, sooner
or later, the clairvoyant experiences a "sensation," or a "dream
picture" of the scene in question. Often, once the picture of the scene
is obtained, the clairvoyant may manifest more marked past-time
clairvoyance, in the direction of running back over the history of the
scene itself. The instance related in the above quotation is a case of
this kind. Similar cases are frequently met with by the investigator
along these lines, in which the clairvoyant is able to give the history
of certain places in ancient Egypt, from the connecting link of a piece
of mummy-cloth; or else to give a picture of certain events in
antediluvian times, from the connecting link of a bit of fossil
substance. The history of Psychometry is filled with remarkable
instances of this kind. Bullets gathered from battlefields also serve
very effectively as such psychometric connecting links. Old furniture,
old pictures, and old jewelry also are common objects serving to produce
wonderful phenomena of this kind. In fact, any physical object having
past-time or far-distant space connections may be employed effectively
in such experiments.


Psychic Underground Exploration.

Psychometry is frequently employed to describe underground or "mine"
conditions existing at the present time at the particular place from
which a particular piece of ore or mineral has been taken, which ore or
mineral has been handed the psychometrist to be used as the connecting
link. As many practical miners know from actual experience, many
valuable coal, zinc, lead, silver and gold mines have been successfully
located in this way. In such cases the psychometrist has been able to
follow up the psychic "scent" given by the piece of mineral, and thus to
describe the strata or veins of the mineral lying underground and
unopened by the pick or drill.


Psychic Detective Work.

Many cases are recorded by the investigators in which the psychometrist
is able to "sense" a particular locality, a house, a room, a place of
business, for instance, by means of the connecting link afforded by some
physical object formerly associated with the said location. Some writers
have called this class of psychometric phenomena "psychic spying" or
"psychic detective work." One writer records a case in which he gave to
a young psychometrist a penholder from the office of a lawyer, the
latter being located about eight hundred miles away; the psychometrist
then gave a perfect picture of the interior of the far-distant lawyer's
office, the scene across the street visible from the office window, and
certain events which were happening in the office and on the street at
that particular time--all of which report was verified in detail by
subsequent careful inquiry.


How to Psychometrize.

The following general remarks concerning Psychometry, given by a writer
on the subject, will be found interesting and instructive. The writer
says: "There are no special directions to be given the student in
psychometry. All that can be done is to suggest that each person should
try the experiments for himself, in order to find out whether he has, or
has not the psychometric power in some degree of development. He may be
able to develop his psychometric powers by the general methods given for
psychic development; but, in any event, he will find that actual
practice and experiment will do much for him in the direction of
experiment. Let the student take strange objects, and, sitting in a
quiet room with the object held to his forehead, endeavor to shut out
all thoughts coming from the outside world, and forget all his personal
affairs. In a short time, if the conditions be right, he will begin to
have flashes of scenes associated with the history of the object in
question. At first these impressions may be somewhat disconnected and
more or less confused, but before long there will be noticed a clearing
away of the scene, and the mental picture will become quite plain.
Practice will develop the power. The student should practice only when
alone or when in the presence of some sympathetic friend or friends. He
should always avoid discordant and inharmonious company while practicing
his psychic power. Many of the best psychometrists keep their physical
eyes closed when practicing this power, thus allowing the inner senses
to function without distraction from the outer senses.


Developing Psychometry.

"You have doubtless heard of the sensing of sealed letters spoken of as
pure clairvoyance. But this phase of phenomena properly belongs to the
realm of Psychometry. Letters frequently prove to be very excellent
connecting links in psychometric experiments. I advise the student to
begin with old letters. He will be surprised to discover how readily he
will begin to receive psychic impressions from the letters--either from
the person who wrote them, or from the place in which they were written,
or from some one connected with their subsequent history. One of the
most interesting experiments I ever witnessed in Psychometry was that in
which a letter that had been forwarded from place to place, until it had
gone completely around the globe, was psychometrized by a young Hindu
maid. Although ignorant of the outside world of foreign lands, the young
women was able to picture the people and scenery of every part of the
globe in which the letter had traveled. Her report was really an
interesting 'travelogue' of a trip around the world, given in tabloid
form. The student may obtain some interesting results in
psychometrizing old letters--but let him always be conscientious about
it, and be careful to refrain from divulging the secrets that will
become his during the course of these experiments. Let him be honorable
on the psychic plane as well as on the physical plane--more so, rather
than less so, in fact."


Varieties of Psychometry.

Another investigator along these lines gives the following instructive
comments regarding the practice of psychometric power: "Persons of a
highly-strung nervous organization, with large perceptive faculties make
the best psychometrists. Phlegmatic people seldom psychometrize clearly,
and usually lack receptivity to the finer forces. Letters, clothes,
hair, coins, ornaments, or jewels--in fact, almost any article which has
belonged to, or has been worn by, its possessor for any length of time,
will suffice to enable the psychometrist to relate himself to, and
glimpse impressions of, the personal sphere of that individual. Some
psychometrists succeed better with certain kinds of objects than with
others. Metals and minerals are not good 'conductors'--if we may use
that term--to some operators; while they are very satisfactory to
others. In the same way, some psychometrists are very good character
readers, others are very successful in the diagnosis of diseases; some
can read the book of Nature, while to others it is a sealed book, or
nearly so, but they are able to gauge the mental qualifications of their
visitors, while others realize their moral and spiritual states. Again,
some read the Past, and enter into the Present states or condition of
their clients, while others are successful in exercising prophetical
prevision. These differences may be modified, and the boundaries of the
perceptive power may be extended by self-study, experiment, and culture;
but every psychic has his qualifications and his limitations; one will
succeed where another may fail; hence it is well and wise for each one
to discover what he can do best, what sphere he can best occupy, and
then endeavor to fill it.


Psychometric "Getting in Touch."

"A psychometrist may, by holding a letter in his hand, or putting it to
his forehead, be able to perceive and delineate the personal appearance
of the writer thereof, and, in a way, to 'take on' his conditions,
describe his feelings and thoughts to such an extent as to identify
himself with him and to feel, for the time being, as if he, himself,
were the writer; he may even tell what is written in the letter,
although unable to see the writing. Human hair is found by some
psychometrists to give them the best means of coming into touch with
their subjects, and it is said that such hair should be cut from the
head just behind the ears, as close to the scalp as possible. It not
infrequently happens that a psychometrist gets started upon a false
trail, so to speak, and especially so when the inquirer is suspicious,
or where there is a mixture of psychic influences. A fan passed by a
lady to a sitter in the front row at a meeting, and held in the hands of
the latter for a few minutes while awaiting a chance to be handed to the
psychic, has resulted in a blending of vibratory influences which has
caused an imperfect or confused 'reading.' In one case the gentleman who
held the fan said 'I fully recognize the part of the description which
the lady does not admit--it applies to myself quite perfectly.' Hence
the necessity for care in providing articles for psychometrists in a
public meeting. A ring, for instance, which has been in the family for
generations, and handed from one wearer to another in the course of
years, may afford such a blending of psychic vibrations that the
psychometrist may be unable to sense distinctly each distinct stratum of
influence therein.


Psychometric Readings.

"The person who sits for the psychometrist for a 'reading' should not be
antagonistic nor frivolous, neither should he desire special
information, nor concentrate his thought forces upon any given point, as
otherwise he may dominate the psychic and thus mislead him into
perceiving only a reflex of his own hopes or fears. He will do well to
preserve an open mind, and an impartial though sympathetic mental
attitude, and then await results. It is unwise to interrupt, explain, or
question during the time that a delineation is being given, for by so
doing the psychic sphere is disturbed and the thought projections caused
to act like the breezes upon the surface of a lake, producing confused
and distorted appearances. It is best to allow the descriptions to be
given in its entirety before asking questions regarding any of its
details; it is quite possible or probable that the very points upon
which inquiries seem necessary will be more fully elucidated before the
close of the reading. If a special reading, and not a general one is
required--say, for instance, a diagnosis of diseased conditions--a hint
of what is desired at the outset should be sufficient."


Crystal Gazing, Etc.

The second of the three general classes of the methods employed to
obtain the manifestation of clairvoyant phenomena is that known as
Crystal Gazing. In this class of methods the clairvoyant establishes the
en rapport condition by means of a crystal, magic mirror, or similar
object, which serves principally to concentrate the psychic visual
powers to a focus, and thus to enable the psychic to raise his or her
psychic vibrations at that concentrated focused point.


Crystals and Bright Objects.

The use of crystals and other bright objects for this purpose has been
common to occultists and psychics at all times, past and present, and at
all places, oriental or occidental. The earlier races employed shining
pieces of quartz or other clear crystal rock for this purpose. Later
polished metals were used in the same way. The native soothsayers of
barbaric lands employ clear water, glowing embers, or sparks, for this
purpose. In some places the soothsayers hold drops of blood in the
hollow of their hands for divining purposes. Others bore a hole in the
ground, and fill it with water, and then gaze into it. Some tribes use
dark polished stones. A writer on the subject has said: "They stare into
a crystal ball, a cup, a mirror, a blot of ink, a drop of blood, a bowl
of water, a pond, water in a glass bowl, or almost any polished surface,
etc." In fact, it may be said that almost every object capable of
presenting a polished surface has been employed by some race as an aid
to psychic vision. In Europe and America, at the present day, quartz or
glass crystals are so used; but others obtain quite satisfactory
results from the use of watch crystals laid over a black cloth,
preferably a piece of black velvet cloth. Others use highly polished
bits of silver; while others content themselves with the use of a little
pool of black ink lying on the bottom of a small saucer, while others
have cups painted black on the inside, into which is poured water.


The Care of the Crystal.

There is no particular virtue in any particular object used for this
purpose, as such object acts merely to focus the psychic power of the
person, as has been said. Certainly the student should not fall into the
error of supposing that the crystal, or similar object, has any
miraculous or supernatural power whatsoever, it is simply an instrument,
like the microscope or telescope, nothing more or less. But, at the same
time, it must be admitted that there is much truth in the claim of
certain crystal gazers, to the effect that the use of a particular
crystal seems to have the effect of polarizing its molecules so as to
render it a more effective instrument in time. In fact, the phenomenon
seems to bear a close relation to the well known case of a long-used
violin becoming a more perfect instrument, and giving forth richer and
fuller notes than a new instrument. The longer a gazing crystal is used,
especially by the one person, the better does it seem to serve the
purposes of that particular person. Experts in crystal gazing insist
that the crystal gazer should keep his own crystal for his own
particular use, and not allow it to be used indiscriminately,
particularly in the case of strangers or of persons not sympathetic with
psychic subjects. They claim that each crystal becomes polarized
according to the individual character and needs of the person habitually
using it, and that it is unwise to allow others to disturb this quality
in it.


How to Use the Crystal.

The best authorities on the subject of crystal-gazing insist that all
experiments along the said lines should be conducted in a serious,
earnest manner, and that all frivolity or trifling should be avoided if
the best results are wished for. This, of course, is true concerning all
phases of psychic investigation, as all true students of the subject
know. All the authorities agree that the crystal gazer should sit with
the light behind his back, and never in front of him. While an earnest
steady gaze is desirable, there should be no straining of the eyes. As
one writer has said: "Gaze calmly at the crystal, but do not strain your
eyes. Do not try to avoid winking your eyes--there is a difference
between 'gazing' and 'staring,' remember." Some authorities advise that
the crystal gazer should make funnels of his hands, using them as he
would a pair of opera-glasses.


The "Milky Mist."

While some experimenters obtain results almost from the time of the
first trial, others find that it requires a number of sittings before
they begin to obtain even faint results. The psychic picture in the
crystal usually begins by the appearance of a cloudy "milky mist,"
succeeding the former transparent appearance of the crystal. The milky
cloud becomes more dense, and finally there appears in its midst a
faint form, outline, face, or scene of some kind. Some have compared
this gradual emergence of the picture to the gradual development of the
picture of the photographic plate when the latter is subjected to the
action of the developing fluid.


Classes of Psychic Pictures.

An English writer on the subject furnishes the following general
classification of the psychic pictures manifested in the process of
crystal gazing. The said authority might well have added that each and
every form of clairvoyant picturing is possible in crystal gazing; for
crystal gazing is merely one particular form or method of inducing
clairvoyant or psychic vision, and is not a distinct branch of psychic
phenomena in itself. The classification of the English authority,
however, is as follows:

"1. Images of something unconsciously observed. New reproductions,
voluntary or spontaneous, and bringing no fresh knowledge to the mind.

"2. Images of ideas unconsciously acquired from others. Some memory or
imaginative effort which does not come from the gazer's ordinary self.
Revivals of memory. Illustrations of thought.

"3. Images, clairvoyant or prophetic. Pictures giving information as to
something past, present, or future, which the gazer has no other chance
of knowing."


General Directions for Crystal Gazing.

An old English authority on the subject of crystal gazing handed down to
his students a certain set of general directions and rules to govern the
conduct of their experiments. These rules and directions have never
been improved upon by the later writers on the subject, according to the
opinion of the best authorities; and such stand today as perhaps the
simplest and best set of general rules and directions on this important
subject. For this reason we have thought it advisable to include the
same in this chapter, for the guidance of our own students. Here follow
the said general rules and directions:

"What is desired through the regular use of the translucent sphere is to
cultivate a personal degree of clairvoyant power, so that visions of
things or events, past, present, and future, may appear clearly in the
interior vision, or eye of the soul. In the pursuit of this effort only,
the crystal becomes at once a beautiful, interesting and harmless
channel of pleasure and instruction, shorn of dangers, and rendered
conducive to mental development. To the attainment of this desirable
end, attention is asked to the following practical directions, which, if
carefully followed, will lead to success:


Selection of Place, Etc.

"(1) Select a quiet room where you will be entirely undisturbed, taking
care that it is as far as possible free from mirrors, ornaments,
pictures, glaring colors, and the like, which may otherwise distract the
attention. The room should be of comfortable temperature, in accordance
with the time of year, neither hot nor cold. About 60 to 65 degrees
Fahr. is suitable in most cases, though allowance can be made where
necessary for natural differences in the temperaments of various
persons. Thus thin, nervous, delicately organized individuals, and those
of lymphatic and soft, easy-going, passive types, require a slightly
warmer apartment than the more positive class who are known by their
dark eyes, hair and complexion, combined with prominent joints. Should a
fire, or any form of artificial light be necessary, it should be
screened off, so as to prevent the light rays from being reflected in,
or in any other manner directly reaching the crystal. The room should
not be dark, but rather shadowed, or charged with a dull light, somewhat
such as prevails on a cloudy or wet day.


Adjusting the Crystal.

"(2) The crystal should be placed on its stand on a table, or it may
rest on a black velvet cushion, but in either case it should be
partially surrounded by a black silk or similar wrap or screen, so
adjusted as to cut off any undesirable reflection. Before beginning to
experiment, remember that most frequently nothing will be seen on the
first occasion, and possibly not for several sittings; though some
sitters, if strongly gifted with psychic powers in a state of
unconsciousness, and sometimes conscious degree of unfoldment, may be
fortunate enough to obtain good results at the first trial. If,
therefore, nothing is perceived during the first few attempts, do not
despair or become impatient, or imagine that you will never see
anything. There is a royal road to crystal vision, but it is open only
to the combined password of Calmness, Patience, and Perseverance. If at
the first attempt to ride a bicycle, failure ensues, the only way to
learn is to pay attention to the necessary rules, and to persevere daily
until the ability to ride comes naturally. Thus it is with the would-be
seer. Persevere in accordance with these simple directions, and success
will sooner or later crown your efforts.


Time of Sittings.

"(3) Commence by sitting comfortably with the eyes fixed upon the
crystal, not by a fixed stare, but with a steady, calm gaze, for ten
minutes only, on the first occasion. In taking the time it is best to
hang your watch at a distance, where, while the face is clearly visible,
the ticking is rendered inaudible. When the time is up, carefully put
the crystal away in its case, and keep it in a dark place, under lock
and key, allowing no one but yourself to handle it. At the second
sitting, which should be at the same place, in the same position, and at
the same time, you may increase the length of the effort to fifteen
minutes, and continue this period during the next five or six sittings,
after which the time may be gradually increased, but should in no case
exceed one hour. The precise order of repetition is always to be
followed until the experimenter has developed an almost automatic
ability to readily obtain results, when it need no longer be adhered to.


Other Persons Present.

"(4) Any person, or persons, admitted to the room, and allowed to remain
while you sit, should (a) keep absolute silence, and (b) remain seated
at a distance from you. When you have developed your latent powers,
questions may, of course, be put to you by one of those present, but
even then in a very gentle, or low and slow tone of voice; never
suddenly, or in a forceful manner.


Crystalline Vision.

"(5) When you find the crystals begin to look dull or cloudy, with small
pin-points of light glittering therein, like tiny stars, you may know
that you are commencing to obtain that for which you seek, viz.,
crystalline vision. Therefore, persevere with confidence. This condition
may, or may not, continue for several sittings, the crystal seeming at
times to alternatively appear and disappear, as in a mist. By and by
this hazy appearance, in its turn, will give way quite suddenly to a
blindness of the senses to all else but a blue or bluish ocean of space,
against which, as if it were a background, the vision will be clearly
apparent.


Physical Requirements.

"(6) The crystal should not be used soon after taking a meal, and care
should be taken in matters of diet to partake only of digestible foods,
and to avoid alcoholic beverages. Plain and nourishing food, and outdoor
exercise, with contentment of mind, or love of simplicity of living, are
great aids to success. Mental anxiety, or ill-health, are not conducive
to the desired end. Attention to correct breathing is of importance.


Determining Time of Fulfillment.

"(7) As regards the time at which events seen will come to pass, each
seer is usually impressed with regard thereto; but, as a general rule,
visions appearing in the extreme background indicate time more remote,
either past or future, than those perceived nearer at hand; while those
appearing in the foreground, or closer to the seer, denote the present
or immediate future.


Two Classes of Visions.

"(8) Two principal classes of vision will present themselves to the
sitter, viz.: (a) the Symbolic, indicated by the appearance of symbols
such as a flag, boat, knife, gold, etc., and (b) Actual Scenes and
Personages, in action or otherwise. Persons of a positive type of
organization, the more active, excitable, yet decided type, are most
likely to perceive symbolically, or allegorically; while those of a
passive nature usually receive direct or literal revelations. Both
classes will find it necessary to carefully cultivate truthfulness,
unselfishness, gratitude for what is shown, and absolute confidence in
the love, wisdom, and guidance of God Himself."


Time and Space in Crystal Gazing.

In the subsequent pages the student will perceive the different
manifestations of clairvoyant vision classified according to the
distinction of Time and Space. Clairvoyant vision may disclose objects,
scenes, or persons either near by in space, or far off in space; either
existing in present time, in past time, or in future time. Inasmuch as
the visions of crystal gazing are merely particular forms of clairvoyant
vision, it follows that all of the several above named distinctive forms
of vision are manifested in crystal gazing. The vision shown in the
crystal may be that of something very near in space, or perhaps very far
off in space, or removed in space only a moderate distance. Likewise
such vision may be based upon things existing at the present time, or at
some period of past time, or at some period of and visions of past,
present, or future things, events, persons, scenes--each or all of these
manifestations are possible to the clairvoyant vision of the crystal
gazer, and pictured in the reflecting surface of the crystal or other
shining surface employed by him in his experiments.


Direct Clairvoyance.

The third of the three general classes of the methods employed to obtain
the manifestation of clairvoyant phenomena is that known as Direct
Clairvoyance. In this class of methods the clairvoyant directly
establishes the en rapport connection with the past or present, near or
distant, objects, persons, scenes, or events, by means of raising his or
her psychic vibrations so as to become "in tune" with the finer
vibrations of Nature, without the aid of the physical objects required
in the methods of Psychometry and Crystal Gazing, respectively.


Trance Conditions.

Many clairvoyants, manifesting their powers by means of the methods of
Direct Clairvoyance, produce in themselves the condition of trance, or
semi-trance condition. Many students believe that these conditions are
absolutely necessary for the production of this kind of phenomena, but
they neglect, or are actually unaware of, the fact that many of the
highest forms of this class of clairvoyant phenomena are manifested by
clairvoyants who are no more in a trance condition, or that of
semi-trance, than those following the methods of Psychometry or Crystal
Gazing, respectively. All that is required is that the clairvoyant
maintain a quiescent mental attitude, shutting out the sounds, sights,
and thoughts of the outside world, and concentrating the full attention
upon the clairvoyant work before him or her. Some, it is true, pass
easily into the semi-trance, or even the full trance condition, but the
latter are not absolutely necessary states.


Clairvoyant Reverie.

A writer on the subject of Clairvoyance says: "The best authorities
instruct their pupils that the state of clairvoyant reverie may be
safely and effectively induced by the practice of mental concentration
alone. They advise positively against artificial methods. All that is
needed is that the consciousness be focused to a single point--become
'one pointed' as the Hindu teachers call it. The intelligent practice of
concentration accomplishes this without the necessity of any artificial
methods of development, or the production of abnormal psychic states.
You easily concentrate your full attention when you witness an
interesting play, or listen to a beautiful rendition of some great
masterpiece of musical composition, or gaze at some miracle of pictured
or sculptured art. In these cases your attention is completely occupied
with the interesting thing before you, so that you have almost
completely shut out the outer world of sound, sight, and thought--but
you are, nevertheless, perfectly wide awake and conscious. The same
thing is true when you read a very interesting book--the world is shut
out from your consciousness, and you are oblivious to the sights and
sounds around you. We frequently witness the sight of two lovers to whom
the outside world is non-existent for the time being, and to whom there
is nothing in the world except themselves. Again, persons often fall
into a 'brown study,' or 'day dream,' in which all consciousness of the
outside world seems to be shut out, yet the person is fully conscious
and wide awake. These mental states are very much akin to that of the
trained clairvoyant, and is the state which should be sought after by
all clairvoyants, whether they are following the methods of Psychometry,
Crystal Gazing, or that of Direct Clairvoyance--for the principle is one
and the same in all of such methods."


The Dawn of Clairvoyance.

A well-known authority on the subject of Psychic Development says:
"Occasional flashes of clairvoyance sometimes comes to the highly
cultured and spiritual-minded man, even though he may never have heard
of the possibility of training such a faculty. In his case such glimpses
usually signify that he is approaching that stage in his evolution when
these powers will naturally begin to manifest themselves. Their
appearance should serve as an additional stimulus to him to strive to
maintain that high standard of moral purity and mental balance without
which clairvoyance is a curse and not a blessing to its possessor.
Between those who are entirely unimpressionable and those who are in
full possession of clairvoyant power, there are many intermediate
stages. Students often ask how this clairvoyant faculty will first be
manifested in themselves--how they may know when they have reached the
stage at which its first faint foreshadowings are beginning to be
visible. Cases differ so widely that it is impossible to give to this
question any answer that will be universally applicable. Some people
begin by a plunge, as it were, and under some unusual stimulus become
able just for once to see some striking vision; and very often in such a
case, because the experience does not repeat itself, the seer comes in
time to believe that on that occasion he must have been the victim of
hallucination. Others begin by becoming intermittently conscious of the
brilliant colors and vibrations of the human aura; yet others find
themselves with increasing frequency seeing and hearing something to
which those around them are blind and deaf; others, again, see faces,
landscapes, or colored clouds floating before their eyes in the dark,
before they sink to rest; while perhaps the commonest experience of all
is that of those who begin to recollect with greater and greater
clearness what they have seen and heard on other planes during sleep."


Methods of Development.

The same authority, after warning students against attempting to develop
their psychic powers by unnatural and harmful practices, such as
self-hypnotism, self-stupefication, etc., gives the following excellent
advice concerning the normal development of clairvoyant and other high
psychic powers and faculties: "There is one practice which if adopted
carefully and reverently can do no harm to any human being, yet from
which a very pure type of clairvoyance has sometimes been developed--and
that is the practice of Meditation. Let a man choose a certain time
every day--a time when he can rely upon being quiet and undisturbed,
though preferably in the daytime rather than at night--and set himself
at that time to keep his mind for a few minutes entirely free from all
earthly thoughts of any kind whatsoever; and, when that is achieved, to
direct the whole force of his being towards the highest ideal he happens
to know. He will find that to gain perfect control of thought is
enormously more difficult than he supposes, but when he attains it this
cannot but be in every way more beneficial to him, and as he grows more
and more able to elevate and concentrate his thoughts, he may gradually
find that new worlds are opening before his sight. As a preliminary
training towards the satisfactory achievement of such meditation, he
will find it desirable to make a practice of concentration in the
affairs of daily life--even in the smallest of them. If he writes a
letter, let him think of nothing else but that letter until it is
finished; if he reads a book, let him see to it that his thought is
never allowed to wander away from his author's meaning. He must learn to
hold his mind in check, and to be master of that also, as well as of his
lower passions; he must patiently labor to acquire absolute control of
his thoughts, so that he will always know exactly what he is thinking
about, and why--so that he can use his mind, and turn it or hold it
still, as a practiced swordsman turns his weapon where he will."




