The Project Gutenberg eBook of Genuine Mediumship; or, The Invisible Powers
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Genuine Mediumship; or, The Invisible Powers

Author: William Walker Atkinson


        
Release date: May 5, 2008 [eBook #25337]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/25337

Credits: Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Brian Janes and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Brian Janes and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  +------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Note:                                        |
  |                                                            |
  | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in        |
  | this text. For a complete list, please see the bottom of   |
  | this document.                                             |
  +------------------------------------------------------------+




Genuine Mediumship

OR

The Invisible Powers

By
SWAMI BHAKTA VISHITA
(Hindoo Master)

Author of Seership, the Science of Knowing the
Future

ADVANCED THOUGHT PUBLISHING CO.
812 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, Ill.

English Representatives
L. N. FOWLER & CO., 7 Imperial Arcade,
Ludgate Circus, London, England

Copyright, 1919 By ADVANCED THOUGHT PUBLISHING CO. Chicago, Ill.




CONTENTS


PART I.

NATURE'S FINER FORCES

Knowledge versus Faith. Supernormal, not Supernatural.
Supernormal, not Abnormal. The Prevailing Ignorance. Prejudice
Against the Unusual. Great Changes Impending. The Naturalness of
Occult Powers. The World of Vibrations. Super-sensible
Vibrations. Unseen Worlds. Interpenetrating Planes and Worlds.
Manifold Planes of Existence. Planes and Vibrations. The Higher
Senses of Man. The World of Sensation. A Senseless World. The
Elemental Sense. The Raw Material of Thought. The Evolution of
the Senses. Unfoldment of New Senses. Discovery of New Worlds. We
Sense Only Vibratory Motion. The Higher Planes of Nature. An
Appeal to Reason                                                       7

PART II.

MENTAL VIBRATIONS AND TRANSMISSION

The Higher Forces. Chitta, or Mind Substance. What Modern Science
Says. A Living Dynamic Focus. Dynamic Correlate of Thought.
Answer to Skeptical Critics. The World of Vibrations. Unchartered
Seas of Vibration. The Human Wireless Telegraph Instrument. A
Great Scientist's Theory. Human-Electro-Magnetism. Human
Etherical Force. The Brain-Battery. A Peculiar Organ. The Pineal
Gland. Transmission of Thought. A General Principle.
Transformation of Vibrations. Example of Electric Light. Example
of Wireless Telegraphy. Example of Light Waves. Transformation of
Mental Vibrations. Vibrational Attunement. In Tune with the
Higher Planes. Two Key-Words                                          31

PART III.

THOUGHT TRANSFERENCE

Involuntary Transmission of Mental Vibrations. Thought Waves.
Vibratory Thought Force. Mental Atmospheres. The Categories of
Thought. Mental Whirlpools. Mental Tidal Waves. Immunity to
Thought Influences. Mental Attunement. Voluntary Transmission of
Mental Vibrations. Voluntary Mental Influence. White Magic. Black
Magic. Base Use of Mind Power. The Secret of Witchcraft. Modern
Black Magic. The Explanation of Sorcery. The Power of
Fearthought. The Negative Pole. Voodooism Explained.
Self-Protection. Repelling Adverse Influences. Telepathic
Phenomena. Scientific Investigators. How Experiments are
Conducted. Private Experiments. Development of Telepathic Power.
"Mind Reading." Development Practices. The "Willing Game." Formal
Tests. Automatic Writing. Psychic Sensitiveness                       53

PART IV.

CLAIRVOYANCE AND KINDRED PHENOMENA

Clairvoyance Defined. The Phenomena of Clairvoyance.
Classification of Clairvoyant Phenomena. Psychometry. The
"Psychic Scent." Magnetic Affinity. Distant En Rapport. Psychic
Underground Explorations. Psychic Detective Work. How to
Psychometrize. Developing Psychometry. Varieties of Psychometry.
Psychometric "Getting in Touch." Psychometric Readings. Crystal
Gazing, etc. Crystals and Bright Objects. The Care of the
Crystal. How To Use the Crystal. The "Milky Mist." Classes of
Psychic Pictures. General Directions for Crystal Gazing.
Selection of Place, etc. Adjusting the Crystal. Time of Sitting.
Other Persons Present. Crystalline Vision. Physical Requirements.
Determining Time of Fulfillment. Two Classes of Visions. Time and
Space in Crystal Gazing. Direct Clairvoyance. Trance Conditions.
Clairvoyant Reverie. The Dawn of Clairvoyance. Methods of
Development                                                           79

PART V.

CLAIRVOYANCE: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE

Present Clairvoyance. The Human Aura. The Prana Aura. The Auric
Colors. Thought Forms. The X-Ray Sense. Microscopic Vision. Space
Clairvoyance. The Psychic Telescope. Radio-Activity. Sensing the
Higher Vibrations. Viewing Distant Scenes. Time Clairvoyance.
Past Time Clairvoyance. The Mystery Seeing the Past. Analogies of
the Physical Plane. Thousand Year Old Light. Reading the Light
Waves. The Akashic Plane. The Akashic Records. Degrees of
Clairvoyant Vision. "The Memory of Nature." Involuntary
Clairvoyance. Future Time Clairvoyance. Seeing What Has Not Yet
Happened. Simple Prevision. The Nature of Time. The Oriental
Teaching. The Eternal Now. Absolute Time                            105

PART VI.

MEDIUMSHIP

What is Mediumship? Ancient Mediumship. Mediumship and Religious
Belief. The Ideals of Modern Spiritualism. Immortality
Demonstrated Through Mediumship. The Truth of Personal Survival.
The Gateway of Mediumship. The Mediumistic Character.
Mediumistic Sensitivity. The Higher Vibratory Forces. Psychic
Attunement. The Development of Mediumship. Unconscious
Mediumship. Mediumship and Individuality. Co-operation of Medium
and Spirits. Mediumship Not Dangerous. Rational Mediumship. The
"Home Circle." The Cure For Fraudulent Mediumship. Warning to
Young Mediums                                                        133

PART VII.

MEDIUMISTIC CONDITIONS

Physical Phenomena. "Psychic Force." Human Magnetism. "Zoether."
"Prana." Mental Phenomena. The Value of Phenomena. Trance
Condition Not Essential. Scientific Reports on Phenomena.
Phenomena Without Darkness. Test Conditions. Is Darkness
Necessary? Developing Circles. Impersonating Mediumship. The
Proper Mental Condition. Proof of Spirit Identity. The "Trance
Condition." Spirit Impersonation. Spirit Suggestion. Psychic
Attunement. Automatic Writing. Inspirational Speaking. Gradual
Development of Powers. Spirit Guides. No Loss of Individuality.
Mediumship Beneficial. Mediumship and the Bible                      153

PART VIII.

HOW TO DEVELOP MEDIUMSHIP

Who are Mediumistic? The Mediumistic Temperament. Is Mediumship
Desirable? Developing the Natural Power. Mediumship and Genius.
Spontaneous Mediumship. Mediumistic Flashes. Systematic
Development. The Development Circle. The Aspirational Attitude.
Natural Unfoldment. Persistent Watchful Waiting. Building Lines
of Communication. Developing Concentration. The Call for
Illumination. The Jacob's Ladder of Communion. What a Development
Circle Is. Forming the Development Circle. The Sitters in the
Circle. The Spirit Communication Code. The Matter of Time
Conditions. Opening the Seance. Developing a Medium. The
Personnel of the Circle. Changing the Sitters. Adding a Medium.
Reasons for Changes. Psychic Attunement. Pre-Test Manifestations.
Premature Tests. Forcing Tests. Spirit Directions. Questioning
the Spirits. Substance and Shadow                                    173

PART IX.

MEDIUMISTIC PHENOMENA

The Part Played by the Sitters. Result of Bad Sitters. Mental
Atmosphere of the Medium. The Mediumistic Mind. Mediumistic
"Stage Fright." The Psychic Telephone System. Interrupted
Communications. Some Difficulties of the Spirits. Difficulties
Overcome. The Psychic Triangle. Harmonious Relationship. The
Discord Note. Antagonistic Elements. The Open Mind. Spirits and
the Sense of Humor. Rhythmic Harmony. Retarding Factors.
Reasonable Demands of Spirits. Harmonious Conditions. The Channel
of Communication. The Role of the Spirits. Difficulties Among
Spirits. Disturbing elements. Impersonation Mediumship. True
Purpose of Mediumship. Gradual Development. Public Seances. Home
Circle Development. Undue Prolongation of Seances. Good Advice to
Young Mediums. Self-Protection for Mediums                           200

PART X.

EXPERIENCES IN THE CIRCLE

Signs of Spirit Presence. Spirit Rappings. Table Tippings. The
Spirit Signals. Flashes of Communication. Spirit Code-Signals.
Ouija Boards. A Homemade Ouija Board. Trance or Inspirational
Mediumship. Symptoms of Trance Conditions. The Entranced Stage.
Trance Phenomena. Entering the Trance. Advice to Trance Mediums.
Speaking Mediumship. Public-Speaking Under Control. Spirit Advice
and Counsel. Impersonating Manifestations. Incidents of
Impersonation. Incidents of Inspirational Mediumship. Value of
Identification. Fraudulent Claims of Identity. Guarding Against
Fraudulent Spirits. Spirit Jokers. A Typical Case of
Identification. Recalling Past Incidents. Identifying Property.
Identifying Historical Personages                                    229

PART XI.

HIGHER SPIRIT MANIFESTATIONS

Spirit Psychometry and Clairvoyance. Spirit Psychic Assistance.
Writing Mediumship. Incidents of Writing Mediumship. Developing
Writing Mediumship. Stead's Method and Results. Automatic Writing
vs. Inspirational Writing. Use and Abuse of Automatic Writing.
Advice to Writing Mediums. Drawing Mediumship. The Planchette.
How to Use the Planchette. Healing Mediumship. How To Heal by
Spirit Power. Materialization Mediumship. The Spirit Cabinet Is
Necessary. How To Make the Spirit Cabinet. How To Use the Spirit
Cabinet. Spirit Phosphorescence. Appearance of Materialized
Substance. Materialized Spirit Forms. Scientific Proof of
Materialization. How To Conduct a Materializing Seance. Trumpet
Mediumship. Spirit Playing on Musical Instruments. Independent
Slate Writing. The Slate Writing Circle. Spirit Paintings.
Practical Advice to Developing Mediums                               251




PART I

NATURE'S FINER FORCES


One of the most common mistaken conceptions of the average student of
the occult sciences, and of so-called "psychic phenomena" in general, is
that which may be expressed by the term "supernatural." This term, as
you know, is used to express the idea of "that which is outside of the
realm of Nature, and of Nature's laws."


Knowledge Versus Faith

As a matter of fact, as all the advanced students and teachers of the
occult doctrine know full well, we have no direct knowledge whatsoever
of anything that is "outside of the realm of nature, and of Nature's
laws." It is true that we may, by an act of faith, profess to believe in
powers and beings entirely apart from the great realm of Nature--in
fact, most persons do believe in such powers and beings in connection
with their formal religion--but their belief is entirely within the
category of Faith, and is not even pretended to be based upon actual
experience and phenomenal manifestation.

The moment that there appears any manifestation which is possible of
being known to, or experienced by, the human senses, ordinary or
extraordinary, that moment the phenomena and the immediate cause thereof
must be regarded as being properly classed in the category of "natural."
This is true not only of such phenomena as are perceived by means of our
ordinary five senses, but also of those which are perceptible only to
the highest powers of perception, or higher senses, which are latent in
all human beings but which are unfolded only in the case of a
comparatively few individuals of the race.

It should be clearly understood by all students of occultism or psychic
phenomena that man's knowledge and experience, normal or supernormal, is
confined to the realm of Nature. There is a "ring pass-not" around the
boundaries of the Kingdom of Nature which mortals cannot pass, no matter
how high may be their degree of development and advancement. Even those
great mystics whose writings are filled with the startling revelations
of "union with the Divine," and of "At-one-ment with Deity," are under
no illusion concerning this fact they know full well that only in so far
as Deity involves itself in Nature--wraps itself up in the garments of
Nature--can it be directly experienced by man, and thus actually known
by him.


Supernormal, Not Supernatural

Perhaps a clearer understanding of this important subject will be had if
we but substitute the term "supernormal" for that of "supernatural." The
term "supernormal" is not commonly employed, and but few know that such
a word is to be found in the dictionaries, much less know its meaning;
but a study of its meaning, and its adoption in our thinking, will serve
to give us a clearer conception of the true nature of many strange
phases of experience of which we have become conscious, either by
reasons of their manifestation by ourselves, or else by the
manifestation on the part of others. It will accordingly be well for us
to carefully examine this term and its meaning.

"Subnormal" means: "Beyond, above, or exceeding that which is NORMAL;
extraordinary, inexplicable perhaps, but NOT supernatural." Now, the
term "normal" means: "Conforming to a certain standard, rule, or type";
hence, anything that is "supernormal" is something that is ABOVE THE
USUAL PATTERN, RULE, OR TYPE.

There is an important distinction to be noted here, to-wit: a thing may
be OUTSIDE of the usual pattern, rule, or type, in the sense of being
INFERIOR TO or UNDER the ordinary standard, and in this case is known as
"ABNORMAL," the latter term being employed as a term of depreciation. On
the other hand, the "OUTSIDE of the standard" quality may consist of a
SUPERIORITY to the prevailing standard, and accordingly is entitled to
be classed in the category of the "SUPERnormal"--the prefix "SUPER"
meaning "ABOVE, OVER, HIGHER, etc."

It is important that the distinction be made clearly between the use and
meaning of these two terms, "abnormal" and "supernormal," respectively.
The first named denotes INFERIORITY, and the latter denotes SUPERIORITY.
This distinction may be more clearly apprehended by means of a concrete
example, as follows:

On our own plane of existence the senses of sight and hearing,
respectively, are included in the usual standard, pattern, and type of
sense normality--every normal person possesses these senses in a certain
general degree of power; hence, on this plane of existence, a person
born blind, or deaf, is spoken of as "ABNORMAL," that is to say, such a
person is DEFICIENT in regard to the sense powers.

On the contrary, let us imagine a plane of existence, in which the
great majority of individuals lack the power of sight and hearing,
respectively. On such a plane of existence, the occasional individual
who was born possessed of the powers of sight and hearing, respectively,
would be properly regarded as "SUPERNORMAL," that is to say, such a
person would be SUPERIOR to the ordinary run of individuals--above them,
in fact. The term "ABNORMAL" means MINUS the ordinary standard quality;
and the term "SUPERNORMAL" means PLUS the ordinary standard quality. And
yet both the "plus" and the "minus" would be "outside" the normal type,
though there is a difference as wide as that between the two poles, in
this "outsideness."


Supernormal, Not Abnormal

The above important statement concerning the distinction between the
"abnormal" and "supernormal" is not made merely for the purpose of
academic differentiation and classification. On the other hand, it is
made because there is a most pernicious tendency on the part of the
ignorant and unthinking portions of the public to regard and to classify
certain high phases of occult and psychic manifestation of power as
"abnormal," hence BELOW the standard; whereas, properly speaking, such
manifestations of power are far ABOVE THE STANDARD, and, hence, clearly
entitled to the term "supernormal."


The Prevailing Ignorance

The ignorant and unthinking attitude of certain portions of the general
public toward this class of phenomena is akin to that of a community of
blind and deaf persons, satisfied that their own "three sense" standard
is the highest possible one attainable by living creatures and that all
variation therefrom must be considered as "abnormal." In such a
community there would occasionally be born certain individuals possessed
of the senses of sight and hearing, in addition to the common three
senses possessed by the entire community. Judging by what we know of the
tendency of human nature in such cases, we are warranted in conjuring
that the ordinary run of persons in such a community would revile the
seeing and hearing individuals as "abnormal," and their possessors
therefore to be pitied, and perhaps shunned. Only the intelligent and
thoughtful members of such a community would be able to grasp the fact
that these exceptional individuals were really not only not "abnormal,"
and inferior to type, but that they were really "supernormal," and
superior to type.


Prejudice Against the Unusual.

Those to whom the above illustration may seem far-fetched, exaggerated,
and unwarranted, are asked to carefully consider the ignorant and
unthinking attitude which the great majority of the general public, at
least at first, present toward that most wonderful display of
supernormal powers, known as "occult" or "psychic," made by the few
highly developed individuals of the race who are able to manifest them
to some degree. These individuals are regarded as "queer," and
"strange," "unnatural," and "abnormal" by their ignorant and unthinking
neighbors and associates, just as the seeing and hearing exceptional
individuals were likewise so regarded by their blind and deaf neighbors
in the above illustration. And, here as in the illustration it is only
the few intelligent and thinking individuals of the community who
recognize that the departure from the standard type is in the direction
of advancement and gain, rather than of retrogression and loss--a plus
attribute, rather than a minus one. The illustration is startlingly true
and in accordance with the facts of the case, as many thoughtful persons
know only to well, and admit sadly.


Great Changes Impending

But it would be unjust and unfair to the general public were we to fail
to add to the above criticism the fact that there is underway a great
change in the public opinion regarding this important matter. More and
more persons are becoming interested in Nature's Finer Forces every day;
more are becoming more familiar with the phenomena manifested by the
gifted individuals possessing these wondrous powers; and more are coming
to realize that these powers are really latent in all of the members of
the human race, though lying dormant in the majority thereof, and may be
unfolded and brought into active manifestation by scientific methods of
training and development. But, even so, the student and teacher of this
great subject should carefully bear in mind the important distinction
above made between that which is "abnormal," and that which is
"supernormal"; and such should lose no opportunity in pointing out this
important distinction whenever the subject arises in conversation or
argument--for the propaganda of truth should be earnestly and vigorously
pursued, in order that the world may be liberated from its chains of
error.


The Naturalness of the Occult Powers

Returning to the subject considered in the opening paragraphs of this
book, namely, the NATURALNESS of the occult and psychic higher powers
and the manifestation thereof, we strongly advise all students of these
subjects to acquire a working knowledge of the place in Nature occupied
by these powers and their manifestations. A little scientific
information on this subject will render the student better able to
intelligently teach others concerning these matters, and also to
successfully defend himself when the ignorant and unthinking seek to
attack the things which are so dear to his heart, and so real and
evident to himself. Many, by reason of their lack of scientific
knowledge on these points, not only fail to make converts to their cause
of truth, but often really drive away persons who might otherwise be
interested. Many persons are really interested in and attracted to the
manifestations of the higher occult and psychic powers, but are fearful
of anything "unnatural" or "supernatural," and are disposed to be
frightened off by any suspicion of such qualities in things. These same
persons, if shown that the phenomena have a perfectly valid scientific
base in natural forces and laws, will throw aside their fears and will
become earnest investigators and students of this great subject. Hence,
as we have said, every teacher and student of this subject should know
the true scientific natural basis thereof; and in the following few
pages we shall endeavor to plainly, though briefly, present these to
you.


The World of Vibrations

Modern science furnishes abundant testimony to support and substantiate
the teachings of the ancient Hindu sages to the effect that everything
in the Universe is in constant motion, which is manifested by varying
rates, degrees, and modes of vibration. The modern scientists, alike
with the ancient occultist, knows that the differences between the
things of the Universe arise mainly from the different rates, modes, and
degrees of the vibrations manifested in the things themselves. If we
change the vibration of a thing, we practically change the manifested
nature of that thing. The difference between solid ice, liquid water,
semi-gaseous vapor, and gaseous steam is simply the difference caused by
various rates of vibration caused by heat. The difference between red
and blue, green and violet, is simply that caused by varying rates of
vibration. Light and heat, as well as sound, depend for the differences
upon rates of vibration.


Super-Sensible Vibrations.

Moreover, as every text book on science informs us, there are sounds too
low as well as those too high for the human ear to register, but which
are registered by delicate instruments. Again, there are colors beyond
the place of red, at one end of the visible spectrum; and others beyond
the place of violet at the other end of that spectrum, which the human
eye is unable to register and detect, but which our apparatus in the
laboratory plainly register. The ray of light which registers on the
photographic plate, and which causes sunburn on our skin, is too high a
rate of vibration for our eyes to perceive. Likewise the X-Rays, and
many other of the finer rays of light known to science are imperceptible
to the unaided human vision--they are actually "dark rays" so far as the
human eye is concerned, though man has devised instruments by means of
which they may be caught and registered.


The Higher Vibrations

The vibrations of magnetism and electricity are imperceptible to our
sight, though they may be registered by the appropriate apparatus; and
if we had the proper sense of apparatus to perceive them, these rays of
vibratory force would open up a whole new world to us. Likewise, if we
could increase our power of hearing-perception, we would seem to be
living in a new world of sights and sounds now closed to us. Reasoning
along the same lines of thought, many great thinkers have held that
there is no reason for doubting the possible existence of other
world-planes of being, just as real and as actual as the one upon which
we live, and move, and have our being, but which is forever invisible to
the ordinary human sight and senses; the apparent nothingness of such
worlds arising solely from the great difference in the rates of
vibrations between the two planes of being.


Unseen Worlds.

Listen to what careful thinkers have said concerning the possibility of
entire worlds existing in the same space occupied by us, but of which we
are unconscious by reason of our failure to sense their vibrations: One
says, "All our sensations are due to the impact upon our sense-organs of
vibrations in some form. Variations in the strength and rapidity of
these vibrations constitute the difference in our perceptions. Our range
of response is but a limited one. Some vibrations are too rapid and some
too slow to affect our senses, and therefore we have called to our aid
various mechanical contrivances which enable us to recognize existences
which would otherwise remain unknown. But it is still conceivable that
there may be, and doubtless are, conditions of vibratory energy that
escape us, and which, if we could develop finer senses, would yield
wonderful results and extensions of our power and knowledge. Today,
indeed, we are coming into contact with forces, possibilities, and
personalities which amount to a revelation of a new universe of things."


Interpenetrating Planes and Worlds.

Another says: "It is true that 'things are not what they seem'; but
everything seems to be 'thus and so' to us only because of its
particular plane of being, and that plane of being is determined by its
vibrations. On one plane there is a certain vibratory value or speed;
on another plane, a different one; but a plane is not a place, but a
state, and so it is possible that two utterly different planes of being
might co-exist in the same place and be entirely unknown to one another.
That may seem absurd, but it is a scientific truth, and many authorities
have endorsed the same."

Another says: "There may be, right here and now, passing through us and
this world, some planet invisible to us, with mountains, oceans, lakes,
rivers, cities, and inhabitants: and yet we know absolutely nothing of
their existence." Another says: "Some students of the occult find it
difficult to grasp the idea of a number of manifestations, each having
its own rate of vibration, occupying the same point of space at the same
time. A slight consideration of the phenomena of the physical world
would perhaps aid such persons in assimilating the concept in question.
For instance, as every student of physics knows, a single point of space
may contain at the same time vibrations of heat, light of many shades,
magnetism electricity, X-Rays, etc., each manifesting its own rate of
vibration, land yet none interfering with the others."

Another says: "Every beam of sunlight contains many different colors,
each with its own degree of vibration, and yet none crowding out the
others. By the use of the proper forms of laboratory apparatus each kind
of light may be separated from the others, and the ray thus split up.
The difference in colors arises simply from the different rates of
etheric vibrations. Again, it is possible to send many telegrams along
the same wire, at the same time, by using senders and receivers of
different vibratory keynotes. The same thing has its corresponding
analogy in the case of the wireless telegraphy. So you see, even on the
physical planes we find many forms of vibratory energy manifesting on,
in, and at the same point of space at the same time, without interfering
one with the other."


Manifold Planes of Existence

The ancient occult teachings have ever insisted upon the presence of
numerous planes of existence, of which our own particular plane is but
one. And all of these numerous planes are equally within the realms of
Nature; none of them being supernatural. And there is always found to
exist a correspondence between these several planes of manifestation;
and, under supernormal conditions, a certain degree of possible
communication between them. Each of these planes has numerous
subdivisions and subplanes, the divisions being according to the rule of
"sevens," as follows: there are seven grand planes, and each of these
are subdivided into seven secondary planes, and each of these into seven
tertiary planes, and so on until the division has been made seven times.

The student of occultism, particularly at the beginning of his studies,
experiences difficulty in comprehending just what is meant by the term
"plane" as employed in the occult teachings. His first impression,
usually encouraged by the use of the dictionary, is that each "plane" is
one of a series of strata or layers, above and below which are present
other layers or strata. Even after the student progresses in his
understanding of the subject, this original picture of material layers
and strata tends to persist in his thought on the subject. The error, of
course, arises from his original conception of the planes, layers, or
strata as being composed of gross material matter, whereas, as a matter
of fact, only one of the many planes is so composed. When one stops to
think that even the grossest form of matter is itself composed of
vibrations of energy (for science teaches that all matter is but energy
at the last); and that all other forms of material substance is likewise
so composed of vibrations of energy; then one is on the road to the
discovery of the real state of affairs. Then he begins to realize that
instead of the planes of being rising one above the other in the scale
of their fineness, they are graded according to their degree of
vibratory energy, and each may actually occupy the same space as all the
others. In short, the "planes" are not strata or layers of "matter" at
all, but are simply different states of vibration of energy; and that
which we know as "matter" is simply one (and a very low one) of the many
forms of such vibrations.

From the above, it is seen that the various planes of being are not
distinguished by spatial position; they do not lie one superimposed on
the other, like layers or strata of matter. Instead, they interpenetrate
each other in the same limits of space. A single point of space may
accommodate the manifestations of each and all of the seven great planes
of being, and all the subdivisions, and sub-divisions (sevenfold in
division) at the same time. The old occultists impressed this and other
facts upon the minds of their pupils by the oft-repeated aphorism: "A
PLANE OF BEING IS NOT A PLACE OF BEING, BUT A STATE OF BEING." And the
"state of being" is simply a certain manifestation of vibratory energy.
With these ideas firmly fixed in the mind, the student is less apt to
wander astray from the facts of the case.


Planes and Vibrations

To those who may be disposed to regard the above statements concerning
the "planes of being" as somewhat visionary, theoretical, or imaginary,
we would say: "Go to modern science, and verify this statement." The
following quotation from a writer on the subject will serve to
illustrate this fact, viz.: "We are apt to think that we are familiar
with every kind of matter in existence, but such is not the case. We are
familiar with only a few forms of matter. Spectrum analysis shows us
that on certain fixed stars there are forms of matter far different from
matter as we know it on this planet. On some stars this unknown matter
appears to be of a much lower form of vibration than that manifested by
terrestrial matter; while on others, there appears to be a much higher
vibratory rate than even that manifested by the most subtle forms of
ultra-gaseous matter known to us here. Even on our own globe we can
distinguish between several great class of matter. In addition to the
forms called 'solid,' 'liquid,' and 'gaseous,' respectively, science now
recognizes a fourth plane of matter known as 'ultra-gaseous' matter, and
there are indications of several even finer states of matter, known
under the general term of 'radiant matter.' In fact, modern science sees
'radiant matter' apparently fading away into 'radiant energy.'"

In view of the facts of modern science concerning the different planes
of substance, matter and energy, it is mere stupidity that ventures to
question the possibility of the existence of great plane of being and
life beyond the range of the ordinary senses of man--planes surrounding
us on all sides, occupying the same space as we do, yet unseen by us,
and we largely unseen by those dwelling upon such planes.


The Higher Senses of Men.

There are found persons who, while admitting the possibility of other
and finer planes of being and life, yet question the possibility of
communication between these planes of existence. They say, with
apparently sound logic, "How is it possible for the human being, with
his ordinary senses, to 'sense' things or being, dwelling on finer
planes of being?" If this were all that there is to the question, we
might well echo "How, indeed?" and agree with the critic. But, this is
not all that there is to it--not even the beginning of the end of the
tale. For not only may things on the finer planes become perceptible to
human beings by means of the lowering of the vibrations of these finer
vibratory objects in certain ways, but human beings may develop and
cultivate an increased power in their senses of sight and hearing, and
thus raise their vibrations so as to "sense" the things of the higher
vibrations; and, still more, human beings may, and often do, develop
and cultivate certain latent powers of "sensing" which are inherent in
every one of us, and thus directly "sense" the sights and sounds of the
higher planes of existence, almost if not quite as clearly as they can
sense the objects and events of their own plane of existence. To
understand how this can be, it is necessary to carefully consider the
question of "sensing" in general, so as to understand just what enables
us to "sense" anything at all. Once understanding this, it is but a step
further to understand this SUPERNORMAL sensing referred to. Let us then
examine this matter of "sensing" in general.


The World of Sensation.

The reports of our sense organs are called "sensations." A sensation is
defined as "an impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made
upon the mind through the medium of a nerve or one of the organs of
sense. The term 'sense' is defined as 'a faculty possessed by animals of
perceiving external objects by means of impressions made upon certain
organs of the body, or of perceiving changes in the condition of the
body.' Our senses have been well said to constitute 'the doors to the
outside world.' Unless our attention is specially directed to the
subject, few of us even begin to realize how completely we are dependent
upon these 'doors' to the outside world" for our knowledge of that
outside world. It is only when we stop to imagine how completely shut
in, or shut out, we would be if all of our sense channels should be
destroyed, that we can even begin to realize just how dependent we are
upon our senses for our knowledge of the world in which we live, and
move, and have our being.


A Senseless World.

A writer on the subject has said: "Psychologists have pointed out to us
the fact that if a human being were born without sense organs, no matter
how perfect a brain he might have, his life would be little more than
that of a plant. Such a person would exist merely in a dreamlike state,
with only the very faintest manifestations of consciousness. His
consciousness would not be able to react in response to the impact of
sensations from the outside world, for there would be no such impact.
And as consciousness depends almost entirely upon the impact of, or
resistance to, outside impressions, his consciousness would be almost
entirely inactive. He would be conscious of his own existence, but would
probably never realize the fact fully, for he would have nothing else
with which to compare himself, and his self-consciousness would never be
aroused by contact with things outside of himself. Such a person would
not have even the memories of previous sensations or experiences to
arouse or heighten his consciousness or thought, and consequently he
would have no imagination to use. He would be, to all intents and
purposes, a living corpse. Helen Keller has only two doors of sensation
closed to her--the sense of sight and the sense of hearing. Touch,
taste, and smell, however were left to her; and each was quickened and
heightened in order to help so far as possible to perform the world of
the defective senses. The reaching of the consciousness of this girl is
considered by science to be akin to a miracle--yet only two senses were
missing. To appreciate the full meaning of the importance of the senses,
one has but to think of Helen Keller as having been also deprived of the
sense of touch."


The Elemental Sense.

Science informs us that all of the five senses of man, viz., the
respective senses of touch, sight, hearing, taste, and smell are but
modifications of one elementary sense namely the sense of touch; and
that the other senses have been gradually evolved from that one
elementary sense. This is seen to be the case when it is realized that
the only way that we "sense" the presence of an outside object--be that
object either a material substance, a vibration of the air, or an
etheric vibration of light--is by that outside object coming in contact,
directly or indirectly, with one or more of our sensory nerves, the
latter conveying the report of the contact to the brain, which
translates the sensation into what is called a "perception." This is
true of the sensations of touch, sight, hearing, taste, and smell, and
of senses higher than these and which as yet are not recognized by
science. Consequently, the consciousness of the presence of an outside
thing arises from contact with that outside thing through the channel of
the sense of touch, or of some of its more complex evolved phases.


The Raw Material of Thought.

From what has been said, it is seen that we can know only those things
concerning the outside world which are capable of being reported to us
by means of sense impressions, simple or complex--all of our thought
regarding the world is made up from "the raw materials of thought" which
psychologists have termed sensations. Consequently, if an individual is
deprived of one or more of his ordinary senses, his knowledge of the
outside world is decreased to just that extent. And, likewise, if the
individual were to be given one or more additional senses, his knowledge
of the world would be increased in the same ratio. The same result, at
least in a certain degree, would be attained if the existing senses of
the individual were to be increased in power so as to register higher
rates of vibration than they now consciously register and record.


The Evolution of the Senses.

This subject of increased sense-powers has always been a fascinating one
for the psychologists, and much speculation has been indulged in
concerning the increased consciousness of mankind were additional senses
opened to it. We ask you to carefully consider the following quotations
from psychologists possessing the "scientific imagination."

A psychologist says: "All the senses have been evolved from the
elementary sense of Touch. All of our senses are but modified,
specialized, and more complex forms of the sense of Touch. The
elementary life-forms possessed merely the sense of Touch; and that but
faintly developed--but a faint sensitiveness to outside impressions.
Then developed the sense of Taste, from which later evolved the sense of
Smell, the latter even now being closely associated with the former.
Then evolved the sense of Hearing, or the consciousness of the contact
of air vibrations called 'sound.' Then evolved the sense of sight, or
the consciousness of contact with the light waves of the other. And it
is not impossible, or even improbable, that the human race will
eventually develop other and more complex senses--in fact, many even now
claim that the development of extra senses is now under way in the race,
and that the same are now manifesting the presence and their powers in
exceptional cases."


Unfoldment of New Senses

The same writer continues as follows: "Even as it is man is able to
perceive only a limited number of sound vibrations--there are many sound
vibrations above and below his scale, and which he is unable to
perceive, but which are registered by delicate instruments. Likewise,
man is able to perceive only a limited range of light vibrations, there
being enormous fields of such vibrations above and below his range.
Again, man is unable to sense electrical waves, or magnetic
waves--though, theoretically, he should be able to sense these as well
as light waves, the difference between these respective fields of
etheric vibrations being simply different rates of vibration. Imagine
what a new world would be opened to man if he could sense the waves of
electricity. In that case he could 'see' things as far away from him as
the waves of electricity could travel, and even though solid objects
intervened, as in the case of the X-Rays. In such a case a man might
actually 'see' things at the other side of the world, by means of
'wireless electrical waves.' Theoretically these things are possible,
providing that man's optical nerves are rendered more sensitive, or
provided that he evolves a new set of sensory nerves and instruments of
impression."


Discovery of New Worlds.

Another psychologist says: "If a new sense or two were added to the
present normal number in man, that which is now the phenomenal world for
all of us might, for all that we know, burst into something amazingly
different and wider, in consequence of the additional revelations of
these new senses." Another authority has said: "It does not seem at all
improbable that there are properties of matter of which none of our
senses can take immediate cognizance, and which other beings might be
able to see in the same manner that we are sensible to light, sound,
etc." Another writer has said: "We know that our sensory nerves are
capable of transmitting to the brain only a part of the phenomena of the
universe. Our senses give us only a section of the world's phenomena.
Our senses usher only certain phenomena into the presence of our minds.
If we had three or four new senses added, this might appear like a new
world to us; we might become conscious of a vast number of phenomena
which at present never have any effect upon our nervous system. It is
not possible to imagine a race of beings whose senses do not resemble
ours, inhabiting other worlds."


Transcendental Senses

Another writer has drawn an interesting picture, which is based upon a
conjecture which is scientifically valid, as follows: "The late
Professor James once suggested as a useful exercise for young students a
consideration of the changes which would be worked in our ordinary world
if the various branches of our receiving instruments happened to
exchange duties; if, for instance, we heard all colors, and saw all
sounds. All this is less mad than it seems. Music is but an
interpretation of certain vibrations undertaken by the ear; and color is
but an interpretation of other vibrations undertaken by the eye. Were
such an alteration of our senses to take place, the world would still be
sending us the same messages, but we should be interpreting them
differently. Beauty would still be ours, though speaking in another
tongue. The birds' song would then strike our retina as pageant of
color; we should see all the magical tones of the wind, hear as a great
fugue the repeated and harmonized greens of the forest, the cadences of
stormy skies. Did we realize how slight an adjustment of our own organs
is needed to initiate us into such a world, we should perhaps be less
contemptuous of those mystics who tell us in moments of transcendental
consciousness they 'heard flowers that sounded, and saw notes that
shone'; or that they have experienced rare moments of consciousness in
which the senses were fused organs is needed to initiate us into such a
world into a single and ineffable act of perception, in which color and
sound were known as aspects of the same thing."


We Sense Only Vibratory Motion.

In assimilating the strange and wonderful conceptions of the
psychologists above quoted, concerning the possibility of a new world of
sensation arising from the possession of new channels of sense
impression, we must never lose sight of the basic fact that all
SENSATIONS RESULT FROM CONTACT WITH VIBRATORY MOTION. An eminent
scientific authority has said regarding this: "The only way the external
world affects the nervous system is by means of vibratory motion. Light
is vibratory motion; Sound is vibratory motion; Heat is vibratory
motion; Touch is vibratory motion; Taste and Smell are vibratory motion.
The world is known to us simply by virtue of, and in relation to, the
vibratory motion of its particles. Those vibratory motions are
appreciated and continued by the nervous system, and by it brought at
length to the mind's perception."


The Higher Planes of Nature

In view of the facts and principles above set forth and considered, we
may begin to see that there is nothing "unnatural" in the hypothesis
that there may be reports conveyed to the consciousness of man by means
of higher vibrations than those of ordinary sound, or ordinary sight,
providing that man has either (1) highly developed his ordinary senses
of sight, hearing, or touch to a degree sufficiently high to register
these higher vibrations; or else has evolved and unfolded into
consciousness certain latent faculties of sense-impression which are
lying dormant in the great masses of mankind. In fact, the thoughtful
person will be forced to admit that this new knowledge of the nature of
sensations, and of its relation to vibratory motion, renders extremely
probable the truth of the great body of reports of such so-called
extra-conscious knowledge which the experience of the race has furnished
from the beginning of human history down to the present time. Such a
person will see that it is not a sign of "credulity" for a person to
accept such reports, so universally set forth; but that, rather, it is a
sign of "credulity" for a person to accept blindly the dogmatic
assertions of the materialistic sceptics to the effect that "there is no
such thing possible in the natural world, under natural world, under
natural laws--the whole thing is delusion or else deliberate fraud."
Such "know-it-all" persons are usually found to really "know much that
is not true," and to lack knowledge of much that is true, regarding
Nature, her realm and her laws.


An Appeal To Reason.

Concluding these statements, let us say that the student of this book
will find nothing contained within this book which is contrary to
Nature's laws and principles. He will nowhere in it be asked to suspend
the exercise of his reason, and to accept as facts things which violate
all of Nature's laws. Instead, he will find at each point full natural
explanations of even the most wonderful phenomena; and the appeal to
accept same will be made always to his reason, and not to his blind
faith or unreasoning belief. The student is urged to build his knowledge
of this important subject upon this solid rock of natural law and fact,
and not upon the shifting and sinking sands of mere dogmatic assertion
and appeal to assumed authority ancient or modern.




