PART VIII

HOW TO DEVELOP MEDIUMSHIP


Anyone is entitled to be considered a "medium" if he or she is
psychically sensitive and capable of receiving and responding to spirit
control or influence. Likewise, anyone is entitled to the designation
who is capable of so generating freely a sufficient quantity of "psychic
force," magnetism, prana, or whatever other name we may choose to apply
to the force which is generated in the human organism and is capable of
being employed by the spirits in order to produce mediumistic phenomena
of the class usually referred to as "physical phenomena." As we have
seen, the spirits themselves are not usually able to manufacture or
generate by themselves this psychic required to produce the said
phenomena, but, on the contrary, must depend upon mediumistic
individuals for such force.


Who Are Mediumistic?

Many persons are more or less naturally sensitive to spirit influence,
and therefore mediumistic. In many cases these persons tend to take on
the psychic conditions of others, both those in earth life and those on
the spirit plane of existence, without realizing the nature of the
influence operating on them. Such persons are frequently more or less
erratic, and are considered as "flighty" by their friends. They need
instruction on the subject of psychic laws and self-control, so that
they may intelligently guard themselves against undesirable influences,
and at the same time cultivate the power of mediumship of the desirable
kind. It has been asserted that "everyone is a medium," and in a way
this is true, for practically every person is more or less sensitive to
spirit influence, and is capable of being developed into an efficient
medium of communication with the spirit world. But it is equally true
that only a certain percentage of persons possess the true spiritual
qualities requisite for the highest phases of true mediumship. That is
to say, but few persons are fitted temperamentally and spiritually for
the higher tasks of mediumship. We think it safe to say, however, that
where a person is filled with a burning desire to become a true medium,
and feels within himself or herself a craving of the soul for
development along these lines, then that person may feel assured that he
or she has within his or her soul the basic qualities required for true
mediumship, and that these may be developed by the proper methods.


The Mediumistic Temperament.

A leading writer on the subject of mediumship has said: "It is a
fundamental proposition that sensitiveness, or the capability of
mediumship, is a faculty common to mankind, differing in degree--as
hearing and sight are common heritages, but keener in some individuals
than in others; or, under certain conditions, it may disappear." What
is called "the mediumistic temperament" is frequently marked
self-consciousness and shrinking from public criticism, and a diffidence
which causes the person to wish to be out of the range of the
observation of strangers and those not sympathetic to them; on the other
hand, however, there are other forms of the "mediumship temperament"
which is marked by a nervous, almost hysterical, self assertiveness and
desire for public notice and attention. Persons of either of these
phases of this temperament, however, have the common quality of being
extremely sensitive to sneers and slights, adverse criticism and
oppositions, while ridicule drives them almost beside themselves.
Likewise they are nearly always found to be enthusiastic and earnest
workers when their interests and sympathies are aroused; as a writer has
said "they are almost invariably emotional, enthusiastic, spontaneous,
and ardent." And, as another writer has said they are usually "generous
and impulsive, hot-headed and independent, close friends with warm
hearts; too sensitive to criticism of an unkind nature, too easily
pleased by praise; without malice, without revengeful thoughts." A
striking feature of this temperament may be summed up in the phrase,
"hungry for sympathy and understanding."


Is Mediumship Desirable?

While it is true that a vast majority of persons possess the mediumistic
power, latent and dormant, and capable of being developed to a greater
or less active power, it is but honest to say that in many cases it is a
grave question whether the person would be justified in undertaking the
hard work, and long time, required to develop himself for the minor
success which would attend his efforts. As a writer has said: "Does the
prospective result justify the labor involved to bring these powers into
efflorescence? My impression is, that in at least three cases out of
four, the time and labor it would take to develop this latent quality to
its greatest efficacy would be far in excess of its value when so
developed." But, as we have already said, the best indication is found
in the "call" to develop his or her latent powers which the true medium
always experiences.


Developing the Natural Power.

A writer on this subject well says: "Just as a drum or tamborine is
incapable of being made to emit a tithe of what can be produced by means
of a piano or a violin, in the way of music, so the differences in
quality and conditions of the physical organisms, and in the degree of
nervous and psychical sensibility of those who desire mediumship, render
it improbable that any but a small proportion will develop such extreme
susceptibility to spirit influence as will repay them for the time and
self-sacrifice involved in the cultivation of their powers. Further, it
should be borne in mind that while wise spirits are ever ready to
respond to the call of the earnest aspirant for spiritual truth, as wise
spirits they are not likely to devote themselves to the preparation of
an instrument that would be inefficient for their purpose. The nervous
system of the medium, whatever his phase may be, has to be trained to
respond to the will and the psychic force of the controlling spirit,
just as much as the muscles of the musician or artist, and 'practice
makes perfect' in the one case as well in the other. Since mediumship
is a strictly natural qualification, depending upon organic fitness and
susceptibility, it is not a supernatural power or a special 'gift,'
neither does it insure the moral purity nor the intellectual ability of
the medium, any more than musical or artistic capabilities are evidences
of the special intelligence or the high moral tones of their
possessors."


Mediumship and Genius.

The spirits controlling the hand of a celebrated writing medium, once
delivered through him the following message regarding the nature and
development of mediumistic powers: "Mediumship is a development of that
which is, in another sort, genius. Genius, the opened and attentive ear
to spirit guidance and inspiration, shades away into mediumship, the
facile instrument of spirit manifestation. In proportion as the medium
becomes open to influence, directly exercised, is he valuable as a means
whereby direct messages are conveyed. And in proportion as the
individual spirit is lost and merged in the great ocean of spirit, is
the result most direct and serviceable. It is when the passive spirit is
content to allow us to use the corporeal instrument, as it does when
itself operates, that we gain satisfactory results. That can only be
when a condition of perfect passivity, as far removed from scepticism as
from credulity, has been secured. This opening of the spiritual being to
spiritual influences is what you call mediumship. The true and valuable
gifts are purely spiritual and must be used for spiritual purposes; not
for gain, or for satisfying curiosity, or for base or unworthy ends."


Spontaneous Mediumship.

What may be called "spontaneous mediumship" is experienced by many
persons not claiming mediumistic powers, and not understanding the
nature of the phenomena manifesting to and through themselves. Such
persons at times are conscious of the presence of spirit friends, and
may even catch glimpses of them either in the form of a mental image
impressed upon their minds by the spirit friends, or else by a more or
less clear partial materialization. Sometimes raps manifest themselves
in their vicinity, and tables and light articles of furniture may
manifest movement at their touch or approach. Such persons, not
understanding the laws of spirit manifestation, are frequently greatly
distressed, or even frightened, by such manifestations; and in not a few
cases they experience considerable annoyance and grief by reason of the
attitude of their friends who are apt to consider them "queer," or
"spooky," and therefore to be avoided. Moreover, in the case of the
physical manifestations such as the movements of tables, furniture,
etc., and the production of raps, these persons are frequently accused
of deliberate fraud in the production of such phenomena, whereas as a
matter of fact they, themselves, are quite in the dark as to the cause
and nature of the phenomena in question. It is obvious that the placing
of the right information in the hands of such persons, and their
instruction in the laws and principles of mediumship would be a blessing
to them.


Mediumistic Flashes.

A writer has the following to say concerning this class of mediumistic
persons: "Those persons who are naturally sensitive sometimes
experience strange and sudden impulses. Thoughts come to them 'in a
flash,' so to speak. They say things spontaneously which they had not
intended to say--the words seem to burst from them and 'say themselves.'
Others have equally sudden and fugitive clairvoyant experiences; they
see spirits where they least expect, and when they are absorbed in
something else; but when they strongly desire to 'see' or to receive
guidance, they get nothing. This state of affairs, in all probability,
is due to the fact that their susceptibility is not sufficiently
developed; their psychical impressibility can only be reached and acted
upon under specially favorable conditions, which are disturbed and
dissipated when the ordinary intellectual self is aroused.


Systematic Development.

"The remedy will be found in the systematic cultivation of interior
repose and confidence. The psychic must learn to regard it as a
perfectly natural experience that the spiritual states and positive
thoughts of excarnate people should impinge upon his spiritual sphere,
and while 'attentive to the holy vision,' should calmly accept the fact
and maintain the attitude or response; not anxiously nor demandingly,
but thankfully enjoying the spiritual communion and illumination thus
afforded to him. It is only natural that many people should desire to
become mediums, and that they should wish to ascertain what constitutes
mediumship, and what is required to secure its development. But those
who express these desires should remember that in all probabilities
months, if not years, of patient development have been necessary for the
success and efficiency of those celebrated mediums whom they admire and
probably envy." But, as we have said before, if the "call" to mediumship
be felt, then it may be heeded; though the person must be prepared to
pay the price of toil and work, patience and perseverance, required to
attain the mountain top of mediumship.


The Development Circle.

As we have repeatedly stated in the foregoing pages, the actual spirit
circle is the best possible means of developing the latent powers of
mediumship, and the simplest, readiest, and most effective method of
discovering the presence of such latent powers in the individual. As a
leading medium has told us, it is "the primary school for the study of
spiritual facts, and for the training of mediums." The "spirit circle,"
as most of you know, is a company of harmonious, earnest, sympathetic
persons joining their psychic powers for the purpose of aiding the
medium to establish the lines of psychic communication between the earth
plane and the planes of the spiritual world. It must here be stated that
by "development" we do not mean the cultivation of the powers of the
spirits, but rather the training and unfoldment of the powers of the
medium to receive and transmit the power exercised by the spirit
controls.


The Aspirational Attitude.

To those who purpose to develop their latent mediumistic powers by and
through the development circle, we would say that it is of the highest
importance that they should cultivate a trustful, hopeful mental
attitude, and a willingness to open themselves to the inflow of the
spiritual power of their friends of the spiritual planes. As a writer
has said, they should "make some mental preparation, such as eliminating
from their minds all disturbing or irritating thoughts, and by striving
to consciously realize union of purpose with those who may have
previously made their presence known or indicated their intention to
help in the work of the development of their mediumistic powers, by
mentally requesting that the spiritual ties may be strengthened. Even
where there has not been any clear indication of the presence of spirit
helpers, a generally aspirational and receptive attitude of mind will do
much towards providing favorable conditions."


Natural Unfoldment.

Again, the person wishing to develop his latent mediumistic powers must
exercise patience and perseverance, and must not insist upon a premature
attempt at revelation on the part of the spirits. The process of the
unfoldment of the mediumistic powers should be akin to that of the
unfoldment of the bud of the flower, that is to say, it must be gradual,
natural, and unforced. The writer above mentioned, says on this point:
"Too many people, instead of waiting until the spirits were ready to
communicate with them, have pressed for 'tests' before the connections
were properly made. They have complicated matters by their eager
questionings, and have worried the operators until everything went
wrong; and then, because the answers were incorrect, inconsequent and
misleading, or persistently negative, they declared that the spirit was
a deceiver, evil, or foolish, and, while having only themselves to
blame, gave up the sittings in disgust, whereas, had they been less
impetuous, less opinionated, less prejudiced, they would in all
probability have eventually obtained satisfactory proofs of the presence
of their spirit loved ones."


Persistent Watchful Waiting.

Some persons are so disappointed because they have not obtained results
after two or three sittings that they give up further efforts. It would
perhaps amaze such persons to know that many of the world's most
celebrated mediums have, in the beginning of their development circle
work, sat for several weeks, or even several months, at frequent
intervals, without obtaining more than the most meagre results; but they
afterwards developed the most marvelous power. An extreme case is cited
in the history of spiritualism, in which a couple sat night after night
for six months, without missing a sitting and without being rewarded by
a single physical result; but after this tedious and discouraging wait,
all at once, as it were, the spirits secured the most perfect kind of
communication through them, and difficult table tippings and levitation,
convincing raps, messages, writings, and finally materializations
follows, until their fame spread all over the world of spiritualism.


Building Lines of Communication.

Just how long it will require to obtain convincing results at the
development circle is a matter largely dependent upon certain
conditions. Much, of course, depends upon the faculty of the medium to
adjust and harmonize himself with the spirits, so as to furnish a "clear
wire" for them to operate over. Again, much depends upon the character
of the persons constituting the circle. A circle composed of
harmonious, helpful persons will do much to hasten the coming of the
manifestation, whereas one composed of inharmonious, sceptical,
impatient, and materialistic persons will do much to retard the progress
and development of the mediumistic powers.


Developing Concentration.

The following advice on this particular subject will be found helpful to
those contemplating the formation of development circles, and the
unfoldment of their latent powers of mediumship; it is from the pen of
an earnest student of this subject, and one who is himself a competent
medium. This person says: "One of the most important prerequisites for
success in the development of mediumship along spiritual lines is the
cultivation of the power of concentration. In the early days of the
movement the would-be medium was advised to be 'passive,' and passivity
was often construed into self-effacement. We are now learning to
distinguish between receptivity and docility, between apathy and
aspiration. A medium is not, and should not be willing to become a mere
irresponsible tool. For intelligent and beneficial association with, and
inspiration from, the people of the higher life, a certain degree of
abstraction is necessary. To cut one's self off from ordinary
conditions, to retire into the sanctuary of one's own inner
consciousness, to 'enter the silence' as it is sometimes called, is
helpful training for the preparation of conditions favorable for the
manifestation of spirit-power. The Quakers were true spiritualists in
this sense, and evidently realized the need for the concentration of the
soul's forces and their withdrawal from the outer plane, preparatory to
the descent of the spiritual influence that moved them to speak.


The Call for Illumination.

"The sincere supplication for illumination and guidance is never in
vain. The spirit breathes a serener air, and is calmed, strengthened,
and comforted by the subsequent reaction. It is harmonized thereby, and
thus becomes accordant to the psychic forces which, like the ocean's
tides, ebb and flow throughout the universe, and bathe every soul that
lies open to their vivifying and quickening influence. Still more, there
are those who dwell in the Light, whose thoughts and love go out to all
such as truly call upon God; and these, the ministering messenger
spirits, often pour their libations of sympathy into the sad hearts of
the sorrowful ones on earth, even though they remain unknown and their
interposition is unrecognized by those to whom they have given their
loving and helpful thoughts.


The Jacob's Ladder of Communion.

"By the earnest study of the conditions requisite for the development of
body, mind, and psychic sense, the intelligent medium will endeavor to
meet the friends who inspire him at least half way on the Jacob's ladder
of communion, and to enter into reciprocal and conscious fellowship with
them on the thought plane, so that their inspirations may freely flow
through his instrumentality to others, unobstructed by his personality.
Classes for the development of mediumship along these lines are very
much needed; classes in which the members are expected to take an
active part, not merely to sit and sit, and let the spirits do all the
work, but by systematic preparation and spiritual aspiration and
cultivated receptivity prepare themselves to become lucid and capable
instruments for the transmission of information and helpful influences
from the other side.


The Attainment of Excellence.

"There is but one course of procedure for the successful attainment of
excellence in any field of labor or thought, and that is by study and
training, by observation, by persevering application and determined
effort, by readiness to learn, and responsiveness to every influence
which will help to smooth the pathway to the desired success. The
intelligent medium who follows this course will not go blindly on
groping in the obscurity of the psychic realm, and becoming the tool for
unseen and unknown agents, but he will unfold his powers, and by
co-operating with them will learn to know and trust his preceptors,
until he may possibly become as a spirit among spirits, the conscious
possessor of such knowledge regarding his own spiritual nature and
powers that he will be a ready instrument in the hands of enlightened
spirit people, with whom he can knowingly work for human good."


What a Development Circle Is.

Now then, with the above advice and admonitions in mind, the persons who
desire to develop and unfold their mediumistic powers will do well to
take the necessary steps to form a development circle. The "circle" it
must be remembered, is not merely a crowd of persons gathered together
for the purpose of witnessing spiritualistic manifestations or
phenomena. Instead, it is a gathering of persons who desire to
co-operate in establishing relations with the world of spirits, and to
receive communications therefrom. In the case of the development circle,
the purpose is to demonstrate that well established spiritualistic
principle that the mediumistic faculty in all of its forms is best
developed and unfolded, cultivated and strengthened, by an actual
sitting in the circle, in such a way as to perfect and spiritualize the
magnetism of the sitters by their mutual action on each other, and by
the influence and power of the spirits employing such magnetic and
psychic forces so furnished them by the circle of harmonious sitters.
Or, as a writer has well expressed it: "The purpose for which a spirit
circle is held is that by the blending of the aura, psychic force, or
magnetic emanations of the sitters, the attention of disembodied spirits
may be attracted and a battery be formed by means of which they can
communicate with the circle. The focalization of this force rests with
the unseen operator, and if they are skilled in the 'modus operana,'
they know where, how, and in what way to use it to the best advantage."


Forming the Development Circle.

The circle should be composed of not less than four persons, and not
more than twelve. It is well to have an equal number of persons of each
sex, if this be possible; if not possible to obtain an equality of the
sexes, the effort should be made to come as near to that equality as is
possible. The members of the circle should seat themselves around a
table, and as nearly as is possible the sexes should be alternated in
this grouping, that is to say, a man should sit next to a woman, and so
on. It will be found well to have the same persons regularly attend the
circles, so far as is possible. Likewise, it will be found advantageous
to always use the same table, and to hold the circle in the same
room--but these things are not absolutely essential, and very good
results may often be obtained by having the members of the circle gather
at the different homes of its respective members. While cheerfulness is
well on the part of the sitters, there should be no indulgence in levity
and joking during the sitting. The room should be comfortably warmed and
lighted in the ordinary way.


The Sitters in the Circle.

The sitters will do well to occupy their same places at each sitting,
unless the spirits indicate otherwise. The medium, or in the absence of
a recognized medium the most sensitive person in the circle, should sit
in the circle at a place mentally recognized as the "head of the table,"
even though the table be circular in form. It will be well for the
sitters to hold each others' hands at the beginning of the circle, in
order to generate the necessary magnetism. But after the circle is
actually formed, the sitters should place their hands on the top of the
table, close to its edge; the small fingers of the hands of each sitter
touching those of the sitter on either side of him--in this way there is
a psychic and magnetic battery formed of the sitters, providing perfect
connection is maintained.


The Spirit Communication Code.

At the beginning, the leader should plainly announce the signalling
conditions, so as to avoid confusion on the part of the sitters and the
visiting spirits (for there are several codes in use, and confusion
sometimes occurs). The most general used and approved code is as
follows: "THREE indicates Yes; ONE indicates No; TWO indicates
'doubtful'; FOUR indicates 'don't know'; and FIVE indicates 'call the
alphabet.'" The numbers refer to the number of raps or table-tilts,
etc., given by the spirits in answer to questions asked them. When the
alphabet is called for, some one of the circle slowly calls out each
letter of the alphabet, in regular order, until a rap or table-tilt
indicate that the right letter has been indicated; this letter should
then be written down, and the alphabet again called, until the next
