PART V

CLAIRVOYANCE: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE


As we have said in the preceding chapter, in our consideration of the
general subject of Clairvoyance, there is possible a general
classification of clairvoyant phenomena according to general
distinctions, as follows: (1) PRESENT CLAIRVOYANCE, in which the objects
perceived by the clairvoyant are present in time and in space, although
invisible to normal sight; (2) SPACE CLAIRVOYANCE, in which the
clairvoyant vision includes objects and scenes removed in space from the
normal perception of the clairvoyant; and (3) TIME CLAIRVOYANCE, in
which the clairvoyant perceives objects or scenes removed from him in
past time, or future time.

While the general methods of manifesting these various forms of
clairvoyant power are practically the same, yet the nature of these
several forms of phenomena vary considerably, as we shall see when we
come to consider them in detail in the following pages: this is
particularly true in the case of the distinction between past-time
clairvoyant phenomena, and future-time clairvoyant phenomena--the
difference between the perception of what has been, and that which has
not yet been.


Present Clairvoyance.

In what is called Present Clairvoyance the objects perceived by the
clairvoyant are present in time and in space, at the moment and place of
the perception, although invisible to normal sight. It is seen at once
that if the object seen clairvoyantly is present in time and in space to
the clairvoyant, and yet is incapable of being perceived by the normal
sight of the clairvoyant, then that object must be capable of being
perceived only through vibrations above the normal range of the human
senses. Perhaps the precise nature of this class of clairvoyant
perceptions will be better understood by a more detailed description of
the objects actually perceived by clairvoyant vision of this mode of
manifestation.


The Human Aura.

In the first place, this mode of clairvoyant vision discloses the
interesting phenomena concerned with the human aura, or psychic
atmosphere which surrounds the human body for a space of several feet,
assuming an egg-shaped form. A writer says on this point: "The trained
clairvoyant vision sees the human aura as a nebulous hazy substance,
like a luminous cloud, surrounding the person for two or three feet on
each side of his body, becoming more dense near the body, and gradually
becoming less dense as it extends away from the body. It has a
phosphorescent appearance, with a peculiar tremulous motion manifesting
through its substance. The clairvoyant sees the human aura as composed
of all the colors of the spectrum, the combination shifting with the
changing mental and emotional states of the person. But, in a general
way, it may be said that each person has his or her distinctive astral
auric colors, depending upon his or her general character or
personality. Each mental state, or emotional manifestation, has its own
particular shade or combination of shades of auric coloring. This
beautiful kaleidoscopic spectacle has its own meaning to the occultist
with clairvoyant vision, for he is thus able to read the character and
general mental states of the person by means of studying his auric
colors. The human aura is not in a state of calm phosphorescence,
however. On the contrary, it sometimes manifests great flames, like
those of a fiery furnace, which shoot forth great tongues, and dart
forth suddenly in certain directions toward the objects attracting them.
Under great emotional excitement the auric flames move around in swift
circling whirlpools, or else swirl away from a centre. Again, it seems
to throw forth tiny glistening sparks of psychic vibrations, some of
which travel for a great distance.


The Prana Aura.

"The clairvoyant vision is also able to discern what is called the
'prana aura' of a person. By this term is indicated that peculiar
emanation of vital force which surrounds the physical body of each and
every person. In fact, many persons of but slight clairvoyant power, who
cannot sense the auric colors, are able to perceive this prana aura
without trouble. It is sometimes called the 'health aura,' or 'physical
aura.' It is colorless, or rather about the shade of clear glass,
diamond, or water. It is streaked with very minute, bristle-like lines.
In a state of good health these fine lines are stiff like toothbrush
bristles; while in the case of poor health these lines droop, curl, and
present a furlike appearance. It is sometimes filled with minute
sparkling particles, like tiny vibratory motion. To the clairvoyant
vision the prana aura appears like the vibrating heated air arising from
a fire, or stove, or from the heated earth in summertime. If the student
will close his eyes partially, and peer through narrowed eyelids, he
will in all probability be able to perceive this prana aura surrounding
the body of some healthy, vigorous person--particularly if that person
be standing in a dim light. Looking closely, he will see the peculiar
vibratory motion, like heated air, at a distance of about two inches
from the body of the person. It requires a little practice in order to
acquire the knack of perceiving these vibrations--a little experimenting
in order to get just the right light on the person--but practice will
bring success, and you will be repaid for your trouble. In the same way,
the student may by practice acquire the faculty of perceiving his own
prana aura. The simplest way to obtain this last mentioned result is to
place your fingers (spread out into fan-shape) against a black
background, in a dim light. Then gaze at the fingers through narrowed
eyelids, and half-closed eyes. After a little practice, you will see a
fine thin line surrounding your fingers on all sides--a semi-luminous
border of prana aura. In most cases this border of aura is colorless,
but sometimes a very pale yellowish hue is perceived. The stronger the
vital force of the person, the stronger and brighter will this border of
prana aura appear. The aura surrounding the fingers will appear very
much like the semi-luminous radiance surrounding a gas-flame, or the
flame of a candle, which is familiar to everyone."


The Auric Colors.

Another writer says of the clairvoyant perception of the human aura: "As
he looks, the clairvoyant will see himself surrounded by the luminous
mist of the aura, flashing with all sorts of brilliant colors, and
constantly changing hue and brilliancy with every variation of the
person's thought and feelings. He will see this aura flooded with the
beautiful rose-color of pure affection, the rich blue of devotional
feeling, the hard, dull brown of selfishness, the deep scarlet of anger,
the horrible lurid red of sensuality, the livid grey of fear, the black
clouds of hatred and malice, or any of the other hundredfold indications
so easily to be read in it by the practiced eye; and thus it will be
impossible for any persons to conceal from his the real state of their
feelings on any subject. Not only does the astral aura show him the
temporary result of the emotion passing through it at the moment, but it
also gives him, by an arrangement and proportion of its colors when in a
condition of perfect rest, a clue to the general disposition and
character of its owner."


Thought Forms.

Another phase of clairvoyant phenomena of this class is that of the
perception of "thought forms," as they are called by occultists. As all
students of occultism know, a strong thought or emotion manifests a
certain high vibratory motion, and takes upon itself a vibratory "form"
which is plainly perceptible to the trained clairvoyant vision. These
thought-forms manifest a great variety in appearance and character. Some
appear in a faint wave-like form, something like the tiny waves caused
by the dropping of a pebble in a pond of water. Others take on a
whirlpool form, rotating and whirling as they move through space. Others
appear like whirling rings, similar in general form to the "ring" puffed
forth from the mouth of a cigar smoker, or from the funnel of a
locomotive. Others glow like great opals. Others appear like jets
emitted from the spout of a teakettle. Others twist along like a
corkscrew. Others appear like exploding bombs. Others branch out arms
like a devil-fish, which wriggle in all directions, as if striving to
attach themselves to some object upon which they wish to take hold.


The X-Ray Sense.

Another phase of clairvoyant phenomena of this general class is that
which may be called "the X-Ray Sense," for indeed it enables the
clairvoyant to see through a brick wall, or other material obstacle, or
through a sealed letter, etc. The higher psychic vibrations easily pass
through the most solid object, just as do the X-Rays, and consequently
the clairvoyant is able to see what is going on on the other side of a
brick wall, or the walls of a house. Likewise, the clairvoyant vision is
able to pierce through the dense earth, and to perceive veins of mineral
or metal lying concealed beneath.


Microscopic Vision.

Another phase of clairvoyant power of this general class, but one not
nearly so common as those above mentioned, is described by a well-known
occultist as follows: "Another strange power of which the clairvoyant
may find himself in possession is that of magnifying at will the
minutest physical particle to any desired size, as through a
microscope--though no microscope ever made, or ever likely to be made,
possesses even a thousandth part of this psychic magnifying power. By
its means the hypothetical molecule and atom postulated by science
becomes visible and living realities to the occult student, and on this
closer examination he finds them to be much more complex in their
structure than the scientific man has yet realized them to be. It also
enables him to follow with the closest attention and the most lively
interest all kinds of electrical, magnetic, and other etheric action;
and when some of the specialists in these branches of science are able
to develop the power to see these things whereof they speak so facilely,
some very wonderful and beautiful revelations may be expected."


Space Clairvoyance.

In what is called Space Clairvoyance the objects, persons, scenes, or
events perceived by the clairvoyant are removed in space from him--often
being located at points in space thousands of miles distant, in fact.
The pages of works upon occultism, and those devoted to the recording of
proved instances gathered by the societies for psychical research, are
filled with the most interesting cases of this form of clairvoyant
vision. Instances are recorded, upon the very best possible authority,
in which persons with clairvoyant powers have been perfectly cognizant
of events occurring on the other side of the world, or across the
Atlantic or Pacific Oceans. In fact, it would seem that distance and
space are practically wiped out in this form of clairvoyant phenomena,
and that it is just as easy to see clairvoyantly over the space of a
thousand miles, as over that of a hundred feet--the principle involved
being precisely the same.


The Psychic Telescope.

Space Clairvoyance, or Distant Clairvoyance, is manifested in the form
of Psychometry, Crystal Gazing, or Direct Clairvoyance, as we have said.
We do not consider it necessary to record here any typical instances of
this phase of phenomena, as the many books on this subject are chiefly
devoted to a recital thereof, and every student is more or less
acquainted with the same. The whole matter may be summed up by saying
that in this form of clairvoyant vision, there is manifested what might
be called a "psychic telescope with an X-Ray attachment," thus enabling
one to see at any distance, and through any intervening objects. This
gives you a mental picture of the process.


Radio-Activity.

In the theory of vibratory forces, as set forth in the earlier chapters
of this book, we have the only scientific explanation of the phenomena
of distant clairvoyance. Modern science, in its teachings regarding the
radio-activity of physical objects, has thrown much additional light on
this subject, and has corroborated the ancient occult teachings on the
subject. These rays of higher vibratory power are like the rays of light
or heat, although of a much higher rate of intensity and vibratory
motion, and though the most delicate scientific instruments are able to
register some of these, it is still practically admitted by science that
the highest of these radio-active vibrations are beyond the scope and
field of even the most sensitive instrument yet known to science. This
is saying much when we remember that some of the delicate instruments of
science are so sensitive that they are able to register the heat waves
of a candle at the distance of one mile; while others are able to record
the presence of certain chemical elements in the most distant of the
visible stars, by means of the light waves carrying certain forms of
vibration.


Sensing the Higher Vibrations.

Under the radio-active theory it is quite reasonable to conceive of the
clairvoyant sense being able to register and interpreting these higher
vibrations which are beyond the power of even the most delicate
instruments of science. It must be admitted that the existence of such
vibrations being granted--and science tacitly admits their
presence--then ordinary distances on earth would be no barrier at all to
the action of clairvoyant vision capable of registering them. Moreover,
in such case all intervening objects would be penetrated by these waves,
and as a writer has well said, "they would be able to cross one another
to infinity in all directions without entanglement, precisely as the
vibrations of ordinary light do." Physical science and psychic science
at last seem to have arrived at a common ground of understanding, and
many of the most advanced scientists do not hesitate to admit this
fact, though their more conservative brethren hesitate to do so.


Viewing Distant Scenes.

A writer has said of this form of clairvoyant perception: "The view of a
distant scene obtained in this way is in many ways not unlike that seen
through a telescope. Human figures usually appear very small, like those
upon a distant stage, but in spite of their diminutive size they are
clear as though they were close by. Sometimes it is possible by this
means to hear what is said as well as to see what is done; but as in the
majority of cases this does not happen, we must consider it rather as
the manifestation of an additional power than as a necessary corollary
of the faculty of sight. It will be observed that in cases of this kind
the clairvoyant does not actually leave his physical body at all--he
simply manufactures for himself, and uses, a kind of psychic telescope.
Consequently he has the use of his physical powers while he is examining
the distant scene; for example, his voice usually describes what he sees
even while he is in the act of making the observation."


Time Clairvoyance.

In what is called Time Clairvoyance the clairvoyant is able to perceive
objects, persons, scenes, and events removed from him in past time or
future time. That is to say, the clairvoyant perceives things which have
existed in the physical world in times long past, which things have long
since vanished from physical existence; or, on the other hand, he
perceives things which belong to future existence--this which have
never as yet been in physical existence, and of course are not in such
existence at the present time. The careful student will see at once that
the principle of manifestation governing these two respective phases of
clairvoyance must be quite different; and, accordingly, the two
respective phases must be considered separately and apart from each
other.


Past Time Clairvoyance.

In what is known as Past Time Clairvoyance there is the manifestation of
clairvoyant vision in the direction of scenes and occurrences of the
past. Here, the clairvoyant perceives the events and scenes of past time
just as clearly and plainly as if such were present before him in time
and in space. Just as in Distant Clairvoyance it is just as easy for the
clairvoyant to see things at a great distance as those at a short
distance, so in Past Time Clairvoyance it is just as easy for the
clairvoyant to see things and events occurring five thousand years ago
as it is to see things occurring one year ago, or one week ago for that
matter. The principle involved is the same in either case.


The Mystery of Seeing the Past.

To persons investigating the phenomena of clairvoyance for the first
time, however, there seems to be a much greater mystery attached to the
phenomena of Past Clairvoyance than in the case of Distant Clairvoyance.
To such persons it seems that while the perception of distant objects,
scenes, and events is wonderful and mysterious, still at the last it is
merely the perception of something now actually in existence--merely
the extension of one's normal powers of vision so as to include objects
beyond the range of the ordinary vision, but, still, actually in
existence though at a distance. The idea of the telescope enables the
mind to grasp the naturalness of this kind of phenomena. But when it
comes to the perception of things, scenes, and events WHICH ARE NO
LONGER IN EXISTENCE--things which have passed entirely out of
existence--the mystery seems to be increased, and incredulity becomes
more insistent. But to the occultist there is really no more mystery in
the one case than in the other--both sets of phenomena are seen to be
perfectly reasonable and within the realms of Nature. Let us now see how
and why the occultists view the matter in this light.


Analogies on the Physical Plane.

We may find many correspondences on the physical plane to serve as
illustrations of the phenomena of Past Time Clairvoyance, if we will but
look for them. For instance, when we withdraw a heated stove from a
room, the heat remains in the room. Likewise, though a woman bearing the
odor of a certain perfume on her clothing may have passed from a house,
the odor still lingers there. The wake of an ocean steamer is often
visible for hours after the ship has passed from sight. As modern
science expressed it: "Causes continue to exist in their Effects."


Thousand-Year-Old Light.

But we have a much more striking illustration and correspondence in the
case of the transmission of light from the distant stars, which we will
do well to carefully consider. Light travels at the rate of 186,000
miles per second. A "light-year," as known to astronomers, means the
distance traversed by a light wave (at the stated rate of travel) during
the period of one of our earth years. Some of the distant stars are
estimated to be fully one thousand light-years distant from us; or, in
other words, the light we now perceive as coming from them really is the
light that left them one thousand years ago. If one of these stars were
to be destroyed, observers on this earth would not become aware of it
for a thousand years. The star whose light we may now perceive may
actually have been destroyed nearly one thousand years ago. Other stars
are only one hundred light-years removed from us in space; others only a
few years; others only a few hours. But the principle is just the same
in all cases, namely, that we see the stars not as they are at the
present moment, but as they were when the light left them, perhaps many
years ago. Thus, as you see, we may actually perceive events long after
their happening.


Reading the Light Waves.

Now, if our physical vision was sufficiently powerful to magnify objects
on the stars, or if we had instruments to do this for us, we could
actually witness scenes, objects, persons and events which had passed
out of existence a thousand years ago. Their records are present in
these light waves from the stars, and all that is needed is an eye or a
telescope sufficiently strong to register them upon our mind. In a
fanciful story written by Camille Flammarion, the French astronomer,
many years ago, the principal character relates how, traveling in the
astral body, he was able to witness the events of the French Revolution
which had occurred many years before, by simply proceeding to the
necessary distance from the earth and there perceiving the registered
records in the earth's light-waves traveling through space at the rate
of 186,000 miles a second. In fact, by getting at the right distance he
was able to see even the events of his own childhood and youth, every
event of his life, in fact, up to the moment of his leaving the earth.
This story, fanciful as it is, nevertheless is based upon scientific
facts, and its happenings would be quite possible for a being capable of
traveling at a sufficiently rapid rate through space, and also possessed
of the power of magnifying the records of light rays. In fact, a person
on earth possessing the power of Distant Clairvoyance might be able to
duplicate these feats, providing he were able to come in rapport contact
with one of these light-waves bearing the past-time records. Think for a
moment, and you will grasp the point of this statement.


The Akashic Plane.

But this, however, is but an illustration of the correspondence on the
ordinary physical plane of certain things on a higher plane of Nature.
Past Time Clairvoyance is not dependent upon light-waves, or any other
of the lesser phases of vibratory activity. Instead, it depends entirely
upon the phenomena and facts of a higher plane of Nature--a plane which
occultists have called the Akashic Plane. Some occultists prefer the
general term, "the Astral Plane," but the former term is a closer and
more definite one. The Akashic Plane, as known to occultists, contains
the impressions or "records" of all events that have happened on the
earth plane during the present cycle of earth manifestation. The very
subtle and tenuous substance of the Akashic Plane--the term "etheric"
may best describe the nature of this substance--contains traces and
impressions of all the happenings of the past of this earth; and such
impressions may be read and seen by the clairvoyant who has developed
sufficiently high powers of vision. These Akashic Records have well been
called "the substantial memory of the earth." Upon the subtle etheric
substance of the Akashic Plane are registered the records of every
event, thing, object, happening, or activity of the earth which has
existed or been manifested from the very beginning of the present cycle
of the earth's existence. These records will, it is claimed, persist
until the final ending of the present earth cycle.


The Akashic Records.

The clairvoyant whose powers of Past Time Clairvoyance have been
developed sufficiently, and who has mastered the art of concentration of
his psychic attention, manages to come into more or less perfect en
rapport condition contact with these Akashic Records, and is thus
enabled to read from them what he sees there. To him it actually seems
as if he were seeing the actions of things in present existence, and
many excellent clairvoyants are ignorant of the existence of the Akashic
Records, though they habitually read the contents thereof; these
clairvoyants know simply that they "see" these past happenings--they
have not the faintest conception of how they are able to see them. This
is no more strange than would be the case of a man who witnessed a
moving picture for the first time, and who was ignorant of the mechanism
involved in the showing of the picture, the existence of the film,
etc.,--such a man would simply know that he "saw" the things, and he
might even believe that he was gazing upon an actual scene in real life.


Degrees of Clairvoyant Vision.

There is, of course, many degrees of power and development among
clairvoyants of this class; and as a result we have many varying degrees
of correctness in their readings. Some have merely a glimpse, as through
dim glasses; and some obtain merely distorted reflections similar to
those of a scene reflected into the troubled waters of a lake. Others
see far more clearly; but it is reserved for the trained occultist to
read the records as he would read the scene before him on the physical
plane. The clairvoyant does not become infallible simply by reason of
the perhaps only faint awakening of his clairvoyant vision--he is not
suddenly gifted with omniscience, as some seem to suppose. There are
almost always elements of error or imperfect visioning, except among the
advanced adepts of the occult world.


"The Memory of Nature."

A celebrated occultist says concerning the point just raised:
"Comparatively few accounts of persons possessing this faculty of
looking into the past are to be found in the literature of the subject,
and it might therefore be supposed to be much less common than
prevision, or future-time clairvoyance. I suspect, however, that the
truth is rather that it is much less commonly recognized. It may easily
happen that a person may see a picture of the past without recognizing
it as such, unless there happens to be in it something which attracts
special attention, such as a figure in armor, or in antique costume. It
is probable that occasional glimpses of these reflections of the Akashic
Records are commoner than the published accounts would lead us to
believe. As usual, we find examples of all degrees of the power to see
into this 'memory of Nature,' from the trained man who can consult the
record for himself at will, down to the person who gets nothing but
occasional vague glimpses, or has even perhaps had only one such
glimpse. But even the man who possesses this faculty only partially and
occasionally may still find it of the deepest interest.


Involuntary Clairvoyance.

"The psychometrist, who needs an object physically connected with the
past in order to bring it all into life again around him; and the
crystal-gazer who can sometimes direct his less certain astral telescope
to some historic scene of long ago, may both derive the greatest
enjoyment from the exercise of their respective gifts, even though they
may not always understand exactly how their results are produced, and
may not have them fully under control under all circumstances. In many
cases of the lower manifestation of these powers we find that they are
exercised unconsciously; many a crystal-gazer watches scenes from the
past without ever realizing that he is in effect psychometrizing the
various objects around him as he happens to touch them or stand near
them. It would be well for all students to bear in mind that occultism
is the apotheosis of common sense, and that every vision that comes to
them is not necessarily a picture from the Akashic Records, nor every
experience a revelation from on high. It is far better to err on the
side of healthy scepticism than that of over-credulity; and it is an
admirable rule never to hunt for an occult explanation of anything when
a plain and obvious physical one is available. Our duty is to keep our
balance always, and never to lose our self-control, but to take a
reasonable, common-sense view of whatever may happen to us."


Future Time Clairvoyance.

In what is known technically as Future Time Clairvoyance, we have the
manifestation of the clairvoyant vision in the direction of scenes and
events of the future. In this phase of clairvoyance the seer perceives
the events and scenes of future time just as if they were present before
him at that very moment. This phase of clairvoyance is far rarer and
more uncommon than any of the other phases. In fact, it is so seldom met
with in its perfection that its manifestation is a matter of greatest
interest to those who make a study of the subject. It occasionally
occurs in flashes, and can not be produced at will by the ordinary
clairvoyant. Unfortunately, its very rarity and uncommonness cause it to
be counterfeited and imitated by unprincipled persons.


Seeing What Has Not Yet Happened.

The student who reasons carefully and logically usually meets with what
to him, at least at first, seems to be an unsurmountable obstacle in
the way of a rational explanation of Future Time Clairvoyance--when it
comes to an understanding of how anyone can expect to see, or can really
see, THAT WHICH HAS NEVER HAPPENED, he throws up his hands in despair.
But, in this as in all the other phases of clairvoyant phenomena, there
is found a reason and cause, although it requires some subtle thinking
to find it, and to grasp it even when it is found. Let us see what are
the highest teachings on this subject, as announced by the careful
thinkers along the lines for many centuries.


Simple Prevision.

There is a phase of prevision, or prophecy of coming events, however,
that is not true clairvoyance at all, but simply the subconscious
workings of the mind along the lines of a supernormal perception of the
laws of cause and effect. Give the active subconscious mental faculties
the perception of a strong existing cause, and it will often reason out
the probable effect (the almost certain effect, in fact) of that cause,
even though that effect lies in the mist of the future. The subconscious
mind works upon the principle that "coming events cast their shadows
before." But this, at the best, is not true clairvoyance--it is merely
the statement of "probable" results, and effects of existing causes,
wonderfully exact and clear though the deduction may be in some cases.
But a thousand-and-one unforeseen things may arise to completely upset
the prediction, or deduction, for it is never actually true until it
occurs. We must look further for real instances of Future Clairvoyance.


The Nature of Time.

That eminent scientist, Sir Oliver Lodge, offers an ingenious and
interesting, though very technical explanation of this class of
clairvoyant phenomena as follows: "Time is but a relative mode of
regarding things; we progress through phenomena at a certain definite
pace, and this subjective advance we interpret in an objective manner,
as if events moved necessarily in this order and at this precise rate.
But that may be only one mode of regarding them. The events may be in
some sort of existence always, both past and future, and it may be we
who are arriving at them, not they which are happening. The analogy of a
traveler in a railway train is useful; if he could never leave the
train, nor alter its pace, he would probably consider the landscapes as
necessarily successive, and be unable to conceive their co-existence. We
perceive, therefore, a possible fourth dimensional aspect about time,
the inexorableness of whose flow may be a natural part of our present
limitations. And if we once grasp the idea that past and future may be
actually existing, we can recognize that they may have a controlling
influence on all present action, and the two together may constitute the
'higher plane' or totality of things after which, it seems to me, we are
impelled to seek, in connection with the directing of form or
determinism, and the action of human beings consciously directed to a
definite and preconceived end."


The Oriental Teaching.

The Hindus, and other oriental peoples, however, have a clearly defined
and positive explanation of the phenomena of Future Time Clairvoyance,
which must be included in our consideration of the subject, even though
it does involve certain metaphysical or philosophical conceptions which
are apart from our present inquiry as conducted in this book. The
oriental theory is based upon that basic conception of the eastern
philosophies which hold that the beginning, duration, and ending of any
particular one of the infinitude of successive universes created by the
Supreme Being, is to that Being but as a single moment of time; or, as
the celebrated Hindu proverb runs: "The creation, duration, and
destruction of a universe is but the time of the twinkling of an eye to
Brahman." In other words, that to the Supreme Being, all the past, all
the present, all the future of the universe, must be as but a single
thought in a single moment of time--an instantaneous act of
consciousness.


The Eternal Now.

A writer on this subject has said: "Those occultists and metaphysicians
who have thought long and deeply upon the ultimate facts and nature of
the universe, have dared to think that there must exist some absolute
consciousness--some absolute mind--which must perceive the past,
present, and future of the universe as one happening; as simultaneously
and actively present at one moment of absolute time. They reason that
just as a man may see at one moment of his time some particular event
which might appear as a year to some minute form of life and mind--the
microscopic creatures in a drop of water, for instance--so that which
seems as a year, or as a hundred years, to the mind of man, may appear
as the happening of a single moment of a higher scale of time to some
exalted Being, or form of consciousness on a higher plane."


Absolute Time

The daring flights of metaphysical fancy have resulted in the general
acceptance, on the part of advanced metaphysicians, of the postulate of
the existence of an Absolute Mind, independent of Time and Space, to
which everything exists HERE and NOW. To such a mind the entire sequence
of events in the life-history of a universe would appear as a single
unit of conscious experience--an infinitesimal point of time in
Eternity. The human imagination staggers at the idea, but logical
thought finally posits it as an unescapable conclusion of extended
thought. This, possibly, is the secret of Future Time Clairvoyance,
Prevision, Second Sight, etc.


The Occult Hypothesis.

But it must not be supposed that the oriental occultists hold for a
moment the theory that the clairvoyant actually obtains access to the
Divine Mind or Absolute Mind, when he experiences this vision of future
events--their idea is very different from this. These occultists teach
that the phenomena of each plane are reflected with more or less
clearness upon the substance of the planes beneath it. This being so, it
is readily seen that the seer who is able to contact with any of the
higher planes of being might thereupon see the reflection, more or less
clear, or more or less distorted, of that which is present in its
completeness on the highest plane of all. This is a mere hint at the
quite complicated occult teaching on this subject; but the capable
thinker will be able to work out the full theory for himself in his own
way. The important fact is that Future Time Clairvoyance is a
reality--that it is a matter of actual experience of the race, and one
that has been authenticated by the investigations of such learned bodies
as the Society for Psychical Research, of England, and other societies
of the same kind in different lands. Future Time Clairvoyance, Second
Sight, Prevision, etc., are facts as fully accepted by such societies as
are the facts of telepathy.


"The Prophecy of Cazotte."

Students of history are familiar with the numerous recorded instances of
marvelous prophecy of future events, wonderful predictions of events to
come, which have been fully corroborated and verified by subsequent
events. We lack the space in this book to record more than one of the
most celebrated of these historical prophecies, namely the Prophecy of
Cazotte. We have thought it advisable to reproduce the story of this
celebrated prophecy, as told by La Harpe, the French writer, who was
present upon the occasion. It may be mentioned that the fact of this
prophecy, and its literal fulfilment, is a part of French history. The
time was just previous to the French Revolution, and the tale as told by
La Harpe is as follows:


The Dinner of the Elect.

"It appears as but yesterday, and yet, nevertheless, it was at the
beginning of the year 1788. We were dining with one of the brethren at
the Academy--a man of considerable wealth and genius. The conversation
became serious; much admiration was expressed on the revolution of
thought which Voltaire had effected, and it was agreed that it was his
first claim to the reputation he enjoyed. We concluded that the
revolution must soon be consummated; that it was indispensable that
superstition and fanaticism should give way to philosophy, and we began
to calculate the probability of the period when this should be, and
which of the present company should live to see it. The oldest
complained that they could hardly flatter themselves with the hope; the
younger rejoiced that they might entertain this very probable
expectation; and they congratulated the Academy especially for having
prepared this great work, and for having been the rallying point, the
centre, and the prime mover of the liberty of thought.


The Illuminatus.

"One only of the guests had not taken part in all the joyousness of this
conversation, and had even gently and cheerfully checked our splendid
enthusiasm. This was Cazotte, an amiable and original man, but unhappily
infatuated with the reveries of the Illuminati. He spoke, and with the
most serious tone, saying: 'Gentlemen, be satisfied; you will all see
this great and sublime revolution, which you so much desire. You know
that I am a little inclined to prophecy; I repeat, you will see it.' He
was answered by the common rejoinder: 'One need not be a conjurer to see
that.' He answered: 'Be it so; but perhaps one must be a little more
than conjurer for what remains for me to tell you. Do you know what
will be the consequences of this revolution--what will be the
consequences to all of you, and what will be the immediate result--the
well-established effect--the thoroughly recognized consequences to all
of you who are here present?'


The Beginning of the Prophecy.

"'Ah,' said Condorcet, with his insolent and half-suppressed smile, 'let
us hear--a philosopher is not sorry to encounter a prophet--let us
hear?' Cazotte replied: 'You, Monsieur de Condorcet--you will yield up
your last breath on the floor of a dungeon; you will die from poison,
which you will have taken in order to escape from execution--from poison
which the happiness of that time will oblige you to carry around your
person. You, Monsieur de Chamfort, you will open your veins with
twenty-two cuts of a razor, and yet will not die till some months
afterward.' These personages looked at each other, and laughed again.
Cazotte continued: 'You, Monsieur Vicq d'Azir, you will not open your
own veins, but you will cause yourself to be bled six times in one day,
during the paroxysm of the gout, in order to make more sure of your end,
and you will die in the night.'


The Shadow of the Guillotine.

"Cazotte went on: 'You, Monsieur de Nicolai, you will die on the
scaffold; you, Monsieur Bailly, on the scaffold; you, Monsieur de
Malesherbes, on the scaffold.' 'Ah, God be thanked,' exclaimed Roucherm,
'and what of I?' Cazotte replied: 'You! you also will die on the
scaffold.' 'Yes,' replied Chamfort, 'but when will all this happen?'
Cazotte answered: 'Six years will not pass over, before all that I have
said to you shall be accomplished.' Here I (La Harpe) spoke, saying:
'Here are some astonishing miracles, but you have not included me in
your list.' Cazotte answered me, saying: 'But you will be there, as an
equally extraordinary miracle; you will then be a Christian!' Vehement
exclamations on all sides followed this startling assertion. 'Ah!' said
Chamfort, 'I am comforted; for if we perish only when La Harpe shall be
a Christian, we are immortal!'


The Fall of the Great.

"'Then,' observed Madame la Duchesse de Grammont, 'as for that, we
women, we are happy to be counted for nothing in this revolution; when I
say for nothing, it is not that we do not always mix ourselves up with
them a little; but it is a received maxim that they take no notice of
us, and of our sex.' 'Your sex, ladies,' said Cazotte, 'your sex will
not protect you this time; and you had far better meddle with nothing,
for you will be treated entirely as men, without any difference
whatever.' 'But what, then, are you really telling us of, Monsieur
Cazotte? You are preaching to us the end of the world.' 'I know nothing
on that subject; but what I do know is, that you, Madame la Duchesse,
will be conducted to the scaffold, you and many other ladies with you,
in the cart of the executioner, and with your hands tied behind your
backs.' 'All! I hope that in that case I shall at least have a carriage
hung in black.' 'No, Madame; higher ladies than yourself will go, like
you, in the common car, with their hands tied behind them.' 'Higher
ladies! what! the princesses of the blood?' 'Yea, and still more exalted
personages!' replied Cazotte.


The Fate of Royalty.

"Here a sensible emotion pervaded the whole company, and the countenance
of the host was dark and lowering--they began to feel that the joke was
becoming too serious. Madame de Grammont, in order to dissipate the
cloud, took no notice of the last reply, and contented herself with
saying in a careless tone: 'You see, he will not leave me even a
confessor!' 'No, madame!' replied Cazotte, 'you will not have
one--neither you, nor any one besides. The last victim to whom this
favor will be afforded will be--' Here he stopped for a moment. 'Well,
who then will be the happy mortal to whom this prerogative will be
given?' Cazotte replied: 'It is the only one which he will have then
retained--and that will be the King of France!' This last startling
prediction caused the company to disband in something like terror and
dismay, for the mere mention of such things was akin to treason."


The Fulfillment of the Prophecy.

To appreciate the startling nature of the Cazotte prophecy at the time
when it was made, one needs but to be even slightly acquainted with the
position and characteristics of the persons whose destinies were thus
foretold. The amazing sequel to this wonderful prophecy is told by
history--within six years every detail thereof was verified absolutely.
The facts are known to all students of French history of that period,
and may be verified by reference to the pages of any comprehensive
history of those times.


Other Historical Instances.

To mention but a few other celebrated instances of historic prophecy:
George Fox, the pioneer Quaker Friend, had the clairvoyant faculty well
developed, and numerous instances of its manifestation by him are
recorded. For instance, he foretold the death of Cromwell, when he met
him riding at Hampton Court; he said that he felt "a waft of death"
around and about Cromwell--and Cromwell died shortly afterward. Fox also
publicly foretold the dissolution of the Rump Parliament of England; the
restoration of Charles II; and the Great Fire of London. These
prophecies are all matters of history. For that matter, history contains
many instances of this kind, as, for instance, the prophecy of Caesar's
death, and its further prevision by his wife. The Bible prophecies and
predictions, major and minor, give us semi-historical instances.


The Eternal Verities.

As a writer has said concerning this phase of clairvoyant phenomena:
"This phase of clairvoyance is very fascinating to the student and the
investigator, and is one in which the highest psychic powers are called
into play. There is a reflection here of something even higher than the
psychic plane--there is a glimpse of regions infinitely higher and
greater. The student here begins to realize at least something of the
existence of that universal Consciousness 'in which we live, and move,
and have our being'; and of the existence of the reality of the Eternal
Now, in which past, present, and future are blended as one fact of
infinite consciousness. He sees here the signboard pointing to the
eternal verities!"




