Chapter IV. Notional And Real Assent.


1. I have said that our apprehension of a proposition varies in
strength, and that it is stronger when it is concerned with a
proposition expressive to us of things than when concerned with a
proposition expressive of notions; and I have given this reason for it,
viz. that what is concrete exerts a force and makes an impression on
the mind which nothing abstract can rival. That is, I have argued that,
because the object is more powerful, therefore so is the apprehension
of it.

I do not think it unfair reasoning thus to take the apprehension for
its object. The mind is ever stimulated in proportion to the cause
stimulating it. Sights, for instance, sway us, as scents do not;
whether this be owing to a greater power in the thing seen, or to a
greater receptivity and expansiveness in the sense of seeing, is a
superfluous question. The strong object would make the apprehension
strong. Our sense of seeing is able to open to its object, as our sense
of smell cannot open to its own. Its objects are able to awaken the
mind, take possession of it, inspire it, act through it, with an energy
and variousness which is not found in the case of scents and their
apprehension. Since we cannot draw the line between the object and the
act, I am at liberty to say, as I have said, that, as is the thing
apprehended, so is the apprehension.

And so in like manner as regards apprehension of mental objects. If
an image derived from experience or information is stronger than an
abstraction, conception, or conclusion—if I am more arrested by our
Lord’s bearing before Pilate and Herod than by the “Justum et tenacem”
&c. of the poet, more arrested by His Voice saying to us, “Give to
him that asketh thee,” than by the best arguments of the Economist
against indiscriminate almsgiving, it does not matter for my present
purpose whether the objects give strength to the apprehension or the
apprehension gives large admittance into the mind to the object. It
is in human nature to be more affected by the concrete than by the
abstract; it may be the reverse with other beings. The apprehension,
then, may be as fairly said to possess the force which acts upon us, as
the object apprehended.

2. Real apprehension, then, may be pronounced stronger than
notional, because things, which are its objects, are confessedly
more impressive and affective than notions, which are the objects of
notional. Experiences and their images strike and occupy the mind,
as abstractions and their combinations do not. Next, passing on to
Assent, I observe that it is this variation in the mind’s apprehension
of an object to which it assents, and not any incompleteness in the
assent itself, which leads us to speak of strong and weak assents, as
if Assent itself admitted of degrees. In either mode of apprehension,
be it real or be it notional, the assent preserves its essential
characteristic of being unconditional. The assent of a Stoic to the
“Justum et tenacem” &c. may be as genuine an assent, as absolute and
entire, as little admitting of degree or variation, as distinct from an
act of inference, as the assent of a Christian to the history of our
Lord’s Passion in the Gospel.

3. However, characteristic as it is of Assent, to be thus in its nature
simply one and indivisible, and thereby essentially different from
Inference, which is ever varying in strength, never quite at the same
pitch in any two of its acts, still it is at the same time true that it
may be difficult in fact, by external tokens, to distinguish certain
acts of assent from certain acts of inference. Thus, whereas no one
could possibly confuse the real assent of a Christian to the fact of
our Lord’s crucifixion, with the notional acceptance of it, as a point
of history, on the part of a philosophical heathen (so removed from
each other, _toto cœlo_, are the respective modes of apprehending it in
the two cases, though in both the assent is in its nature one and the
same), nevertheless it would be easy to mistake the Stoic’s notional
assent, genuine though it might be, to the moral nobleness of the just
man “struggling in the storms of fate,” for a mere act of inference
resulting from the principles of his Stoical profession, or again for
an assent merely to the inferential necessity of the nobleness of that
struggle. Nothing, indeed, is more common than to praise men for their
consistency to their principles, whatever those principles are, that
is, to praise them on an inference, without thereby implying any assent
to the principles themselves.

The cause of this resemblance between acts so distinct is obvious. It
exists only in cases of notional assents; when the assent is given
to notions, then it is possible to hesitate in deciding whether it
is assent or inference, whether the mind is merely without doubt or
whether it is actually certain. And the reason is this: notional Assent
seems like Inference, because the apprehension which accompanies acts
of inference is notional also,—because Inference is engaged for the
most part on notional propositions, both premiss and conclusion. This
point, which I have implied throughout, I here distinctly record, and
shall enlarge upon hereafter. Only propositions about individuals are
not notional, and they are seldom the matter of inference. Thus, did
the Stoic infer the fact of our Lord’s death instead of assenting to
it, the proposition would have been as much an abstraction to him as
the “Justum et tenacem,” &c; nay further, the “Justus et tenax” was at
least a notion in his mind, but “Jesus Christ” would, in the schools
of Athens or of Rome, have stood for less, for an unknown being, the
x or y of a formula. Except then in some of the cases of singular
conclusions, inferences are employed on notions, that is, unless they
are employed on mere symbols; and, indeed, when they are symbolical,
then are they clearest and most cogent, as I shall hereafter show.
The next clearest are such as carry out the necessary results of
previous classifications, and therefore may be called definitions or
conclusions, as we please. For instance, having divided beings into
their classes, the definition of man is inevitable.

4. We may call it then the normal state of Inference to apprehend
propositions as notions:—and we may call it the normal state of Assent
to apprehend propositions as things. If notional apprehension is most
congenial to Inference, real apprehension will be the most natural
concomitant on Assent. An act of Inference includes in its object the
dependence of its thesis upon its premisses, that is, upon a relation,
which is abstract; but an act of Assent rests wholly on the thesis as
its object, and the reality of the thesis is almost a condition of its
unconditionality.

5. I am led on to make one remark more, and it shall be my last.

An act of assent, it seems, is the most perfect and highest of its
kind, when it is exercised on propositions, which are apprehended as
experiences and images, that is, which stand for things; and, on the
other hand, an act of inference is the most perfect and highest of its
kind, when it is exercised on propositions which are apprehended as
notions, that is, which are creations of the mind. An act of inference
indeed may be made with either of these modes of apprehension; so
may an act of assent; but, when inferences are exercised on things,
they tend to be conjectures or presentiments, without logical force;
and when assents are exercised on notions, they tend to be mere
assertions without any personal hold on them on the part of those who
make them. If this be so, the paradox is true, that, when Inference
is clearest, Assent may be least forcible, and, when Assent is most
intense, Inference may be least distinct;—for, though acts of assent
require previous acts of inference, they require them, not as adequate
causes, but as _sine quâ non_ conditions: and, while the apprehension
strengthens Assent, Inference often weakens the apprehension.


§ 1. Notional Assents.


I shall consider Assent made to propositions which express abstractions
or notions under five heads; which I shall call Profession, Credence,
Opinion, Presumption, and Speculation.

1. _Profession._

There are assents so feeble and superficial, as to be little more than
assertions. I class them all together under the head of Profession.
Such are the assents made upon habit and without reflection; as when
a man calls himself a Tory or a Liberal, as having been brought up as
such; or again, when he adopts as a matter of course the literary or
other fashions of the day, admiring the poems, or the novels, or the
music, or the personages, or the costume, or the wines, or the manners,
which happen to be popular, or are patronized in the higher circles.
Such again are the assents of men of wavering restless minds, who
take up and then abandon beliefs so readily, so suddenly, as to make
it appear that they had no view (as it is called) on the matter they
professed, and did not know to what they assented or why.

Then, again, when men say they have no doubt of a thing, this is a
case, in which it is difficult to determine whether they assent to it,
infer it, or consider it highly probable. There are many cases, indeed,
in which it is impossible to discriminate between assent, inference,
and assertion, on account of the otiose, passive, inchoate character
of the act in question. If I say that to-morrow will be fine, what
does this enunciation mean? Perhaps it means that it ought to be fine,
if the glass tells truly; then it is the inference of a probability.
Perhaps it means no more than a surmise, because it is fine to-day, or
has been so for the week past. And perhaps it is a compliance with the
word of another, in which case it is sometimes a real assent, sometimes
a polite assertion or a wish.

Many a disciple of a philosophical school, who talks fluently, does but
assert, when he seems to assent to the _dicta_ of his master, little as
he may be aware of it. Nor is he secured against this self-deception
by knowing the arguments on which those _dicta_ rest, for he may learn
the arguments by heart, as a careless schoolboy gets up his Euclid.
This practice of asserting simply on authority, with the pretence and
without the reality of assent, is what is meant by formalism. To say
“I do not understand a proposition, but I accept it on authority,” is
not formalism, but faith; it is not a direct assent to the proposition,
still it _is_ an assent to the authority which enunciates it; but what
I here speak of is professing to understand without understanding. It
is thus that political and religious watchwords are created; first
one man of name and then another adopts them, till their use becomes
popular, and then every one professes them, because every one else
does. Such words are “liberality,” “progress,” “light,” “civilization;”
such are “justification by faith only,” “vital religion,” “private
judgment,” “the Bible and nothing but the Bible.” Such again are
“Rationalism,” “Gallicanism,” “Jesuitism,” “Ultramontanism”—all of
which, in the mouths of conscientious thinkers, have a definite
meaning, but are used by the multitude as war-cries, nicknames,
and shibboleths, with scarcely enough of the scantiest grammatical
apprehension of them to allow of their being considered really more
than assertions.

Thus, instances occur now and then, when, in consequence of the
urgency of some fashionable superstition or popular delusion, some
eminent scientific authority is provoked to come forward, and to set
the world right by his “ipse dixit.” He, indeed, himself knows very
well what he is about; he has a right to speak, and his reasonings
and conclusions are sufficient, not only for his own, but for general
assent, and, it may be, are as simply true and impregnable, as they are
authoritative; but an intelligent hold on the matter in dispute, such
as he has himself, cannot be expected in the case of men in general.
They, nevertheless, one and all, repeat and retail his arguments, as
suddenly as if they had not to study them, as heartily as if they
understood them, changing round and becoming as strong antagonists of
the error which their master has exposed, as if they had never been its
advocates. If their word is to be taken, it is not simply his authority
that moves them, which would be sensible enough and suitable in them,
both apprehension and assent being in that case grounded on the maxim
“Cuique in arte suâ credendum,” but so far forth as they disown this
motive, and claim to judge in a scientific question of the worth of
arguments which require some real knowledge, they are little better,
not of course in a very serious matter, than pretenders and formalists.

Not only Authority, but Inference also may impose on us assents which
in themselves are little better than assertions, and which, so far as
they are assents, can only be notional assents, as being assents, not
to the propositions inferred, but to the truth of those propositions.
For instance, it can be proved by irrefragable calculations, that the
stars are not less than billions of miles distant from the earth; and
the process of calculation, upon which such statements are made, is
not so difficult as to require authority to secure our acceptance of
both it and of them; yet who can say that he has any real, nay, any
notional apprehension of a billion or a trillion? We can, indeed, have
some notion of it, if we analyze it into its factors, if we compare
it with other numbers, or if we illustrate it by analogies or by its
implications; but I am speaking of the vast number in itself. We cannot
assent to a proposition of which it is the predicate; we can but assent
to the truth of it.

This leads me to the question, whether belief in a mystery can be more
than an assertion. I consider it can be an assent, and my reasons
for saying so are as follows:—A mystery is a proposition conveying
incompatible notions, or is a statement of the inconceivable. Now we
can assent to propositions (and a mystery is a proposition), provided
we can apprehend them; therefore we can assent to a mystery, for,
unless we in some sense apprehended it, we should not recognize it
to be a mystery, that is, a statement uniting incompatible notions.
The same act, then, which enables us to discern that the words of
the proposition express a mystery, capacitates us for assenting to
it. Words which make nonsense, do not make a mystery. No one would
call Warton’s line—“Revolving swans proclaim the welkin near”—an
inconceivable assertion. It is equally plain, that the assent which
we give to mysteries, as such, is notional assent; for, by the
supposition, it is assent to propositions which we cannot conceive,
whereas, if we had had experience of them, we should be able to
conceive them, and without experience assent is not real.

But the question follows, Can processes of inference end in a mystery?
that is, not only in what is incomprehensible, that the stars are
billions of miles from each other, but in what is inconceivable, in the
co-existence of (seeming) incompatibilities? For how, it may be asked,
can reason carry out notions into their contradictories? since all the
developments of a truth must from the nature of the case be consistent
both with it and with each other. I answer, certainly processes of
inference, however accurate, can end in mystery; and I solve the
objection to such a doctrine thus:—our notion of a thing may be only
partially faithful to the original; it may be in excess of the thing,
or it may represent it incompletely, and, in consequence, it may serve
for it, it may stand for it, only to a certain point, in certain cases,
but no further. After that point is reached, the notion and the thing
part company; and then the notion, if still used as the representative
of the thing, will work out conclusions, not inconsistent with itself,
but with the thing to which it no longer corresponds.

This is seen most familiarly in the use of metaphors. Thus, in an
Oxford satire, which deservedly made a sensation in its day, it is said
that Vice “from its hardness takes a polish too.”(1) Whence we might
argue, that, whereas Caliban was vicious, he was therefore polished;
but politeness and Caliban are incompatible notions. Or again, when
some one said, perhaps to Dr. Johnson, that a certain writer (say
Hume) was a clear thinker, he made answer, “All shallows are clear.”
But supposing Hume to be in fact both a clear and a deep thinker,
yet supposing clearness and depth are incompatible in their literal
sense, which the objection seems to imply, and still in their full
literal sense were to be ascribed to Hume, then our reasoning about his
intellect has ended in the mystery, “Deep Hume is shallow;” whereas
the contradiction lies, not in the reasoning, but in the fancying that
inadequate notions can be taken as the exact representations of things.

Hence in science we sometimes use a definition or a _formula_, not as
exact, but as being sufficient for our purpose, for working out certain
conclusions, for a practical approximation, the error being small, till
a certain point is reached. This is what in theological investigations
I should call an economy.

A like contrast between notions and the things which they represent is
the principle of suspense and curiosity in those enigmatical sayings
which were frequent in the early stage of human society. In them the
problem proposed to the acuteness of the hearers, is to find some real
thing which may unite in itself certain conflicting notions which in
the question are attributed to it: “Out of the eater came forth meat,
and out of the strong came forth sweetness;” or, “What creature is
that, which in the morning goes on four legs, at noon on two, and on
three in the evening?” The answer, which names the thing, interprets
and thereby limits the notions under which it has been represented.

Let us take an example in algebra. Its calculus is commonly used
to investigate, not only the relations of quantity generally, but
geometrical facts in particular. Now it is at once too wide and too
narrow for such a purpose, fitting on to the doctrine of lines and
angles with a bad fit, as the coat of a short and stout man might serve
the needs of one who was tall and slim. Certainly it works well for
geometrical purposes up to a certain point, as when it enables us to
dispense with the cumbrous method of proof in questions of ratio and
proportion, which is adopted in the fifth book of Euclid; but what are
we to make of the fourth power of _a_, when it is to be translated into
geometrical language? If from this algebraical expression we determined
that space admitted of four dimensions, we should be enunciating a
mystery, because we should be applying to space a notion which belongs
to quantity. In this case algebra is in excess of geometrical truth.
Now let us take an instance in which it falls short of geometry,—What
is the meaning of the square root of _minus a_? Here the mystery is on
the side of algebra; and, in accordance with the principle which I am
illustrating, it has sometimes been considered as an abortive effort to
express, what is really beyond the capacity of algebraical notation,
the direction and position of lines in the third dimension of space,
as well as their length upon a plane. When the calculus is urged on by
the inevitable course of the working to do what it cannot do, it stops
short as if in resistance, and protests by an absurdity.

Our notions of things are never simply commensurate with the things
themselves; they are aspects of them, more or less exact, and
sometimes a mistake _ab initio_. Take an instance from arithmetic:—We
are accustomed to subject all that exists to numeration; but, to
be correct, we are bound first to reduce to some level of possible
comparison the things which we wish to number. We must be able to say,
not only that they are ten, twenty, or a hundred, but so many definite
somethings. For instance, we could not without extravagance throw
together Napoleon’s brain, ambition, hand, soul, smile, height, and
age at Marengo, and say that there were seven of them, though there
are seven words; nor will it even be enough to content ourselves with
what may be called a negative level, viz. that these seven were an
un-English or are a departed seven. Unless numeration is to issue in
nonsense, it must be conducted on conditions. This being the case,
there are, for what we know, collections of beings, to whom the notion
of number cannot be attached, except _catachrestically_, because, taken
individually, no positive point of real agreement can be found between
them, by which to call them. If indeed we can denote them by a plural
noun, then we can measure that plurality; but if they agree in nothing,
they cannot agree in bearing a common name, and to say that they amount
to a thousand these or those, is not to number them, but to count up a
certain number of names or words which we have written down.

Thus, the Angels have been considered by divines to have each of them
a species to himself; and we may fancy each of them so absolutely _sui
similis_ as to be like nothing else, so that it would be as untrue
to speak of a thousand Angels as of a thousand Hannibals or Ciceros.
It will be said, indeed, that all beings but One at least will come
under the notion of creatures, and are dependent upon that One; but
that is true of the brain, smile, and height of Napoleon, which no one
would call three creatures. But, if all this be so, much more does it
apply to our speculations concerning the Supreme Being, whom it may
be unmeaning, not only to number with other beings, but to subject to
number in regard to His own intrinsic characteristics. That is, to
apply arithmetical notions to Him may be as unphilosophical as it is
profane. Though He is at once Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the word
“Trinity” belongs to those notions of Him which are forced on us by the
necessity of our finite conceptions, the real and immutable distinction
which exists between Person and Person implying in itself no
infringement of His real and numerical Unity. And if it be asked how,
if we cannot properly speak of Him as Three, we can speak of Him as
One, I reply that He is not One in the way in which created things are
severally units; for one, as applied to ourselves, is used in contrast
to two or three and a whole series of numbers; but of the Supreme Being
it is safer to use the word “monad” than unit, for He has not even such
relation to His creatures as to allow, philosophically speaking, of our
contrasting Him with them.

Coming back to the main subject, which I have illustrated at the
risk of digression, I observe, that an alleged fact is not therefore
impossible because it is inconceivable; for the incompatible notions,
in which consists its inconceivableness, need not each of them really
belong to it in that fulness which involves their being incompatible
with each other. It is true indeed that I deny the possibility of
two straight lines enclosing a space, on the ground of its being
inconceivable; but I do so because a straight line is a notion and
nothing more, and not a thing, to which I may have attached a notion
more or less unfaithful. I have defined a straight line in my own way
at my own pleasure; the question is not one of facts at all, but of
the consistency with each other of definitions and of their logical
consequences.

“Space is not infinite, for nothing but the Creator is such:”—starting
from this thesis as a theological information, to be assumed as a
fact, though not one of experience, we arrive at once at an insoluble
mystery; for, if space be not infinite, it is finite, and finite space
is a contradiction in notions, space, as such, implying the absence
of boundaries. Here again it is our notion that carries us beyond the
fact, and in opposition to it, showing that from the first what we
apprehend of space does not in all respects correspond to the thing, of
which indeed we have no image.

This, then, is another instance in which the juxtaposition of notions
by the logical faculty lands us in what are commonly called mysteries.
Notions are but aspects of things; the free deductions from one of
these necessarily contradicts the free deductions from another. After
proceeding in our investigations a certain way, suddenly a blank or
a maze presents itself before the mental vision, as when the eye is
confused by the varying slides of a telescope. Thus, we believe in the
infinitude of the Divine Attributes, but we can have no experience of
infinitude as a fact; the word stands for a definition or a notion.
Hence, when we try how to reconcile in the moral world the fulness
of mercy with exactitude in sanctity and justice, or to explain that
the physical tokens of creative skill need not suggest any want of
creative power, we feel we are not masters of our subject. We apprehend
sufficiently to be able to assent to these theological truths as
mysteries; did we not apprehend them at all, we should be merely
asserting; though even then we might convert that assertion into an
assent, if we wished to do so, as I have already shown, by making it
the subject of a proposition, and predicating of it that it is true.

2. _Credence._

What I mean by giving credence to propositions is pretty much the same
as having “no doubt” about them. It is the sort of assent which we
give to those opinions and professed facts which are ever presenting
themselves to us without any effort of ours, and which we commonly
take for granted, thereby obtaining a broad foundation of thought
for ourselves, and a medium of intercourse between ourselves and
others. This form of notional assent comprises a great variety of
subject-matters; and is, as I have implied, of an otiose and passive
character, accepting whatever comes to hand, from whatever quarter,
warranted or not, so that it convey nothing on the face of it to its
own disadvantage. From the time that we begin to observe, think, and
reason, to the final failure of our powers, we are ever acquiring
fresh and fresh informations by means of our senses, and still more
from others and from books. The friends or strangers whom we fall in
with in the course of the day, the conversations or discussions to
which we are parties, the newspapers, the light reading of the season,
our recreations, our rambles in the country, our foreign tours, all
pour their contributions of intellectual matter into the storehouses
of our memory; and, though much may be lost, much is retained. These
informations, thus received with a spontaneous assent, constitute the
furniture of the mind, and make the difference between its civilized
condition and a state of nature. They are its education, as far as
general knowledge can so be called; and, though education is discipline
as well as learning, still, unless the mind implicitly welcomes the
truths, real or ostensible, which these informations supply, it will
gain neither formation nor a stimulus for its activity and progress.
Besides, to believe frankly what it is told, is in the young an
exercise of teachableness and humility.

Credence is the means by which, in high and low, in the man of the
world and in the recluse, our bare and barren nature is overrun and
diversified from without with a rich and living clothing. It is by
such ungrudging, prompt assents to what is offered to us so lavishly,
that we become possessed of the principles, doctrines, sentiments,
facts, which constitute useful, and especially liberal knowledge. These
various teachings, shallow though they be, are of a breadth which
secures us against those _lacunæ_ of knowledge which are apt to befall
the professed student, and keep us up to the mark in literature, in
the arts, in history, and in public matters. They give us in great
measure our morality, our politics, our social code, our art of
life. They supply the elements of public opinion, the watchwords of
patriotism, the standards of thought and action; they are our mutual
understandings, our channels of sympathy, our means of co-operation,
and the bond of our civil union. They become our moral language; we
learn them as we learn our mother tongue; they distinguish us from
foreigners; they are, in each of us, not indeed personal, but national
characteristics.

This account of them implies that they are received with a notional,
not a real assent; they are too manifold to be received in any
other way. Even the most practised and earnest minds must needs be
superficial in the greater part of their attainments. They know just
enough on all subjects, in literature, history, politics, philosophy,
and art, to be able to converse sensibly on them, and to understand
those who are really deep in one or other of them. This is what is
called, with a special appositeness, a gentleman’s knowledge, as
contrasted with that of a professional man, and is neither worthless
nor despicable, if used for its proper ends; but it is never more than
the furniture of the mind, as I have called it; it never is thoroughly
assimilated with it. Yet of course there is nothing to hinder those who
have even the largest stock of such notions from devoting themselves
to one or other of the subjects to which those notions belong, and
mastering it with a real apprehension; and then their general knowledge
of all subjects may be made variously useful in the direction of that
particular study or pursuit which they have selected.

I have been speaking of secular knowledge; but religion may be made a
subject of notional assent also, and is especially so made in our own
country. Theology, as such, always is notional, as being scientific:
religion, as being personal, should be real; but, except within a
small range of subjects, it commonly is not real in England. As to
Catholic populations, such as those of medieval Europe, or the Spain
of this day, or quasi-Catholic as those of Russia, among them assent
to religious objects is real, not notional. To them the Supreme Being,
our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints, heaven and hell, are
as present as if they were objects of sight; but such a faith does
not suit the genius of modern England. There is in the literary world
just now an affectation of calling religion a “sentiment;” and it must
be confessed that usually it is nothing more with our own people,
educated or rude. Objects are barely necessary to it. I do not say so
of old Calvinism or Evangelical Religion; I do not call the religion of
Leighton, Beveridge, Wesley, Thomas Scott, or Cecil a mere sentiment;
nor do I so term the high Anglicanism of the present generation.
But these are only denominations, parties, schools, compared with
the national religion of England in its length and breadth. “Bible
Religion” is both the recognized title and the best description of
English religion.

It consists, not in rites or creeds, but mainly in having the Bible
read in Church, in the family, and in private. Now I am far indeed from
undervaluing that mere knowledge of Scripture which is imparted to the
population thus promiscuously. At least in England, it has to a certain
point made up for great and grievous losses in its Christianity. The
reiteration, again and again, in fixed course in the public service,
of the words of inspired teachers under both Covenants, and that in
grave majestic English, has in matter of fact been to our people a vast
benefit. It has attuned their minds to religious thoughts; it has given
them a high moral standard; it has served them in associating religion
with compositions which, even humanly considered, are among the most
sublime and beautiful ever written; especially, it has impressed
upon them the series of Divine Providences in behalf of man from his
creation to his end, and, above all, the words, deeds, and sacred
sufferings of Him in whom all the Providences of God centre.

So far the indiscriminate reading of Scripture has been of service;
still, much more is necessary than the benefits which I have
enumerated, to answer to the idea of a Religion; whereas our national
form professes to be little more than thus reading the Bible and
living a correct life. It is not a religion of persons and things, of
acts of faith and of direct devotion; but of sacred scenes and pious
sentiments. It has been comparatively careless of creed and catechism;
and has in consequence shown little sense of the need of consistency
in the matter of its teaching. Its doctrines are not so much facts, as
stereotyped aspects of facts; and it is afraid, so to say, of walking
round them. It induces its followers to be content with this meagre
view of revealed truth; or, rather, it is suspicious and protests,
or is frightened, as if it saw a figure in a picture move out of its
frame, when our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, or the Holy Apostles, are
spoken of as real beings, and really such as Scripture implies them to
be. I am not denying that the assent which it inculcates and elicits is
genuine as regards its contracted range of doctrine, but it is at best
notional. What Scripture especially illustrates from its first page to
its last, is God’s Providence; and that is nearly the only doctrine
held with a real assent by the mass of religious Englishmen. Hence the
Bible is so great a solace and refuge to them in trouble. I repeat, I
am not speaking of particular schools and parties in England, whether
of the High Church or the Low, but of the mass of piously-minded and
well-living people in all ranks of the community.

3. _Opinion._

That class of assents which I have called Credence, being a spontaneous
acceptance of the various informations, which are by whatever means
conveyed to our minds, sometimes goes by the name of Opinion. When
we speak of a man’s opinions, what do we mean, but the collection
of notions which he happens to have, and does not easily part with,
though he has neither sufficient proof nor firm grasp of them? This
is true; however, Opinion is a word of various significations, and
I prefer to use it in my own. Besides standing for Credence, it is
sometimes taken to mean Conviction, as when we speak of the “variety of
religious opinions,” or of being “persecuted for religious opinions,”
or of our having “no opinion on a particular point,” or of another
having “no religious opinions.” And sometimes it is used in contrast
with Conviction, as synonymous with a light and casual, though genuine
assent; thus, if a man was every day changing his mind, that is, his
assents, we might say, that he was very changeable in his opinions.

I shall here use the word to denote an assent, but an assent to a
proposition, not as true, but as probably true, that is, to the
probability of that which the proposition enunciates; and, as that
probability may vary in strength without limit, so may the cogency and
moment of the opinion. This account of Opinion may seem to confuse
it with Inference; for the strength of an inference varies with its
premisses, and is a probability; but the two acts of mind are really
distinct. Opinion, as being an assent, is independent of premisses. We
have opinions which we never think of defending by argument, though,
of course, we think they can be so defended. We are even obstinate in
them, or what is called “opinionated,” and may say that we have a right
to think just as we please, reason or no reason; whereas Inference is
in its nature and by its profession conditional and uncertain. To say
that “we shall have a fine hay-harvest if the present weather lasts,”
does not come of the same state of mind as, “I am of opinion that we
shall have a fine hay-harvest this year.”

Opinion, thus explained, has more connexion with Credence than with
Inference. It differs from Credence in these two points, viz. that,
while Opinion explicitly assents to the probability of a given
proposition, Credence is an implicit assent to its truth. It differs
from Credence in a third respect, viz. in being a reflex act;—when we
take a thing for granted, we have credence in it; when we begin to
reflect upon our credence, and to measure, estimate, and modify it,
then we are forming an opinion.

It is in this sense that Catholics speak of theological opinion, in
contrast with faith in dogma. It is much more than an inferential
act, but it is distinct from an act of certitude. And this is really
the sense which Protestants give to the word, when they interpret it
by Conviction; for their highest opinion in religion is, generally
speaking, an assent to a probability—as even Butler has been understood
or misunderstood to teach,—and therefore consistent with toleration of
its contradictory.

Opinion, being such as I have described, is a notional assent, for the
predicate of the proposition, on which it is exercised, is the abstract
word “probable.”

4. _Presumption._

By Presumption I mean an assent to first principles; and by first
principles I mean the propositions with which we start in reasoning on
any given subject-matter. They are in consequence very numerous, and
vary in great measure with the persons who reason, according to their
judgment and power of assent, being received by some minds, not by
others, and only a few of them received universally. They are all of
them notions, not images, because they express what is abstract, not
what is individual and from direct experience.

1. Sometimes our trust in our powers of reasoning and memory, that
is, our implicit assent to their telling truly, is treated as a first
principle; but we cannot properly be said to have any trust in them as
faculties. At most we trust in particular acts of memory and reasoning.
We are sure there was a yesterday, and that we did this or that in it;
we are sure that three times six is eighteen, and that the diagonal
of a square is longer than the side. So far as this we may be said to
trust the mental act, by which the object of our assent is verified;
but, in doing so, we imply no recognition of a general power or
faculty, or of any capability or affection of our minds, over and above
the particular act. We know indeed that we have a faculty by which we
remember, as we know we have a faculty by which we breathe; but we gain
this knowledge by abstraction or inference from its particular acts,
not by direct experience. Nor do we trust in the faculty of memory or
reasoning as such, even after that we have inferred its existence; for
its acts are often inaccurate, nor do we invariably assent to them.

However, if I must speak my mind, I have another ground for reluctance
to speak of our trusting memory or reasoning, except indeed by a
figure of speech. It seems to me unphilosophical to speak of trusting
ourselves. We are what we are, and we use, not trust our faculties. To
debate about trusting in a case like this, is parallel to the confusion
implied in wishing I had had a choice if I would be created or no, or
speculating what I should be like, if I were born of other parents.
“Proximus sum egomet mihi.” Our consciousness of self is prior to all
questions of trust or assent. We act according to our nature, by means
of ourselves, when we remember or reason. We are as little able to
accept or reject our mental constitution, as our being. We have not the
option; we can but misuse or mar its functions. We do not confront or
bargain with ourselves; and therefore I cannot call the trustworthiness
of the faculties of memory and reasoning one of our first principles.

2. Next, as to the proposition, that things exist external to
ourselves, this I do consider a first principle, and one of universal
reception. It is founded on an instinct; I so call it, because the
brute creation possesses it. This instinct is directed towards
individual phenomena, one by one, and has nothing of the character of
a generalization; and, since it exists in brutes, the gift of reason
is not a condition of its existence, and it may justly be considered
an instinct in man. What the human mind does is what brutes cannot
do, viz. to draw from our ever-recurring experiences of its testimony
in particulars a general proposition, and, because this instinct or
intuition acts whenever the phenomena of sense present themselves, to
lay down in broad terms, by an inductive process, the great aphorism,
that there is an external world, and that all the phenomena of sense
proceed from it. This general proposition, to which we go on to assent,
goes (_extensivè_, though not _intensivè_) far beyond our experience,
illimitable as that experience may be, and represents a notion.

3. I have spoken, and I think rightly spoken, of instinct as a force
which spontaneously impels us, not only to bodily movements, but to
mental acts. It is instinct which leads the quasi-intelligent principle
(whatever it is) in brutes to perceive in the phenomena of sense a
something distinct from and beyond those phenomena. It is instinct
which impels the child to recognize in the smiles or the frowns of
a countenance which meets his eyes, not only a being external to
himself, but one whose looks elicit in him confidence or fear. And,
as he instinctively interprets these physical phenomena, as tokens
of things beyond themselves, so from the sensations attendant upon
certain classes of his thoughts and actions he gains a perception of
an external being, who reads his mind, to whom he is responsible,
who praises and blames, who promises and threatens. As I am only
illustrating a general view by examples, I shall take this analogy for
granted here. As then we have our initial knowledge of the universe
through sense, so do we in the first instance begin to learn about its
Lord and God from conscience; and, as from particular acts of that
instinct, which makes experiences, mere images (as they ultimately are)
upon the retina, the means of our perceiving something real beyond
them, we go on to draw the general conclusion that there is a vast
external world, so from the recurring instances in which conscience
acts, forcing upon us importunately the mandate of a Superior, we have
fresh and fresh evidence of the existence of a Sovereign Ruler, from
whom those particular dictates which we experience proceed; so that,
with limitations which cannot here be made without digressing from
my main subject, we may, by means of that induction from particular
experiences of conscience, have as good a warrant for concluding the
Ubiquitous Presence of One Supreme Master, as we have, from parallel
experience of sense, for assenting to the fact of a multiform and vast
world, material and mental.

However, this assent is notional, because we generalize a consistent,
methodical form of Divine Unity and Personality with Its attributes,
from particular experiences of the religious instinct, which are
themselves, only _intensivè_, not _extensivè_, and in the imagination,
not intellectually, notices of Its Presence; though at the same
time that assent may become real of course, as may the assent to
the external world, viz. when we apply our general knowledge to a
particular instance of that knowledge, as, according to a former
remark, the general “varium et mutabile” was realized in Dido. And in
thus treating the origin of these great notions, I am not forgetting
the aid which from our earliest years we receive from teachers, nor
am I denying the influence of certain original forms of thinking or
formative ideas, connatural with our minds, without which we could not
reason at all. I am only contemplating the mind as it moves in fact,
by whatever hidden mechanism; as a locomotive engine could not move
without steam, but still, under whatever number of forces, it certainly
does start from Birmingham and does arrive in London.

4. And so again, as regards the first principles expressed in such
propositions as “There is a right and a wrong,” “a true and a false,”
“a just and an unjust,” “a beautiful and a deformed;” they are
abstractions to which we give a notional assent in consequence of our
particular experiences of qualities in the concrete, to which we give a
real assent. As we form our notion of whiteness from the actual sight
of snow, milk, a lily, or a cloud, so, after experiencing the sentiment
of approbation which arises in us on the sight of certain acts one by
one, we go on to assign to that sentiment a cause, and to those acts
a quality, and we give to this notional cause or quality the name of
virtue, which is an abstraction, not a thing. And in like manner, when
we have been affected by a certain specific admiring pleasure at the
sight of this or that concrete object, we proceed by an arbitrary act
of the mind to give a name to the hypothetical cause or quality in
the abstract, which excites it. We speak of it as beautifulness, and
henceforth, when we call a thing beautiful, we mean by the word nothing
else than a certain quality of things which creates in us this special
sensation.

These so-called first principles, I say, are really conclusions or
abstractions from particular experiences; and an assent to their
existence is not an assent to things or their images, but to notions,
real assent being confined to the propositions directly embodying those
experiences. Such notions indeed are an evidence of the reality of the
special sentiments in particular instances, without which they would
not have been formed; but in themselves they are abstractions from
facts, not elementary truths prior to reasoning.

I am not of course dreaming of denying the objective existence of the
Moral Law, nor our instinctive recognition of the immutable difference
in the moral quality of acts, as elicited in us by one instance of
them. Even one act of cruelty, ingratitude, generosity, or justice
reveals to us at once _intensivè_ the immutable distinction between
those qualities and their contraries; that is, in that particular
instance and _pro hac vice_. From such experience—an experience which
is ever recurring—we proceed to abstract and generalize; and thus the
abstract proposition “There is a right and a wrong,” as representing
an act of inference, is received by the mind with a notional, not a
real assent. However, in proportion as we obey the particular dictates
which are its tokens, so are we led on more and more to view it in the
association of those particulars, which are real, and virtually to
change our notion of it into the image of that objective fact, which in
each particular case it undeniably is.

5. Another of these presumptions is the belief in causation. It is to
me a perplexity that grave authors seem to enunciate as an intuitive
truth, that every thing must have a cause. If this were so, the voice
of nature would tell false; for why in that case stop short at One, who
is Himself without cause? The assent which we give to the proposition,
as a first principle, that nothing happens without a cause, is
derived, in the first instance, from what we know of ourselves; and
we argue analogically from what is within us to what is external to
us. One of the first experiences of an infant is that of his willing
and doing; and, as time goes on, one of the first temptations of the
boy is to bring home to himself the fact of his sovereign arbitrary
power, though it be at the price of waywardness, mischievousness, and
disobedience. And when his parents, as antagonists of this wilfulness,
begin to restrain him, and to bring his mind and conduct into shape,
then he has a second series of experiences of cause and effect, and
that upon a principle or rule. Thus the notion of causation is one of
the first lessons which he learns from experience, that experience
limiting it to agents possessed of intelligence and will. It is the
notion of power combined with a purpose and an end. Physical phenomena,
as such, are without sense; and experience teaches us nothing about
physical phenomena as causes. Accordingly, wherever the world is
young, the movements and changes of physical nature have been and are
spontaneously ascribed by its people to the presence and will of hidden
agents, who haunt every part of it, the woods, the mountains and the
streams, the air and the stars, for good or for evil;—just as children
again, by beating the ground after falling, imply that what has bruised
them has intelligence;—nor is there anything illogical in such a
belief. It rests on the argument from analogy.

As time goes on, and society is formed, and the idea of science
is mastered, a different aspect of the physical universe presents
itself to the mind. Since causation implies a sequence of acts in our
own case, and our doing is always posterior, never contemporaneous
or prior, to our willing, therefore, when we witness invariable
antecedents and consequents, we call the former the cause of the
latter, though intelligence is absent, from the analogy of external
appearances. At length we go on to confuse causation with order;
and, because we happen to have made a successful analysis of some
complicated assemblage of phenomena, which experience has brought
before us in the visible scene of things, and have reduced them to a
tolerable dependence on each other, we call the ultimate points of
this analysis, and the hypothetical facts in which the whole mass of
phenomena is gathered up, by the name of causes, whereas they are
really only the formula under which those phenomena are conveniently
represented. Thus the constitutional formula, “The king can do no
wrong,” is not a fact, or a cause of the Constitution, but a happy mode
of bringing out its genius, of determining the correlations of its
elements, and of grouping or regulating political rules and proceedings
in a particular direction and in a particular form. And in like manner,
that all the particles of matter throughout the universe are attracted
to each other with a force varying inversely with the square of their
respective distances, is a profound idea, harmonizing the physical
works of the Creator; but even could it be proved to be a universal
fact, and also to be the actual cause of the movements of all bodies
in the universe, still it would not be an experience, any more than is
the mythological doctrine of the presence of innumerable spirits in
physical phenomena.

Of these two senses of the word “cause,” viz. that which brings a thing
to be, and that on which a thing under given circumstances follows,
the former is that of which our experience is the earlier and more
intimate, being suggested to us by our consciousness of willing and
doing. The latter of the two requires a discrimination and exactness of
thought for its apprehension, which implies special mental training;
else, how do we learn to call food the cause of refreshment, but day
never the cause of night, though night follows day more surely than
refreshment follows food? Starting, then, from experience, I consider
a cause to be an effective will; and, by the doctrine of causation, I
mean the notion, or first principle, that all things come of effective
will; and the reception or presumption of this notion is a notional
assent.

6. As to causation in the second sense (viz. an ordinary succession of
antecedents and consequents, or what is called the Order of Nature),
when so explained, it falls under the doctrine of general laws; and of
this I proceed to make mention, as another first principle or notion,
derived by us from experience, and accepted with what I have called
a presumption. By natural law I mean the fact that things happen
uniformly according to certain circumstances, and not without them and
at random: that is, that they happen in an order; and, as all things
in the universe are unit and individual, order implies a certain
repetition, whether of things or like things, or of their affections
and relations. Thus we have experience, for instance, of the regularity
of our physical functions, such as the beating of the pulse and the
heaving of the breath; of the recurring sensations of hunger and
thirst; of the alternation of waking and sleeping, and the succession
of youth and age. In like manner we have experience of the great
recurring phenomena of the heavens and earth, of day and night, summer
and winter. Also, we have experience of a like uniform succession in
the instance of fire burning, water choking, stones falling down and
not up, iron moving towards a magnet, friction followed by sparks and
crackling, an oar looking bent in the stream, and compressed steam
bursting its vessel. Also, by scientific analysis, we are led to the
conclusion that phenomena, which seem very different from each other,
admit of being grouped together as modes of the operation of one
hypothetical law, acting under varied circumstances. For instance, the
motion of a stone falling freely, of a projectile, and of a planet, may
be generalized as one and the same property, in each of them, of the
particles of matter; and this generalization loses its character of
hypothesis, and becomes a probability, in proportion as we have reason
for thinking on other grounds that the particles of all matter really
move and act towards each other in one certain way in relation to space
and time, and not in half a dozen ways; that is, that nature acts
by uniform laws. And thus we advance to the general notion or first
principle of the sovereignty of law throughout the universe.

There are philosophers who go farther, and teach, not only a general,
but an invariable, and inviolable, and necessary uniformity in the
action of the laws of nature, holding that every thing is the result
of some law or laws, and that exceptions are impossible; but I do
not see on what ground of experience or reason they take up this
position. Our experience rather is adverse to such a doctrine, for
what concrete fact or phenomenon exactly repeats itself? Some abstract
conception of it, more perfect than the recurrent phenomenon itself,
is necessary, before we are able to say that it has happened even
twice, and the variations which accompany the repetition are of the
nature of exceptions. The earth, for instance, never moves exactly in
the same orbit year by year, but is in perpetual vacillation. It will,
indeed, be replied that this arises from the interaction of one law
with another, of which the actual orbit is only the accidental issue,
that the earth is under the influence of a variety of attractions from
cosmical bodies, and that, if it is subject to continual aberrations
in its course, these are accounted for accurately or sufficiently by
the presence of those extraordinary and variable attractions:—science,
then, by its analytical processes sets right the _primâ facie_
confusion. Of course; still let us not by our words imply that we are
appealing to experience, when really we are only accounting, and that
by hypothesis, for the absence of experience. The confusion is a fact,
the reasoning processes are not facts. The extraordinary attractions
assigned to account for our experience of that confusion are not
themselves experienced phenomenal facts, but more or less probable
hypotheses, argued out by means of an assumed analogy between the
cosmical bodies to which those attractions are referred and falling
bodies on the earth. I say “assumed,” because that analogy (in other
words, the unfailing uniformity of nature) is the very point which
has to be proved. It is true, that we can make experiment of the law
of attraction in the case of bodies on the earth; but, I repeat, to
assume from analogy that, as stones do fall to the earth, so Jupiter,
if let alone, would fall upon the earth and the earth upon Jupiter,
and with certain peculiarities of velocity on either side, is to have
recourse to an explanation which is not necessarily valid, unless
nature is necessarily uniform. Nor, indeed, has it yet been proved,
nor ought it to be assumed, even that the law of velocity of falling
bodies on the earth is invariable in its operation; for that again is
only an instance of the general proposition, which is the very thesis
in debate. It seems safer then to hold that the order of nature is not
necessary, but general in its manifestations.

But, it may be urged, if a thing happens once, it must happen always;
for what is to hinder it? Nay, on the contrary, why, because one
particle of matter has a certain property, should all particles have
the same? Why, because particles have instanced the property a thousand
times, should the thousand and first instance it also? It is _primâ
facie_ unaccountable that an accident should happen twice, not to
speak of its happening always. If we expect a thing to happen twice,
it is because we think it is not an accident, but has a cause. What
has brought about a thing once, may bring it about twice. _What_ is to
hinder its happening? rather, What is to make it happen? Here we are
thrown back from the question of Order to that of Causation. A law is
not a cause, but a fact; but when we come to the question of cause,
then, as I have said, we have no experience of any cause but Will. If,
then, I must answer the question, What is to alter the order of nature?
I reply, That which willed it;—That which willed it, can unwill it; and
the invariableness of law depends on the unchangeableness of that Will.

And here I am led to observe that, as a cause implies a will, so order
implies a purpose. Did we see flint celts, in their various receptacles
all over Europe, scored always with certain special and characteristic
marks, even though those marks had no assignable meaning or final
cause whatever, we should take that very repetition, which indeed is
the principle of order, to be a proof of intelligence. The agency then
which has kept up and keeps up the general laws of nature, energizing
at once in Sirius and on the earth, and on the earth in its primary
period as well as in the nineteenth century, must be Mind, and nothing
else, and Mind at least as wide and as enduring in its living action,
as the immeasurable ages and spaces of the universe on which that
agency has left its traces.

In these remarks I have digressed from my immediate subject, but
they have some bearing on points which will subsequently come into
discussion.

5. _Speculation._

Speculation is one of those words which, in the vernacular, have so
different a sense from what they bear in philosophy. It is commonly
taken to mean a conjecture, or a venture on chances; but its proper
meaning is mental sight, or the contemplation of mental operations and
their results as opposed to experience, experiment, or sense, analogous
to its meaning in Shakspeare’s line, “Thou hast no speculation in those
eyes.” In this sense I use it here.

And I use it in this sense to denote those notional assents which are
the most direct, explicit, and perfect of their kind, viz. those which
are the firm, conscious acceptance of propositions as true. This kind
of assent includes the assent to all reasoning and its conclusions, to
all general propositions, to all rules of conduct, to all proverbs,
aphorisms, sayings, and reflections on men and society. Of course
mathematical investigations and truths are the subjects of this
speculative assent. So are legal judgments, and constitutional maxims,
as far as they appeal to us for assent. So are the determinations
of science; so are the principles, disputations, and doctrines of
theology. That there is a God, that He has certain attributes, and in
what sense He can be said to have attributes, that He has done certain
works, that He has made certain revelations of Himself and of His will,
and what they are, and the multiplied bearings of the parts of the
teaching, thus developed and formed, upon each other, all this is the
subject of notional assent, and of that particular department of it
which I have called Speculation. As far as these particular subjects
can be viewed in the concrete and represent experiences, they can be
received by real assent also; but as expressed in general propositions
they belong to notional apprehension and assent.


§ 2. Real Assents.


I have in a measure anticipated the subject of Real Assent by what
I have been saying about Notional. In comparison of the directness
and force of the apprehension, which we have of an object, when our
assent is to be called real, Notional Assent and Inference seem to be
thrown back into one and the same class of intellectual acts, though
the former of the two is always an unconditional acceptance of a
proposition, and the latter is an acceptance on the condition of an
acceptance of its premisses. In its notional assents as well as in
its inferences, the mind contemplates its own creations instead of
things; in real, it is directed towards things, represented by the
impressions which they have left on the imagination. These images, when
assented-to, have an influence both on the individual and on society,
which mere notions cannot exert.

I have already given various illustrations of Real Assent; I will
follow them up here by some instances of the change of Notional Assent
into Real.

1. For instance: boys at school look like each other, and pursue the
same studies, some of them with greater success than others; but it
will sometimes happen, that those who acquitted themselves but poorly
in class, when they come into the action of life, and engage in some
particular work, which they have already been learning in its theory
and with little promise of proficiency, are suddenly found to have
what is called an eye for that work—an eye for trade matters, or for
engineering, or a special taste for literature—which no one expected
from them at school, while they were engaged on notions. Minds of
this stamp not only know the received rules of their profession, but
enter into them, and even anticipate them, or dispense with them, or
substitute other rules instead. And when new questions are opened,
and arguments are drawn up on one side and the other in long array,
they with a natural ease and promptness form their views and give
their decision, as if they had no need to reason, from their clear
apprehension of the lie and issue of the whole matter in dispute, as
if it were drawn out in a map before them. These are the reformers,
systematizers, inventors, in various departments of thought,
speculative and practical; in education, in administration, in social
and political matters, in science. Such men indeed are far from
infallible; however great their powers, they sometimes fall into great
errors, in their own special department, while second-rate men who go
by rule come to sound and safe conclusions. Images need not be true;
but I am illustrating what vividness of apprehension is, and what is
the strength of belief consequent upon it.

2. Again:—twenty years ago, the Duke of Wellington wrote his celebrated
letter on the subject of the national defences. His authority gave
it an immediate circulation among all classes of the community; none
questioned what he said, nor as if taking his words on faith merely,
but as intellectually recognizing their truth; yet few could be said
to see or feel that truth. His letter lay, so to say, upon the pure
intellect of the national mind, and nothing for a time came of it.
But eleven years afterwards, after his death, the anger of the French
colonels with us, after the attempt upon Louis Napoleon’s life,
transferred its facts to the charge of the imagination. Then forthwith
the national assent became in various ways an operative principle,
especially in its promotion of the volunteer movement. The Duke, having
a special eye for military matters, had realized the state of things
from the first; but it took a course of years to impress upon the
public mind an assent to his warning deeper and more energetic than the
reception it is accustomed to give to a clever article in a newspaper
or a review.

3. And so generally: great truths, practical or ethical, float on
the surface of society, admitted by all, valued by few, exemplifying
the poet’s adage, “Probitas laudatur et alget,” until changed
circumstances, accident, or the continual pressure of their advocates,
force them upon its attention. The iniquity, for instance, of the
slave-trade ought to have been acknowledged by all men from the first;
it was acknowledged by many, but it needed an organized agitation, with
tracts and speeches innumerable, so to affect the imagination of men as
to make their acknowledgment of that iniquitousness operative.

In like manner, when Mr. Wilberforce, after succeeding in the slave
question, urged the Duke of Wellington to use his great influence
in discountenancing duelling, he could only get from him in answer,
“A relic of barbarism, Mr. Wilberforce;” as if he accepted a notion
without realizing a fact: at length, the growing intelligence of
the community, and the shock inflicted upon it by the tragical
circumstances of a particular duel, were fatal to that barbarism.
The governing classes were roused from their dreamy acquiescence in
an abstract truth, and recognized the duty of giving it practical
expression.

4. Let us consider, too, how differently young and old are affected by
the words of some classic author, such as Homer or Horace. Passages,
which to a boy are but rhetorical commonplaces, neither better nor
worse than a hundred others which any clever writer might supply, which
he gets by heart and thinks very fine, and imitates, as he thinks,
successfully, in his own flowing versification, at length come home
to him, when long years have passed, and he has had experience of
life, and pierce him, as if he had never before known them, with their
sad earnestness and vivid exactness. Then he comes to understand how
it is that lines, the birth of some chance morning or evening at an
Ionian festival, or among the Sabine hills, have lasted generation
after generation, for thousands of years, with a power over the mind,
and a charm, which the current literature of his own day, with all
its obvious advantages, is utterly unable to rival. Perhaps this is
the reason of the medieval opinion about Virgil, as if a prophet or
magician; his single words and phrases, his pathetic half lines, giving
utterance, as the voice of Nature herself, to that pain and weariness,
yet hope of better things, which is the experience of her children in
every time.

5. And what the experience of the world effects for the illustration
of classical authors, that office the religious sense, carefully
cultivated, fulfils towards Holy Scripture. To the devout and
spiritual, the Divine Word speaks of things, not merely of notions.
And, again, to the disconsolate, the tempted, the perplexed, the
suffering, there comes, by means of their very trials, an enlargement
of thought, which enables them to see in it what they never saw before.
Henceforth there is to them a reality in its teachings, which they
recognize as an argument, and the best of arguments, for its divine
origin. Hence the practice of meditation on the Sacred Text, so highly
thought of by Catholics. Reading, as we do, the Gospels from our youth
up, we are in danger of becoming so familiar with them as to be dead
to their force, and to view them as a mere history. The purpose, then,
of meditation is to realize them; to make the facts which they relate
stand out before our minds as objects, such as may be appropriated by a
faith as living as the imagination which apprehends them.

It is obvious to refer to the unworthy use made of the more solemn
parts of the sacred volume by the mere popular preacher. His very mode
of reading, whether warnings or prayers, is as if he thought them to
be little more than fine writing, poetical in sense, musical in sound,
and worthy of inspiration. The most awful truths are to him but sublime
or beautiful conceptions, and are adduced and used by him, in season
and out of season, for his own purposes, for embellishing his style or
rounding his periods. But let his heart at length be ploughed by some
keen grief or deep anxiety, and Scripture is a new book to him. This
is the change which so often takes place in what is called religious
conversion, and it is a change so far simply for the better, by
whatever infirmity or error it is in the particular case accompanied.
And it is strikingly suggested to us, to take a saintly example, in the
confession of the patriarch Job, when he contrasts his apprehension
of the Almighty before and after his afflictions. He says he had
indeed a true apprehension of the Divine Attributes before as well as
after; but with the trial came a great change in the character of that
apprehension:—“With the hearing of the ear,” he says, “I have heard
Thee, but now mine eye seeth Thee; therefore I reprehend myself, and do
penance in dust and ashes.”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Let these instances suffice of Real Assent in its relation to Notional;
they lead me to make three remarks in further illustration of its
character.

1. The fact of the distinctness of the images, which are required for
real assent, is no warrant for the existence of the objects which those
images represent. A proposition, be it ever so keenly apprehended,
may be true or may be false. If we simply put aside all inferential
information, such as is derived from testimony, from general belief,
from the concurrence of the senses, from common sense, or otherwise,
we have no right to consider that we have apprehended a truth, merely
because of the strength of our mental impression of it. Hence the
proverb, “Fronti nulla fides.” An image, with the characters of perfect
veracity and faithfulness, may be ever so distinct and eloquent an
object presented before the mind (or, as it is sometimes called,
an “objectum internum,” or a “subject-object”); but, nevertheless,
there may be no external reality in the case, corresponding to it, in
spite of its impressiveness. One of the most remarkable instances of
this fallacious impressiveness is the illusion which possesses the
minds of able men, those especially who are exercised in physical
investigations, in favour of the inviolability of the laws of nature.
Philosophers of the school of Hume discard the very supposition of
miracles, and scornfully refuse to hear evidence in their behalf in
given instances, from their intimate experience of physical order and
of the ever-recurring connexion of antecedent and consequent. Their
imagination usurps the functions of reason; and they cannot bring
themselves even to entertain as a hypothesis (and this is all that they
are asked to do) a thought contrary to that vivid impression of which
they are the victims, that the uniformity of nature, which they witness
hour by hour, is equivalent to a necessary, inviolable law.

Yet it is plain, and I shall take it for granted here, that when
I assent to a proposition, I ought to have some more legitimate
reason for doing so, than the brilliancy of the image of which that
proposition is the expression. That I have no experience of a thing
happening except in one way, is a cause of the intensity of my assent,
if I assent, but not the reason of my assenting. In saying this, I
am not disposed to deny the presence in some men of an idiosyncratic
sagacity, which really and rightly sees reasons in impressions which
common men cannot see, and is secured from the peril of confusing truth
with make-belief; but this is genius, and beyond rule. I grant too, of
course, that accidentally impressiveness does in matter of fact, as in
the instance which I have been giving, constitute the motive principle
of belief; for the mind is ever exposed to the danger of being carried
away by the liveliness of its conceptions, to the sacrifice of good
sense and conscientious caution, and the greater and the more rare are
its gifts, the greater is the risk of swerving from the line of reason
and duty; but here I am not speaking of transgressions of rule any more
than of exceptions to it, but of the normal constitution of our minds,
and of the natural and rightful effect of acts of the imagination upon
us, and this is, not to create assent, but to intensify it.

2. Next, Assent, however strong, and accorded to images however
vivid, is not therefore necessarily practical. Strictly speaking, it
is not imagination that causes action; but hope and fear, likes and
dislikes, appetite, passion, affection, the stirrings of selfishness
and self-love. What imagination does for us is to find a means of
stimulating those motive powers; and it does so by providing a supply
of objects strong enough to stimulate them. The thought of honour,
glory, duty, self-aggrandisement, gain, or on the other hand of Divine
Goodness, future reward, eternal life, perseveringly dwelt upon, leads
us along a course of action corresponding to itself, but only in case
there be that in our minds which is congenial to it. However, when
there is that preparation of mind, the thought does lead to the act.
Hence it is that the fact of a proposition being accepted with a real
assent is accidentally an earnest of that proposition being carried out
in conduct, and the imagination may be said in some sense to be of a
practical nature, inasmuch as it leads to practice indirectly by the
action of its object upon the affections.

3. There is a third remark suggested by the view which I have been
taking of real assents, viz. that they are of a personal character,
each individual having his own, and being known by them. It is
otherwise with notions; notional apprehension is in itself an ordinary
act of our common nature. All of us have the power of abstraction, and
can be taught either to make or to enter into the same abstractions;
and thus to co-operate in the establishment of a common measure
between mind and mind. And, though for one and all of us to assent
to the notions which we thus apprehend in common, is a further step,
as requiring the adoption of a common stand-point of principle and
judgment, yet this too depends in good measure on certain logical
processes of thought, with which we are all familiar, and on facts
which we all take for granted. But we cannot make sure, for ourselves
or others, of real apprehension and assent, because we have to secure
first the images which are their objects, and these are often peculiar
and special. They depend on personal experience; and the experience of
one man is not the experience of another. Real assent, then, as the
experience which it presupposes, is proper to the individual, and, as
such, thwarts rather than promotes the intercourse of man with man. It
shuts itself up, as it were, in its own home, or at least it is its own
witness and its own standard; and, as in the instances above given, it
cannot be reckoned on, anticipated, accounted for, inasmuch as it is
the accident of this man or that.

I call the characteristics of an individual accidents, in spite of the
universal reign of law, because they are severally the co-incidents of
many laws, and there are no laws as yet discovered of such coincidence.
A man who is run over in the street and killed, in one sense suffers
according to rule or law; he was crossing, he was short-sighted or
preoccupied in mind, or he was looking another way; he was deaf, lame,
or flurried; and the cab came up at a great pace. If all this was
so, it was by a necessity that he was run over; it would have been a
miracle if he had escaped. So far is clear; but what is not clear is
how all these various conditions met together in the particular case,
how it was that a man, short-sighted, hard of hearing, deficient in
presence of mind, happened to get in the way of a cab hurrying along to
catch a train. This concrete fact does not come under any law of sudden
deaths, but, like the earth’s yearly path which I spoke of above, is
the accident of the individual.

It does not meet the case to refer to the law of averages, for such
laws deal with percentages, not with individuals, and it is about
individuals that I am speaking. That this particular man out of
the three millions congregated in the metropolis, was to have the
experience of this catastrophe, and to be the select victim to appease
that law of averages, no statistical tables could foretell, even
though they could determine that it was in the fates that in that week
or day some four persons in the length and breadth of London should
be run over. And in like manner that this or that person should have
the particular experiences necessary for real assent on any point,
that the Deist should become a Theist, the Erastian a Catholic, the
Protectionist a Free-trader, the Conservative a Legitimist, the high
Tory an out-and-out Democrat, are facts, each of which may be the
result of a multitude of coincidences in one and the same individual,
coincidences which we have no means of determining, and which,
therefore, we may call accidents. For—


    “There’s a Divinity that shapes our ends,
    Rough hew them how we will.”


Such accidents are the characteristics of persons, as _differentiæ_ and
properties are the characteristics of species or natures.

That a man dies when deprived of air, is not an accident of his person,
but a law of his nature; that he cannot live without quinine or opium,
or out of the climate of Madeira, is his own peculiarity. If all men
every where usually had the yellow fever once in their lives, we should
call it (speaking according to our knowledge) a law of the human
constitution; if the inhabitants of a particular country commonly had
it, we should call it a law of the climate; if a healthy man has a
fever in a healthy place, in a healthy season, we call it an accident,
though it be reducible to the coincidence of laws, because there is
no known law of their coincidence. To be rational, to have speech, to
pass through successive changes of mind and body from infancy to death,
belong to man’s nature; to have a particular history, to be married or
single, to have children or to be childless, to live a given number of
years, to have a certain constitution, moral temperament, intellectual
outfit, mental formation, these and the like, taken all together, are
the accidents which make up our notion of a man’s person, and are the
ground-work or condition of his particular experiences.

Moreover, various of the experiences which befall this man may be the
same as those which befall that, although those experiences result
each from the combination of its own accidents, and are ultimately
traceable each to its own special condition or history. That is, images
which are possessed in common, with their apprehensions and assents,
may nevertheless be personal characteristics. If two or three hundred
men are to be found, who cannot live out of Madeira, that inability
would still be an accident and a peculiarity of each of them. Even
if in each case it implied delicacy of lungs, still that delicacy is
a vague notion, comprehending under it a great variety of cases in
detail. If “five hundred brethren at once” saw our risen Lord, that
common experience would not be a law, but a personal accident which
was the prerogative of each. And so again in this day the belief of
so many thousands in His Divinity, is not therefore notional, because
it is common, but may be a real and personal belief, being produced
in different individual minds by various experiences and disposing
causes, variously combined; such as a warm or strong imagination,
great sensibility, compunction and horror at sin, frequenting the
Mass and other rites of the Church, meditating on the contents of
the Gospels, familiarity with hymns and religious poems, dwelling on
the Evidences, parental example and instruction, religious friends,
strange providences, powerful preaching. In each case the image in
the mind, with the experiences out of which it is formed, would be a
personal result; and, though the same in all, would in each case be so
idiosyncratic in its circumstances, that it would stand by itself, a
special formation, unconnected with any law; though at the same time it
would necessarily be a principle of sympathy and a bond of intercourse
between those whose minds had been thus variously wrought into a common
assent, far stronger than could follow upon any multitude of mere
notions which they unanimously held. And even when that assent is not
the result of concurrent causes, if such a case is possible, but has
one single origin, as the study of Scripture, careful teaching, or a
religious temper, still its presence argues a special history, and a
personal formation, which an abstraction does not. For an abstraction
can be made at will, and may be the work of a moment; but the moral
experiences which perpetuate themselves in images, must be sought after
in order to be found, and encouraged and cultivated in order to be
appropriated.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I have now said all that occurs to me on the subject of Real Assents,
perhaps not without some risk of subtlety and minuteness. They are
sometimes called beliefs, convictions, certitudes; and, as given to
moral objects, they are perhaps as rare as they are powerful. Till we
have them, in spite of a full apprehension and assent in the field of
notions, we have no intellectual moorings, and are at the mercy of
impulses, fancies, and wandering lights, whether as regards personal
conduct, social and political action, or religion. These beliefs,
be they true or false in the particular case, form the mind out of
which they grow, and impart to it a seriousness and manliness which
inspires in other minds a confidence in its views, and is one secret
of persuasiveness and influence in the public stage of the world.
They create, as the case may be, heroes and saints, great leaders,
statesmen, preachers, and reformers, the pioneers of discovery in
science, visionaries, fanatics, knight-errants, demagogues, and
adventurers. They have given to the world men of one idea, of immense
energy, of adamantine will, of revolutionary power. They kindle
sympathies between man and man, and knit together the innumerable units
which constitute a race and a nation. They become the principle of
its political existence; they impart to it homogeneity of thought and
fellowship of purpose. They have given form to the medieval theocracy
and to the Mahometan superstition; they are now the life both of “Holy
Russia,” and of that freedom of speech and action which is the special
boast of Englishmen.


§ 3. Notional and Real Assents Contrasted.


It appears from what has been said, that, though Real Assent is not
intrinsically operative, it accidentally and indirectly affects
practice. It is in itself an intellectual act, of which the object is
presented to it by the imagination; and though the pure intellect does
not lead to action, nor the imagination either, yet the imagination has
the means, which pure intellect has not, of stimulating those powers of
the mind from which action proceeds. Real Assent then, or Belief, as it
may be called, viewed in itself, that is, simply as Assent, does not
lead to action; but the images in which it lives, representing as they
do the concrete, have the power of the concrete upon the affections and
passions, and by means of these indirectly become operative. Still this
practical influence is not invariable, nor to be relied on; for given
images may have no tendency to affect given minds, or to excite them to
action. Thus, a philosopher or a poet may vividly realize the brilliant
rewards of military genius or of eloquence, without wishing either to
be a commander or an orator. However, on the whole, broadly contrasting
Belief with Notional Assent and with Inference, we shall not, with this
explanation, be very wrong in pronouncing that acts of Notional Assent
and of Inference do not affect our conduct, and acts of Belief, that
is, of Real Assent, do (not necessarily, but do) affect it.

I have scarcely spoken of Inference since my Introductory Chapter,
though I intend, before I conclude, to consider it fully; but I have
said enough to admit of my introducing it here in contrast with Real
Assent or Belief, and that contrast is necessary in order to complete
what I have been saying about the latter. Let me then, for the sake
of the latter, be allowed here to say, that, while Assent, or Belief,
presupposes some apprehension of the things believed, Inference
requires no apprehension of the things inferred; that in consequence,
Inference is necessarily concerned with surfaces and aspects; that it
begins with itself, and ends with itself; that it does not reach as
far as facts; that it is employed upon formulas; that, as far as it
takes real objects of whatever kind into account, such as motives and
actions, character and conduct, art, science, taste, morals, religion,
it deals with them, not as they are, but simply in its own line, as
materials of argument or inquiry, that they are to it nothing more than
major and minor premisses and conclusions. Belief, on the other hand,
being concerned with things concrete, not abstract, which variously
excite the mind from their moral and imaginative properties, has for
its object, not only directly what is true, but inclusively what is
beautiful, useful, admirable, heroic; objects which kindle devotion,
rouse the passions, and attach the affections; and thus it leads the
way to actions of every kind, to the establishment of principles, and
the formation of character, and is thus again intimately connected with
what is individual and personal.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I insisted on this marked distinction between Beliefs on the one hand,
and Notional Assents and Inferences on the other, many years ago in
words which it will be to my purpose to use now.(2) I quote them,
because, over and above their appositeness in this place, they present
the doctrine on which I have been insisting, from a second point of
view, and with a freshness and force which I cannot now command, and,
moreover, (though they are my own, nevertheless, from the length of
time which has elapsed since their publication,) almost with the
cogency of an independent testimony.

They occur in a protest which I had occasion to write in February,
1841, against a dangerous doctrine maintained, as I considered, by two
very eminent men of that day, now no more—Lord Brougham and Sir Robert
Peel. That doctrine was to the effect that the claims of religion could
be secured and sustained in the mass of men, and in particular in the
lower classes of society, by acquaintance with literature and physical
science, and through the instrumentality of Mechanics’ Institutes and
Reading Rooms, to the serious disparagement, as it seemed to me, of
direct Christian instruction. In the course of my remarks is found the
passage which I shall here quote, and which, with whatever differences
in terminology, and hardihood of assertion, befitting the circumstances
of its publication, nay, as far as words go, inaccuracy of theological
statement, suitably illustrates the subject here under discussion. It
runs thus:—

“People say to me, that it is but a dream to suppose that Christianity
should regain the organic power in human society which once it
possessed. I cannot help that; I never said it could. I am not a
politician; I am proposing no measures, but exposing a fallacy and
resisting a pretence. Let Benthamism reign, if men have no aspirations;
but do not tell them to be romantic and then solace them with ‘glory:’
do not attempt by philosophy what once was done by religion. The
ascendency of faith may be impracticable, but the reign of knowledge
is incomprehensible. The problem for statesmen of this age is how to
educate the masses, and literature and science cannot give the solution.

“Science gives us the grounds or premisses from which religious truths
are to be enforced; but it does not set about inferring them, much
less does it reach the inference—that is not its province. It brings
before us phenomena, and it leaves us, if we will, to call them works
of design, wisdom, or benevolence; and further still, if we will, to
proceed to confess an Intelligent Creator. We have to take its facts,
and to give them a meaning, and to draw our own conclusions from them.
First comes knowledge, then a view, then reasoning, and then belief.
This is why science has so little of a religious tendency; deductions
have no power of persuasion. The heart is commonly reached, not
through the reason, but through the imagination, by means of direct
impressions, by the testimony of facts and events, by history, by
description. Persons influence us, voices melt us, looks subdue us,
deeds inflame us. Many a man will live and die upon a dogma: no man
will be a martyr for a conclusion. A conclusion is but an opinion; it
is not a thing which _is_, but which we are ‘_quite sure about_;’ and
it has often been observed, that we never say we are sure and certain
without implying that we doubt. To say that a thing _must_ be, is
to admit that it _may not_ be. No one, I say, will die for his own
calculations: he dies for realities. This is why a literary religion
is so little to be depended upon; it looks well in fair weather; but
its doctrines are opinions, and, when called to suffer for them, it
slips them between its folios, or burns them at its hearth. And this
again is the secret of the distrust and raillery with which moralists
have been so commonly visited. They say and do not. Why? Because they
are contemplating the fitness of things, and they live by the square,
when they should be realizing their high maxims in the concrete. Now
Sir Robert Peel thinks better of natural history, chemistry, and
astronomy than of such ethics; but these too, what are they more than
divinity _in posse_? He protests against ‘_controversial_ divinity:’ is
_inferential_ much better?

“I have no confidence, then, in philosophers who cannot help being
religious, and are Christians by implication. They sit at home, and
reach forward to distances which astonish us; but they hit without
grasping, and are sometimes as confident about shadows as about
realities. They have worked out by a calculation the lie of a country
which they never saw, and mapped it by means of a gazetteer; and, like
blind men, though they can put a stranger on his way, they cannot walk
straight themselves, and do not feel it quite their business to walk at
all.

“Logic makes but a sorry rhetoric with the multitude; first shoot
round corners, and you may not despair of converting by a syllogism.
Tell men to gain notions of a Creator from His works, and, if they
were to set about it (which nobody does) they would be jaded and
wearied by the labyrinth they were tracing. Their minds would be gorged
and surfeited by the logical operation. Logicians are more set upon
concluding rightly, than on right conclusions. They cannot see the
end for the process. Few men have that power of mind which may hold
fast and firmly a variety of thoughts. We ridicule ’men of one idea;’
but a great many of us are born to be such, and we should be happier
if we knew it. To most men argument makes the point in hand only more
doubtful, and considerably less impressive. After all, man is _not_
a reasoning animal; he is a seeing, feeling, contemplating, acting
animal. He is influenced by what is direct and precise. It is very well
to freshen our impressions and convictions from physics, but to create
them we must go elsewhere. Sir Robert Peel ‘never can think it possible
that a mind can be so constituted, that, after being familiarized
with the wonderful discoveries which have been made in every part of
experimental science, it can retire from such contemplation without
more enlarged conceptions of God’s providence, and a higher reverence
for His Name!’ If he speaks of religious minds, he perpetrates a
truism; if of irreligious, he insinuates a paradox.

“Life is not long enough for a religion of inferences; we shall never
have done beginning, if we determine to begin with proof. We shall ever
be laying our foundations; we shall turn theology into evidences, and
divines into textuaries. We shall never get at our first principles.
Resolve to believe nothing, and you must prove your proof and analyze
your elements, sinking farther and farther, and finding ‘in the lowest
depth a lower deep,’ till you come to the broad bosom of scepticism.
I would rather be bound to defend the reasonableness of assuming that
Christianity is true, than to demonstrate a moral governance from the
physical world. Life is for action. If we insist on proofs for every
thing, we shall never come to action: to act you must assume, and that
assumption is faith.

“Let no one suppose, that in saying this I am maintaining that all
proofs are equally difficult, and all propositions equally debatable.
Some assumptions are greater than others, and some doctrines involve
postulates larger than others, and more numerous. I only say, that
impressions lead to action, and that reasonings lead from it. Knowledge
of premisses, and inferences upon them,—this is not to _live_. It is
very well as a matter of liberal curiosity and of philosophy to analyze
our modes of thought: but let this come second, and when there is
leisure for it, and then our examinations will in many ways even be
subservient to action. But if we commence with scientific knowledge
and argumentative proof, or lay any great stress upon it as the basis
of personal Christianity, or attempt to make man moral and religious
by libraries and museums, let us in consistency take chemists for our
cooks, and mineralogists for our masons.

“Now I wish to state all this as matter of fact, to be judged by the
candid testimony of any persons whatever. Why we are so constituted
that faith, not knowledge or argument, is our principle of action, is
a question with which I have nothing to do; but I think it is a fact,
and, if it be such, we must resign ourselves to it as best we may,
unless we take refuge in the intolerable paradox, that the mass of men
are created for nothing, and are meant to leave life as they entered it.

“So well has this practically been understood in all ages of the world,
that no religion yet has been a religion of physics or of philosophy.
It has ever been synonymous with revelation. It never has been a
deduction from what we know; it has ever been an assertion of what
we are to believe. It has never lived in a conclusion; it has ever
been a message, a history, or a vision. No legislator or priest ever
dreamed of educating our moral nature by science or by argument. There
is no difference here between true religions and pretended. Moses was
instructed not to reason from the creation, but to work miracles.
Christianity is a history supernatural, and almost scenic: it tells us
what its Author is, by telling us what He has done.

“Lord Brougham himself has recognized the force of this principle. He
has not left his philosophical religion to argument; he has committed
it to the keeping of the imagination. Why should he depict a great
republic of letters, and an intellectual pantheon, but that he feels
that instances and patterns, not logical reasonings, are the living
conclusions which alone have a hold over the affections or can form the
character?”




