Chapter VIII. Inference.


§ 1. Formal Inference.


Inference is the conditional acceptance of a proposition, Assent is
the unconditional; the object of Assent is a truth, the object of
Inference is the truth-like or a verisimilitude. The problem which I
have undertaken is that of ascertaining how it comes to pass that a
conditional act leads to an unconditional; and, having now shown that
assent really is unconditional, I proceed to show how inferential
exercises, as such, always must be conditional.

We reason, when we hold this by virtue of that; whether we hold it as
evident or as approximating or tending to be evident, in either case we
so hold it because of holding something else to be evident or tending
to be evident. In the next place, our reasoning ordinarily presents
itself to our mind as a simple act, not a process or series of acts.
We apprehend the antecedent and then apprehend the consequent, without
explicit recognition of the medium connecting the two, as if by a sort
of direct association of the first thought with the second. We proceed
by a sort of instinctive perception, from premiss to conclusion. I call
it instinctive, not as if the faculty were one and the same to all
men in strength and quality (as we generally conceive of instinct),
but because ordinarily, or at least often, it acts by a spontaneous
impulse, as prompt and inevitable as the exercise of sense and memory.
We perceive external objects, and we remember past events, without
knowing how we do so; and in like manner we reason without effort and
intention, or any necessary consciousness of the path which the mind
takes in passing from antecedent to conclusion.

Such is ratiocination, in what may be called a state of nature, as it
is found in the uneducated,—nay, in all men, in its ordinary exercise;
nor is there any antecedent ground for determining that it will not be
as correct in its informations as it is instinctive, as trustworthy
as are sensible perception and memory, though its informations are
not so immediate and have a wider range. By means of sense we gain
knowledge directly; by means of reasoning we gain it indirectly, that
is, by virtue of a previous knowledge. And if we may justly regard
the universe, according to the meaning of the word, as one whole, we
may also believe justly that to know one part of it is necessarily to
know much more than that one part. This thought leads us to a further
view of ratiocination. The proverb says, “Ex pede Herculem;” and we
have actual experience how the practised zoologist can build up some
intricate organization from the sight of its smallest bone, evoking
the whole as if it were a remembrance; how, again, a philosophical
antiquarian, by means of an inscription, interprets the mythical
traditions of former ages, and makes the past live; and how a Columbus
is led, from considerations which are common property, and fortuitous
phenomena which are successively brought to his notice, to have such
faith in a western world, as willingly to commit himself to the terrors
of a mysterious ocean in order to arrive at it. That which the mind is
able thus variously to bring together into unity, must have some real
intrinsic connexion of part with part. But if this _summa rerum_ is
thus one whole, it must be constructed on definite principles and laws,
the knowledge of which will enlarge our capacity of reasoning about it
in particulars;—thus we are led on to aim at determining on a large
scale and on system, what even gifted or practised intellects are only
able by their own personal vigour to reach piece-meal and fitfully,
that is, at substituting scientific methods, such as all may use, for
the action of individual genius.

There is another reason for attempting to discover an instrument of
reasoning (that is, of gaining new truths by means of old), which may
be less vague and arbitrary than the talent and experience of the few
or the common-sense of the many. As memory is not always accurate, and
has on that account led to the adoption of writing, as being a _memoria
technica_, unaffected by the failure of mental impressions,—as our
senses at times deceive us, and have to be corrected by each other; so
is it also with our reasoning faculty. The conclusions of one man are
not the conclusions of another; those of the same man do not always
agree together; those of ever so many who agree together may differ
from the facts themselves, which those conclusions are intended to
ascertain. In consequence it becomes a necessity, if it be possible,
to analyze the process of reasoning, and to invent a method which may
act as a common measure between mind and mind, as a means of joint
investigation, and as a recognized intellectual standard,—a standard
such as to secure us against hopeless mistakes, and to emancipate us
from the capricious _ipse dixit_ of authority.

As the index on the dial notes down the sun’s course in the heavens,
as a key, revolving through the intricate wards of the lock, opens for
us a treasure-house, so let us, if we can, provide ourselves with some
ready expedient to serve as a true record of the system of objective
truth, and an available rule for interpreting its phenomena; or at
least let us go as far as we can in providing it. One such experimental
key is the science of geometry, which, in a certain department of
nature, substitutes a collection of true principles, fruitful and
interminable in consequences, for the guesses, _pro re natâ_, of our
intellect, and saves it both the labour and the risk of guessing.
Another far more subtle and effective instrument is algebraical
science, which acts as a spell in unlocking for us, without merit or
effort of our own individually, the _arcana_ of the concrete physical
universe. A more ambitious, because a more comprehensive contrivance
still, for interpreting the concrete world is the method of logical
inference. What we desiderate is something which may supersede the need
of personal gifts by a far-reaching and infallible rule. Now, without
external symbols to mark out and to steady its course, the intellect
runs wild; but with the aid of symbols, as in algebra, it advances with
precision and effect. Let then our symbols be words: let all thought
be arrested and embodied in words. Let language have a monopoly of
thought; and thought go for only so much as it can show itself to be
worth in language. Let every prompting of the intellect be ignored,
every _momentum_ of argument be disowned, which is unprovided with an
equivalent wording, as its ticket for sharing in the common search
after truth. Let the authority of nature, common-sense, experience,
genius, go for nothing. Ratiocination, thus restricted and put into
grooves, is what I have called Inference, and the science, which is its
regulating principle, is Logic.

The first step in the inferential method is to throw the question to be
decided into the form of a proposition; then to throw the proof itself
into propositions, the force of the proof lying in the comparison of
these propositions with each other. When the analysis is carried out
fully and put into form, it becomes the Aristotelic syllogism. However,
an inference need not be expressed thus technically; an enthymeme
fulfils the requirements of what I have called Inference. So does any
other form of words with the mere grammatical expressions, “for,”
“therefore,” “supposing,” “so that,” “similarly,” and the like. Verbal
reasoning, of whatever kind, as opposed to mental, is what I mean by
inference, which differs from logic only inasmuch as logic is its
scientific form. And it will be more convenient here to use the two
words indiscriminately, for I shall say nothing about logic which does
not in its substance also apply to inference.

Logical inference, then, being such, and its office such as I have
described, the question follows, how far it answers the purpose for
which it is used. It proposes to provide both a test and a common
measure of reasoning; and I think it will be found partly to succeed
and partly to fail; succeeding so far as words can in fact be found for
representing the countless varieties and subtleties of human thought,
failing on account of the fallacy of the original assumption, that
whatever can be thought can be adequately expressed in words.

In the first place, Inference, being conditional, is hampered with
other propositions besides that which is especially its own, that
is, with the premisses as well as the conclusion, and with the rules
connecting the latter with the former. It views its own proper
proposition in the medium of prior propositions, and measures it
by them. It does not hold a proposition for its own sake, but as
dependent upon others, and those others it entertains for the sake of
the conclusion. Thus it is practically far more concerned with the
comparison of propositions, than with the propositions themselves.
It is obliged to regard all the propositions, with which it has to
do, not so much for their own sake, as for the sake of each other,
as regards the identity or likeness, independence or dissimilarity,
which has to be mutually predicated of them. It follows from this,
that the more simple and definite are the words of a proposition,
and the narrower their meaning, and the more that meaning in each
proposition is restricted to the relation which it has to the words of
the other propositions compared with it,—in other words, the nearer
the propositions concerned in the inference approach to being mental
abstractions, and the less they have to do with the concrete reality,
and the more closely they are made to express exact, intelligible,
comprehensible, communicable notions, and the less they stand for
objective things, that is, the more they are the subjects, not of real,
but of notional apprehension,—so much the more suitable do they become
for the purposes of Inference.

Hence it is that no process of argument is so perfect, as that which is
conducted by means of symbols. In Arithmetic 1 is 1, and just 1, and
never anything else but 1; it never is 2, it has no tendency to change
its meaning, and to become 2; it has no portion, quality, admixture of
2 in its meaning. And 6 under all circumstances is 3 times 2, and the
sum of 2 and 4; nor can the whole world supply anything to throw doubt
upon these elementary positions. It is not so with language. Take, by
contrast, the word “inference,” which I have been using: it may stand
for the act of inferring, as I have used it; or for the connecting
principle, or _inferentia_, between premisses and conclusions; or
for the conclusion itself. And sometimes it will be difficult, in a
particular sentence, to say which it bears of these three senses. And
so again in Algebra, _a_ is never _x_, or anything but _a_, wherever it
is found; and _a_ and _b_ are always standard quantities, to which _x_
and _y_ are always to be referred, and by which they are always to be
measured. In Geometry again, the subjects of argument, points, lines,
and surfaces, are precise creations of the mind, suggested indeed by
external objects, but meaning nothing but what they are defined to
mean: they have no colour, no motion, no heat, no qualities which
address themselves to the ear or to the palate; so that, in whatever
combinations or relations the words denoting them occur, and to
whomsoever they come, those words never vary in their meaning, but are
just of the same measure and weight at one time and at another.

What is true of Arithmetic, Algebra, and Geometry, is true also of
Aristotelic argumentation in its typical modes and figures. It compares
two given words separately with a third, and then determines how they
stand towards each other, in a _bona fide_ identity of sense. In
consequence, its formal process is best conducted by means of symbols,
A, B, and C. While it keeps to these, it is safe; it has the cogency of
mathematical reasoning, and draws its conclusions by a rule as unerring
as it is blind.

Symbolical notation, then, being the perfection of the syllogistic
method, it follows that, when words are substituted for symbols, it
will be its aim to circumscribe and stint their import as much as
possible, lest perchance A should not always exactly mean A, and B mean
B; and to make them, as much as possible, the _calculi_ of notions,
which are in our absolute power, as meaning just what we choose them
to mean, and as little as possible the tokens of real things, which
are outside of us, and which mean we do not know how much, but so much
certainly as may run away with us, in proportion as we enter into them,
beyond the range of scientific management. The concrete matter of
propositions is a constant source of trouble to syllogistic reasoning,
as marring the simplicity and perfection of its process. Words, which
denote things, have innumerable implications; but in inferential
exercises it is the very triumph of that clearness and hardness of
head, which is the characteristic talent for the art, to have stripped
them of all these connatural senses, to have drained them of that
depth and breadth of associations which constitute their poetry, their
rhetoric, and their historical life, to have starved each term down
till it has become the ghost of itself, and everywhere one and the
same ghost, “omnibus umbra locis,” so that it may stand for just one
unreal aspect of the concrete thing to which it properly belongs, for a
relation, a generalization, or other abstraction, for a notion neatly
turned out of the laboratory of the mind, and sufficiently tame and
subdued, because existing only in a definition.

Thus it is that the logician for his own purposes, and most usefully
as far as those purposes are concerned, turns rivers, full, winding,
and beautiful, into navigable canals. To him dog or horse is not a
thing which he sees, but a mere name suggesting ideas; and by dog or
horse universal he means, not the aggregate of all individual dogs
or horses brought together, but a common aspect, meagre but precise,
of all existing or possible dogs or horses, which all the while does
not really correspond to any one single dog or horse out of the whole
aggregate. Such minute fidelity in the representation of individuals
is neither necessary nor possible to his art; his business is not
to ascertain facts in the concrete, but to find and dress up middle
terms; and, provided they and the extremes which they go between are
not equivocal, either in themselves or in their use, and he can enable
his pupils to show well in a _vivâ voce_ disputation, or in a popular
harangue, or in a written dissertation, he has achieved the main
purpose of his profession.

Such are the characteristics of reasoning, viewed as a science or
scientific art, or inferential process, and we might anticipate that,
narrow as by necessity is its field of view, for that reason its
pretensions to be demonstrative were incontrovertible. In a certain
sense they really are so; while we talk logic, we are unanswerable;
but then, on the other hand, this universal living scene of things is
after all as little a logical world as it is a poetical; and, as it
cannot without violence be exalted into poetical perfection, neither
can it be attenuated into a logical formula. Abstract can only conduct
to abstract; but we have need to attain by our reasonings to what
is concrete; and the margin between the abstract conclusions of the
science, and the concrete facts which we wish to ascertain, will be
found to reduce the force of the inferential method from demonstration
to the mere determination of the probable. Thus, whereas (as I have
already said) Inference starts with conditions, as starting with
premisses, here are two reasons why, when employed upon matters of
fact, it can only conclude probabilities: first, because its premisses
are assumed, not proved; and secondly, because its conclusions are
abstract, and not concrete. I will now consider these two points
separately.

1.

Inference comes short of proof in concrete matters, because it has
not a full command over the objects to which it relates, but merely
assumes its premisses. In order to complete the proof, we are thrown
upon some previous syllogism or syllogisms, in which the assumptions
may be proved; and then, still farther back, we are thrown upon others
again, to prove the new assumptions of that second order of syllogisms.
Where is this process to stop? especially since it must run upon
separated, divergent, and multiplied lines of argument, the farther
the investigation is carried back. At length a score of propositions
present themselves, all to be proved by propositions more evident than
themselves, in order to enable them respectively to become premisses to
that series of inferences which terminates in the conclusion which we
originally drew. But even now the difficulty is not at an end; it would
be something to arrive at length at premisses which are undeniable,
however long we might be in arriving at them; but in this case the long
retrospection lodges us at length at what are called first principles,
the recondite sources of all knowledge, as to which logic provides
no common measure of minds,—which are accepted by some, rejected by
others,—in which, and not in the syllogistic exhibitions, lies the
whole problem of attaining to truth,—and which are called self-evident
by their respective advocates because they are evident in no other way.
One of the two uses contemplated in reasoning by rule, or in verbal
argumentation, was, as I have said, to establish a standard of truth
and to supersede the _ipse dixit_ of authority: how does it fulfil this
end, if it only leads us back to first principles, about which there is
interminable controversy? We are not able to prove by syllogism that
there are any self-evident propositions at all; but supposing there
are (as of course I hold there are), still who can determine these by
logic? Syllogism, then, though of course it has its use, still does
only the minutest and easiest part of the work, in the investigation of
truth, for when there is any difficulty, that difficulty commonly lies
in determining first principles, not in the arrangement of proofs.

Even when argument is the most direct and severe of its kind, there
must be those assumptions in the process which resolve themselves into
the conditions of human nature; but how many more assumptions does that
process in ordinary concrete matters involve, subtle assumptions not
directly arising out of these primary conditions, but accompanying the
course of reasoning, step by step, and traceable to the sentiments of
the age, country, religion, social habits and ideas, of the particular
inquirers or disputants, and passing current without detection,
because admitted equally on all hands! And to these must be added
the assumptions which are made from the necessity of the case, in
consequence of the prolixity and elaborateness of any argument which
should faithfully note down all the propositions which go to make it
up. We recognize this tediousness even in the case of the theorems of
Euclid, though mathematical proof is comparatively simple.

Logic then does not really prove; it enables us to join issue with
others; it suggests ideas; it opens views; it maps out for us the lines
of thought; it verifies negatively; it determines when differences of
opinion are hopeless; and when and how far conclusions are probable;
but for genuine proof in concrete matter we require an _organon_ more
delicate, versatile, and elastic than verbal argumentation.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I ought to give an illustration of what I have been stating in general
terms; but it is difficult to do so without a digression. However, if
it must be, I look round the room in which I happen to be writing, and
take down the first book which catches my eye. It is an old volume
of a Magazine of great name; I open it at random and fall upon a
discussion about the then lately discovered emendations of the text of
Shakespeare. It will do for my purpose.

In the account of Falstaff’s death in “Henry V.” (act ii. scene 3) we
read, according to the received text, the well-known words, “His nose
was as sharp as a pen, and ’a babbled of green fields.” In the first
authentic edition, published in 1623, some years after Shakespeare’s
death, the words, I believe, ran, “and a table of green fields,” which
has no sense. Accordingly, an anonymous critic, reported by Theobald in
the last century, corrected them to “and ’a talked of green fields,”
Theobald himself improved the reading into “and ’a babbled of green
fields,” which since his time has been the received text. But just
twenty years ago an annotated copy of the edition of 1632 was found,
annotated perhaps by a contemporary, which, among as many as 20,000
corrections of the text, substituted for the corrupt reading of
1623, the words “on a table of green frieze,” which has a sufficient
sense, though far less acceptable to an admirer of Shakespeare, than
Theobald’s. The genuineness of this copy with its annotations, as it is
presented to us, I shall here take for granted.

Now I understand, or at least will suppose, the argument, maintained
in the article of the Magazine in question, to run thus:—“Theobald’s
reading, as at present received, is to be retained, to the exclusion
of the text of 1623 and of the emendation made on the copy of the
edition of 1632;—to the exclusion of the text of 1623 because that
text is corrupt; to the exclusion of the annotation of 1632 because
it is anonymous.” I wish it then observed how many large questions
are opened in the discussion which ensues, how many recondite and
untractable principles have to be settled, and how impotent is logic,
or any reasonings which can be thrown into language, to deal with these
indispensable first principles.

The first position is, “The authoritative reading of 1623 is not to
be restored to the received text, because it is corrupt.” Now are we
to take it for granted, as a first principle, which needs no proof,
that a text may be tampered with, because it is corrupt? However the
corrupt reading arose, it is authoritative. It is found in an edition,
published by known persons, only six years after Shakespeare’s death,
from his own manuscript, as it appears, and with his corrections of
earlier faulty impressions. Authority cannot sanction nonsense, but
it can forbid critics from experimentalizing upon it. If the text of
Shakespeare is corrupt, it should be published as corrupt.

I believe the best editors of the Greek tragedians have given up the
impertinence of introducing their conjectures into the text; and a
classic like Shakespeare has a right to be treated with the same
respect as Æschylus. To this it will be replied, that Shakespeare is
for the general public and Æschylus for students of a dead language;
that the run of men read for amusement or as a recreation, and that,
if the editions of Shakespeare were made on critical principles, they
would remain unsold. Here, then, we are brought to the question whether
it is any advantage to read Shakespeare except with the care and pains
which a classic demands, and whether he is in fact read at all by those
whom such critical exactness would offend; and thus we are led on to
further questions about cultivation of mind and the education of the
masses. Further, the question presents itself, whether the general
admiration of Shakespeare is genuine, whether it is not a mere fashion,
whether the multitude of men understand him at all, whether it is not
true that every one makes much of him, because every one else makes
much of him. Can we possibly make Shakespeare light reading, especially
in this day of cheap novels, by ever so much correction of his text?

Now supposing this point settled, and the text of 1623 put out of
court, then comes the claim of the Annotator to introduce into
Shakespeare’s text the emendation made upon his copy of the edition of
1632; why is he not of greater authority than Theobald, the inventor
of the received reading, and his emendation of more authority than
Theobald’s? If the corrupt reading must any how be got out of the
way, why should not the Annotator, rather than Theobald, determine
its substitute? For what we know, the authority of the anonymous
Annotator may be very great. There is nothing to show that he was
not a contemporary of the poet; and if so, the question arises, what
is the character of his emendations? are they his own private and
arbitrary conjectures, or are they informations from those who knew
Shakespeare, traditions of the theatre, of the actors or spectators of
his plays? Here, then, we are involved in intricate questions which
can only be decided by a minute examination of the 20,000 emendations
so industriously brought together by this anonymous critic. But
it is obvious that a verbal argumentation upon 20,000 corrections
is impossible: there must be first careful processes of perusal,
classification, discrimination, selection, which mainly are acts of the
mind without the intervention of language. There must be a cumulation
of arguments on one side and on the other, of which only the heads or
the results can be put upon paper. Next come in questions of criticism
and taste, with their recondite and disputable premisses, and the
usual deductions from them, so subtle and difficult to follow. All
this being considered, am I wrong in saying that, though controversy
is both possible and useful at all times, yet it is not adequate
to this occasion; rather that that sum-total of argument (whether
for or against the Annotator) which is furnished by his numerous
emendations,—or what may be called the multiform, evidential fact, in
which the examination of these emendations results,—requires rather
to be photographed on the individual mind as by one impression, than
admits of delineation for the satisfaction of the many in any known or
possible language, however rich in vocabulary and flexible in structure?

And now as to the third point which presents itself for consideration,
the claim of Theobald’s emendation to retain its place in the _textus
receptus_. It strikes me with wonder that an argument in its defence
could have been put forward to the following effect, viz. that true
though it be, that the Editors of 1623 are of much more authority than
Theobald, and that the Annotator’s reading in the passage in question
is more likely to be correct than Theobald’s, nevertheless Theobald’s
has by this time acquired a prescriptive right to its place there,
the prescription of more than a hundred years;—that usurpation has
become legitimacy; that Theobald’s words have sunk into the hearts of
thousands; that in fact they have become Shakespeare’s; that it would
be a dangerous innovation and an evil precedent to touch them. If we
begin an unsettlement of the popular mind, where is it to stop?

Thus it appears, in order to do justice to the question before us, we
have to betake ourselves to the consideration of myths, pious frauds,
and other grave matters, which introduce us into a _sylva_, dense and
intricate, of first principles and elementary phenomena, belonging to
the domains of archeology and theology. Nor is this all; when such
views of the duty of garbling a classic are propounded, they open upon
us a long vista of sceptical interrogations which go far to disparage
the claims upon us, the genius, the very existence of the great poet
to whose honour these views are intended to minister. For perhaps,
after all, Shakespeare is really but a collection of many Theobalds,
who have each of them a right to his own share of him. There was a
great dramatic school in his day; he was one of a number of first-rate
artists,—perhaps they wrote in common. How are we to know what is his,
or how much? Are the best parts his, or the worst? It is said that the
players put in what is vulgar and offensive in his writings; perhaps
they inserted the beauties. I have heard it urged years ago, as an
objection to Sheridan’s claim of authorship to the plays which bear
his name, that they were so unlike each other; is not this the very
peculiarity of those imputed to Shakespeare? Were ever the writings of
one man so various, so impersonal? can we form any one true idea of
what he was in history or character, by means of them? is he not in
short “_vox et præterea nihil_”? Then again, in corroboration, is there
any author’s life so deficient in biographical notices as his? We know
about Hooker, Spenser, Spelman, Raleigh, Harvey, his contemporaries:
what do we know of Shakespeare? Is he much more than a name? Is not
the traditional object of an Englishman’s idolatry after all a nebula
of genius, destined, like Homer, to be resolved into its separate and
independent luminaries, as soon as we have a criticism powerful enough
for the purpose? I must not be supposed for a moment to countenance
such scepticism myself,—though it is a subject worthy the attention
of a sceptical age: here I have introduced it simply to suggest how
many words go to make up a thoroughly valid argument; how short and
easy a way to a true conclusion is the logic of good sense; how little
syllogisms have to do with the formation of opinion; how little depends
upon the inferential proofs, and how much upon those pre-existing
beliefs and views, in which men either already agree with each other or
hopelessly differ, before they begin to dispute, and which are hidden
deep in our nature, or, it may be, in our personal peculiarities.

2.

So much on the multiplicity of assumptions, which in spite of formal
exactness, logical reasoning in concrete matters is forced to admit,
and on the consequent uncertainty which attends its conclusions. Now
I come to the second reason why its conclusions are thus wanting in
precision.

In this world of sense we have to do with things, far more than with
notions. We are not solitary, left to the contemplation of our own
thoughts and their legitimate developments. We are surrounded by
external beings, and our enunciations are directed to the concrete.
We reason in order to enlarge our knowledge of matters, which do not
depend on us for being what they are. But how is an exercise of mind,
which is for the most part occupied with notions, not things, competent
to deal with things, except partially and indirectly? This is the main
reason why an inference, however fully worded, (except perhaps in some
peculiar cases, which are out of place here,) never can reach so far
as to ascertain a fact. As I have already said, arguments about the
abstract cannot handle and determine the concrete. They may approximate
to a proof, but they only reach the probable, because they cannot reach
the particular.

Even in mathematical physics a margin is left for possible imperfection
in the investigation. When the planet Neptune was discovered, it was
deservedly considered a triumph of science, that abstract reasonings
had done so much towards determining the planet and its orbit. There
would have been no triumph in success, had there been no hazard of
failure; it is no triumph to Euclid, in pure mathematics, that the
geometrical conclusions of his second book can be worked out and
verified by algebra.

The motions of the heavenly bodies are almost mathematical in their
precision; but there is a multitude of matters, to which mathematical
science is applied, which are in their nature intricate and obscure,
and require that reasoning by rule should be completed by the living
mind. Who would be satisfied with a navigator or engineer, who had no
practice or experience whereby to carry on his scientific conclusions
out of their native abstract into the concrete and the real? What is
the meaning of the distrust, which is ordinarily felt, of speculators
and theorists but this, that they are dead to the necessity of personal
prudence and judgment to qualify and complete their logic? Science,
working by itself, reaches truth in the abstract, and probability in
the concrete; but what we aim at is truth in the concrete.

This is true of other inferences besides mathematical. They come to
no definite conclusions about matters of fact, except as they are
made effectual for their purpose by the living intelligence which
uses them. “All men have their price; Fabricius is a man; he has his
price;” but he had not his price; how is this? Because he is more
than a universal; because he falls under other universals; because
universals are ever at war with each other; because what is called a
universal is only a general; because what is only general does not lead
to a necessary conclusion. Let us judge him by another universal. “Men
have a conscience; Fabricius is a man; he has a conscience.” Until we
have actual experience of Fabricius, we can only say, that, since he is
a man, perhaps he will take a bribe, and perhaps he will not. “Latet
dolus in generalibus;” they are arbitrary and fallacious, if we take
them for more than broad views and aspects of things, serving as our
notes and indications for judging of the particular, but not absolutely
touching and determining facts.

Let units come first, and (so-called) universals second; let universals
minister to units, not units be sacrificed to universals. John,
Richard, and Robert are individual things, independent, incommunicable.
We may find some kind of common measure between them, and we may give
it the name of man, man as such, the typical man, the _auto-anthropos_.
We are justified in so doing, and in investing it with general
attributes, and bestowing on it what we consider a definition. But
we think we may go on to impose our definition on the whole race,
and to every member of it, to the thousand Johns, Richards, and
Roberts who are found in it. No; each of them is what he is, in spite
of it. Not any one of them is man, as such, or coincides with the
_auto-anthropos_. Another John is not necessarily rational, because
“all men are rational,” for he may be an idiot;—nor because “man is a
being of progress,” does the second Richard progress, for he may be a
dunce;—nor, because “man is made for society,” must we therefore go on
to deny that the second Robert is a gipsy or a bandit, as he is found
to be. There is no such thing as stereotyped humanity; it must ever
be a vague, bodiless idea, because the concrete units from which it
is formed are independent realities. General laws are not inviolable
truths; much less are they necessary causes. Since, as a rule, men are
rational, progressive, and social, there is a high probability of this
rule being true in the case of a particular person; but we must know
him to be sure of it.

Each thing has its own nature and its own history. When the nature and
the history of many things are similar, we say that they have the same
nature; but there is no such thing as one and the same nature; they are
each of them itself, not identical, but like. A law is not a fact, but
a notion. “All men die; therefore Elias has died;” but he has not died,
and did not die. He was an exception to the general law of humanity;
so far, he did not come under that law, but under the law (so to say)
of Elias. It was the peculiarity of his individuality, that he left
the world without dying: what right have we to subject the person of
Elias to the scientific notion of an abstract humanity, which we have
formed without asking his leave? Why must the tyrant majority find a
rule for his history? “But all men are mortal;” not so; what is really
meant is, that “man, as such, is mortal,” or the abstract, typical
_auto-anthropos_; therefore the minor premiss ought to be, “Elias was
the _auto-anthropos_ or abstract man;” but he was not, and could not be
the abstract man, nor could any one else, any more than the average man
of an Insurance Company is every individual man who insures his life
with it. Such a syllogism proves nothing about the veritable Elias,
except in the way of antecedent probability. If it be said that Elias
was exempted from death, not by nature, but by miracle, what is this
to the purpose, undeniable as it is? Still, to have this miraculous
exemption was the personal prerogative of Elias. We call it miracle,
because God ordinarily acts otherwise. He who causes men in general
to die, gave to Elias not to die. This miraculous gift comes into the
individuality of Elias. On this individuality we must fix our thoughts,
and not begin our notion of him by ignoring it. He was a man, and
something more than “man”; and if we do not take this into account, we
fall into an initial error in our thoughts of him.

What is true of Elias is true of every one in his own place and degree.
We call rationality the distinction of man, when compared with other
animals. This is true in logic; but in fact a man differs from a brute,
not in rationality only, but in all that he is, even in those respects
in which he is most like a brute; so that his whole self, his bones,
limbs, make, life, reason, moral feeling, immortality, and all that
he is besides, is his real _differentia_, in contrast to a horse or
a dog. And in like manner as regards John and Richard, when compared
with one another; each is himself, and nothing else, and, though,
regarded abstractedly, the two may fairly be said to have something in
common, (viz. that abstract sameness which does not exist at all,) yet,
strictly speaking, they have nothing in common, for each of them has a
vested interest in all that he himself is; and, moreover, what seems
to be common in the two, becomes in fact so uncommon, so _sui simile_,
in their respective individualities—the bodily frame of each is so
singled out from all other bodies by its special constitution, sound
or weak, by its vitality, activity, pathological history and changes,
and, again, the mind of each is so distinct from all other minds, in
disposition, powers, and habits,—that, instead of saying, as logicians
say, that the two men differ only in number, we ought, I repeat, rather
to say that they differ from each other in all that they are, in
identity, in incommunicability, in personality.

Nor does any real thing admit, by any calculus of logic, of being
dissected into all the possible general notions which it admits, nor,
in consequence, of being recomposed out of them; though the attempt
thus to treat it is more unpromising in proportion to the intricacy
and completeness of its make. We cannot see through any one of the
myriad beings which make up the universe, or give the full catalogue
of its belongings. We are accustomed, indeed, and rightly, to speak of
the Creator Himself as incomprehensible; and, indeed, He is so by an
incommunicable attribute; but in a certain sense each of His creatures
is incomprehensible to us also, in the sense that no one has a perfect
understanding of it but He. We recognize and appropriate aspects of
them, and logic is useful to us in registering these aspects and what
they imply; but it does not give us to know even one individual being.

So much on logical argumentation; and in speaking of the syllogism,
I have spoken of all inferential processes whatever, as expressed
in language, (if they are such as to be reducible to science,) for
they all require general notions, as conditions of their coming to a
conclusion.

Thus, in the deductive argument, “Europe has no security for peace,
till its large standing armies in its separate states are reduced; for
a large standing army is in its very idea provocative of war,” the
conclusion is only probable, for it may so be that in no country is
that pure idea realized, but in every country in concrete fact there
may be circumstances, political or social, which destroy the abstract
dangerousness.

So, too, as regards Induction and Analogy, as modes of Inference;
for, whether I argue, “This place will have the cholera, unless it is
drained; for there are a number of well-ascertained cases which point
to this conclusion;” or, “The sun will rise to-morrow, for it rose
to-day;” in either method of reasoning I appeal, in order to prove a
particular case, to a general principle or law, which has not force
enough to warrant more than a probable conclusion. As to the cholera,
the place in question may have certain antagonist advantages, which
anticipate or neutralize the miasma which is the principle of the
poison; and as to the sun’s rising to-morrow, there was a first day of
the sun’s rising, and therefore there may be a last.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

This is what I have to say on formal Inference, when taken to represent
Ratiocination. Science in all its departments has too much simplicity
and exactness, from the nature of the case, to be the measure of fact.
In its very perfection lies its incompetency to settle particulars
and details. As to Logic, its chain of conclusions hangs loose at
both ends; both the point from which the proof should start, and the
points at which it should arrive, are beyond its reach; it comes
short both of first principles and of concrete issues. Even its most
elaborate exhibitions fail to represent adequately the sum total
of considerations by which an individual mind is determined in its
judgment of things; even its most careful combinations made to bear
on a conclusion want that steadiness of aim which is necessary for
hitting it. As I said when I began, thought is too keen and manifold,
its sources are too remote and hidden, its path too personal, delicate,
and circuitous, its subject-matter too various and intricate, to admit
of the trammels of any language, of whatever subtlety and of whatever
compass.

Nor is it any disparagement of the proper value of formal reasonings
thus to speak of them. That they cannot proceed beyond probabilities
is most readily allowed by those who use them most. Philosophers,
experimentalists, lawyers, in their several ways, have commonly the
reputation of being, at least on moral and religious subjects, hard
of belief; because, proceeding in the necessary investigation by the
analytical method of verbal inference, they find within its limits
no sufficient resources for attaining a conclusion. Nay, they do not
always find it possible in their own special province severally; for,
even when in their hearts they have no doubt about a conclusion, still
often, from the habit of their minds, they are reluctant to own it,
and dwell upon the deficiencies of the evidence, or the possibility of
error, because they speak by rule and by book, though they judge and
determine by common-sense.

Every exercise of nature or of art is good in its place; and the uses
of this logical inference are manifold. It is the great principle of
order in our thinking; it reduces a chaos into harmony; it catalogues
the accumulations of knowledge; it maps out for us the relations of
its separate departments; it puts us in the way to correct its own
mistakes. It enables the independent intellects of many, acting and
re-acting on each other, to bring their collective force to bear upon
one and the same subject-matter, or the same question. If language
is an inestimable gift to man, the logical faculty prepares it for
our use. Though it does not go so far as to ascertain truth, still it
teaches us the direction in which truth lies, and how propositions
lie towards each other. Nor is it a slight benefit to know what is
probable, and what is not so, what is needed for the proof of a point,
what is wanting in a theory, how a theory hangs together, and what
will follow, if it be admitted. Though it does not itself discover
the unknown, it is one principal way by which discoveries are made.
Moreover, a course of argument, which is simply conditional, will
point out when and where experiment and observation should be applied,
or testimony sought for, as often happens both in physical and legal
questions. A logical hypothesis is the means of holding facts together,
explaining difficulties, and reconciling the imagination to what is
strange. And, again, processes of logic are useful as enabling us to
get over particular stages of an investigation speedily and surely, as
on a journey we now and then gain time by travelling by night, make
short cuts when the high-road winds, or adopt water-carriage to avoid
fatigue.

But reasoning by rule and in words is too natural to us, to admit
of being regarded merely in the light of utility. Our inquiries
spontaneously fall into scientific sequence, and we think in logic,
as we talk in prose, without aiming at doing so. However sure we are
of the accuracy of our instinctive conclusions, we as instinctively
put them into words, as far as we can; as preferring, if possible, to
have them in an objective shape which we can fall back upon,—first
for our own satisfaction, then for our justification with others.
Such a tangible defence of what we hold, inadequate as it necessarily
is, considered as an analysis of our ratiocination in its length and
breadth, nevertheless is in such sense associated with our holdings,
and so fortifies and illustrates them, that it acts as a vivid
apprehension acts, giving them luminousness and force. Thus inference
becomes a sort of symbol of assent, and even bears upon action.

I have enlarged on these obvious considerations, lest I should seem
paradoxical; but they do not impair the main position of this Section,
that Inference, considered in the shape of verbal argumentation,
determines neither our principles, nor our ultimate judgments,—that it
is neither the test of truth, nor the adequate basis of assent.(12)


§ 2. Informal Inference.


It is plain that formal logical sequence is not in fact the method
by which we are enabled to become certain of what is concrete; and
it is equally plain, from what has been already suggested, what the
real and necessary method is. It is the cumulation of probabilities,
independent of each other, arising out of the nature and circumstances
of the particular case which is under review; probabilities too fine
to avail separately, too subtle and circuitous to be convertible into
syllogisms, too numerous and various for such conversion, even were
they convertible. As a man’s portrait differs from a sketch of him, in
having, not merely a continuous outline, but all its details filled in,
and shades and colours laid on and harmonized together, such is the
multiform and intricate process of ratiocination, necessary for our
reaching him as a concrete fact, compared with the rude operation of
syllogistic treatment.

Let us suppose I wish to convert an educated, thoughtful Protestant,
and accordingly present for his acceptance a syllogism of the following
kind:—“All Protestants are bound to join the Church; you are a
Protestant: ergo.” He answers, we will say, by denying both premisses;
and he does so by means of arguments, which branch out into other
arguments, and those into others, and all of them severally requiring
to be considered by him on their own merits, before the syllogism
reaches him, and in consequence mounting up, taken all together, into
an array of inferential exercises large and various beyond calculation.
Moreover, he is bound to submit himself to this complicated process
from the nature of the case; he would act rashly, if he did not; for
he is a concrete individual unit, and being so, is under so many laws,
and is the subject of so many predications all at once, that he cannot
determine, offhand, his position and his duty by the law and the
predication of one syllogism in particular. I mean he may fairly say,
“Distinguo,” to each of its premisses: he says, “Protestants are bound
to join the Church,—under circumstances,” and “I am a Protestant—in a
certain sense;” and therefore the syllogism, at first sight, does not
touch him at all.

Before, then, he grants the major, he asks whether all Protestants
really are bound to join the Church—are they bound in case they do
not feel themselves bound; if they are satisfied that their present
religion is a safe one; if they are sure it is true; if, on the other
hand, they have grave doubts as to the doctrinal fidelity and purity of
the Church; if they are convinced that the Church is corrupt; if their
conscience instinctively rejects certain of its doctrines; if history
convinces them that the Pope’s power is not _jure divino_, but merely
in the order of Providence? if, again, they are in a heathen country
where priests are not? or where the only priest who is to be found
exacts of them, as a condition of their reception, a profession, which
the Creed of Pope Pius IV. says nothing about; for instance, that the
Holy See is fallible even when it teaches, or that the Temporal Power
is an anti-Christian corruption? On one or other of such grounds he
thinks he need not change his religion; but presently he asks himself,
Can a Protestant be in such a state as to be really satisfied with
his religion, as he has just now been professing? Can he possibly
believe Protestantism came from above, as a whole? how much of it can
he believe came from above? and, as to that portion which he feels did
come from above, has it not all been derived to him from the Church,
when traced to its source? Is not Protestantism in itself a negation?
Did not the Church exist before it? and can he be sure, on the other
hand, that any one of the Church’s doctrines is not from above?
Further, he finds he has to make up his mind what is a corruption,
and what are the tests of it; what he means by a religion; whether
it is obligatory to profess any religion in particular; what are the
standards of truth and falsehood in religion; and what are the special
claims of the Church.

And so, again, as to the minor premiss, perhaps he will answer, that
he is not a Protestant; that he is a Catholic of the early undivided
Church; that he is a Catholic, but not a Papist. Then he has to
determine questions about division, schism, visible unity, what is
essential, what is desirable; about provisional states; as to the
adjustment of the Church’s claims with those of personal judgment and
responsibility; as to the soul of the Church contrasted with the body;
as to degrees of proof, and the degree necessary for his conversion;
as to what is called his providential position, and the responsibility
of change; as to the sincerity of his purpose to follow the Divine
Will, whithersoever it may lead him; as to his intellectual capacity of
investigating such questions at all.

None of these questions, as they come before him, admit of simple
demonstration; but each carries with it a number of independent
probable arguments, sufficient, when united, for a reasonable
conclusion about itself. And first he determines that the questions are
such as he personally, with such talents or attainments as he has, may
fairly entertain; and then he goes on, after deliberation, to form a
definite judgment upon them; and determines them, one way or another,
in their bearing on the bald syllogism which was originally offered
to his acceptance. And, we will say, he comes to the conclusion, that
he ought to accept it as true in his case; that he is a Protestant
in such a sense, of such a complexion, of such knowledge, under such
circumstances, as to be called upon by duty to join the Church; that
this is a conclusion of which he can be certain, and ought to be
certain, and that he will be incurring grave responsibility, if he
does not accept it as certain, and act upon the certainty of it. And
to this conclusion he comes, as is plain, not by any possible verbal
enumeration of all the considerations, minute but abundant, delicate
but effective, which unite to bring him to it; but by a mental
comprehension of the whole case, and a discernment of its upshot,
sometimes after much deliberation, but, it may be, by a clear and rapid
act of the intellect, always, however, by an unwritten summing-up,
something like the summation of the terms, _plus_ and _minus_ of an
algebraical series.

This I conceive to be the real method of reasoning in concrete matters;
and it has these characteristics:—First, it does not supersede the
logical form of inference, but is one and the same with it; only it is
no longer an abstraction, but carried out into the realities of life,
its premisses being instinct with the substance and the momentum of
that mass of probabilities, which, acting upon each other in correction
and confirmation, carry it home definitely to the individual case,
which is its original scope.

Next, from what has been said it is plain, that such a process of
reasoning is more or less implicit, and without the direct and full
advertence of the mind exercising it. As by the use of our eyesight we
recognize two brothers, yet without being able to express what it is by
which we distinguish them; as at first sight we perhaps confuse them
together, but, on better knowledge, we see no likeness between them at
all; as it requires an artist’s eye to determine what lines and shades
make a countenance look young or old, amiable, thoughtful, angry or
conceited, the principle of discrimination being in each case real,
but implicit;—so is the mind unequal to a complete analysis of the
motives which carry it on to a particular conclusion, and is swayed and
determined by a body of proof, which it recognizes only as a body, and
not in its constituent parts.

And thirdly, it is plain, that, in this investigation of the method of
concrete inference, we have not advanced one step towards depriving
inference of its conditional character; for it is still as dependent on
premisses, as it is in its elementary idea. On the contrary, we have
rather added to the obscurity of the problem; for a syllogism is at
least a demonstration, when the premisses are granted, but a cumulation
of probabilities, over and above their implicit character, will vary
both in their number and their separate estimated value, according to
the particular intellect which is employed upon it. It follows that
what to one intellect is a proof is not so to another, and that the
certainty of a proposition does properly consist in the certitude of
the mind which contemplates it. And this of course may be said without
prejudice to the objective truth or falsehood of propositions, since it
does not follow that these propositions on the one hand are not true,
and based on right reason, and those on the other not false, and based
on false reason, because not all men discriminate them in the same way.

Having thus explained the view which I would take of reasoning in
the concrete, viz. that, from the nature of the case, and from the
constitution of the human mind, certitude is the result of arguments
which, taken in the letter, and not in their full implicit sense,
are but probabilities, I proceed to dwell on some instances and
circumstances of a phenomenon which seems to me as undeniable as to
many it may be perplexing.

1.

Let us take three instances belonging respectively to the present, the
past, and the future.

1. We are all absolutely certain, beyond the possibility of doubt, that
Great Britain is an island. We give to that proposition our deliberate
and unconditional adhesion. There is no security on which we should
be better content to stake our interests, our property, our welfare,
than on the fact that we are living in an island. We have no fear of
any geographical discovery which may reverse our belief. We should be
amused or angry at the assertion, as a bad jest, did any one say that
we were at this time joined to the main-land in Norway or in France,
though a canal was cut across the isthmus. We are as little exposed to
the misgiving, “Perhaps we are not on an island after all,” as to the
question, “Is it quite certain that the angle in a semi-circle is a
right-angle?” It is a simple and primary truth with us, if any truth is
such; to believe it is as legitimate an exercise of assent, as there
are legitimate exercises of doubt or of opinion. This is the position
of our minds towards our insularity; yet are the arguments producible
for it (to use the common expression) in black and white commensurate
with this overpowering certitude about it?

Our reasons for believing that we are circumnavigable are such as
these:—first, we have been so taught in our childhood, and it is so in
all the maps; next, we have never heard it contradicted or questioned;
on the contrary, every one whom we have heard speak on the subject
of Great Britain, every book we have read, invariably took it for
granted; our whole national history, the routine transactions and
current events of the country, our social and commercial system, our
political relations with foreigners, imply it in one way or another.
Numberless facts, or what we consider facts, rest on the truth of it;
no received fact rests on its being otherwise. If there is anywhere a
junction between us and the continent, where is it? and how do we know
it? is it in the north or in the south? There is a manifest _reductio
ad absurdum_ attached to the notion that we can be deceived on such a
point as this.

However, negative arguments and circumstantial evidence are not all,
in such a matter, which we have a right to require. They are not the
highest kind of proof possible. Those who have circumnavigated the
island have a right to be certain: have we ever ourselves even fallen
in with any one who has? And as to the common belief, what is the proof
that we are not all of us believing it on the credit of each other?
And then, when it is said that every one believes it, and everything
implies it, how much comes home to me personally of this “every one”
and “everything”? The question is, Why do I believe it myself? A living
statesman is said to have fancied Demerara an island; his belief was
an impression; have we personally more than an impression, if we view
the matter argumentatively, a lifelong impression about Great Britain,
like the belief, so long and so widely entertained, that the earth was
immovable, and the sun careered round it? I am not at all insinuating
that we are not rational in our certitude; I only mean that we cannot
analyze a proof satisfactorily, the result of which good sense actually
guarantees to us.

2. Father Hardouin maintained that Terence’s Plays, Virgil’s “Æneid,”
Horace’s Odes, and the Histories of Livy and Tacitus, were the
forgeries of the monks of the thirteenth century. That he should be
able to argue in behalf of such a position, shows of course that the
proof in behalf of the received opinion is not overwhelming. That is,
we have no means of inferring absolutely, that Virgil’s episode of
Dido, or of the Sibyl, and Horace’s “Te quoque mensorem” and “Quem
tu Melpomene,” belong to that Augustan age, which owes its celebrity
mainly to those poets. Our common-sense, however, believes in their
genuineness without any hesitation or reserve, as if it had been
demonstrated, and not in proportion to the available evidence in its
favour, or the balance of arguments.

So much at first sight;—but what are our grounds for dismissing thus
summarily, as we are likely to do, a theory such as Hardouin’s? For
let it be observed first, that all knowledge of the Latin classics
comes to us from the medieval transcriptions of them, and they who
transcribed them had the opportunity of forging or garbling them. We
are simply at their mercy; for neither by oral transmission, nor by
monumental inscriptions, nor by contemporaneous manuscripts are the
works of Virgil, Horace, and Terence, of Livy and Tacitus, brought
to our knowledge. The existing copies, whenever made, are to us the
autographic originals. Next, it must be considered, that the numerous
religious bodies, then existing over the face of Europe, had leisure
enough, in the course of a century, to compose, not only all the
classics, but all the Fathers too. The question is, whether they had
the ability. This is the main point on which the inquiry turns, or at
least the most obvious; and it forms one of those arguments, which,
from the nature of the case, are felt rather than are convertible into
syllogisms. Hardouin allows that the Georgics, Horace’s Satires and
Epistles, and the whole of Cicero, are genuine: we have a standard
then in these undisputed compositions of the Augustan age. We have a
standard also, in the extant medieval works, of what the thirteenth
century could do; and we see at once how widely the disputed works
differ from the medieval. Now could the thirteenth century simulate
Augustan writers better than the Augustan could simulate such writers
as those of the thirteenth? No. Perhaps, when the subject is critically
examined, the question may be brought to a more simple issue; but
as to our personal reasons for receiving as genuine the whole of
Virgil, Horace, Livy, Tacitus, and Terence, they are summed up in
our conviction that the monks had not the ability to write them.
That is, we take for granted that we are sufficiently informed about
the capabilities of the human mind, and the conditions of genius, to
be quite sure that an age which was fertile in great ideas and in
momentous elements of the future, robust in thought, hopeful in its
anticipations, of singular intellectual curiosity and acumen, and of
high genius in at least one of the fine arts, could not, for the very
reason of its pre-eminence in its own line, have an equal pre-eminence
in a contrary one. We do not pretend to be able to draw the line
between what the medieval intellect could or could not do; but we feel
sure that at least it could not write the classics. An instinctive
sense of this, and a faith in testimony, are the sufficient, but the
undeveloped argument on which to ground our certitude.

I will add, that, if we deal with arguments in the mere letter, the
question of the authorship of works in any case has much difficulty.
I have noticed it in the instance of Shakespeare, and of Newton. We
are all certain that Johnson wrote the prose of Johnson, and Pope the
poetry of Pope; but what is there but prescription, at least after
contemporaries are dead, to connect together the author of the work and
the owner of the name? Our lawyers prefer the examination of present
witnesses to affidavits on paper; but the tradition of “testimonia,”
such as are prefixed to the classics and the Fathers, together with the
absence of dissentient voices, is the adequate groundwork of our belief
in the history of literature.

3. Once more: what are my grounds for thinking that I, in my own
particular case, shall die? I am as certain of it in my own innermost
mind, as I am that I now live; but what is the distinct evidence on
which I allow myself to be certain? how would it tell in a court of
justice? how should I fare under a cross-examination upon the grounds
of my certitude? Demonstration of course I cannot have of a future
event, unless by means of a Divine Voice; but what logical defence can
I make for that undoubting, obstinate anticipation of it, of which I
could not rid myself, if I tried?

First, the future cannot be proved _à posteriori_; therefore we
are compelled by the nature of the case to put up with _à priori_
arguments, that is, with antecedent probability, which is by itself no
logical proof. Men tell me that there is a law of death, meaning by law
a necessity; and I answer that they are throwing dust into my eyes,
giving me words instead of things. What is a law but a generalized
fact? and what power has the past over the future? and what power has
the case of others over my own case? and how many deaths have I seen?
how many ocular witnesses have imparted to me their experience of
deaths, sufficient to establish what is called a law?

But let there be a law of death; so there is a law, we are told, that
the planets, if let alone, would severally fall into the sun—it is the
centrifugal law which hinders it, and so the centripetal law is never
carried out. In like manner I am not under the law of death alone,
I am under a thousand laws, if I am under one; and they thwart and
counteract each other, and jointly determine the irregular line, along
which my actual history runs, divergent from the special direction
of any one of them. No law is carried out, except in cases where it
acts freely: how do I know that the law of death will be allowed its
free action in my particular case? We often are able to avert death by
medical treatment: why should death have its effect, sooner or later,
in every case conceivable?

It is true that the human frame, in all instances which come before
me, first grows, and then declines, wastes, and decays, in visible
preparation for dissolution. We see death seldom, but of this decline
we are witnesses daily; still, it is a plain fact, that most men who
die, die, not by any law of death, but by the law of disease; and some
writers have questioned whether death is ever, strictly speaking,
natural. Now, are diseases necessary? is there any law that every one,
sooner or later, must fall under the power of disease? and what would
happen on a large scale, were there no diseases? Is what we call the
law of death anything more than the chance of disease? Is the prospect
of my death, in its logical evidence,—as that evidence is brought home
to me—much more than a high probability?

The strongest proof I have for my inevitable mortality is the _reductio
ad absurdum_. Can I point to the man, in historic times, who has
lived his two hundred years? What has become of past generations of
men, unless it is true that they suffered dissolution? But this is
a circuitous argument to warrant a conclusion to which in matter
of fact I adhere so relentlessly. Anyhow, there is a considerable
“surplusage,” as Locke calls it, of belief over proof, when I determine
that I individually must die. But what logic cannot do, my own living
personal reasoning, my good sense, which is the healthy condition of
such personal reasoning, but which cannot adequately express itself in
words, does for me, and I am possessed with the most precise, absolute,
masterful certitude of my dying some day or other.

I am led on by these reflections to make another remark. If it is
difficult to explain how a man knows that he shall die, is it not more
difficult for him to satisfy himself how he knows that he was born?
His knowledge about himself does not rest on memory, nor on distinct
testimony, nor on circumstantial evidence. Can he bring into one
focus of proof the reasons which make him so sure? I am not speaking
of scientific men, who have diverse channels of knowledge, but of an
ordinary individual, as one of ourselves.

Answers doubtless may be given to some of these questions; but, on the
whole, I think it is the fact that many of our most obstinate and most
reasonable certitudes depend on proofs which are informal and personal,
which baffle our powers of analysis, and cannot be brought under
logical rule, because they cannot be submitted to logical statistics.
If we must speak of Law, this recognition of a correlation between
certitude and implicit proof seems to me a law of our minds.

2.

I said just now that an object of sense presents itself to our view as
one whole, and not in its separate details: we take it in, recognize
it, and discriminate it from other objects, all at once. Such too is
the intellectual view we take of the _momenta_ of proof for a concrete
truth; we grasp the full tale of premisses and the conclusion, _per
modum unius_,—by a sort of instinctive perception of the legitimate
conclusion in and through the premisses, not by a formal juxta-position
of propositions; though of course such a juxta-position is useful and
natural, both to direct and to verify, just as in objects of sight
our notice of bodily peculiarities, or the remarks of others may aid
us in establishing a case of disputed identity. And, as this man or
that will receive his own impression of one and the same person, and
judge differently from others about his countenance, its expression,
its moral significance, its physical contour and complexion, so an
intellectual question may strike two minds very differently, may awaken
in them distinct associations, may be invested by them in contrary
characteristics, and lead them to opposite conclusions;—and so, again,
a body of proof, or a line of argument, may produce a distinct, nay, a
dissimilar effect, as addressed to one or to the other.

Thus in concrete reasonings we are in great measure thrown back into
that condition, from which logic proposed to rescue us. We judge for
ourselves, by our own lights, and on our own principles; and our
criterion of truth is not so much the manipulation of propositions, as
the intellectual and moral character of the person maintaining them,
and the ultimate silent effect of his arguments or conclusions upon our
minds.

It is this distinction between ratiocination as the exercise of
a living faculty in the individual intellect, and mere skill in
argumentative science, which is the true interpretation of the
prejudice which exists against logic in the popular mind, and of the
animadversions which are levelled against it, as that its formulas make
a pedant and a _doctrinaire_, that it never makes converts, that it
leads to rationalism, that Englishmen are too practical to be logical,
that an ounce of common-sense goes farther than many cartloads of
logic, that Laputa is the land of logicians, and the like. Such maxims
mean, when analyzed, that the processes of reasoning which legitimately
lead to assent, to action, to certitude, are in fact too multiform,
subtle, omnigenous, too implicit, to allow of being measured by rule,
that they are after all personal,—verbal argumentation being useful
only in subordination to a higher logic. It is this which was meant
by the Judge who, when asked for his advice by a friend, on his being
called to important duties which were new to him, bade him always lay
down the law boldly, but never give his reasons, for his decision was
likely to be right, but his reasons sure to be unsatisfactory. This is
the point which I proceed to illustrate.

1. I will take a question of the present moment. “We shall have a
European war, _for_ Greece is audaciously defying Turkey.” How are we
to test the validity of the reason, implied, not expressed, in the
word “for”? Only the judgment of diplomatists, statesmen, capitalists,
and the like, founded on experience, strengthened by practical and
historical knowledge, controlled by self-interest, can decide the worth
of that “for” in relation to accepting or not accepting the conclusion
which depends on it. The argument is from concrete fact to concrete
fact. How will mere logical inferences, which cannot proceed without
general and abstract propositions, help us on to the determination
of this particular case? It is not the case of Switzerland attacking
Austria, or of Portugal attacking Spain, or of Belgium attacking
Prussia, but a case without parallels. To draw a scientific conclusion,
the argument must run somewhat in this way:—“All audacious defiances
of Turkey on the part of Greece must end in a European war; these
present acts of Greece are such: ergo;”—where the major premiss is
more difficult to accept than the conclusion, and the proof becomes an
“obscurum per obscurius.” But, in truth, I should not betake myself
to some one universal proposition to defend my view of the matter; I
should determine the particular case by its particular circumstances,
by the combination of many uncatalogued experiences floating in my
memory, of many reflections, variously produced, felt rather than
capable of statement; and if I had them not, I should go to those who
had. I assent in consequence of some such complex act of judgment,
or from faith in those who are capable of making it, and practically
syllogism has no part, even verificatory, in the action of my mind.

I take this instance at random in illustration; now let me follow it up
by more serious cases.

2. Leighton says, “What a full confession do we make of our
dissatisfaction with the objects of our bodily senses, that in our
attempts to express what we conceive of the best of beings and the
greatest of felicities to be, we describe by the exact contraries of
all that we experience here,—the one as infinite, incomprehensible,
immutable, &c.; the other as incorruptible, undefiled, and that passeth
not away. At all events, this coincidence, say rather identity of
attributes, is sufficient to apprise us that, to be inheritors of
bliss, we must become the children of God.” Coleridge quotes this
passage, and adds, “Another and more fruitful, perhaps more solid,
inference from the facts would be, that there is something in the human
mind which makes it know that in all finite quantity, there is an
infinite, in all measures of time an eternal; that the latter are the
basis, the substance, of the former; and that, as we truly are only as
far as God is with us, so neither can we truly possess, that is, enjoy
our being or any other real good, but by living in the sense of His
holy presence.(13)”

What is this an argument for? how few readers will enter into either
premiss or conclusion! and of those who understand what it means, will
not at least some confess that they understand it by fits and starts,
not at all times? Can we ascertain its force by mood and figure? Is
there any royal road by which we may indolently be carried along into
the acceptance of it? Does not the author rightly number it among his
“aids” for our “reflection,” not instruments for our compulsion? It is
plain that, if the passage is worth anything, we must secure that worth
for our own use by the personal action of our own minds, or else we
shall be only professing and asserting its doctrine, without having any
ground or right to assert it. And our preparation for understanding and
making use of it will be the general state of our mental discipline and
cultivation, our own experiences, our appreciation of religious ideas,
the perspicacity and steadiness of our intellectual vision.

3. It is argued by Hume against the actual occurrence of the Jewish
and Christian miracles, that, whereas “it is experience only which
gives authority to human testimony, and it is the same experience which
assures us of the laws of nature,” therefore, “when these two kinds of
experience are contrary” to each other, “we are bound to subtract the
one from the other;” and, in consequence, since we have no experience
of a violation of natural laws, and much experience of the violation of
truth, “we may establish it as a maxim that no human testimony can have
such force as to prove a miracle, and make it a just foundation for any
such system of religion.”

I will accept the general proposition, but I resist its application.
Doubtless it is abstractedly more likely that men should lie than
that the order of nature should be infringed; but what is abstract
reasoning to a question of concrete fact? To arrive at the fact of any
matter, we must eschew generalities, and take things as they stand,
with all their circumstances. _À priori_, of course the acts of men
are not so trustworthy as the order of nature, and the pretence of
miracles is in fact more common than the occurrence. But the question
is not about miracles in general, or men in general, but definitely,
whether these particular miracles, ascribed to the particular Peter,
James, and John, are more likely to have been or not; whether they
are unlikely, supposing that there is a Power, external to the world,
who can bring them about; supposing they are the only means by which
He can reveal Himself to those who need a revelation; supposing He
is likely to reveal Himself; that He has a great end in doing so;
that the professed miracles in question are like His natural works,
and such as He is likely to work, in case He wrought miracles; that
great effects, otherwise unaccountable, in the event followed upon the
acts said to be miraculous; that they were from the first accepted as
true by large numbers of men against their natural interests; that
the reception of them as true has left its mark upon the world, as no
other event ever did; that, viewed in their effects, they have—that is,
the belief of them has—served to raise human nature to a high moral
standard, otherwise unattainable: these and the like considerations
are parts of a great complex argument, which so far can be put into
propositions, but which, even between, and around, and behind these,
still is implicit and secret, and cannot by any ingenuity be imprisoned
in a formula, and packed into a nut-shell. These various conditions may
be decided in the affirmative or in the negative. That is a further
point; here I only insist upon the nature of the argument, if it is to
be philosophical. It must be no smart antithesis which may look well on
paper, but the living action of the mind on a great problem of fact;
and we must summon to our aid all our powers and resources, if we would
encounter it worthily, and not as if it were a literary essay.

4. “Consider the establishment of the Christian religion,” says Pascal
in his “Thoughts.” “Here is a religion contrary to our nature, which
establishes itself in men’s minds with so much mildness, as to use no
external force; with so much energy, that no tortures could silence
its martyrs and confessors; and consider the holiness, devotion,
humility of its true disciples; its sacred books, their superhuman
grandeur, their admirable simplicity. Consider the character of its
Founder; His associates and disciples, unlettered men, yet possessed of
wisdom sufficient to confound the ablest philosopher; the astonishing
succession of prophets who heralded Him; the state at this day of the
Jewish people who rejected Him and His religion; its perpetuity and its
holiness; the light which its doctrines shed upon the contrarieties of
our nature;—after considering these things, let any man judge if it be
possible to doubt about its being the only true one.(14)”

This is an argument parallel in its character to that by which we
ascribe the classics to the Augustan age. We urge, that, though we
cannot draw the line definitely between what the monks could do in
literature, and what they could not, anyhow Virgil’s “Æneid” and the
Odes of Horace are far beyond the highest capacity of the medieval
mind, which, however great, was different in the character of its
endowments. And in like manner we maintain, that, granting that we
cannot decide how far the human mind can advance by its own unaided
powers in religious ideas and sentiments, and in religious practice,
still the facts of Christianity, as they stand, are beyond what is
possible to man, and betoken the presence of a higher intelligence,
purpose, and might.

Many have been converted and sustained in their faith by this argument,
which admits of being powerfully stated; but still such statement is
after all only intended to be a vehicle of thought, and to open the
mind to the apprehension of the facts of the case, and to trace them
and their implications in outline, not to convince by the logic of its
mere wording. Do we not think and muse as we read it, try to master
it as we proceed, put down the book in which we find it, fill out its
details from our own resources, and then resume the study of it? And,
when we have to give an account of it to others, should we make use
of its language, or even of its thoughts, and not rather of its drift
and spirit? Has it never struck us what different lights different
minds throw upon the same theory and argument, nay, how they seem to be
differing in detail when they are professing, and in reality showing,
a concurrence in it? Have we never found, that, when a friend takes
up the defence of what we have written or said, that at first we are
unable to recognize in his statement of it what we meant it to convey?
It will be our wisdom to avail ourselves of language, as far as it will
go, but to aim mainly by means of it to stimulate, in those to whom we
address ourselves, a mode of thinking and trains of thought similar to
our own, leading them on by their own independent action, not by any
syllogistic compulsion. Hence it is that an intellectual school will
always have something of an esoteric character; for it is an assemblage
of minds that think; their bond is unity of thought, and their words
become a sort of _tessera_, not expressing thought, but symbolizing it.

Recurring to Pascal’s argument, I observe that, its force depending
upon the assumption that the facts of Christianity are beyond human
nature, therefore, according as the powers of nature are placed at a
high or low standard, that force will be greater or less; and that
standard will vary according to the respective dispositions, opinions,
and experiences, of those to whom the argument is addressed. Thus its
value is a personal question; not as if there were not an objective
truth and Christianity as a whole not supernatural, but that, when we
come to consider where it is that the supernatural presence is found,
there may be fair differences of opinion, both as to the fact and the
proof of what is supernatural. There is a multitude of facts, which,
taken separately, may perhaps be natural, but, found together, must
come from a source above nature; and what these are, and how many are
necessary, will be variously determined. And while every inquirer has
a right to determine the question according to the best exercise of
his judgment, still whether he so determine it for himself, or trust
in part or altogether to the judgment of those who have the best claim
to judge, in either case he is guided by the implicit processes of the
reasoning faculty, not by any manufacture of arguments forcing their
way to an irrefragable conclusion.

5. Pascal writes in another place, “He who doubts, but seeks not
to have his doubts removed, is at once the most criminal and the
most unhappy of mortals. If, together with this, he is tranquil and
self-satisfied, if he be vain of his tranquillity, or makes his state
a topic of mirth and self-gratulation, I have not words to describe so
insane a creature. Truly it is to the honour of religion to have for
its adversaries men so bereft of reason; their opposition, far from
being formidable, bears testimony to its most distinguishing truths;
for the great object of the Christian religion is to establish the
corruption of our nature, and the redemption by Jesus Christ.(15)”
Elsewhere he says of Montaigne, “He involves everything in such
universal, unmingled scepticism, as to doubt of his very doubts. He was
a pure Pyrrhonist. He ridicules all attempts at certainty in anything.
Delighted with exhibiting in his own person the contradictions that
exist in the mind of a free-thinker, it is all one to him whether
he is successful or not in his argument. The virtue he loved was
simple, sociable, gay, sprightly, and playful; to use one of his own
expressions, ‘Ignorance and incuriousness are two charming pillows for
a sound head.’(16)”

Here are two celebrated writers in direct opposition to each other in
their fundamental view of truth and duty. Shall we say that there is
no such thing as truth and error, but that anything is truth to a man
which he troweth? and not rather, as the solution of a great mystery,
that truth there is, and attainable it is, but that its rays stream in
upon us through the medium of our moral as well as our intellectual
being; and that in consequence that perception of its first principles
which is natural to us is enfeebled, obstructed, perverted, by
allurements of sense and the supremacy of self, and, on the other hand,
quickened by aspirations after the supernatural; so that at length two
characters of mind are brought out into shape, and two standards and
systems of thought,—each logical, when analyzed, yet contradictory
of each other, and only not antagonistic because they have no common
ground on which they can conflict?

6. Montaigne was endowed with a good estate, health, leisure, and an
easy temper, literary tastes, and a sufficiency of books: he could
afford thus to play with life, and the abysses into which it leads us.
Let us take a case in contrast.

“I think,” says the poor dying factory-girl in the tale, “if this
should be the end of all, and if all I have been born for is just to
work my heart and life away, and to sicken in this dree place, with
those mill-stones in my ears for ever, until I could scream out for
them to stop and let me have a little piece of quiet, and with the
fluff filling my lungs, until I thirst to death for one long deep
breath of the clear air, and my mother gone, and I never able to tell
her again how I loved her, and of all my troubles,—I think, if this
life is the end, and that there is no God to wipe away all tears from
all eyes, I could go mad!(17)”

Here is an argument for the immortality of the soul. As to its force,
be it great or small, will it make a figure in a logical disputation,
carried on _secundum artem_? Can any scientific common measure compel
the intellects of Dives and Lazarus to take the same estimate of it? Is
there any test of the validity of it better than the _ipse dixit_ of
private judgment, that is, the judgment of those who have a right to
judge, and next, the agreement of many private judgments in one and the
same view of it?

7. “In order to prove plainly and intelligibly,” says Dr. Samuel
Clarke, “that God is a Being, which must of necessity be endued with
perfect knowledge, ’tis to be observed that knowledge is a perfection,
without which the foregoing attributes are no perfections at all, and
without which those which follow can have no foundation. Where there
is no Knowledge, Eternity and Immensity are as nothing, and Justice,
Goodness, Mercy, and Wisdom can have no place. The idea of eternity
and omnipresence, devoid of knowledge, is as the notion of darkness
compared with that of light. ’Tis as a notion of the world without the
sun to illuminate it; ’tis as the notion of inanimate matter (which is
the atheist’s supreme cause) compared with that of light and spirit.
And as for the following attributes of Justice, Goodness, Mercy, and
Wisdom, ’tis evident that without knowledge there could not possibly be
any such things as these at all.(18)”

The argument here used in behalf of the Divine Attribute of Knowledge
comes under the general proposition that the attributes imply each
other, for the denial of one is the denial of the rest. To some minds
this thesis is self-evident; others are utterly insensible to its
force. Will it bear bringing out into words throughout the whole
series of its argumentative links? for if it does, then either those
who maintain it or those who reject it, the one or the other, will be
compelled by logical necessity to confess that they are in error. “God
is wise, if He is eternal; He is good, if He is wise; He is just, if
He is good.” What skill can so arrange these propositions, so add to
them, so combine them, that they may be able, by the force of their
juxta-position, to follow one from the other, and become one and the
same by an inevitable correlation. That is not the method by which the
argument becomes a demonstration. Such a method, used by a Theist in
controversy against men who are unprepared personally for the question,
will but issue in his retreat along a series of major propositions,
farther and farther back, till he and they find themselves in a land of
shadows, “where the light is as darkness.”

To feel the true force of an argument like this, we must not confine
ourselves to abstractions, and merely compare notion with notion, but
we must contemplate the God of our conscience as a Living Being, as
one Object and Reality, _under_ the aspect of this or that attribute.
We must patiently rest in the thought of the Eternal, Omnipresent, and
All-knowing, rather than of Eternity, Omnipresence, and Omniscience;
and we must not hurry on and force a series of deductions, which, if
they are to be realized, must distil like dew into our minds, and form
themselves spontaneously there, by a calm contemplation and gradual
understanding of their premisses. Ordinarily speaking, such deductions
do not flow forth, except according as the Image,(19) presented to us
through conscience, on which they depend, is cherished within us with
the sentiments which, supposing it be, as we know it is, the truth, it
necessarily claims of us, and is seen reflected, by the habit of our
intellect, in the appointments and the events of the external world.
And, in their manifestation to our inward sense, they are analogous to
the knowledge which we at length attain of the details of a landscape,
after we have selected the right stand-point, and have learned to
accommodate the pupil of our eye to the varying focus necessary for
seeing them; have accustomed it to the glare of light, have mentally
grouped or discriminated lines and shadows and given them their due
meaning, and have mastered the perspective of the whole. Or they may be
compared to a landscape as drawn by the pencil (unless the illustration
seem forced), in which by the skill of the artist, amid the bold
outlines of trees and rocks, when the eye has learned to take in their
reverse aspects, the forms or faces of historical personages are
discernible, which we catch and lose again, and then recover, and which
some who look on with us are never able to catch at all.

Analogous to such an exercise of sight, must be our mode of dealing
with the verbal expositions of an argument such as Clarke’s. His words
speak to those who understand the speech. To the mere barren intellect
they are but the pale ghosts of notions; but the trained imagination
sees in them the representations of things. He who has once detected
in his conscience the outline of a Lawgiver and Judge, needs no
definition of Him, whom he dimly but surely contemplates there, and
he rejects the mechanism of logic, which cannot contain in its grasp
matters so real and so recondite. Such a one, according to the strength
and perspicacity of his mind, the force of his presentiments, and his
power of sustained attention, is able to pronounce about the great
Sight which encompasses him, as about some visible object; and, in his
investigation of the Divine Attributes, is not inferring abstraction
from abstraction, but noting down the aspects and phases of that one
thing on which he ever is gazing. Nor is it possible to limit the depth
of meaning, which at length he will attach to words, which to the many
are but definitions and ideas.

Here then again, as in the other instances, it seems clear, that
methodical processes of inference, useful as they are, as far as they
go, are only instruments of the mind, and need, in order to their due
exercise, that real ratiocination and present imagination which gives
them a sense beyond their letter, and which, while acting through them,
reaches to conclusions beyond and above them. Such a living _organon_
is a personal gift, and not a mere method or calculus.

3.

That there are cases, in which evidence, not sufficient for a
scientific proof, is nevertheless sufficient for assent and certitude,
is the doctrine of Locke, as of most men. He tells us that belief,
grounded on sufficient probabilities, “rises to assurance;” and as
to the question of sufficiency, that where propositions “border near
on certainty,” then “we assent to them as firmly as if they were
infallibly demonstrated.” The only question is, what these propositions
are: this he does not tell us, but he seems to think that they are
few in number, and will be without any trouble recognized at once by
common-sense; whereas, unless I am mistaken, they are to be found
throughout the range of concrete matter, and that supra-logical
judgment, which is the warrant for our certitude about them, is not
mere common-sense, but the true healthy action of our ratiocinative
powers, an action more subtle and more comprehensive than the mere
appreciation of a syllogistic argument. It is often called the
“judicium prudentis viri,” a standard of certitude which holds good
in all concrete matter, not only in those cases of practice and duty,
in which we are more familiar with it, but in questions of truth and
falsehood generally, or in what are called “speculative” questions,
and that, not indeed to the exclusion, but as the supplement of logic.
Thus a proof, except in abstract demonstration, has always in it,
more or less, an element of the personal, because “prudence” is not a
constituent part of our nature, but a personal endowment.

And the language in common use, when concrete conclusions are in
question, implies the presence of this personal element in the proof
of them. We are considered to feel, rather than to see, its cogency;
and we decide, not that the conclusion must be, but that it cannot be
otherwise. We say, that we do not see our way to doubt it, that it is
impossible to doubt, that we are bound to believe it, that we should
be idiots, if we did not believe. We never should say, in abstract
science, that we could not escape the conclusion that 25 was a mean
proportional between 5 and 125; or that a man had no right to say
that a tangent to a circle at the extremity of the radius makes an
acute angle with it. Yet, though our certitude of the fact is quite
as clear, we should not think it unnatural to say that the insularity
of Great Britain is as good as demonstrated, or that none but a fool
expects never to die. Phrases indeed such as these are sometimes
used to express a shade of doubt, but it is enough for my purpose if
they are also used when doubt is altogether absent. What, then, they
signify, is, what I have so much insisted on, that we have arrived at
these conclusions—not _ex opere operato_, by a scientific necessity
independent of ourselves,—but by the action of our own minds, by our
own individual perception of the truth in question, under a sense of
duty to those conclusions and with an intellectual conscientiousness.

This certitude and this evidence are often called moral; a word which
I avoid, as having a very vague meaning; but using it here for once,
I observe that moral evidence and moral certitude are all that we can
attain, not only in the case of ethical and spiritual subjects, such
as religion, but of terrestrial and cosmical questions also. So far,
physical Astronomy and Revelation stand on the same footing. Vince, in
his treatise on Astronomy, does but use the language of philosophical
sobriety, when, after speaking of the proofs of the earth’s rotatory
motion, he says, “When these reasons, all upon different principles,
are considered, they amount to a proof of the earth’s rotation about
its axis, which is as satisfactory to the mind as the most direct
demonstration could be;” or, as he had said just before, “the mind
rests equally satisfied, as if the matter was strictly proved.(20)”
That is, first there is no demonstration that the earth rotates; next
there is a cluster of “reasons on _different_ principles,” that is,
independent probabilities in cumulation; thirdly, these “_amount_ to a
proof,” and “the mind” feels “_as if_ the matter was strictly proved,”
that is, there is the equivalent of proof; lastly, “the mind rests
_satisfied_,” that is, it is certain on the point. And though evidence
of the fact is now obtained which was not known fifty years ago, that
evidence on the whole has not changed its character.

Compare with this avowal the language of Butler, when discussing the
proof of Revelation. “Probable proofs,” he says, “by being added, not
only increase the evidence, but multiply it. The truth of our religion,
like the truth of common matters, is to be judged by the whole evidence
taken together ... in like manner as, if in any common case numerous
events acknowledged were to be alleged in proof of any other event
disputed, the truth of the disputed event would be proved, not only if
any one of the acknowledged ones did of itself clearly imply it, but
though no one of them singly did so, if the whole of the acknowledged
events taken together could not in reason be supposed to have happened,
unless the disputed one were true.(21)” Here, as in Astronomy, is the
same absence of demonstration of the thesis, the same cumulating and
converging indications of it, the same indirectness in the proof, as
being _per impossibile_, the same recognition nevertheless that the
conclusion is not only probable, but true. One other characteristic
of the argumentative process is given, which is unnecessary in a
subject-matter so clear and simple as astronomical science, viz. the
moral state of the parties inquiring or disputing. They must be “as
much in earnest about religion, as about their temporal affairs,
capable of being convinced, on real evidence, that there is a God who
governs the world, and feel themselves to be of a moral nature and
accountable creatures.(22)”

This being the state of the case, the question arises, whether,
granting that the personality (so to speak) of the parties reasoning
is an important element in proving propositions in concrete matter,
any account can be given of the ratiocinative method in such proofs,
over and above that analysis into syllogism which is possible in each
of its steps in detail. I think there can; though I fear, lest to some
minds it may appear far-fetched or fanciful; however, I will hazard
this imputation. I consider, then, that the principle of concrete
reasoning is parallel to the method of proof which is the foundation of
modern mathematical science, as contained in the celebrated lemma with
which Newton opens his “Principia.” We know that a regular polygon,
inscribed in a circle, its sides being continually diminished, tends
to become that circle, as its limit; but it vanishes before it has
coincided with the circle, so that its tendency to be the circle,
though ever nearer fulfilment, never in fact gets beyond a tendency. In
like manner, the conclusion in a real or concrete question is foreseen
and predicted rather than actually attained; foreseen in the number
and direction of accumulated premisses, which all converge to it, and
approach it, as the result of their combination, more nearly than any
assignable difference, yet do not touch it logically, (though only not
touching it,) on account of the nature of its subject-matter, and the
delicate and implicit character of at least part of the reasonings on
which it depends. It is by the strength, variety, or multiplicity of
premisses, which are only probable, not by invincible syllogisms,—by
objections overcome, by adverse theories neutralized, by difficulties
gradually clearing up, by exceptions proving the rule, by unlooked-for
correlations found with received truths, by suspense and delay in the
process issuing in triumphant reactions,—by all these ways, and many
others, the practised and experienced mind is able to make a sure
divination that a conclusion is inevitable, of which his lines of
reasoning do not actually put him in possession. This is what is meant
by a proposition being “as good as proved,” a conclusion as undeniable
“as if it were proved,” and by the reasons for it “amounting to a
proof,” for a proof is the limit of converging probabilities.

It may be added, that, whereas the logical form of this argument,
is, as I have already observed, indirect, viz. that “the conclusion
cannot be otherwise,” and Butler says that an event is proved, if
its antecedents “could not in reason be supposed to have happened
_unless_ it were true,” and law-books tell us that the principle of
circumstantial evidence is the _reductio ad absurdum_, so Newton
is forced to the same mode of proof for the establishment of his
lemma, about prime and ultimate ratios. “If you deny that they become
ultimately equal,” he says, “let them be ultimately unequal;” and the
consequence follows, “which is against the supposition.”

Such being the character of the mental process in concrete reasoning,
I should wish to adduce some good instances of it in illustration,
instances in which the person reasoning confesses that he is reasoning
on this very process, as I have been stating it; but these are
difficult to find, from the very circumstance that the process from
first to last is carried on as much without words as with them.
However, I will set down three such.

1. First, an instance in physics. Wood, treating of the laws of motion,
thus describes the line of reasoning by which the mind is certified of
them. “They are not indeed self-evident, nor do they admit of accurate
proof by experiment, on account of the effects of friction and the
air’s resistance, which cannot entirely be removed. They are, however,
constantly and invariably suggested to our senses, and they agree with
experiment, as far as experiment can go; and the more accurately the
experiments are made, and the greater care we take to remove all those
impediments which tend to render the conclusions erroneous, the more
nearly do the experiments coincide with these laws.

“Their truth is also established upon a different ground: from these
general principles innumerable particular conclusions have been
deducted; sometimes the deductions are simple and immediate, sometimes
they are made by tedious and intricate operations; yet they are all,
without exception, consistent with each other and with experiment. It
follows thereby, that the principles upon which the calculations are
founded are true.(23)”

The reasoning of this passage (in which the uniformity of the laws of
nature is assumed) seems to me a good illustration of what must be
considered the principle or form of an induction. The conclusion, which
is its scope, is, by its own confession, not proved; but it ought to be
proved, or is as good as proved, and a man would be irrational who did
not take it to be virtually proved; first, because the imperfections
in the proof arise out of its subject-matter and the nature of the
case, so that it _is_ proved _interpretativè_; and next, because in the
same degree in which these faults in the subject-matter are overcome
here or there, are the involved imperfections here or there of the
proof remedied; and further, because, when the conclusion is assumed
as an hypothesis, it throws light upon a multitude of collateral
facts, accounting for them, and uniting them together in one whole.
Consistency is not always the guarantee of truth; but there may be a
consistency in a theory so variously tried and exemplified as to lead
to belief in it, as reasonably as a witness in a court of law may,
after a severe cross-examination, satisfy and assure judge, jury, and
the whole court, of his simple veracity.

2. And from the courts of law shall my second illustration be taken.

A learned writer says, “In criminal prosecutions, the circumstantial
evidence should be such, as to produce nearly the same degree of
certainty as that which arises from direct testimony, and to exclude
a rational probability of innocence.(24)” By degrees of certainty he
seems to mean, together with many other writers, degrees of proof, or
approximations towards proof, and not certitude, as a state of mind;
and he says that no one should be pronounced guilty on evidence which
is not equivalent in weight to direct testimony. So far is clear;
but what is meant by the expression “_rational_ probability”? for
there can be no probability but what is rational. I consider that the
“exclusion of a rational probability” means “the exclusion of any
argument in the man’s favour which has a rational claim to be called
probable,” or rather, “the rational exclusion of any supposition
that he is innocent;” and “rational” is used in contradistinction to
argumentative, and means “resting on implicit reasons,” such as we
feel, indeed, but which for some cause or other, because they are too
subtle or too circuitous, we cannot put into words so as to satisfy
logic. If this is a correct account of his meaning, he says that the
evidence against a criminal, in order to be decisive of his guilt, to
the satisfaction of our conscience, must bear with it, along with the
palpable arguments for that guilt, such a reasonableness, or body of
implicit reasons for it in addition, as may exclude any probability,
really such, that he is not guilty,—that is, it must be an evidence
free from anything obscure, suspicious, unnatural, or defective, such
as (in the judgment of a prudent man) to hinder that summation or
coalescence of the evidence into a proof, which I have compared to the
running into a limit, in the case of mathematical ratios. Just as an
algebraical series may be of a nature never to terminate or admit of
valuation, as being the equivalent of an irrational quantity or surd,
so there may be some grave imperfections in a body of reasons, explicit
or implicit, which is directed to a proof, sufficient to interfere with
its successful issue or resolution, and to balk us with an irrational,
that is, an indeterminate, conclusion.

So much as to the principle of conclusions made upon evidence in
criminal cases; now let us turn to an instance of its application in
a particular instance. Some years ago there was a murder committed,
which unusually agitated the popular mind, and the evidence against
the culprit was necessarily circumstantial. At the trial the Judge, in
addressing the Jury, instructed them on the kind of evidence necessary
for a verdict of _guilty_. Of course he could not mean to say that they
must convict a man, of whose guilt they were not certain, especially
in a case in which two foreign countries, Germany and the American
States, were attentively looking on. If the Jury had any doubt, that
is, reasonable doubt, about the man’s guilt, of course they would
give him the benefit of that doubt. Nor could the certitude, which
would be necessary for an adverse verdict, be merely that which is
sometimes called a “practical certitude,” that is, a certitude indeed,
but a certitude that it was a “duty,” “expedient,” “safe,” to bring
in a verdict of guilty. Of course the Judge spoke of what is called
a “speculative certitude,” that is, a certitude of the fact that the
man was guilty; the only question being, what evidence was sufficient
for the proof, for the certitude of that fact. This is what the Judge
meant; and these are among the remarks which, with this drift, he made
upon the occasion:—

After observing that by circumstantial evidence he meant a case in
which “the facts do not directly prove the actual crime, but lead to
the conclusion that the prisoner committed that crime,” he went on
to disclaim the suggestion, made by counsel in the case, that the
Jury could not pronounce a verdict of _guilty_, unless they were as
much satisfied that the prisoner did the deed as if they had seen him
commit it. “That is not the certainty,” he said, “which is required
of you to discharge your duty to the prisoner, whose safety is in
your hands.” Then he stated what was the “degree of certainty,” that
is, of certainty or perfection of proof, which was necessary to the
question, “involving as it did the life of the prisoner at the bar,”—it
was such as that “with which,” he said, “you decide upon and conclude
your own most important transactions in life. Take the facts which
are proved before you, separate those you believe from those which
you do not believe, and all the conclusions that naturally and almost
necessarily result from those facts, you may confide in as much as in
the facts themselves. The case on the part of the prosecution is the
_story_ of the murder, told by the _different_ witnesses, who _unfold
the circumstances one after another_, according to their occurrence,
together with the _gradual_ discovery of some apparent connexion
between the property that was lost, and the possession of it by the
prisoner.”

Now here I observe, that whereas the conclusion which is contemplated
by the Judge, is what may be pronounced (on the whole, and considering
all things, and judging reasonably) a proved or certain conclusion,
that is, a conclusion of the truth of the allegation against the
prisoner, or of the fact of his guilt, on the other hand, the _motiva_
constituting this reasonable, rational proof, and this satisfactory
certitude, needed not, according to him, to be stronger than those on
which we prudently act on matters of important interest to ourselves,
that is, probable reasons viewed in their convergence and combination.
And whereas the certitude is viewed by the Judge as following on
converging probabilities, which constitute a real, though only a
reasonable, not an argumentative, proof, so it will be observed in this
particular instance, that, in illustration of the general doctrine
which I have laid down, the process is one of “line upon line, and
letter upon letter,” of various details accumulating and of deductions
fitting in to each other; for, in the Judge’s words, there was a
story—and that not told right out and by one witness, but taken up
and handed on from witness to witness—gradually unfolded, and tending
to a proof, which of course might have been ten times stronger than
it was, but was still a proof for all that, and sufficient for its
conclusion,—just as we see that two straight lines are meeting, and are
certain they will meet at a given distance, though we do not actually
see the junction.

3. The third instance I will take is one of a literary character,
the divination of the authorship of a certain anonymous publication,
as suggested mainly by internal evidence, as I find it in a critique
written some twenty years ago. In the extract which I make from it,
we may observe the same steady march of a proof towards a conclusion,
which is (as it were) out of sight;—a reckoning, or a reasonable
judgment, that the conclusion really is proved, and a personal
certitude upon that judgment, joined with a confession that a logical
argument could not well be made out for it, and that the various
details in which the proof consisted were in no small measure implicit
and impalpable.

“Rumour speaks uniformly and clearly enough in attributing it to the
pen of a particular individual. Nor, although a cursory reader might
well skim the book without finding in it anything to suggest, &c.,
... will it appear improbable to the more attentive student of its
internal evidence; and the improbability will decrease more and more,
in proportion as the _reader is capable_ of judging and appreciating
the _delicate, and at first invisible touches_, which limit, to _those
who understand them_, the individuals who can have written it to a very
small number indeed. The utmost scepticism as to its authorship (_which
we do not feel ourselves_) cannot remove it farther from him than to
that of some one among his most intimate friends; so that, leaving
others to discuss antecedent probabilities,” &c.

Here is a writer who professes to have no doubt at all about the
authorship of a book,—which at the same time he cannot prove by mere
argumentation set down in words. The reasons of his conviction are too
delicate, too intricate; nay, they are in part invisible; invisible,
except to those who from circumstances have an intellectual perception
of what does not appear to the many. They are personal to the
individual. This again is an instance, distinctly set before us, of the
particular mode in which the mind progresses in concrete matter, viz.
from merely probable antecedents to the sufficient proof of a fact or a
truth, and, after the proof, to an act of certitude about it.

I trust the foregoing remarks may not deserve the blame of a needless
refinement. I have thought it incumbent on me to illustrate the
intellectual process by which we pass from conditional inference to
unconditional assent; and I have had only the alternative of lying
under the imputation of a paradox or of a subtlety.


§ 3. Natural Inference.


I commenced my remarks upon Inference by saying that reasoning
ordinarily shows as a simple act, not as a process, as if there were no
medium interposed between antecedent and consequent, and the transition
from one to the other were of the nature of an instinct,—that is,
the process is altogether unconscious and implicit. It is necessary,
then, to take some notice of this natural or material Inference, as
an existing phenomenon of mind; and that the more, because I shall
thereby be illustrating and supporting what I have been saying of the
characteristics of inferential processes as carried on in concrete
matter, and especially of their being the action of the mind itself,
that is, by its ratiocinative or illative faculty, not a mere operation
as in the rules of arithmetic.

I say, then, that our most natural mode of reasoning is, not from
propositions to propositions, but from things to things, from concrete
to concrete, from wholes to wholes. Whether the consequents, at
which we arrive from the antecedents with which we start, lead us
to assent or only towards assent, those antecedents commonly are
not recognized by us as subjects for analysis; nay, often are only
indirectly recognized as antecedents at all. Not only is the inference
with its process ignored, but the antecedent also. To the mind itself
the reasoning is a simple divination or prediction; as it literally
is in the instance of enthusiasts, who mistake their own thoughts for
inspirations.

This is the mode in which we ordinarily reason, dealing with things
directly, and as they stand, one by one, in the concrete, with an
intrinsic and personal power, not a conscious adoption of an artificial
instrument or expedient; and it is especially exemplified both in
uneducated men, and in men of genius,—in those who know nothing of
intellectual aids and rules, and in those who care nothing for them,—in
those who are either without or above mental discipline. As true poetry
is a spontaneous outpouring of thought, and therefore belongs to rude
as well as to gifted minds, whereas no one becomes a poet merely by the
canons of criticism, so this unscientific reasoning, being sometimes
a natural, uncultivated faculty, sometimes approaching to a gift,
sometimes an acquired habit and second nature, has a higher source
than logical rule,—“nascitur, non fit.” When it is characterized by
precision, subtlety, promptitude, and truth, it is of course a gift and
a rarity: in ordinary minds it is biassed and degraded by prejudice,
passion, and self-interest; but still, after all, this divination comes
by nature, and belongs to all of us in a measure, to women more than
to men, hitting or missing, as the case may be, but with a success on
the whole sufficient to show that there is a method in it, though it be
implicit.

A peasant who is weather-wise may be simply unable to assign
intelligible reasons why he thinks it will be fine to-morrow; and if
he attempts to do so, he may give reasons wide of the mark; but that
will not weaken his own confidence in his prediction. His mind does not
proceed step by step, but he feels all at once the force of various
combined phenomena, though he is not conscious of them. Again, there
are physicians who excel in the _diagnosis_ of complaints; though it
does not follow from this, that they could defend their decision in a
particular case against a brother physician who disputed it. They are
guided by natural acuteness and varied experience; they have their own
idiosyncratic modes of observing, generalizing, and concluding; when
questioned, they can but rest on their own authority, or appeal to
the future event. In a popular novel,(25) a lawyer is introduced, who
“would know, almost by instinct, whether an accused person was or was
not guilty; and he had already perceived by instinct” that the heroine
was guilty. “I’ve no doubt she’s a clever woman,” he said, and at once
named an attorney practising at the Old Bailey. So, again, experts and
detectives, when employed to investigate mysteries, in cases whether
of the civil or criminal law, discern and follow out indications which
promise solution with a sagacity incomprehensible to ordinary men.
A parallel gift is the intuitive perception of character possessed
by certain men, while others are as destitute of it, as others again
are of an ear for music. What common measure is there between the
judgments of those who have this intuition, and those who have not?
What but the event can settle any difference of opinion which occurs in
their estimation of a third person? These are instances of a natural
capacity, or of nature improved by practice and habit, enabling the
mind to pass promptly from one set of facts to another, not only, I
say, without conscious media, but without conscious antecedents.

Sometimes, I say, this illative faculty is nothing short of genius.
Such seems to have been Newton’s perception of truths mathematical and
physical, though proof was absent. At least that is the impression left
on my own mind by various stories which are told of him, one of which
was stated in the public papers a few years ago. “Professor Sylvester,”
it was said, “has just discovered the proof of Sir Isaac Newton’s rule
for ascertaining the imaginary roots of equations.... This rule has
been a Gordian-knot among algebraists for the last century and a half.
The proof being wanting, authors became ashamed at length of advancing
a proposition, the evidence for which rested on no other foundation
than belief in Newton’s sagacity.(26)”

Such is the gift of the calculating boys who now and then make their
appearance, who seem to have certain short-cuts to conclusions, which
they cannot explain to themselves. Some are said to have been able to
determine off-hand what numbers are prime,—numbers, I think, up to
seven places.

In a very different subject-matter, Napoleon supplies us with an
instance of a parallel genius in reasoning, by which he was enabled
to look at things in his own province, and to interpret them truly,
apparently without any ratiocinative media. “By long experience,” says
Alison, “joined to great natural quickness and precision of eye, he
had acquired the power of judging, with extraordinary accuracy, both
of the amount of the enemy’s force opposed to him in the field, and of
the probable result of the movements, even the most complicated, going
forward in the opposite armies.... He looked around him for a little
while with his telescope, and immediately formed a clear conception of
the position, forces, and intention of the whole hostile array. In this
way he could, with surprising accuracy, calculate in a few minutes,
according to what he could see of their formation and the extent of the
ground which they occupied, the numerical force of armies of 60,000 or
80,000 men; and if their troops were at all scattered, he knew at once
how long it would require for them to concentrate, and how many hours
must elapse before they could make their attack.(27)”

It is difficult to avoid calling such clear presentiments by the name
of instinct; and I think they may so be called, if by instinct be
understood, not a natural sense, one and the same in all, and incapable
of cultivation, but a perception of facts without assignable media of
perceiving. There are those who can tell at once what is conducive or
injurious to their welfare, who are their friends, who their enemies,
what is to happen to them, and how they are to meet it. Presence of
mind, fathoming of motives, talent for repartee, are instances of
this gift. As to that divination of personal danger which is found in
the young and innocent, we find a description of it in one of Scott’s
romances, in which the heroine, “without being able to discover what
was wrong either in the scenes of unusual luxury with which she was
surrounded, or in the manner of her hostess,” is said nevertheless
to have felt “an instinctive apprehension that all was not right,—a
feeling in the human mind,” the author proceeds to say, “allied perhaps
to that sense of danger, which animals exhibit, when placed in the
vicinity of the natural enemies of their race, and which makes birds
cower when the hawk is in the air, and beasts tremble when the tiger is
abroad in the desert.(28)”

A religious biography, lately published, affords us an instance of this
spontaneous perception of truth in the province of revealed doctrine.
“Her firm faith,” says the Author of the Preface, “was so vivid in
its character, that it was almost like an intuition of the entire
prospect of revealed truth. Let an error against faith be concealed
under expressions however abstruse, and her sure instinct found it
out. I have tried this experiment repeatedly. She might not be able to
separate the heresy by analysis, but she saw, and felt, and suffered
from its presence.(29)”

And so of the great fundamental truths of religion, natural and
revealed, and as regards the mass of religious men: these truths,
doubtless, may be proved and defended by an array of invincible logical
arguments, but such is not commonly the method in which those same
logical arguments make their way into our minds. The grounds, on which
we hold the divine origin of the Church, and the previous truths which
are taught us by nature—the being of a God, and the immortality of the
soul—are felt by most men to be recondite and impalpable, in proportion
to their depth and reality. As we cannot see ourselves, so we cannot
well see intellectual motives which are so intimately ours, and which
spring up from the very constitution of our minds; and while we refuse
to admit the notion that religion has not irrefragable arguments in
its behalf, still the attempts to argue, on the part of an individual
_hic et nunc_, will sometimes only confuse his apprehension of sacred
objects, and subtracts from his devotion quite as much as it adds to
his knowledge.

This is found in the case of other perceptions besides that of faith.
It is the case of nature against art: of course, if possible, nature
and art should be combined, but sometimes they are incompatible.
Thus, in the case of calculating boys, it is said, I know not with
what truth, that to teach them the ordinary rules of arithmetic is to
endanger or to destroy the extraordinary endowment. And men who have
the gift of playing on an instrument by ear, are sometimes afraid to
learn by rule, lest they should lose it.

There is an analogy, in this respect, between Ratiocination and
Memory, though the latter may be exercised without antecedents or
media, whereas the former requires them in its very idea. At the
same time association has so much to do with memory, that we may not
unfairly consider that memory, as well as reasoning, depends on certain
previous conditions. Writing, as I have already observed, is a _memoria
technica_, or logic of memory. Now it will be found, I think, that
indispensable as is the use of letters, still, in fact, we weaken our
memory in proportion as we habituate ourselves to commit all that we
wish to remember to memorandums. Of course in proportion as our memory
is weak or over-burdened, and thereby treacherous, we cannot help
ourselves; but in the case of men of strong memory in any particular
subject-matter, as in that of dates, all artificial expedients, from
the “Thirty days has September,” &c., to the more formidable formulas
which are offered for their use, are as difficult and repulsive as
the natural exercise of memory is healthy and easy to them; just as
the clear-headed and practical reasoner, who sees conclusions at a
glance, is uncomfortable under the drill of a logician, being oppressed
and hampered, as David in Saul’s armour, by what is intended to be a
benefit.

I need not say more on this part of the subject. What is called
reasoning is often only a peculiar and personal mode of abstraction,
and so far, like memory, may be said to exist without antecedents.
It is a power of looking at things in some particular aspect, and
of determining their internal and external relations thereby. And
according to the subtlety and versatility of their gift, are men able
to read what comes before them justly, variously, and fruitfully.
Hence, too, it is, that in our intercourse with others, in business
and family matters, in social and political transactions, a word or
an act on the part of another is sometimes a sudden revelation; light
breaks in upon us, and our whole judgment of a course of events, or
of an undertaking, is changed. We determine correctly or otherwise,
as it may be; but in either case, by a sense proper to ourselves, for
another may see the objects which we are thus using, and give them
quite a different interpretation, inasmuch as he abstracts another set
of general notions from those same phenomena which present themselves
to us.

What I have been saying of Ratiocination, may be said of Taste, and
is confirmed by the obvious analogy between the two. Taste, skill,
invention in the fine arts—and so, again, discretion or judgment in
conduct—are exerted spontaneously, when once acquired, and could not
give a clear account of themselves, or of their mode of proceeding.
They do not go by rule, though to a certain point their exercise may
be analyzed, and may take the shape of an art or method. But these
parallels will come before us presently.

And now I come to a further peculiarity of this natural and spontaneous
ratiocination. This faculty, as it is actually found in us, proceeding
from concrete to concrete, belongs to a definite subject-matter,
according to the individual. In spite of Aristotle, I will not allow
that genuine reasoning is an instrumental art; and in spite of Dr.
Johnson, I will assert that genius, as far as it is manifested in
ratiocination, is not equal to all undertakings, but has its own
peculiar subject-matter, and is circumscribed in its range. No one
would for a moment expect that because Newton and Napoleon both had a
genius for ratiocination, that, in consequence, Napoleon could have
generalized the principle of gravitation, or Newton have seen how to
concentrate a hundred thousand men at Austerlitz. The ratiocinative
faculty, then, as found in individuals, is not a general instrument of
knowledge, but has its province, or is what may be called departmental.
It is not so much one faculty, as a collection of similar or analogous
faculties under one name, there being really as many faculties as there
are distinct subject-matters, though in the same person some of them
may, if it so happen, be united,—nay, though some men have a sort of
literary power in arguing in all subject-matters, _de omni scibili_, a
power extensive, but not deep or real.

This surely is the conclusion, to which we are brought by our ordinary
experience of men. It is almost proverbial that a hard-headed
mathematician may have no head at all for what is called historical
evidence. Successful experimentalists need not have talent for legal
research or pleading. A shrewd man of business may be a bad arguer
in philosophical questions. Able statesmen and politicians have been
before now eccentric or superstitious in their religious views. It is
notorious how ridiculous a clever man may make himself, who ventures
to argue with professed theologians, critics, or geologists, though
without positive defects in knowledge of his subject. Priestley, great
in electricity and chemistry, was but a poor ecclesiastical historian.
The Author of the Minute Philosopher is also the Author of the Analyst.
Newton wrote not only his “Principia,” but his comments on the
Apocalypse; Cromwell, whose actions savoured of the boldest logic, was
a confused speaker. In these, and various similar instances, the defect
lay, not so much in an ignorance of facts, as in an inability to handle
those facts suitably; in feeble or perverse modes of abstraction,
observation, comparison, analysis, inference, which nothing could have
obviated, but that which was wanting,—a specific talent, and a ready
exercise of it.

I have already referred to the faculty of memory in illustration; it
will serve me also here. We can form an abstract idea of memory, and
call it one faculty, which has for its subject-matter all past facts
of our personal experience; but this is really only an illusion; for
there is no such gift of universal memory. Of course we all remember,
in a way, as we reason, in all subject-matters; but I am speaking of
remembering rightly, as I spoke of reasoning rightly. In real fact
memory, as a talent, is not one indivisible faculty, but a power of
retaining and recalling the past in this or that department of our
experience, not in any whatever. Two memories, which are both specially
retentive, may also be incommensurate. Some men can recite the canto
of a poem, or good part of a speech, after once reading it, but have
no head for dates. Others have great capacity for the vocabulary of
languages, but recollect nothing of the small occurrences of the day
or year. Others never forget any statement which they have read, and
can give volume and page, but have no memory for faces. I have known
those who could, without effort, run through the succession of days
on which Easter fell for years back; or could say where they were,
or what they were doing, on a given day, in a given year; or could
recollect accurately the Christian names of friends and strangers; or
could enumerate in exact order the names on all the shops from Hyde
Park Corner to the Bank; or had so mastered the University Calendar as
to be able to bear an examination in the academical history of any M.
A. taken at random. And I believe in most of these cases the talent,
in its exceptional character, did not extend beyond several classes of
subjects. There are a hundred memories, as there are a hundred virtues.
Virtue is one indeed in the abstract; but, in fact, gentle and kind
natures are not therefore heroic, and prudent and self-controlled minds
need not be open-handed. At the utmost such virtue is one only _in
posse_; as developed in the concrete, it takes the shape of species
which in no sense imply each other.

So is it with Ratiocination; and as we should betake ourselves to
Newton for physical, not for theological conclusions, and to Wellington
for his military experience, not for statesmanship, so the maxim
holds good generally, “Cuique in arte suâ credendum est:” or, to
use the grand words of Aristotle, “We are bound to give heed to the
undemonstrated sayings and opinions of the experienced and aged, not
less than to demonstrations; because, from their having the eye of
experience, they behold the principles of things.(30)” Instead of
trusting logical science, we must trust persons, namely, those who by
long acquaintance with their subject have a right to judge. And if we
wish ourselves to share in their convictions and the grounds of them,
we must follow their history, and learn as they have learned. We must
take up their particular subject as they took it up, beginning at the
beginning, give ourselves to it, depend on practice and experience
more than on reasoning, and thus gain that mental insight into truth,
whatever its subject-matter may be, which our masters have gained
before us. By following this course, we may make ourselves of their
number, and then we rightly lean upon ourselves; we follow our own
moral or intellectual judgment, but not our skill in argumentation.

This doctrine, stated in substance as above by the great philosopher
of antiquity, is more fully expounded in a passage which he elsewhere
quotes from Hesiod. “Best of all is he,” says that poet, “who is
wise by his own wit; next best he who is wise by the wit of others;
but whoso is neither able to see, nor willing to hear, he is a
good-for-nothing fellow.” Judgment then in all concrete matter is the
architectonic faculty; and what may be called the Illative Sense, or
right judgment in ratiocination, is one branch of it.




