PART II. ASSENT AND INFERENCE.




Chapter VI. Assent Considered As Unconditional.


I have now said as much as need be said about the relation of Assent
to Apprehension, and shall turn to the consideration of the relation
existing between Assent and Inference.

As apprehension is a concomitant, so inference is ordinarily the
antecedent of assent;—on this surely I need not enlarge;—but neither
apprehension nor inference interferes with the unconditional character
of the assent, viewed in itself. The circumstances of an act, however
necessary to it, do not enter into the act; assent is in its nature
absolute and unconditional, though it cannot be given except under
certain conditions.

This is obvious; but what presents some difficulty is this, how it is
that a conditional acceptance of a proposition,—such as is an act of
inference,—is able to lead, as it does, to an unconditional acceptance
of it,—such as is assent; how it is that a proposition which is not,
and cannot be, demonstrated, which at the highest can only be proved
to be truth-like, not true, such as “I shall die,” nevertheless
claims and receives our unqualified adhesion. To the consideration
of this paradox, as it may be called, I shall now proceed; that is,
to the consideration, first, of the act of assent to a proposition,
which act is unconditional; next, of the act of inference, which goes
before the assent and is conditional; and, thirdly, of the solution
of the apparent inconsistency which is involved in holding that an
unconditional acceptance of a proposition can be the result of its
conditional verification.


§ 1. Simple Assent.


The doctrine which I have been enunciating requires such careful
explanation, that it is not wonderful that writers of great ability
and name are to be found who have put it aside for a doctrine of their
own; but no doctrine on the subject is without its difficulties, and
certainly not theirs, though it carries with it a show of common sense.
The authors to whom I refer wish to maintain that there are degrees
of assent, and that, as the reasons for a proposition are strong or
weak, so is the assent. It follows from this that absolute assent
has no legitimate exercise, except as ratifying acts of intuition or
demonstration. What is thus brought home to us is indeed to be accepted
unconditionally; but, as to reasonings in concrete matters, they are
never more than probabilities, and the probability in each conclusion
which we draw is the measure of our assent to that conclusion. Thus
assent becomes a sort of necessary shadow, following upon inference,
which is the substance; and is never without some alloy of doubt,
because inference in the concrete never reaches more than probability.

Such is what may be called the _à priori_ method of regarding assent
in its relation to inference. It condemns an unconditional assent in
concrete matters on what may be called the nature of the case. Assent
cannot rise higher than its source; inference in such matters is at
best conditional, therefore assent is conditional also.

Abstract argument is always dangerous, and this instance is no
exception to the rule; I prefer to go by facts. The theory to which
I have referred cannot be carried out in practice. It may be rightly
said to prove too much; for it debars us from unconditional assent
in cases in which the common voice of mankind, the advocates of this
theory included, would protest against the prohibition. There are many
truths in concrete matter, which no one can demonstrate, yet every one
unconditionally accepts; and though of course there are innumerable
propositions to which it would be absurd to give an absolute assent,
still the absurdity lies in the circumstances of each particular
case, as it is taken by itself, not in their common violation of the
pretentious axiom that probable reasoning can never lead to certitude.

Locke’s remarks on the subject are an illustration of what I have been
saying. This celebrated writer, after the manner of his school, speaks
freely of degrees of assent, and considers that the strength of assent
given to each proposition varies with the strength of the inference on
which the assent follows; yet he is obliged to make exceptions to his
general principle,—exceptions, unintelligible on his abstract doctrine,
but demanded by the logic of facts. The practice of mankind is too
strong for the antecedent theorem, to which he is desirous to subject
it.

First he says, in his chapter “On Probability,” “Most of the
propositions we think, reason, discourse, nay, act upon, are such as
we cannot have undoubted knowledge of their truth; yet some of them
_border so near_ upon certainty, that we _make no doubt at all_ about
them, but _assent_ to them _as firmly_, and act according to that
assent as resolutely, _as if they were infallibly demonstrated_, and
that our knowledge of them was perfect and certain.” Here he allows
that inferences, which are only “near upon certainty,” are so near,
that we legitimately accept them with “no doubt at all,” and “assent to
them as firmly as if they were infallibly demonstrated.” That is, he
affirms and sanctions the very paradox to which I am committed myself.

Again; he says, in his chapter on “The Degrees of Assent,” that
“when any particular thing, consonant to the constant observation of
ourselves and others in the like case, comes attested by the concurrent
reports of all that mention it, we receive it as easily, and build as
firmly upon it, as if it were certain knowledge, and we reason and act
thereupon, _with as little doubt as if it were perfect demonstration_.”
And he repeats, “These _probabilities_ rise so near to certainty,
that they _govern our thoughts as absolutely_, and influence all our
actions as fully, as _the most evident demonstration_; and in what
concerns us, we make little or no difference between them and certain
knowledge. _Our belief thus grounded, rises to assurance._” Here
again, “probabilities” may be so strong as to “govern our thoughts as
absolutely” as sheer demonstration, so strong that belief, grounded on
them, “rises to assurance,” that is, certitude.

I have so high a respect both for the character and the ability of
Locke, for his manly simplicity of mind and his outspoken candour, and
there is so much in his remarks upon reasoning and proof in which I
fully concur, that I feel no pleasure in considering him in the light
of an opponent to views, which I myself have ever cherished as true
with an obstinate devotion; and I would willingly think that in the
passage which follows in his chapter on “Enthusiasm,” he is aiming at
superstitious extravagances which I should repudiate myself as much as
he can do; but, if so, his words go beyond the occasion, and contradict
what I have quoted from him above.

“He that would seriously set upon the search of truth, ought, in the
first place, to prepare his mind with a love of it. For he that loves
it not will not take much pains to get it, nor be much concerned when
he misses it. There is nobody, in the commonwealth of learning, who
does not profess himself a lover of truth,—and there is not a rational
creature, that would not take it amiss, to be thought otherwise of.
And yet, for all this, one may truly say, there are very few lovers
of truth, for truth-sake, even amongst those who persuade themselves
that they are so. How a man may know, whether he be so, in earnest, is
worth inquiry; and I think, there is this one unerring mark of it, viz.
_the not entertaining any proposition with greater assurance than the
proofs it is built on will warrant_. Whoever goes beyond this measure
of assent, it is plain, receives not truth in the love of it, loves
not truth for truth-sake, but for some other by-end. For the evidence
that any proposition is true (_except such as are self-evident_) lying
only in the proofs a man has of it, whatsoever degrees of assent he
affords it _beyond the degrees of that_ evidence, it is plain _all
that surplusage of assurance_ is owing to some other affection, and
not to the love of truth; it being as _impossible_ that the love of
truth should carry _my assent above the evidence_ there is to me that
it is true, as that the love of truth should make me assent to any
proposition for the sake of that evidence which it has not that it is
true; which is in effect to love it as a truth, because it is possible
or probable that it may not be true.(5)”

Here he says that it is not only illogical, but immoral to “carry our
_assent above_ the _evidence_ that a proposition is true,” to have “a
surplusage of _assurance beyond_ the degrees of that evidence.” And
he excepts from this rule only self-evident propositions. How then
is it not inconsistent with right reason, with the love of truth for
its own sake, to allow, in his words quoted above, certain strong
“probabilities” to “govern our thoughts as absolutely as the most
evident demonstration”? how is there no “surplusage of assurance
beyond the degrees of evidence” when in the case of those strong
probabilities, we permit “our belief, thus grounded, to rise to
assurance,” as he pronounces we are rational in doing? Of course he
had in view one set of instances, when he implied that demonstration
was the condition of absolute assent, and another set when he said
that it was no such condition; but he surely cannot be acquitted of
slovenly thinking in thus treating a cardinal subject. A philosopher
should so anticipate the application, and guard the enunciation of his
principles, as to secure them against the risk of their being made to
change places with each other, to defend what he is eager to denounce,
and to condemn what he finds it necessary to sanction. However,
whatever is to be thought of his _à priori_ method and his logical
consistency, his _animus_, I fear, must be understood as hostile to
the doctrine which I am going to maintain. He takes a view of the
human mind, in relation to inference and assent, which to me seems
theoretical and unreal. Reasonings and convictions which I deem natural
and legitimate, he apparently would call irrational, enthusiastic,
perverse, and immoral; and that, as I think, because he consults his
own ideal of how the mind ought to act, instead of interrogating human
nature, as an existing thing, as it is found in the world. Instead of
going by the testimony of psychological facts, and thereby determining
our constitutive faculties and our proper condition, and being content
with the mind as God has made it, he would form men as he thinks they
ought to be formed, into something better and higher, and calls them
irrational and immoral, if (so to speak) they take to the water,
instead of remaining under the narrow wings of his own arbitrary theory.

1. Now the first question which this theory leads me to consider is,
whether there is such an act of the mind as assent at all. If there
is, it is plain it ought to show itself unequivocally as such, as
distinct from other acts. For if a professed act can only be viewed
as the recessary and immediate repetition of another act, if assent
is a sort of reproduction and double of an act of inference, if when
inference determines that a proposition is somewhat, or not a little,
or a good deal, or very like truth, assent as its natural and normal
counterpart says that it is somewhat, or not a little, or a good deal,
or very like truth, then I do not see what we mean by saying, or why
we say at all, that there is any such act. It is simply superfluous,
in a psychological point of view, and a curiosity of subtle minds,
and the sooner it is got out of the way the better. When I assent,
I am supposed, it seems, to do precisely what I do when I infer, or
rather not quite so much, but something which is included in inferring;
for, while the disposition of my mind towards a given proposition is
identical in assent and in inference, I merely drop the thought of
the premisses when I assent, though not of their influence on the
proposition inferred. This, then, and no more after all, is what nature
prescribes; and this, and no more than this, is the conscientious use
of our faculties, so to assent forsooth as to do nothing else than
infer. Then, I say, if this be really the state of the case, if assent
in no real way differs from inference, it is one and the same thing
with it. It is another name for inference, and to speak of it at all
does but mislead. Nor can it fairly be urged as a parallel case that an
act of conscious recognition, though distinct from an act of knowledge,
is after all only its repetition. On the contrary, such a recognition
is a reflex act with its own object, viz. the act of knowledge itself.
As well might it be said that the hearing of the notes of my voice is a
repetition of the act of singing:—it gives no plausibility then to the
anomaly I am combating.

I lay it down, then, as a principle that either assent is intrinsically
distinct from inference, or the sooner we get rid of the word in
philosophy the better. If it be only the echo of an inference, do not
treat it as a substantive act; but on the other hand, supposing it be
not such an idle repetition, as I am sure it is not, supposing the word
“assent” does hold a necessary place in language and in thought, if it
does not admit of being confused with concluding and inferring, if the
two words are used for two operations of the intellect which cannot
change their character, if in matter of fact they are not always found
together, if they do not vary with each other, if one is sometimes
found without the other, if one is strong when the other is weak, if
sometimes they seem even in conflict with each other, then, since we
know perfectly well what an inference is, it comes upon us to consider
what, as distinct from inference, an assent is, and we are, by the very
fact of its being distinct, advanced one step towards that account of
it which I think is the true one. The first step then towards deciding
the point, will be to inquire what the experience of human life, as it
is daily brought before us, teaches us of the relation to each other of
inference and assent.

(1.) First, we know from experience that assents may endure without
the presence of the inferential acts upon which they were originally
elicited. It is plain, that, as life goes on, we are not only inwardly
formed and changed by the accession of habits, but we are also enriched
by a great multitude of beliefs and opinions, and that on a variety
of subjects. These beliefs and opinions, held, as some of them are,
almost as first principles, are assents, and they constitute, as it
were, the clothing and furniture of the mind. I have already spoken of
them under the head of “Credence” and “Opinion.” Sometimes we are fully
conscious of them; sometimes they are implicit, or only now and then
come directly before our reflective faculty. Still they are assents;
and, when we first admitted them, we had some kind of reason, slight
or strong, recognized or not, for doing so. However, whatever those
reasons were, even if we ever realized them, we have long forgotten
them. Whether it was the authority of others, or our own observation,
or our reading, or our reflections, which became the warrant of our
assent, any how we received the matters in question into our minds as
true, and gave them a place there. We assented to them, and we still
assent, though we have forgotten what the warrant was. At present they
are self-sustained in our minds, and have been so for long years; they
are in no sense conclusions; they imply no process of thought. Here
then is a case in which assent stands out as distinct from inference.

(2.) Again; sometimes assent fails, while the reasons for it and the
inferential act which is the recognition of those reasons, are still
present, and in force. Our reasons may seem to us as strong as ever,
yet they do not secure our assent. Our beliefs, founded on them, were
and are not; we cannot perhaps tell when they went; we may have thought
that we still held them, till something happened to call our attention
to the state of our minds, and then we found that our assent had become
an assertion. Sometimes, of course, a cause may be found why they
went; there may have been some vague feeling that a fault lay at the
ultimate basis, or in the underlying conditions, of our reasonings; or
some misgiving that the subject-matter of them was beyond the reach
of the human mind; or a consciousness that we had gained a broader
view of things in general than when we first gave our assent; or that
there were strong objections to our first convictions, which we had
never taken into account. But this is not always so; sometimes our mind
changes so quickly, so unaccountably, so disproportionately to any
tangible arguments to which the change can be referred, and with such
abiding recognition of the force of the old arguments, as to suggest
the suspicion that moral causes, arising out of our condition, age,
company, occupations, fortunes, are at the bottom. However, what once
was assent is gone; yet the perception of the old arguments remains,
showing that inference is one thing, and assent another.

(3.) And as assent sometimes dies out without tangible reasons,
sufficient to account for its failure, so sometimes, in spite of strong
and convincing arguments, it is never given. We sometimes find men loud
in their admiration of truths which they never profess. As, by the law
of our mental constitution, obedience is quite distinct from faith,
and men may believe without practising, so is assent also independent
of our acts of inference. Again, prejudice hinders assent to the most
incontrovertible proofs. Again, it not unfrequently happens, that while
the keenness of the ratiocinative faculty enables a man to see the
ultimate result of a complicated problem in a moment, it takes years
for him to embrace it as a truth, and to recognize it as an item in the
circle of his knowledge. Yet he does at last so accept it, and then we
say that he assents.

(4.) Again; very numerous are the cases, in which good arguments,
and really good as far as they go, and confessed by us to be good,
nevertheless are not strong enough to incline our minds ever so little
to the conclusion at which they point. But why is it that we do not
assent a little, in proportion to those arguments? On the contrary, we
throw the full _onus probandi_ on the side of the conclusion, and we
refuse to assent to it at all, until we can assent to it altogether.
The proof is capable of growth; but the assent either exists or does
not exist.

(5.) I have already alluded to the influence of moral motives in
hindering assent to conclusions which are logically unimpeachable.
According to the couplet,—


    “A man convinced against his will
    Is of the same opinion still;”—


assent then is not the same as inference.

(6.) Strange as it may seem, this contrast between inference and assent
is exemplified even in the province of mathematics. Argument is not
always able to command our assent, even though it be demonstrative.
Sometimes of course it forces its way, that is, when the steps of the
reasoning are few, and admit of being viewed by the mind altogether.
Certainly, one cannot conceive a man having before him the series of
conditions and truths on which it depends that the three angles of a
triangle are together equal to two right angles, and yet not assenting
to that proposition. Were all propositions as plain, though assent
would not in consequence be the same act as inference, yet it would
certainly follow immediately upon it. I allow then as much as this,
that, when an argument is in itself and by itself conclusive of a
truth, it has by a law of our nature the same command over our assent,
or rather the truth which it has reached has the same command, as our
senses have. Certainly our intellectual nature is under laws, and the
correlative of ascertained truth is unreserved assent.

But I am not speaking of short and lucid demonstrations; but of long
and intricate mathematical investigations; and in that case, though
every step may be indisputable, it still requires a specially sustained
attention and an effort of memory to have in the mind all at once all
the steps of the proof, with their bearings on each other, and the
antecedents which they severally involve; and these conditions of the
inference may interfere with the promptness of our assent.

Hence it is that party spirit or national feeling or religious
prepossessions have before now had power to retard the reception of
truths of a mathematical character; which never could have been,
if demonstrations were _ipso facto_ assents. Nor indeed would any
mathematician, even in questions of pure science, assent to his own
conclusions, on new and difficult ground, and in the case of abstruse
calculations, however often he went over his work, till he had the
corroboration of other judgments besides his own. He would have
carefully revised his inference, and would assent to the probability of
his accuracy in inferring, but still he would abstain from an immediate
assent to the truth of his conclusion. Yet the corroboration of others
cannot add to his perception of the proof; he would still perceive the
proof, even though he failed in gaining their corroboration. And yet
again he might arbitrarily make it his rule, never to assent to his
conclusions without such corroboration, or at least before the lapse of
a sufficient interval. Here again inference is distinct from assent.

I have been showing that inference and assent are distinct acts of the
mind, and that they may be made apart from each other. Of course I
cannot be taken to mean that there is no legitimate or actual connexion
between them, as if arguments adverse to a conclusion did not naturally
hinder assent; or as if the inclination to give assent were not greater
or less according as the particular act of inference expressed a
stronger or weaker probability; or as if assent did not always imply
grounds in reason, implicit, if not explicit, or could be rightly given
without sufficient grounds. So much is it commonly felt that assent
must be preceded by inferential acts, that obstinate men give their own
will as their very reason for assenting, if they can think of nothing
better; “stat pro ratione voluntas.” Indeed, I doubt whether assent is
ever given without some preliminary, which stands for a reason; but it
does not follow from this, that it may not be withheld in cases when
there are good reasons for giving it to a proposition, or may not be
withdrawn after it has been given, the reasons remaining, or may not
remain when the reasons are forgotten; or must always vary in strength,
as the reasons vary; and this substantiveness, as I may call it, of the
act of assent is the very point which I have wished to establish.

2. And in showing that assent is distinct from an act of inference, I
have gone a good way towards showing in what it differs from it. If
assent and inference are each of them the acceptance of a proposition,
but the special characteristic of inference is that it is conditional,
it is natural to suppose that assent is unconditional. Again, if
assent is the acceptance of truth, and truth is the proper object of
the intellect, and no one can hold conditionally what by the same
act he holds to be true, here too is a reason for saying that assent
is an adhesion without reserve or doubt to the proposition to which
it is given. And again, it is to be presumed that the word has not
two meanings: what it has at one time, it has at another. Inference
is always inference; even if demonstrative, it is still conditional;
it establishes an incontrovertible conclusion on the condition of
incontrovertible premisses. To the conclusion thus drawn, assent gives
its absolute recognition. In the case of all demonstrations, assent,
when given, is unconditionally given. In one class of subjects, then,
assent certainly is always unconditional; but if the word stands for
an undoubting and unhesitating act of the mind once, why does it not
denote the same always? what evidence is there that it ever means any
thing else than that which the whole world will unite in witnessing
that it means in certain cases? why are we not to interpret what is
controverted by what is known? This is what is suggested on the first
view of the question; but to continue:—

In demonstrative matters assent excludes the presence of doubt: now
are instances producible, on the other hand, of its ever co-existing
with doubt in cases of the concrete? As the above instances have shown,
on very many questions we do not give an assent at all. What commonly
happens is this, that, after hearing and entering into what may be
said for a proposition, we pronounce neither for nor against it. We
may accept the conclusion as a conclusion, dependent on premisses,
abstract, and tending to the concrete; but we do not follow up our
inference of a proposition by giving an assent to it. That there are
concrete propositions to which we give unconditional assents, I shall
presently show; but I am now asking for instances of conditional, for
instances in which we assent a little and not much. Usually, we do not
assent at all. Every day, as it comes, brings with it opportunities for
us to enlarge our circle of assents. We read the newspapers; we look
through debates in Parliament, pleadings in the law courts, leading
articles, letters of correspondents, reviews of books, criticisms in
the fine arts, and we either form no opinion at all upon the subjects
discussed, as lying out of our line, or at most we have only an opinion
about them. At the utmost we say that we are inclined to believe this
proposition or that, that we are not sure it is not true, that much may
be said for it, that we have been much struck by it; but we never say
that we give it a degree of assent. We might as well talk of degrees of
truth as of degrees of assent.

Yet Locke heads one of his chapters with the title “Degrees of Assent;”
and a writer, of this century, who claims our respect from the tone and
drift of his work, thus expresses himself after Locke’s manner: “Moral
evidence,” he says, “may produce a variety of degrees of assents, from
suspicion to moral certainty. For, here, the degree of assent depends
upon the degree in which the evidence on one side preponderates, or
exceeds that on the other. And as this preponderancy may vary almost
infinitely, so likewise may the degrees of assent. For a few of these
degrees, though but for a few, names have been invented. Thus, when the
evidence on one side preponderates a very little, there is ground for
suspicion, or conjecture. Presumption, persuasion, belief, conclusion,
conviction, moral certainty,—doubt, wavering, distrust, disbelief,—are
words which imply an increase or decrease of this preponderancy. Some
of these words also admit of epithets which denote a further increase
or diminution of the assent.(6)”

Can there be a better illustration than this passage supplies of what I
have been insisting on above, viz. that, in teaching various degrees of
assent, we tend to destroy assent, as an act of the mind, altogether?
This author makes the degrees of assent “infinite,” as the degrees
of probability are infinite. His assents are really only inferences,
and assent is a name without a meaning, the needless repetition of
an inference. But in truth “suspicion, conjecture, presumption,
persuasion, belief, conclusion, conviction, moral certainty,” are
not “assents” at all; they are simply more or less strong inferences
of a proposition; and “doubt, wavering, distrust, disbelief,”
are recognitions, more or less strong, of the probability of its
contradictory.

There is only one sense in which we are allowed to call such acts or
states of mind assents. They are opinions; and, as being such, they
are, as I have already observed, when speaking of Opinion, assents to
the plausibility, probability, doubtfulness, or untrustworthiness, of
a proposition; that is, not variations of assent to an inference, but
assents to a variation in inferences. When I assent to a doubtfulness,
or to a probability, my assent, as such, is as complete as if I
assented to a truth; it is not a certain degree of assent. And, in like
manner, I may be certain of an uncertainty; that does not destroy the
specific notion convened in the word “certain.”

I do not know then when it is that we ever deliberately profess assent
to a proposition without meaning to convey to others the impression
that we accept it unreservedly, and that because it is true. Certainly,
we familiarly use such phrases as a half-assent, as we also speak of
half-truths; but a half-assent is not a kind of assent any more than
a half-truth is a kind of truth. As the object is indivisible, so is
the act. A half-truth is a proposition which in one aspect is a truth,
and in another is not; to give a half-assent is to feel drawn towards
assent, or to assent one moment and not the next, or to be in the way
to assent to it. It means that the proposition in question deserves a
hearing, that it is probable, or attractive, that it opens important
views, that it is a key to perplexing difficulties, or the like.

3. Treating the subject then, not according to _à priori_ fitness,
but according to the facts of human nature, as they are found in the
concrete action of life, I find numberless cases in which we do not
assent at all, none in which assent is evidently conditional;—and many,
as I shall now proceed to show, in which it is unconditional, and
these in subject-matters which admit of nothing higher than probable
reasoning. If human nature is to be its own witness, there is no medium
between assenting and not assenting. Locke’s theory of the duty of
assenting more or less according to degrees of evidence, is invalidated
by the testimony of high and low, young and old, ancient and modern,
as continually given in their ordinary sayings and doings. Indeed, as
I have shown, he does not strictly maintain it himself; yet, though he
feels the claims of nature and fact to be too strong for him in certain
cases, he gives no reason why he should violate his theory in these,
and yet not in many more.

Now let us review some of those assents, which men give on evidence
short of intuition and demonstration, yet which are as unconditional as
if they had that highest evidence.

First of all, starting from intuition, of course we all believe,
without any doubt, that we exist; that we have an individuality and
identity all our own; that we think, feel, and act, in the home of our
own minds; that we have a present sense of good and evil, of a right
and a wrong, of a true and a false, of a beautiful and a hideous,
however we analyze our ideas of them. We have an absolute vision before
us of what happened yesterday or last year, so as to be able without
any chance of mistake to give evidence upon it in a court of justice,
let the consequences be ever so serious. We are sure that of many
things we are ignorant, that of many things we are in doubt, and that
of many things we are not in doubt.

Nor is the assent which we give to facts limited to the range of
self-consciousness. We are sure beyond all hazard of a mistake, that
our own self is not the only being existing; that there is an external
world; that it is a system with parts and a whole, a universe carried
on by laws; and that the future is affected by the past. We accept
and hold with an unqualified assent, that the earth, considered as a
phenomenon, is a globe; that all its regions see the sun by turns; that
there are vast tracts on it of land and water; that there are really
existing cities on definite sites, which go by the names of London,
Paris, Florence, and Madrid. We are sure that Paris or London, unless
swallowed up by an earthquake or burned to the ground, is to-day just
what it was yesterday, when we left it.

We laugh to scorn the idea that we had no parents, though we have no
memory of our birth; that we shall never depart this life, though we
can have no experience of the future; that we are able to live without
food, though we have never tried; that a world of men did not live
before our time, or that that world has had no history; that there has
been no rise and fall of states, no great men, no wars, no revolutions,
no art, no science, no literature, no religion.

We should be either indignant or amused at the report of our intimate
friend being false to us; and we are able sometimes, without any
hesitation, to accuse certain parties of hostility and injustice to us.
We may have a deep consciousness, which we never can lose, that we on
our part have been cruel to others, and that they have felt us to be
so, or that we have been, and have been felt to be, ungenerous to those
who love us. We may have an overpowering sense of our moral weakness,
of the precariousness of our life, health, wealth, position, and good
fortune. We may have a clear view of the weak points of our physical
constitution, of what food or medicine is good for us, and what does
us harm. We may be able to master, at least in part, the course of our
past history; its turning-points, our hits, and our great mistakes. We
may have a sense of the presence of a Supreme Being, which never has
been dimmed by even a passing shadow, which has inhabited us ever since
we can recollect any thing, and which we cannot imagine our losing. We
may be able, for others have been able, so to realize the precepts and
truths of Christianity, as deliberately to surrender our life, rather
than transgress the one or to deny the other.

On all these truths we have an immediate and an unhesitating hold,
nor do we think ourselves guilty of not loving truth for truth’s
sake, because we cannot reach them through a series of intuitive
propositions. Assent on reasonings not demonstrative is too widely
recognized an act to be irrational, unless man’s nature is irrational,
too familiar to the prudent and clear-minded to be an infirmity or
an extravagance. None of us can think or act without the acceptance
of truths, not intuitive, not demonstrated, yet sovereign. If our
nature has any constitution, any laws, one of them is this absolute
reception of propositions as true, which lie outside the narrow range
of conclusions to which logic, formal or virtual, is tethered; nor has
any philosophical theory the power to force on us a rule which will not
work for a day.

When, then, philosophers lay down principles, on which it follows that
our assent, except when given to objects of intuition or demonstration,
is conditional, that the assent given to propositions by well-ordered
minds necessarily varies with the proof producible for them, and that
it does not and cannot remain one and the same while the proof is
strengthened or weakened,—are they not to be considered as confusing
together two things very distinct from each other, a mental act or
state and a scientific rule, an interior assent and a set of logical
formulas? When they speak of degrees of assent, surely they have no
intention at all of defining the position of the mind itself relative
to the adoption of a given conclusion, but they mean to determine
the relation of that conclusion towards its premisses. They are
contemplating how representative symbols work, not how the intellect is
affected towards the thing which those symbols represent. In real truth
they as little mean to assert the principle of measuring our assents by
our logic, as they would fancy they could record the refreshment which
we receive from the open air by the readings of the graduated scale
of a thermometer. There is a connexion doubtless between a logical
conclusion and an assent, as there is between the variation of the
mercury and our sensations; but the mercury is not the cause of life
and health, nor is verbal argumentation the principle of inward belief.
If we feel hot or chilly, no one will convince us to the contrary
by insisting that the glass is at 60°. It is the mind that reasons
and assents, not a diagram on paper. I may have difficulty in the
management of a proof, while I remain unshaken in my adherence to the
conclusion. Supposing a boy cannot make his answer to some arithmetical
or algebraical question tally with the book, need he at once distrust
the book? Does his trust in it fall down a certain number of degrees,
according to the force of his difficulty? On the contrary, he keeps to
the principle, implicit but present to his mind, with which he took up
the book, that the book is more likely to be right than he is; and this
mere preponderance of probability is sufficient to make him faithful
to his belief in its correctness, till its incorrectness is actually
proved.

My own opinion is, that the class of writers of whom I have been
speaking, have themselves as little misgiving about the truths which
they pretend to weigh out and measure, as their unsophisticated
neighbours; but they think it a duty to remind us, that since the full
etiquette of logical requirements has not been satisfied, we must
believe those truths at our peril. They warn us, that an issue which
can never come to pass in matter of fact, is nevertheless in theory a
possible supposition. They do not, for instance, intend for a moment
to imply that there is even the shadow of a doubt that Great Britain
is an island, but they think we ought to know, if we do not know, that
there is no proof of the fact, in mode and figure, equal to the proof
of a proposition of Euclid; and that in consequence they and we are all
bound to suspend our judgment about such a fact, though it be in an
infinitesimal degree, lest we should seem not to love truth for truth’s
sake. Having made their protest, they subside without scruple into
that same absolute assurance of only partially-proved truths, which is
natural to the illogical imagination of the multitude.

4. It remains to explain some conversational expressions, at first
sight favourable to that doctrine of degrees in assent, which I have
been combating.

(1.) We often speak of giving a modified and qualified, or a
presumptive and _primâ facie_ assent, or (as I have already said) a
half-assent to opinions or facts; but these expressions admit of an
easy explanation. Assent, upon the authority of others is often, as I
have noticed, when speaking of notional assents, little more than a
profession or acquiescence or inference, not a real acceptance of a
proposition. I report, for instance, that there was a serious fire in
the town in the past night; and then perhaps I add, that at least the
morning papers say so;—that is, I have perhaps no positive doubt of
the fact; still, by referring to the newspapers I imply that I do not
take on myself the responsibility of the statement. In thus qualifying
my apparent assent, I show that it was not a genuine assent at all.
In like manner a _primâ facie_ assent is an assent to an antecedent
probability of a fact, not to the fact itself; as I might give a _primâ
facie_ assent to the Plurality of worlds or to the personality of
Homer, without pledging myself to either absolutely. “Half-assent,”
of which I spoke above, is an inclination to assent, or again, an
intention of assenting, when certain difficulties are surmounted. When
we speak without thought, assent has as vague a meaning as half-assent;
but when we deliberately say, “I assent,” we signify an act of the mind
so definite, as to admit of no change but that of its ceasing to be.

(2.) And so, too, though we sometimes use the phrase “conditional
assent,” yet we only mean thereby to say that we will assent under
certain contingencies. Of course we may, if we please, include a
condition in the proposition to which our assent is given; and then,
that condition enters into the matter of the assent, but not into the
assent itself. To assent to—“If this man is in a consumption, his
days are numbered,”—is as little a conditional assent, as to assent
to—“Of this consumptive patient the days are numbered,”—which, (though
without the conditional form,) is an equivalent proposition. In such
cases, strictly speaking, the assent is given neither to antecedent
nor consequent of the conditional proposition, but to their connexion,
that is, to the enthymematic _inferentia_. If we place the condition
external to the proposition, then the assent will be given to “That
‘his days are numbered’ is conditionally true;” and of course we
can assent to the conditionality of a proposition as well as to its
probability. Or again, if so be, we may give our assent not only to
the _inferentia_ in a complex conditional proposition, but to each of
the simple propositions, of which it is made up, besides. “There will
be a storm soon, for the mercury falls;”—here, besides assenting to
the connexion of the propositions, we may assent also to “The mercury
falls,” and to “There will be a storm.” This is assenting to the
premiss, _inferentia_, and thing inferred, all at once;—we assent to
the whole syllogism, and to its component parts.

(3.) In like manner are to be explained the phrases, “deliberate
assent,” a “rational assent;” a “sudden,” “impulsive,” or “hesitating”
assent. These expressions denote, not kinds or qualities, but the
circumstances of assenting. A deliberate assent is an assent following
upon deliberation. It is sometimes called a conviction, a word which
commonly includes in its meaning two acts, both the act of inference,
and the act of assent consequent upon the inference. This subject will
be considered in the next Section. On the other hand, a hesitating
assent is an assent to which we have been slow and intermittent in
coming; or an assent which, when given, is thwarted and obscured by
external and flitting misgivings, though not such as to enter into the
act itself, or essentially to damage it.

There is another sense in which we speak of a hesitating or uncertain
assent; viz. when we assent in act, but not in the habit of our minds.
Till assent to a doctrine or fact is my habit, I am at the mercy of
inferences contrary to it; I assent to-day, and give up my belief, or
incline to disbelief, to-morrow. I may find it my duty, for instance,
after the opportunity of careful inquiry and inference, to assent to
another’s innocence, whom I have for years considered guilty; but from
long prejudice I may be unable to carry my new assent well about me,
and may every now and then relapse into momentary thoughts injurious to
him.

(4.) A more plausible objection to the absolute absence of all doubt or
misgiving in an act of assent is found in the use of the terms firm and
weak assent, or in the growth of belief and trust. Thus, we assent to
the events of history, but not with that fulness and force of adherence
to the received account of them with which we realize a record of
occurrences which are within our own memory. And again, we assent
to the praise bestowed on a friend’s good qualities with an energy
which we do not feel, when we are speaking of virtue in the abstract:
and if we are political partisans, our assent is very cold, when we
cannot refuse it, to representations made in favour of the wisdom or
patriotism of statesmen whom we dislike. And then as to religious
subjects we speak of “strong” faith and “feeble” faith; of the faith
which would move mountains, and of the ordinary faith “without which it
is impossible to please God.” And as we can grow in graces, so surely
can we inclusively in faith. Again we rise from one work of Christian
Evidences with our faith enlivened and invigorated; from another
perhaps with the distracted father’s words in our mouth, “I believe,
help my unbelief.”

Now it is evident, first of all, that habits of mind may grow, as being
a something permanent and continuous; and by assent growing, it is
often only meant that the habit grows and has greater hold upon the
mind.

But again, when we carefully consider the matter, it will be found
that this increase or decrease of strength does not lie in the assent
itself, but in its circumstances and concomitants; for instance, in the
emotions, in the ratiocinative faculty, or in the imagination.

For instance, as to the emotions, this strength of assent may be
nothing more than the strength of love, hatred, interest, desire, or
fear, which the object of the assent elicits, and this is especially
the case when that object is of a religious nature. Such strength is
adventitious and accidental; it may come, it may go; it is found in one
man, not in another; it does not interfere with the genuineness and
perfection of the act of assent. Balaam assented to the fact of his
own intercourse with the supernatural, as well as Moses; but, to use
religious language, he had light without love; his intellect was clear,
his heart was cold. Hence his faith would popularly be considered
wanting in strength. On the other hand, prejudice implies strong
assents to the disadvantage of its object; that is, it encourages such
assents, and guards them from the chance of being lost.

Again, when a conclusion is recommended to us by the number and force
of the arguments in proof of it, our recognition of them invests it
with a luminousness, which in one sense adds strength to our assent
to it, as it certainly does protect and embolden that assent. Thus
we assent to a review of recent events, which we have studied from
original documents, with a triumphant peremptoriness which it neither
occurs to us, nor is possible for us, to exercise, when we make an act
of assent to the assassination of Julius Caesar, or to the existence of
the Abipones, though we are as securely certain of these latter facts
as of the doings and occurrences of yesterday.

And further, all that I have said about the apprehension of
propositions is in point here. We may speak of assent to our Lord’s
divinity as strong or feeble, according as it is given to the
reality as impressed upon the imagination, or to the notion of it as
entertained by the intellect.

(5.) Nor, lastly, does this doctrine of the intrinsic integrity and
indivisibility (if I may so speak) of assent interfere with the
teaching of Catholic theology as to the pre-eminence of strength in
divine faith, which has a supernatural origin, when compared with all
belief which is merely human and natural. For first, that pre-eminence
consists, not in its differing from human faith, merely in degree
of assent, but in its being superior in nature and kind,(7) so that
the one does not admit of a comparison with the other; and next, its
intrinsic superiority is not a matter of experience, but is above
experience.(8) Assent is ever assent;(9) but in the assent which
follows on a divine announcement, and is vivified by a divine grace,
there is, from the nature of the case, a transcendant adhesion of mind,
intellectual and moral, and a special self-protection,(10) beyond the
operation of those ordinary laws of thought, which alone have a place
in my discussion.


§ 2. Complex Assent.


I have been considering assent as the mental assertion of an
intelligible proposition, as an act of the intellect direct, absolute,
complete in itself, unconditional, arbitrary, yet not incompatible
with an appeal to argument, and at least in many cases exercised
unconsciously. On this last characteristic of assent I have not dwelt,
as it has not come in my way; nor is it more than an accident of
acts of assent, though an ordinary accident. That it is of ordinary
occurrence cannot be doubted. A great many of our assents are merely
expressions of our personal likings, tastes, principles, motives,
and opinions, as dictated by nature, or resulting from habit; in
other words, they are acts and manifestations of self: now what is
more rare than self-knowledge? In proportion then to our ignorance
of self, is our unconsciousness of those innumerable acts of assent,
which we are incessantly making. And so again in what may be almost
called the mechanical operation of our minds, in our continual acts of
apprehension and inference, speculation, and resolve, propositions pass
before us and receive our assent without our consciousness. Hence it
is that we are so apt to confuse together acts of assent and acts of
inference. Indeed, I may fairly say, that those assents which we give
with a direct knowledge of what we are doing, are few compared with the
multitude of like acts which pass through our minds in long succession
without our observing them.

That mode of assent which is exercised thus unconsciously, I may call
simple assent, and of it I have treated in the foregoing Section; but
now I am going to speak of such assents as must be made consciously and
deliberately, and which I shall call complex or reflex assents. And I
begin by recalling what I have already stated about the relation in
which Assent and Inference stand to each other,—Inference, which holds
propositions conditionally, and Assent, which unconditionally accepts
them; the relation is this:—

Acts of inference are both the antecedents of assent before
assenting, and its usual concomitants after assenting. For instance,
I hold absolutely that the country which we call India exists, upon
trustworthy testimony; and next, I may continue to believe it on the
same testimony. In like manner, I have ever believed that Great Britain
is an island, for certain sufficient reasons; and on the same reasons I
may persist in the belief. But it may happen that I forget my reasons
for what I believe to be so absolutely true; or I may never have asked
myself about them, or formally marshalled them in order, and have been
accustomed to assent without a recognition of my assent or of its
grounds, and then perhaps something occurs which leads to my reviewing
and completing those grounds, analyzing and arranging them, yet without
on that account implying of necessity any suspense, ever so slight,
of assent, to the proposition that India is in a certain part of the
earth, and that Great Britain is an island. With no suspense of assent
at all; any more than the boy in my former illustration had any doubt
about the answer set down in his arithmetic-book, when he began working
out the question; any more than he would be doubting his eyes and his
common sense, that the two sides of a triangle are together greater
than the third, because he drew out the geometrical proof of it. He
does but repeat, after his formal demonstration, that assent which he
made before it, and assents to his previous assenting. This is what I
call a reflex or complex assent.

I say, there is no necessary incompatibility between thus assenting and
yet proving,—for the conclusiveness of a proposition is not synonymous
with its truth. A proposition may be true, yet not admit of being
concluded;—it may be a conclusion and yet not a truth. To contemplate
it under one aspect, is not to contemplate it under another; and the
two aspects may be consistent, from the very fact that they are two
_aspects_. Therefore to set about concluding a proposition is not _ipso
facto_ to doubt its truth; we may aim at inferring a proposition,
while all the time we assent to it. We have to do this as a common
occurrence, when we take on ourselves to convince another on any point
in which he differs from us. We do not deny our faith, because we
become controversialists; and in like manner we may employ ourselves in
proving what we believe to be true, simply in order to ascertain the
producible evidence in its favour, and in order to fulfil what is due
to ourselves and to the claims and responsibilities of our education
and social position.

I have been speaking of investigation, not of inquiry; it is quite true
that inquiry is inconsistent with assent, but inquiry is something more
than the mere exercise of inference. He who inquires has not found; he
is in doubt where the truth lies, and wishes his present profession
either proved or disproved. We cannot without absurdity call ourselves
at once believers and inquirers also. Thus it is sometimes spoken
of as a hardship that a Catholic is not allowed to inquire into the
truth of his Creed;—of course he cannot, if he would retain the name
of believer. He cannot be both inside and outside of the Church at
once. It is merely common sense to tell him that, if he is seeking,
he has not found. If seeking includes doubting, and doubting excludes
believing, then the Catholic who sets about inquiring, thereby declares
that he is not a Catholic. He has already lost faith. And this is
his best defence to himself for inquiring, viz. that he is no longer
a Catholic, and wishes to become one. They who would forbid him to
inquire, would in that case be shutting the stable-door after the steed
is stolen. What can he do better than inquire, if he is in doubt? how
else can he become a Catholic again? Not to inquire is in his case to
be satisfied with disbelief.

However, in thus speaking, I am viewing the matter in the abstract, and
without allowing for the manifold inconsistencies of individuals, as
they are found in the world, who attempt to unite incompatibilities;
who do not doubt, but who act as if they did; who, though they believe,
are weak in faith, and put themselves in the way of losing it by
unnecessarily listening to objections. Moreover, there are minds,
undoubtedly, with whom at all times to question a truth is to make
it questionable, and to investigate is equivalent to inquiring; and
again, there may be beliefs so sacred or so delicate, that, if I may
use the metaphor, they will not wash without shrinking and losing
colour. I grant all this; but here I am discussing broad principles,
not individual cases; and these principles are, that inquiry implies
doubt, and that investigation does not imply it, and that those who
assent to a doctrine or fact may without inconsistency investigate its
credibility, though they cannot literally inquire about its truth.

Next, I consider that, in the case of educated minds, investigations
into the argumentative proof of the things to which they have given
their assent, is an obligation, or rather a necessity. Such a trial of
their intellects is a law of their nature, like the growth of childhood
into manhood, and analogous to the moral ordeal which is the instrument
of their spiritual life. The lessons of right and wrong, which are
taught them at school, are to be carried out into action amid the
good and evil of the world; and so again the intellectual assents, in
which they have in like manner been instructed from the first, have
to be tested, realized, and developed by the exercise of their mature
judgment.

Certainly, such processes of investigation, whether in religious
subjects or secular, often issue in the reversal of the assents which
they were originally intended to confirm; as the boy who works out an
arithmetical problem from his book may end in detecting, or thinking
he detects, a false print in the answer. But the question before us
is whether acts of assent and of inference are compatible; and my
vague consciousness of the possibility of a reversal of my belief in
the course of my researches, as little interferes with the honesty
and firmness of that belief while those researches proceed, as the
recognition of the possibility of my train’s oversetting is an evidence
of an intention on my part of undergoing so great a calamity. My mind
is not moved by a scientific computation of chances, nor can any law of
averages affect my particular case. To incur a risk is not to expect
reverse; and if my opinions are true, I have a right to think that
they will bear examining. Nor, on the other hand, does belief, viewed
in its idea, imply a positive resolution in the party believing never
to abandon that belief. What belief, as such, does imply is, not an
intention never to change, but the utter absence of all thought, or
expectation, or fear of changing. A spontaneous resolution never to
change is inconsistent with the idea of belief; for the very force and
absoluteness of the act of assent precludes any such resolution. We do
not commonly determine not to do what we cannot fancy ourselves ever
doing. We should readily indeed make such a formal promise if we were
called upon to do so; for, since we have the truth, and truth cannot
change, how can we possibly change in our belief, except indeed through
our own weakness or fickleness? We have no intention whatever of being
weak or fickle; so our promise is but the natural guarantee of our
sincerity. It is possible then, without disloyalty to our convictions,
to examine their grounds, even though in the event they are to fail
under the examination, for we have no suspicion of this failure.

And such examination, as I have said, does but fulfil a law of our
nature. Our first assents, right or wrong, are often little more than
prejudices. The reasonings, which precede and accompany them, though
sufficient for their purpose, do not rise up to the importance and
energy of the assents themselves. As time goes on, by degrees and
without set purpose, by reflection and experience, we begin to confirm
or to correct the notions and the images to which those assents are
given. At times it is a necessity formally to undertake a survey and
revision of this or that class of them, of those which relate to
religion, or to social duty, or to politics, or to the conduct of
life. Sometimes this review begins in doubt as to the matters which we
propose to consider, that is, in a suspension of the assents hitherto
familiar to us; sometimes those assents are too strong to allow of
being lost on the first stirring of the inquisitive intellect, and if,
as time goes on, they give way, our change of mind, be it for good
or for evil, is owing to the accumulating force of the arguments,
sound or unsound, which bear down upon the propositions which we have
hitherto received. Objections, indeed, as such, have no direct force to
weaken assent; but, when they multiply, they tell against the implicit
reasonings or the formal inferences which are its warrant, and suspend
its acts and gradually undermine its habit. Then the assent goes; but
whether slowly or suddenly, noticeably or imperceptibly, is a matter
of circumstance or accident. However, whether the original assent is
continued on or not, the new assent differs from the old in this, that
it has the strength of explicitness and deliberation, that it is not
a mere prejudice, and its strength the strength of prejudice. It is
an assent, not only to a given proposition, but to the claim of that
proposition on our assent as true; it is an assent to an assent, or
what is commonly called a conviction.

Of course these reflex acts may be repeated in a series. As I
pronounce that “Great Britain is an island,” and then pronounce “That
‘Great Britain is an island’ has a claim on my assent,” or is to
“be assented-to,” or to be “accepted as true,” or to be “believed,”
or simply “is true” (these predicates being equivalent), so I may
proceed, “The proposition ‘that _Great-Britain-is-an-island_ is to be
believed,’ is to be believed,” &c., &c., and so on to _ad infinitum_.
But this would be trifling. The mind is like a double mirror, in
which reflexions of self within self multiply themselves till they
are undistinguishable, and the first reflexion contains all the
rest. At the same time, it is worth while to notice two other reflex
propositions:—“That ‘Great Britain is an island’ is probable” is
true;—and “That ‘Great Britain is an island’ is uncertain” is true:—for
the former of these is the expression of Opinion, and the latter of
formal or theological Doubt, as I have already determined.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I have one step farther to make:—let the proposition to which the
assent is given be as absolutely true as the reflex act pronounces it
to be, that is, objectively true as well as subjectively:—then the
assent may be called a _perception_, the conviction a _certitude_, the
proposition or truth a _certainty_, or thing known, or a matter of
_knowledge_, and to assent to it is to _know_.

Of course, in thus speaking, I open the all-important question, what
is truth, and what apparent truth? what is genuine knowledge, and what
is its counterfeit? what are the tests for discriminating certitude
from mere persuasion or delusion? Whatever a man holds to be true,
he will say he holds for certain; and for the present I must allow
him in his assumption, hoping in one way or another, as I proceed, to
lessen the difficulties which lie in the way of calling him to account
for so doing. And I have the less scruple in taking this course, as
believing that, among fairly prudent and circumspect men, there are
far fewer instances of false certitude than at first sight might be
supposed. Men are often doubtful about propositions which are really
true; they are not commonly certain of such as are simply false. What
they judge to be a certainty is in matter of fact for the most part
a truth. Not that there is not a great deal of rash talking even
among the educated portion of the community, and many a man makes
professions of certitude, for which he has no warrant; but that such
off-hand, confident language is no token how these persons will express
themselves when brought to book. No one will with justice consider
himself certain of any matter, unless he has sufficient reasons for so
considering; and it is rare that what is not true should be so free
from every circumstance and token of falsity as to create no suspicion
in his mind to its disadvantage, no reason for suspense of judgment.

However, I shall have to remark on this difficulty by and by; here
I will mention two conditions of certitude, in close connexion with
that necessary preliminary of investigation and proof of which I have
been speaking, which will throw some light upon it. The one, which is
_à priori_, or from the nature of the case, will tell us what is not
certitude; the other, which is _à posteriori_, or from experience, will
tell us in a measure what certitude is.

1. Certitude, as I have said, is the perception of a truth with the
perception that it is a truth, or the consciousness of knowing, as
expressed in the phrase, “I know that I know,” or “I know that I know
that I know,”—or simply “I know;” for one reflex assertion of the mind
about self sums up the series of self-consciousnesses without the need
of any actual evolution of them.

Certitude is the knowledge of a truth:—but what is once true is always
true, and cannot fail, whereas what is once known need not always be
known, and is capable of failing. It follows, that if I am certain
of a thing, I believe it will remain what I now hold it to be, even
though my mind should have the bad fortune to let it drop. Since mere
argument is not the measure of assent, no one can be called certain of
a proposition, whose mind does not spontaneously and promptly reject,
on their first suggestion, as idle, as impertinent, as sophistical, any
objections which are directed against its truth. No man is certain of
a truth, who can endure the thought of the fact of its contradictory
existing or occurring; and that not from any set purpose or effort to
reject that thought, but, as I have said, by the spontaneous action of
the intellect. What is contradictory to the truth, with its apparatus
of argument, fades out of the mind as fast as it enters it; and though
it be brought back to the mind ever so often by the pertinacity of an
opponent, or by a voluntary or involuntary act of imagination, still
that contradictory proposition and its arguments are mere phantoms and
dreams, in the light of our certitude, and their very entering into the
mind is the first step of their going out of it. Such is the position
of our minds towards the heathen fancy that Enceladus lies under
Etna; or, not to take so extreme a case, that Joanna Southcote was a
messenger from heaven, or the Emperor Napoleon really had a star. Equal
to this peremptory assertion of negative propositions is the revolt
of the mind from suppositions incompatible with positive statements
of which we are certain, whether abstract truths or facts; as that a
straight line is the longest possible distance between its two extreme
points, that Great Britain is in shape an exact square or circle, that
I shall escape dying, or that my intimate friend is false to me.

We may indeed say, if we please, that a man ought not to have so
supreme a conviction in a given case, or in any case whatever; and
that he is therefore wrong in treating opinions which he does not
himself hold, with this even involuntary contempt;—certainly, we
have a right to say so, if we will; but if, in matter of fact, a man
has such a conviction, if he is sure that Ireland is to the West of
England, or that the Pope is the Vicar of Christ, nothing is left to
him, if he would be consistent, but to carry his conviction out into
this magisterial intolerance of any contrary assertion; and if he
were in his own mind tolerant, I do not say patient (for patience and
gentleness are moral duties, but I mean intellectually tolerant), of
objections as objections, he would virtually be giving countenance
to the views which those objections represented. I say I certainly
should be very intolerant of such a notion as that I shall one day
be Emperor of the French; I should think it too absurd even to be
ridiculous, and that I must be mad before I could entertain it. And
did a man try to persuade me that treachery, cruelty, or ingratitude
were as praiseworthy as honesty and temperance, and that a man who
lived the life of a knave and died the death of a brute had nothing to
fear from future retribution, I should think there was no call on me
to listen to his arguments, except with the hope of converting him,
though he called me a bigot and a coward for refusing to inquire into
his speculations. And if, in a matter in which my temporal interests
were concerned, he attempted to reconcile me to fraudulent acts by what
he called philosophical views, I should say to him, “Retro Satana,”
and that, not from any suspicion of his ability to reverse immutable
principles, but from a consciousness of my own moral changeableness,
and a fear, on that account, that I might not be intellectually true
to the truth. This, then, from the nature of the case, is a main
characteristic of certitude in any matter, to be confident indeed that
that certitude will last, but to be confident of this also, that, if it
did fail, nevertheless, the thing itself, whatever it is, of which we
are certain, will remain just as it is, true and irreversible. If this
be so, it is easy to instance cases of an adherence to propositions,
which does not fulfil the conditions of certitude; for instance:—

(1.) How positive and circumstantial disputants may be on both sides
of a question of fact, on which they give their evidence, till they
are called to swear to it, and then how guarded and conditional their
testimony becomes! Again, how confident are they in their rival
accounts of a transaction at which they were present, till a third
person makes his appearance, whose word will be decisive about it!
Then they suddenly drop their tone, and trim their statements, and by
provisos and explanations leave themselves loopholes for escape, in
case his testimony should turn out to their disadvantage. At first no
language could be too bold or absolute to express the distinctness of
their knowledge on this side or that; but second thoughts are best, and
their giving way shows that their belief does not come up to the mark
of certitude.

(2.) Again, can we doubt that many a confident expounder of Scripture,
who is so sure that St. Paul meant this, and that St. John and St.
James did not mean that, would be seriously disconcerted at the
presence of those Apostles, if their presence were possible, and that
they have now an especial “boldness of speech” in treating their
subject, because there is no one authoritatively to set them right, if
they are wrong?

(3.) Take another instance, in which the absence of certitude is
professed from the first. Though it is a matter of faith with Catholics
that miracles never cease in the Church, still that this or that
professed miracle really took place, is for the most part only a matter
of opinion, and when it is believed, whether on testimony or tradition,
it is not believed to the exclusion of all doubt, whether about the
fact or its miraculousness. Thus I may believe in the liquefaction of
St. Pantaleon’s blood, and believe it to the best of my judgment to
be a miracle, yet, supposing a chemist offered to produce exactly the
same phenomena under exactly similar circumstances by the materials
put at his command by his science, so as to reduce what seemed beyond
nature within natural laws, I should watch with some suspense of mind
and misgiving the course of his experiment, as having no Divine Word
to fall back upon as a ground of certainty that the liquefaction was
miraculous.

(4.) Take another virtual exhibition of fear; I mean irritation and
impatience of contradiction, vehemence of assertion, determination
to silence others,—these are the tokens of a mind which has not yet
attained the tranquil enjoyment of certitude. No one, I suppose, would
say that he was certain of the Plurality of worlds: that uncertitude
on the subject is just the explanation, and the only explanation
satisfactory to my mind, of the strange violence of language which has
before now dishonoured the philosophical controversy upon it. Those who
are certain of a fact are indolent disputants; it is enough for them
that they have the truth; and they have little disposition, except at
the call of duty, to criticize the hallucinations of others, and much
less are they angry at their positiveness or ingenuity in argument;
but to call names, to impute motives, to accuse of sophistry, to be
impetuous and overbearing, is the part of men who are alarmed for their
own position, and fear to have it approached too nearly. And in like
manner the intemperance of language and of thought, which is sometimes
found in converts to a religious creed, is often attributed, not
without plausibility (even though erroneously in the particular case),
to some flaw in the completeness of their certitude, which interferes
with the harmony and repose of their convictions.

(5.) Again, this intellectual anxiety, which is incompatible with
certitude, shows itself in our running back in our minds to the
arguments on which we came to believe, in not letting our conclusions
alone, in going over and strengthening the evidence, and, as it were,
getting it by heart, as if our highest assent were only an inference.
And such too is our unnecessarily declaring that we are certain, as if
to reassure ourselves, and our appealing to others for their suffrage
in behalf of the truths of which we are so sure; which is like our
asking another whether we are weary and hungry, or have eaten and drunk
to our satisfaction.

All laws are general; none are invariable; I am not writing as a
moralist or casuist. It must ever be recollected that these various
phenomena of mind, though signs, are not infallible signs of
uncertitude; they may proceed, in the particular case, from other
circumstances. Such anxieties and alarms may be merely emotional
and from the imagination, not intellectual; parallel to the beating
of the heart, nay, as I have been told, the trembling of the limbs,
of even the bravest men, before a battle, when standing still to
receive the first attack of the enemy. Such too is that palpitating
self-interrogation, that trouble of the mind lest it should not believe
strongly enough, which, and not doubt, underlies the sensitiveness
described in the well-known lines,—


    “With eyes too tremblingly awake,
    To bear with dimness for His sake.”


And so again, a man’s over-earnestness in argument may arise from zeal
or charity; his impatience from loyalty to the truth; his extravagance
from want of taste, from enthusiasm, or from youthful ardour; and his
restless recurrence to argument, not from personal disquiet, but from
a vivid appreciation of the controversial talent of an opponent, or
of his own, or of the mere philosophical difficulties of the subject
in dispute. These are points for the consideration of those who
are concerned in registering and explaining what may be called the
meteorological phenomena of the human mind, and do not interfere with
the broad principle which I would lay down, that to fear argument is to
doubt the conclusion, and to be certain of a truth is to be careless of
objections to it;—nor with the practical rule, that mere assent is not
certitude, and must not be confused with it.

2. Now to consider what Certitude positively is, as a matter of
experience.

It is accompanied, as a state of mind, by a specific feeling, proper to
it, and discriminating it from other states, intellectual and moral, I
do not say, as its practical test or as its _differentia_, but as its
token, and in a certain sense its form. When a man says he is certain,
he means he is conscious to himself of having this specific feeling.
It is a feeling of satisfaction and self-gratulation, of intellectual
security, arising out of a sense of success, attainment, possession,
finality, as regards the matter which has been in question. As a
conscientious deed is attended by a self-approval which nothing but
itself can create, so certitude is united to a sentiment _sui generis_
in which it lives and is manifested. These two parallel sentiments
indeed have no relationship with each other, the enjoyable self-repose
of certitude being as foreign to a good deed, as the self-approving
glow of conscience is to the perception of a truth; yet knowledge,
as well as virtue, is an end, and both knowledge and virtue, when
reflected on, carry with them respectively their own reward in the
characteristic sentiment, which, as I have said, is proper to each.
And, as the performance of what is right is distinguished by this
religious peace, so the attainment of what is true is attested by this
intellectual security.

And, as the feeling of self-approbation, which is proper to good
conduct, does not belong to the sense or to the possession of the
beautiful or of the becoming, of the pleasant or of the useful, so
neither is the special relaxation and repose of mind, which is the
token of Certitude, ever found to attend upon simple Assent, on
processes of Inference, or on Doubt; nor on investigation, conjecture,
opinion, as such, or on any other state or action of mind, besides
Certitude. On the contrary, those acts and states of mind have
gratifications proper to themselves, and unlike that of Certitude, as
will sufficiently appear on considering them separately.

(1.) Philosophers are fond of enlarging on the pleasures of Knowledge,
(that is, Knowledge as such,) nor need I here prove that such pleasures
exist; but the repose in self and in its object, as connected with
self, which I attribute to Certitude, does not attach to mere knowing,
that is, to the perception of things, but to the consciousness of
having that knowledge. The simple and direct perception of things has
its own great satisfaction; but it must recognize them as realities,
and recognize them as known, before it becomes the perception and has
the satisfaction of certitude. Indeed, as far as I see, the pleasure
of perceiving truth without reflecting on it as truth, is not very
different, except in intensity and in dignity, from the pleasure, as
such, of assent or belief given to what is not true, nay, from the
pleasure of the mere passive reception of recitals or narratives, which
neither profess to be true nor claim to be believed. Representations
of any kind are in their own nature pleasurable, whether they be true
or not, whether they come to us, or do not come, as true. We read
a history, or a biographical notice, with pleasure; and we read a
romance with pleasure; and a pleasure which is quite apart from the
question of fact or fiction. Indeed, when we would persuade young
people to read history, we tell them that it is as interesting as a
romance or a novel. The mere acquisition of new images, and those
images striking, great, various, unexpected, beautiful, with mutual
relations and bearings, as being parts of a whole, with continuity,
succession, evolution, with recurring complications and corresponding
solutions, with a crisis and a catastrophe, is highly pleasurable,
quite independently of the question whether there is any truth in them.
I am not denying that we should be baulked and disappointed to be told
they were all untrue, but this seems to arise from the reflection
that we have been taken in; not as if the fact of their truth were a
distinct element of pleasure, though it would increase the pleasure, as
investing them with a character of marvellousness, and as associating
them with known or ascertained places. But even if the pleasure of
knowledge is not thus founded on the imagination, at least it does not
consist in that triumphant repose of the mind after a struggle, which
is the characteristic of Certitude.

And so too as to such statements as gain from us a half-assent,
as superstitious tales, stories of magic, of romantic crime, of
ghosts, or such as we follow for the moment with a faint and languid
assent,—contemporary history, political occurrences, the news of the
day,—the pleasure resulting from these is that of novelty or curiosity,
and is like the pleasure arising from the excitement of chance and from
variety; it has in it no sense of possession: it is simply external to
us, and has nothing akin to the thought of a battle and a victory.

(2.) Again, the Pursuit of knowledge has its own pleasure,—as distinct
from the pleasures of knowledge, as it is distinct from that of
consciously possessing it. This will be evident at once, if we consider
what a vacuity and depression of mind sometimes comes upon us on the
termination of an inquiry, however successfully terminated, compared
with the interest and spirit with which we carried it on. The pleasure
of a search, like that of a hunt, lies in the searching, and ends at
the point at which the pleasure of Certitude begins. Its elements are
altogether foreign to those which go to compose the serene satisfaction
of Certitude. First, the successive steps of discovery, which attend
on an investigation, are continual and ever-extending informations,
and pleasurable, not only as such, but also as the evidence of past
efforts, and the earnest of success at the last. Next, there is the
interest which attaches to a mystery, not yet removed, but tending to
removal,—the complex pleasure of wonder, expectation, sudden surprises,
suspense, and hope, of advances fitful, yet sure, to the unknown. And
there is the pleasure which attaches to the toil and conflict of the
strong, the consciousness and successive evidences of power, moral and
intellectual, the pride of ingenuity and skill, of industry, patience,
vigilance, and perseverance.

Such are the pleasures of investigation and discovery; and to these
we must add, what I have suggested in the last sentence, the logical
satisfaction, as it may be called, which accompanies these efforts of
mind. There is great pleasure, as is plain, at least to certain minds,
in proceeding from particular facts to principles, in generalizing,
discriminating, reducing into order and meaning the maze of phenomena
which nature presents to us. This is the kind of pleasure attendant
on the treatment of probabilities which point at conclusions without
reaching them, or of objections which must be weighed and measured,
and adjusted for what they are worth, over and against propositions
which are antecedently evident. It is the special pleasure belonging
to Inference as contrasted with Assent, a pleasure almost poetical, as
twilight has more poetry in it than noon-day. Such is the joy of the
pleader, with a good case in hand, and expecting the separate attacks
of half a dozen acute intellects, each advancing from a point of his
own. I suppose this was the pleasure which the Academics had in mind,
when they propounded that happiness lay, not in finding the truth,
but in seeking it. To seek, indeed, with the certainty of not finding
what we seek, cannot in any serious matter, be pleasurable, any more
than the labour of Sisyphus or the Danaides; but when the result does
not concern us very much, clever arguments and rival ones have the
attraction of a game of chance or skill, whether or not they lead to
any definite conclusion.

(3.) Are there pleasures of Doubt, as well as of Inference and of
Assent? In one sense, there are. Not indeed, if doubt simply means
ignorance, uncertainty, or hopeless suspense; but there is a certain
grave acquiescence in ignorance, a recognition of our impotence to
solve momentous and urgent questions, which has a satisfaction of its
own. After high aspirations, after renewed endeavours, after bootless
toil, after long wanderings, after hope, effort, weariness, failure,
painfully alternating and recurring, it is an immense relief to the
exhausted mind to be able to say, “At length I know that I can know
nothing about any thing,”—that is, while it can maintain itself in a
posture of thought which has no promise of permanence, because it is
unnatural. But here the satisfaction does not lie in not knowing, but
in knowing there is nothing to know. It is a positive act of assent
or conviction, given to what in the particular case is an untruth.
It is the assent and the false certitude which are the cause of the
tranquillity of mind. Ignorance remains the evil which it ever was, but
something of the peace of Certitude is gained in knowing the worst, and
in having reconciled the mind to the endurance of it.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I may seem to have been needlessly diffuse in thus dwelling on the
pleasurable affections severally attending on these various conditions
of the intellect, but I have had a purpose in doing so. That Certitude
is a natural and normal state of mind, and not (as is sometimes
objected) one of its extravagances or infirmities, is proved indeed
by the remarks which I have made above on the same objection, as
directed against Assent; for Certitude is only one of its forms. But
I have thought it well in addition to suggest, even at the expense
of a digression, that as no one would refuse to Inquiry, Doubt, and
Knowledge a legitimate place among our mental constituents, so no one
can reasonably ignore a state of mind which not only is shown to be
substantive by possessing a sentiment _sui generis_ and characteristic,
but is analogical to Inquiry, Doubt, and Knowledge, in the fact of its
thus having a sentiment of its own.




