The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Essay In Aid Of A Grammar Of Assent by
John Henry Newman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: An Essay In Aid Of A Grammar Of Assent

Author: John Henry Newman

Release Date: October 1, 2010 [Ebook #34022]
Last Updated: June 4, 2023

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Martin

OF ASSENT ***




                                 An Essay

                                In Aid Of

                           A Grammar Of Assent.

                                    by

                            John Henry Newman,

                             Of the Oratory.

       Non in dialecticà complacuit Deo salvum facere populum suum.

                               ST. AMBROSE.

                                 London:

                           Burns, Oates, & Co.

            17 & 18, Portman Street, and 63, Paternoster Row.

                                   1874




CONTENTS


Dedication.
Part I. Assent And Apprehension.
   Chapter I. Modes Of Holding And Apprehending Propositions.
      § 1. Modes of Holding Propositions.
      § 2. Modes of apprehending Propositions.
   Chapter II. Assent Considered As Apprehensive.
   Chapter III. The Apprehension Of Propositions.
   Chapter IV. Notional And Real Assent.
      § 1. Notional Assents.
      § 2. Real Assents.
      § 3. Notional and Real Assents Contrasted.
   Chapter V. Apprehension And Assent In The Matter Of Religion.
      § 1. Belief in One God.
      § 2. Belief in the Holy Trinity.
      § 3. Belief in Dogmatic Theology.
Part II. Assent And Inference.
   Chapter VI. Assent Considered As Unconditional.
      § 1. Simple Assent.
      § 2. Complex Assent.
   Chapter VII. Certitude.
      § 1. Assent and Certitude Contrasted.
      § 2. Indefectibility of Certitude.
   Chapter VIII. Inference.
      § 1. Formal Inference.
      § 2. Informal Inference.
      § 3. Natural Inference.
   Chapter IX. The Illative Sense.
      § 1. The Sanction of the Illative Sense.
      § 2. The Nature of the Illative Sense.
      § 3. The Range of the Illative Sense.
   Chapter X. Inference And Assent In The Matter Of Religion.
      § 1. Natural Religion.
      § 2. Revealed Religion.
Note.
Footnotes






DEDICATION.


To

Edward Bellasis,

Serjeant At Law,

In Remembrance

Of A Long, Equable, Sunny Friendship;

In Gratitude

For Continual Kindnesses Shown To Me,

For An Unwearied Zeal In My Behalf,

For A Trust In Me Which Has Never Wavered,

And A Prompt, Effectual Succour And Support

In Times Of Special Trial,

From His Affectionate

J. H. N.

_February 21, 1870._




PART I. ASSENT AND APPREHENSION.




Chapter I. Modes Of Holding And Apprehending Propositions.


§ 1. Modes of Holding Propositions.


1. Propositions (consisting of a subject and predicate united by the
copula) may take a categorical, conditional, or interrogative form.

(1) An interrogative, when they ask a Question, (e. g. Does Free-trade
benefit the poorer classes?) and imply the possibility of an
affirmative or negative resolution of it.

(2) A conditional, when they express a Conclusion (e. g. Free-trade
therefore benefits the poorer classes), and both imply, and imply their
dependence on, other propositions.

(3) A categorical, when they simply make an Assertion (e. g. Free-trade
does benefit), and imply the absence of any condition or reservation of
any kind, looking neither before nor behind, as resting in themselves
and being intrinsically complete.

These three modes of shaping a proposition, distinct as they are from
each other, follow each other in natural sequence. A proposition,
which starts with being a Question, may become a Conclusion, and
then be changed into an Assertion; but it has of course ceased to
be a question, so far forth as it has become a conclusion, and has
rid itself of its argumentative form—that is, has ceased to be a
conclusion,—so far forth as it has become an assertion. A question has
not yet got so far as to be a conclusion, though it is the necessary
preliminary of a conclusion; and an assertion has got beyond being a
mere conclusion, though it is the natural issue of a conclusion. Their
correlation is the measure of their distinction one from another.

No one is likely to deny that a question is distinct both from a
conclusion and from an assertion; and an assertion will be found to be
equally distinct from a conclusion. For, if we rest our affirmation on
arguments, this shows that we are not asserting; and, when we assert,
we do not argue. An assertion is as distinct from a conclusion, as a
word of command is from a persuasion or recommendation. Command and
assertion, as such, both of them, in their different ways, dispense
with, discard, ignore, antecedents of any kind, though antecedents may
have been a _sine quâ non_ condition of their being elicited. They both
carry with them the pretension of being personal acts.

In insisting on the intrinsic distinctness of these three modes
of putting a proposition, I am not maintaining that they may not
co-exist as regards one and the same subject. For what we have already
concluded, we may, if we will, make a question of; and what we are
asserting, we may of course conclude over again. We may assert, to
one man, and conclude to another, and ask of a third; still, when we
assert, we do not conclude, and, when we assert or conclude, we do not
question.

2. The internal act of holding propositions is for the most part
analogous to the external act of enunciating them; as there are three
ways of enunciating, so are there three ways of holding them, each
corresponding to each. These three mental acts are Doubt, Inference,
and Assent. A question is the expression of a doubt; a conclusion
is the expression of an act of inference; and an assertion is the
expression of an act of assent. To doubt, for instance, is not to see
one’s way to hold that Free-trade is or that it is not a benefit; to
infer, is to hold on sufficient grounds that Free-trade may, must, or
should be a benefit; to assent to the proposition, is to hold that
Free-trade is a benefit.

Moreover, propositions, while they are the material of these three
enunciations, are the objects of the three corresponding mental acts;
and as without a proposition, there cannot be a question, conclusion,
or assertion, so without a proposition there is nothing to doubt about,
nothing to infer, nothing to assent to. Mental acts of whatever kind
presuppose their objects.

And, since the three enunciations are distinct from each other,
therefore the three mental acts also, Doubt, Inference, and Assent,
are, with reference to one and the same proposition, distinct from each
other; else, why should their several enunciations be distinct? And
indeed it is very evident, that, so far forth as we infer, we do not
doubt, and that, when we assent, we are not inferring, and, when we
doubt, we cannot assent.

And in fact, these three modes of entertaining propositions,—doubting
them, inferring them, assenting to them, are so distinct in their
action, that, when they are severally carried out into the intellectual
habits of an individual, they become the principles and notes of three
distinct states or characters of mind. For instance, in the case of
Revealed Religion, according as one or other of these is paramount
within him, a man is a sceptic as regards it; or a philosopher,
thinking it more or less probable considered as a conclusion of
reason; or he has an unhesitating faith in it, and is recognized as a
believer. If he simply disbelieves, or dissents, he is assenting to the
contradictory of the thesis, viz. that there is no Revelation.

Many minds of course there are, which are not under the predominant
influence of any one of the three. Thus men are to be found of
irreflective, impulsive, unsettled, or again of acute minds, who do
not know what they believe and what they do not, and who may be by
turns sceptics, inquirers, or believers; who doubt, assent, infer, and
doubt again, according to the circumstances of the season. Nay further,
in all minds there is a certain coexistence of these distinct acts;
that is, of two of them, for we can at once infer and assent, though
we cannot at once either assent or infer and also doubt. Indeed, in a
multitude of cases we infer truths, or apparent truths, before, and
while, and after we assent to them.

Lastly, it cannot be denied that these three acts are all natural to
the mind; I mean, that, in exercising them, we are not violating the
laws of our nature, as if they were in themselves an extravagance or
weakness, but are acting according to it, according to its legitimate
constitution. Undoubtedly, it is possible, it is common, in the
particular case, to err in the exercise of Doubt, of Inference, and of
Assent; that is, we may be withholding a judgment about propositions
on which we have the means of coming to some definitive conclusion; or
we may be assenting to propositions which we ought to receive only on
the credit of their premisses, or again to keep ourselves in suspense
about; but such errors of the individual belong to the individual, not
to his nature, and cannot avail to forfeit for him his natural right,
under proper circumstances, to doubt, or to infer, or to assent. We
do but fulfil our nature in doubting, inferring, and assenting; and
our duty is, not to abstain from the exercise of any function of our
nature, but to do what is in itself right rightly.

3. So far in general:—in this Essay I treat of propositions only in
their bearing upon concrete matter, and I am mainly concerned with
Assent; with Inference, in its relation to Assent, and only such
inference as is not demonstration; with Doubt hardly at all. I dismiss
Doubt with one observation. I have here spoken of it simply as a
suspense of mind, in which sense of the word, to have “no doubt” about
a thesis is equivalent to one or other of the two remaining acts,
either to inferring it or else assenting to it. However, the word is
often taken to mean the deliberate recognition of a thesis as being
uncertain; in this sense Doubt is nothing else than an assent, viz. an
assent to a proposition at variance with the thesis, as I have already
noticed in the case of Disbelief.

Confining myself to the subject of Assent and Inference, I observe two
points of contrast between them.

The first I have already noted. Assent is unconditional; else, it is
not really represented by assertion. Inference is conditional, because
a conclusion at least implies the assumption of premisses, and still
more, because in concrete matter, on which I am engaged, demonstration
is impossible.

The second has regard to the apprehension necessary for holding
a proposition. We cannot assent to a proposition, without some
intelligent apprehension of it; whereas we need not understand it at
all in order to infer it. We cannot give our assent to the proposition
that “x is z,” till we are told something about one or other of the
terms; but we can infer, if “x is y, and y is z, that x is z,” whether
we know the meaning of x and z or no.

These points of contrast and their results will come before us in
due course: here, for a time leaving the consideration of the modes
of holding propositions, I proceed to inquire into what is to be
understood by apprehending them.


§ 2. Modes of apprehending Propositions.


By our apprehension of propositions I mean our imposition of a sense
on the terms of which they are composed. Now what do the terms of a
proposition, the subject and predicate, stand for? Sometimes they stand
for certain ideas existing in our own minds, and for nothing outside of
them; sometimes for things simply external to us, brought home to us
through the experiences and informations we have of them. All things in
the exterior world are unit and individual, and are nothing else; but
the mind not only contemplates those unit realities, as they exist, but
has the gift, by an act of creation, of bringing before it abstractions
and generalizations, which have no existence, no counterpart, out of it.

Now there are propositions, in which one or both of the terms
are common nouns, as standing for what is abstract, general, and
non-existing, such as “Man is an animal, some men are learned, an
Apostle is a creation of Christianity, a line is length without
breadth, to err is human, to forgive divine.” These I shall call
notional propositions, and the apprehension with which we infer or
assent to them, notional.

And there are other propositions, which are composed of singular nouns,
and of which the terms stand for things external to us, unit and
individual, as “Philip was the father of Alexander,” “the earth goes
round the sun,” “the Apostles first preached to the Jews;” and these I
shall call real propositions, and their apprehension real.

There are then two apprehensions or interpretations to which
propositions may be subjected, notional and real.

Next I observe, that the same proposition may admit of both of these
interpretations at once, having a notional sense as used by one
man, and a real as used by another. Thus a schoolboy may perfectly
apprehend, and construe with spirit, the poet’s words, “Dum Capitolium
scandet cum tacitâ Virgine Pontifex;” he has seen steep hills, flights
of steps, and processions; he knows what enforced silence is; also he
knows all about the Pontifex Maximus, and the Vestal Virgins; he has
an abstract hold upon every word of the description, yet without the
words therefore bringing before him at all the living image which they
would light up in the mind of a contemporary of the poet, who had seen
the fact described, or of a modern historian who had duly informed
himself in the religious phenomena, and by meditation had realized the
Roman ceremonial, of the age of Augustus. Again, “Dulce et decorum
est pro patriâ mori,” is a mere common-place, a terse expression of
abstractions in the mind of the poet himself, if Philippi is to be the
index of his patriotism, whereas it would be the record of experiences,
a sovereign dogma, a grand aspiration, inflaming the imagination,
piercing the heart, of a Wallace or a Tell.

As the multitude of common nouns have originally been singular, it
is not surprising that many of them should so remain still in the
apprehension of particular individuals. In the proposition “Sugar
is sweet,” the predicate is a common noun as used by those who have
compared sugar in their thoughts with honey or glycerine; but it may be
the only distinctively sweet thing in the experience of a child, and
may be used by him as a noun singular. The first time that he tastes
sugar, if his nurse says, “Sugar is sweet” in a notional sense, meaning
by sugar, lump-sugar, powdered, brown, and candied, and by sweet, a
specific flavour or scent which is found in many articles of food and
many flowers, he may answer in a real sense, and in an individual
proposition “Sugar is sweet,” meaning “this sugar is this sweet thing.”

Thirdly, in the same mind and at the same time, the same proposition
may express both what is notional and what is real. When a lecturer in
mechanics or chemistry shows to his class by experiment some physical
fact, he and his hearers at once enunciate it as an individual thing
before their eyes, and also as generalized by their minds into a law of
nature. When Virgil says, “Varium et mutabile semper fœmina,” he both
sets before his readers what he means to be a general truth, and at the
same time applies it individually to the instance of Dido. He expresses
at once a notion and a fact.

Of these two modes of apprehending propositions, notional and real,
real is the stronger; I mean by stronger the more vivid and forcible.
It is so to be accounted for the very reason that it is concerned with
what is either real or taken for real; for intellectual ideas cannot
compete in effectiveness with the experience of concrete facts. Various
proverbs and maxims sanction me in so speaking, such as, “Facts are
stubborn things,” “Experientia docet,” “Seeing is believing;” and
the popular contrast between theory and practice, reason and sight,
philosophy and faith. Not that real apprehension, as such, impels to
action, any more than notional; but it excites and stimulates the
affections and passions, by bringing facts home to them as motive
causes. Thus it indirectly brings about what the apprehension of large
principles, of general laws, or of moral obligations, never could
effect.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Reverting to the two modes of holding propositions, conditional and
unconditional, which was the subject of the former Section, that
is, inferences and assents, I observe that inferences, which are
conditional acts, are especially cognate to notional apprehension, and
assents, which are unconditional, to real. This distinction, too, will
come before us in the course of the following chapters.

And now I have stated the main subjects of which I propose to treat;
viz., the distinctions in the use of propositions, which I have been
drawing, and the questions which those distinctions involve.




