Chapter X. Inference And Assent In The Matter Of Religion.


And now I have completed my review of the second subject to which I
have given my attention in this Essay, the connexion existing between
the intellectual acts of Assent and Inference, my first being the
connexion of Assent with Apprehension; and as I closed my remarks
upon Assent and Apprehension by applying the conclusions at which I
had arrived to our belief in the Truths of Religion, so now I ought
to speak of its Evidences, before quitting the consideration of the
dependence of Assent upon Inference. I shall attempt to do so in this
Chapter, not without much anxiety, lest I should injure so large,
momentous, and sacred a subject by a necessarily cursory treatment.

I begin with expressing a sentiment, which is habitually in my
thoughts, whenever they are turned to the subject of mental or moral
science, and which I am as willing to apply here to the Evidences of
Religion as it properly applies to Metaphysics or Ethics, viz. that
in these provinces of inquiry egotism is true modesty. In religious
inquiry each of us can speak only for himself, and for himself he has
a right to speak. His own experiences are enough for himself, but
he cannot speak for others: he cannot lay down the law; he can only
bring his own experiences to the common stock of psychological facts.
He knows what has satisfied and satisfies himself; if it satisfies
him, it is likely to satisfy others; if, as he believes and is sure,
it is true, it will approve itself to others also, for there is but
one truth. And doubtless he does find in fact, that, allowing for the
difference of minds and of modes of speech, what convinces him, does
convince others also. There will be very many exceptions, but these
will admit of explanation. Great numbers of men refuse to inquire at
all; they put the subject of religion aside altogether; others are
not serious enough to care about questions of truth and duty and to
entertain them; and to numbers, from their temper of mind, or the
absence of doubt, or a dormant intellect, it does not occur to inquire
why or what they believe; many, though they tried, could not do so in
any satisfactory way. This being the case, it causes no uneasiness to
any one who honestly attempts to set down his own view of the Evidences
of Religion, that at first sight he seems to be but one among many
who are all in opposition to each other. But, however that may be, he
brings together his reasons, and relies on them, because they are his
own, and this is his primary evidence; and he has a second ground of
evidence, in the testimony of those who agree with him. But his best
evidence is the former, which is derived from his own thoughts; and it
is that which the world has a right to demand of him; and therefore
his true sobriety and modesty consists, not in claiming for his
conclusions an acceptance or a scientific approval which is not to be
found anywhere, but in stating what are personally his own grounds for
his belief in Natural and Revealed Religion,—grounds which he holds to
be so sufficient, that he thinks that others do hold them implicitly
or in substance, or would hold them, if they inquired fairly, or will
hold if they listen to him, or do not hold from impediments, invincible
or not as it may be, into which he has no call to inquire. However,
his own business is to speak for himself. He uses the words of the
Samaritans to their countrywoman, when our Lord had remained with them
for two days, “Now we believe, not for thy saying, for we have heard
Him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world.”

In these words it is declared both that the Gospel Revelation is
divine, and that it carries with it the evidence of its divinity; and
this is of course the matter of fact. However, these two attributes
need not have been united; a revelation might have been really
given, yet given without credentials. Our Supreme Master might have
imparted to us truths which nature cannot teach us, without telling
us that He had imparted them, as is actually the case now, as regards
heathen countries, into which portions of revealed truth overflow
and penetrate, without their populations knowing whence those truths
came. But the very idea of Christianity in its profession and history,
is something more than this; it is a “Revelatio revelata;” it is a
definite message from God to man distinctly conveyed by His chosen
instruments, and to be received as such a message; and therefore to
be positively acknowledged, embraced, and maintained as true, on the
ground of its being divine, not as true on intrinsic grounds, not as
probably true, or partially true, but as absolutely certain knowledge,
certain in a sense in which nothing else can be certain, because it
comes from Him who neither can deceive nor be deceived.

And the whole tenor of Scripture from beginning to end is to this
effect: the matter of revelation is not a mere collection of truths,
not a philosophical view, not a religious sentiment or spirit, not
a special morality,—poured out upon mankind as a stream might pour
itself into the sea, mixing with the world’s thought, modifying,
purifying, invigorating it;—but an authoritative teaching, which bears
witness to itself and keeps itself together as one, in contrast to the
assemblage of opinions on all sides of it, and speaks to all men, as
being ever and everywhere one and the same, and claiming to be received
intelligently, by all whom it addresses, as one doctrine, discipline,
and devotion directly given from above. In consequence, the exhibition
of credentials, that is, of evidence, that it is what it professes to
be, is essential to Christianity, as it comes to us; for we are not
left at liberty to pick and choose out of its contents according to
our judgment, but must receive it all, as we find it, if we accept it
at all. It is a religion in addition to the religion of nature; and as
nature has an intrinsic claim upon us to be obeyed and used, so what is
over and above nature, or supernatural, must also bring with it valid
testimonials of its right to demand our homage.

Next, as to its relation to nature. As I have said, Christianity is
simply an addition to it; it does not supersede or contradict it; it
recognizes and depends on it, and that of necessity: for how possibly
can it prove its claims except by an appeal to what men have already?
be it ever so miraculous, it cannot dispense with nature; this would
be to cut the ground from under it; for what would be the worth of
evidences in favour of a revelation which denied the authority of that
system of thought, and those courses of reasoning, out of which those
evidences necessarily grew?

And in agreement with this obvious conclusion we find in Scripture our
Lord and His Apostles always treating Christianity as the completion
and supplement of Natural Religion, and of previous revelations; as
when He says that the Father testified of Him; that not to know Him
was not to know the Father; and as St. Paul at Athens appeals to the
“Unknown God,” and says that “He that made the world” “now declareth
to all men to do penance, because He hath appointed a day to judge
the world by the man whom He hath appointed.” As then our Lord and
His Apostles appeal to the God of nature, we must follow them in that
appeal; and, to do this with the better effect, we must first inquire
into the chief doctrines and the grounds of Natural Religion.


§ 1. Natural Religion.


By Religion I mean the knowledge of God, of His Will, and of our duties
towards Him; and there are three main channels which Nature furnishes
for our acquiring this knowledge, viz. our own minds, the voice of
mankind, and the course of the world, that is, of human life and human
affairs. The informations which these three convey to us teach us the
Being and Attributes of God, our responsibility to Him, our dependence
on Him, our prospect of reward or punishment, to be somehow brought
about, according as we obey or disobey Him. And the most authoritative
of these three means of knowledge, as being specially our own, is
our own mind, whose informations give us the rule by which we test,
interpret, and correct what is presented to us for belief, whether by
the universal testimony of mankind, or by the history of society and of
the world.

Our great internal teacher of religion is, as I have said in an earlier
part of this Essay, our Conscience.(34) Conscience is a personal guide,
and I use it because I must use myself; I am as little able to think
by any mind but my own as to breathe with another’s lungs. Conscience
is nearer to me than any other means of knowledge. And as it is given
to me, so also is it given to others; and being carried about by every
individual in his own breast, and requiring nothing besides itself,
it is thus adapted for the communication to each separately of that
knowledge which is most momentous to him individually,—adapted for the
use of all classes and conditions of men, for high and low, young and
old, men and women, independently of books, of educated reasoning, of
physical knowledge, or of philosophy. Conscience, too, teaches us,
not only that God is, but what He is; it provides for the mind a real
image of Him, as a medium of worship; it gives us a rule of right and
wrong, as being His rule, and a code of moral duties. Moreover, it is
so constituted that, if obeyed, it becomes clearer in its injunctions,
and wider in their range, and corrects and completes the accidental
feebleness of its initial teachings. Conscience, then, considered as
our guide, is fully furnished for its office. I say all this without
entering into the question how far external assistances are in all
cases necessary to the action of the mind, because in fact man does not
live in isolation, but is everywhere found as a member of society. I am
not concerned here with abstract questions.

Now Conscience suggests to us many things about that Master, whom
by means of it we perceive, but its most prominent teaching, and
its cardinal and distinguishing truth, is that He is our Judge.
In consequence, the special Attribute under which it brings Him
before us, to which it subordinates all other Attributes, is that of
justice—retributive justice. We learn from its informations to conceive
of the Almighty, primarily, not as a God of Wisdom, of Knowledge, of
Power, of Benevolence, but as a God of Judgment and Justice; as One,
who not simply for the good of the offender, but as an end good in
itself, and as a principle of government, ordains that the offender
should suffer for his offence. If it tells us anything at all of the
characteristics of the Divine Mind, it certainly tells us this; and,
considering that our shortcomings are far more frequent and important
than our fulfilment of the duties enjoined upon us, and that of this
point we are fully aware ourselves, it follows that the aspect under
which Almighty God is presented to us by Nature, is (to use a figure)
of One who is angry with us, and threatens evil. Hence its effect is
to burden and sadden the religious mind, and is in contrast with the
enjoyment derivable from the exercise of the affections, and from
the perception of beauty, whether in the material universe or in the
creations of the intellect. This is that fearful antagonism brought
out with such soul-piercing reality by Lucretius, when he speaks so
dishonourably of what he considers the heavy yoke of religion, and the
“æternas pœnas in morte timendum;” and, on the other hand, rejoices in
his “Alma Venus,” “quæ rerum naturam sola gubernas.” And we may appeal
to him for the fact, while we repudiate his view of it.

Such being the _primâ facie_ aspect of religion which the teachings
of Conscience bring before us individually, in the next place let us
consider what are the doctrines, and what the influences of religion,
as we find it embodied in those various rites and devotions which
have taken root in the many races of mankind, since the beginning
of history, and before history, all over the earth. Of these also
Lucretius gives us a specimen; and they accord in form and complexion
with that doctrine about duty and responsibility, which he so bitterly
hates and loathes. It is scarcely necessary to insist, that wherever
Religion exists in a popular shape, it has almost invariably worn its
dark side outwards. It is founded in one way or other on the sense of
sin; and without that vivid sense it would hardly have any precepts
or any observances. Its many varieties all proclaim or imply that
man is in a degraded, servile condition, and requires expiation,
reconciliation, and some great change of nature. This is suggested
to us in the many ways in which we are told of a realm of light and
a realm of darkness, of an elect fold and a regenerate state. It is
suggested in the almost ubiquitous and ever-recurring institution of
a Priesthood; for wherever there is a priest, there is the notion of
sin, pollution, and retribution, as, on the other hand, of intercession
and mediation. Also, still more directly, is the notion of our guilt
impressed upon us by the doctrine of future punishment, and that
eternal, which is found in mythologies and creeds of such various
parentage.

Of these distinct rites and doctrines embodying the severe side of
Natural Religion, the most remarkable is that of atonement, that is, “a
substitution of something offered, or some personal suffering, for a
penalty which would otherwise be exacted;” most remarkable, I say, both
from its close connexion with the notion of vicarious satisfaction,
and, on the other hand, from its universality. “The practice of
atonement,” says the author, whose definition of the word I have just
given, “is remarkable for its antiquity and universality, proved by the
earliest records that have come down to us of all nations, and by the
testimony of ancient and modern travellers. In the oldest books of the
Hebrew Scriptures, we have numerous instances of expiatory rites, where
atonement is the prominent feature. At the earliest date, to which
we can carry our inquiries by means of the heathen records, we meet
with the same notion of atonement. If we pursue our inquiries through
the accounts left us by the Greek and Roman writers of the barbarous
nations with which they were acquainted, from India to Britain, we
shall find the same notions and similar practices of atonement. From
the most popular portion of our own literature, our narratives of
voyages and travels, every one, probably, who reads at all will be
able to find for himself abundant proof that the notion has been as
permanent as it is universal. It shows itself among the various tribes
of Africa, the islanders of the South Seas, and even that most peculiar
race, the natives of Australia, either in the shape of some offering,
or some mutilation of the person.(35)”

These ceremonial acknowledgments, in so many distinct forms of worship,
of the existing degradation of the human race, of course imply a
brighter, as well as a threatening aspect of Natural Religion; for why
should men adopt any rites of deprecation or of purification at all,
unless they had some hope of attaining to a better condition than their
present? Of this happier side of religion I will speak presently; here,
however, a question of another kind occurs, viz. whether the notion of
atonement can be admitted among the doctrines of Natural Religion,—I
mean, on the ground that it is inconsistent with those teachings of
Conscience, which I have recognized above, as the rule and corrective
of every other information on the subject. If there is any truth
brought home to us by conscience, it is this, that we are personally
responsible for what we do, that we have no means of shifting our
responsibility, and that dereliction of duty involves punishment; how,
it may be asked, can acts of ours of any kind—how can even amendment of
life—undo the past? And if even our own subsequent acts of obedience
bring with them no promise of reversing what has once been committed,
how can external rites, or the actions of another (as of a priest),
be substitutes for that punishment which is the connatural fruit and
intrinsic development of violation of the sense of duty? I think this
objection avails as far as this, that amendment is no reparation, and
that no ceremonies or penances can in themselves exercise any vicarious
virtue in our behalf; and that, if they avail, they only avail in the
intermediate season of probation; that in some way we must make them
our own; and that, when the time comes, which conscience forebodes, of
our being called to judgment, then, at least, we shall have to stand in
and by ourselves, whatever we shall have by that time become, and must
bear our own burden. But it is plain that in this final account, as it
lies between us and our Master, He alone can decide how the past and
the present will stand together who is our Creator and our Judge.

In thus making it a necessary point to adjust the religions of the
world with the intimations of our conscience, I am suggesting the
reason why I confine myself to such religions as have had their rise in
barbarous times, and do not recognize the religion of what is called
civilization, as having legitimately a part in the delineation of
Natural Religion. It may at first sight seem strange, that, considering
I have laid such stress upon the progressive nature of man, I should
take my ideas of his religion from his initial, and not his final
testimony about its doctrines; and it may be urged that the religion
of civilized times is quite opposite in character to the rites and
traditions of barbarians, and has nothing of that gloom and sternness,
on which I have insisted as their characteristic. Thus the Greek
Mythology was for the most part cheerful and graceful, and the new
gods certainly more genial and indulgent than the old ones. And, in
like manner, the religion of philosophy is more noble and more humane
than those primitive conceptions which were sufficient for early kings
and warriors. But my answer to this objection is obvious: the progress
of which man’s nature is capable is a development, not a destruction
of its original state; it must subserve the elements from which it
proceeds, in order to be a true development and not a perversion.(36)

And it does in fact subserve and complete that nature with which man
is born. It is otherwise with the religion of so-called civilization;
such religion does but contradict the religion of barbarism; and since
this civilization itself is not a development of man’s whole nature,
but mainly of the intellect, recognizing indeed the moral sense, but
ignoring the conscience, no wonder that the religion in which it
issues has no sympathy either with the hopes and fears of the awakened
soul, or with those frightful presentiments which are expressed in the
worship and traditions of the heathen. This artificial religion, then,
has no place in the inquiry; first, because it comes of a one-sided
progress of mind, and next, for the very reason that it contradicts
informants which speak with greater authority than itself.

Now we come to the third natural informant on the subject of Religion;
I mean the system and the course of the world. This established order
of things, in which we find ourselves, if it has a Creator, must
surely speak of His will in its broad outlines and its main issues.
This principle being laid down as certain, when we come to apply it
to things as they are, our first feeling is one of surprise and (I
may say) of dismay, that His control of the world is so indirect, and
His action so obscure. This is the first lesson that we gain from the
course of human affairs. What strikes the mind so forcibly and so
painfully is, His absence (if I may so speak) from His own world.(37)
It is a silence that speaks. It is as if others had got possession of
His work. Why does not He, our Maker and Ruler, give us some immediate
knowledge of Himself? Why does He not write His Moral Nature in large
letters upon the face of history, and bring the blind, tumultuous rush
of its events into a celestial, hierarchical order? Why does He not
grant us in the structure of society at least so much of a revelation
of Himself as the religions of the heathen attempt to supply? Why
from the beginning of time has no one uniform steady light guided all
families of the earth, and all individual men, how to please Him? Why
is it possible without absurdity to deny His will, His attributes,
His existence? Why does He not walk with us one by one, as He is said
to have walked with His chosen men of old time? We both see and know
each other; why, if we cannot have the sight of Him, have we not at
least the knowledge? On the contrary, He is specially “a Hidden God;”
and with our best efforts we can only glean from the surface of the
world some faint and fragmentary views of Him. I see only a choice of
alternatives in explanation of so critical a fact:—either there is no
Creator, or He has disowned His creatures. Are then the dim shadows
of His Presence in the affairs of men but a fancy of our own, or, on
the other hand, has He hid His face and the light of His countenance,
because we have in some special way dishonoured Him? My true informant,
my burdened conscience, gives me at once the true answer to each of
these antagonist questions:—it pronounces without any misgiving that
God exists:—and it pronounces quite as surely that I am alienated from
Him; that “His Hand is not shortened, but that our iniquities have
divided between us and our God.” Thus it solves the world’s mystery,
and sees in that mystery only a confirmation of its own original
teaching.

Let us pass on to another great fact of experience, bearing on
Religion, which confirms this testimony both of conscience and of the
forms of worship which prevail among mankind;—I mean, the amount of
suffering, bodily and mental, which is our portion in this life. Not
only is the Creator far off, but some being of malignant nature seems,
as I have said, to have got hold of us, and to be making us his sport.
Let us say there are a thousand millions of men on the earth at this
time; who can weigh and measure the aggregate of pain which this one
generation has endured and will endure from birth to death? Then add to
this all the pain which has fallen and will fall upon our race through
centuries past and to come. Is there not then some great gulf fixed
between us and the good God? Here again the testimony of the system of
nature is more than corroborated by those popular traditions about the
unseen state, which are found in mythologies and superstitions, ancient
and modern; for those traditions speak, not only of present misery, but
of pain and evil hereafter, and even without end. But this dreadful
addition is not necessary for the conclusion which I am here wishing to
draw. The real mystery is, not that evil should never have an end, but
that it should ever have had a beginning. Even a universal restitution
could not undo what had been, or account for evil being the necessary
condition of good. How are we to explain it, the existence of God being
taken for granted, except by saying that another will, besides His, has
had a part in the disposition of His work, that there is an intractable
quarrel, a chronic alienation, between God and man?

I have implied that the laws on which this world is governed do not
go so far as to prove that evil will never die out of the creation;
nevertheless, they look in that direction. No experience indeed of
life can assure us about the future, but it can and does give us means
of conjecturing what is likely to be; and those conjectures coincide
with our natural forebodings. Experience enables us to ascertain the
moral constitution of man, and thereby to presage his future from
his present. It teaches us, first, that he is not sufficient for
his own happiness, but is dependent upon the sensible objects which
surround him, and that these he cannot take with him when he leaves
the world; secondly, that disobedience to his sense of right is even
by itself misery, and that he carries that misery about him, wherever
he is, though no divine retribution followed upon it; and thirdly,
that he cannot change his nature and his habits by wishing, but is
simply himself, and will ever be himself and what he now is, wherever
he is, as long as he continues to be,—or at least that pain has no
natural tendency to make him other than he is, and that the longer he
lives, the more difficult he is to change. How can we meet these not
irrational anticipations, except by shutting our eyes, turning away
from them, and saying that we have no call, no right, to think of them
at present, or to make ourselves miserable about what is not certain,
and may be not true?(38)

Such is the severe aspect of Natural Religion: also it is the most
prominent aspect, because the multitude of men follow their own likings
and wills, and not the decisions of their sense of right and wrong.
To them Religion is a mere yoke, as Lucretius describes it; not a
satisfaction or refuge, but a terror and a superstition. However, I
must not for an instant be supposed to mean, that this is its only, its
chief, or its legitimate aspect. All Religion, so far as it is genuine,
is a blessing, Natural as well as Revealed. I have insisted on its
severe aspect in the first place, because, from the circumstances of
human nature, though not by the fault of Religion, such is the shape
in which we first encounter it. Its large and deep foundation is the
sense of sin and guilt, and without this sense there is for man, as he
is, no genuine religion. Otherwise, it is but counterfeit and hollow;
and that is the reason why this so-called religion of civilization
and philosophy is so great a mockery. However, true as this judgment
is which I pass on philosophical religion, and troubled as are the
existing relations between God and man, as both the voice of mankind
and the facts of Divine Government testify, equally true are other
general laws which govern those relations, and they speak another
language, and compensate for what is stern in the teaching of nature,
without tending to deny that sternness.

The first of these laws, relieving the aspect of Natural Religion, is
the very fact that religious beliefs and institutions, of some kind
or other, are of such general acceptance in all times and places. Why
should men subject themselves to the tyranny which Lucretius denounces,
unless they had either experience or hope of benefits to themselves
by so doing? Though it be mere hope of benefits, that alone is a
great alleviation of the gloom and misery which their religious rites
presuppose or occasion; for thereby they have a prospect, more or less
clear, of some happier state in reserve for them, or at least the
chances of it. If they simply despaired of their fortunes, they would
not care about religion. And hope of future good, as we know, sweetens
all suffering.

Moreover, they have an earnest of that future in the real and recurring
blessings of life, the enjoyment of the gifts of the earth, and of
domestic affection and social intercourse, which is sufficient to
touch and to subdue even the most guilty of men in his better moments,
reminding him that he is not utterly cast off by Him whom nevertheless
he is not given to know. Or, in the Apostle’s words, though the Creator
once “suffered all nations to walk in their own ways,” still, “He left
not Himself without testimony, doing good from heaven, giving rains and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.”

Nor are these blessings of physical nature the only tokens in the
Divine System, which in that heathen time, and indeed in every
age, bring home to our experience the fact of a Good God, in spite
of the tumult and confusion of the world. It is possible to give
an interpretation to the course of things, by which every event
or occurrence in its order becomes providential: and though that
interpretation does not hold good unless the world is contemplated
from a particular point of view, in one given aspect, and with certain
inward experiences, and personal first principles and judgments,
yet these may be fairly pronounced to be common conditions of human
thought, that is, till they are wilfully or accidentally lost; and
they issue in fact, in leading the great majority of men to recognize
the Hand of unseen power, directing in mercy or in judgment the
physical and moral system. In the prominent events of the world, past
and contemporary, the fate, evil or happy, of great men, the rise and
fall of states, popular revolutions, decisive battles, the migration
of races, the replenishing of the earth, earthquakes and pestilences,
critical discoveries and inventions, the history of philosophy, the
advancement of knowledge, in these the spontaneous piety of the
human mind discerns a Divine Supervision. Nay, there is a general
feeling, originating directly in the workings of conscience, that a
similar governance is extended over the persons of individuals, who
thereby both fulfil the purposes and receive the just recompenses of
an Omnipotent Providence. Good to the good, and evil to the evil,
is instinctively felt to be, even from what we see, amid whatever
obscurity and confusion, the universal rule of God’s dealings with
us. Hence come the great proverbs, indigenous in both Christian and
heathen nations, that punishment is sure, though slow, that murder will
out, that treason never prospers, that pride will have a fall, that
honesty is the best policy, and that curses fall on the heads of those
who utter them. To the unsophisticated apprehension of the many, the
successive passages of life, social or political, are so many miracles,
if that is to be accounted miraculous which brings before them the
immediate Divine Presence; and should it be objected that this is an
illogical exercise of reason, I answer, that since it actually brings
them to a right conclusion, and was intended to bring them to it, if
logic finds fault with it, so much the worse for logic.

Again, prayer is essential to religion, and, where prayer is, there
is a natural relief and solace in all trouble, great or ordinary:
now prayer is not less general in mankind at large than is faith in
Providence. It has ever been in use, both as a personal and as a social
practice. Here again, if, in order to determine what the Religion of
Nature is, we may justly have recourse to the spontaneous acts and
proceedings of our race, as viewed on a large field, we may safely
say that prayer, as well as hope, is a constituent of man’s religion.
Nor is it a fair objection to this argument, to say that such prayers
and rites as have obtained in various places and times, are in their
character, object, and scope inconsistent with each other; because
their contrarieties do not come into the idea of religion, as such, at
all, and the very fact of their discordance destroys their right to
be taken into account, so far as they are discordant; for what is not
universal has no claim to be considered natural, right, or of divine
origin. Thus we may determine prayer to be part of Natural Religion,
from such instances of the usage as are supplied by the priests of Baal
and by dancing Dervishes, without therefore including in our notions
of prayer the frantic excesses of the one, or the artistic spinning of
the other, or sanctioning their respective objects of belief, Baal or
Mahomet.

As prayer is the voice of man to God, so Revelation is the voice of
God to man. Accordingly, it is another alleviation of the darkness
and distress which weigh upon the religions of the world, that in
one way or other such religions are founded on some idea of express
revelation, coming from the unseen agents whose anger they deprecate;
nay, that the very rites and observances, by which they hope to gain
the favour of these beings, are by these beings themselves communicated
and appointed. The Religion of Nature is not a deduction of reason,
or the joint, voluntary manifesto of a multitude meeting together and
pledging themselves to each other, as men move resolutions now for some
political or social purpose, but it is a tradition or an interposition
vouchsafed to a people from above. To such an interposition men even
ascribed their civil polity or citizenship, which did not originate
in any plebiscite, but in _dii minores_ or heroes, was inaugurated
with portents or palladia, and protected and prospered by oracles
and auguries. Here is an evidence, too, how congenial the notion of
a revelation is to the human mind, so that the expectation of it may
truly be considered an integral part of Natural Religion.

Among the observances imposed by these professed revelations, none is
more remarkable, or more general, than the rite of sacrifice, in which
guilt was removed or blessing gained by an offering, which availed
instead of the merits of the offerer. This, too, as well as the notion
of divine interpositions, may be considered almost an integral part
of the Religion of Nature, and an alleviation of its gloom. But it
does not stand by itself; I have already spoken of the doctrine of
atonement, under which it falls, and which, if what is universal is
natural, enters into the idea of religious service. And what the nature
of man suggests, the providential system of the world sanctions by
enforcing. It is the law, or the permission, given to our whole race,
to use the Apostle’s words, to “bear one another’s burdens;” and this,
as I said when on the subject of Atonement, is quite consistent with
his antithesis that “every one must bear his own burden.” The final
burden of responsibility when we are called to judgment is our own;
but among the media by which we are prepared for that judgment are the
exertions and pains taken in our behalf by others. On this vicarious
principle, by which we appropriate to ourselves what others do for
us, the whole structure of society is raised. Parents work and endure
pain, that their children may prosper; children suffer for the sin of
their parents, who have died before it bore fruit. “Delirant reges,
plectuntur Achivi.” Sometimes it is a compulsory, sometimes a willing
mediation. The punishment which is earned by the husband falls upon
the wife; the benefits in which all classes partake are wrought out by
the unhealthy or dangerous toil of the few. Soldiers endure wounds and
death for those who sit at home; and ministers of state fall victims
to their zeal for their countrymen, who do little else than criticize
their actions. And so in some measure or way this law embraces all of
us. We all suffer for each other, and gain by each other’s sufferings;
for man never stands alone here, though he will stand by himself one
day hereafter; but here he is a social being, and goes forward to his
long home as one of a large company.

Butler, it need scarcely be said, is the great master of this
doctrine, as it is brought out in the system of nature. In answer
to the objection to the Christian doctrine of satisfaction, that it
“represents God as indifferent whether He punishes the innocent or
the guilty,” he observes that “the world is a constitution or system,
whose parts have a mutual reference to each other; and that there is a
scheme of things gradually carrying on, called the course of nature,
to the carrying on of which God has appointed us, in various ways,
to contribute. And in the daily course of natural providence, it is
appointed that innocent people should suffer for the faults of the
guilty. Finally, indeed and upon the whole, every one shall receive
according to his personal deserts; but during the progress, and, for
aught we know, even in order to the completion of this moral scheme,
vicarious punishments may be fit, and absolutely necessary. We see in
what variety of ways one person’s sufferings contribute to the relief
of another; and being familiarized to it, men are not shocked with it.
So the reason of their insisting on objections against the [doctrine
of] satisfaction is, either that they do not consider God’s settled and
uniform appointments as His appointments at all; or else they forget
that vicarious punishment is a providential appointment of every day’s
experience.(39)” I will but add, that, since all human suffering is in
its last resolution the punishment of sin, and punishment implies a
Judge and a rule of justice, he who undergoes the punishment of another
in his stead may be said in a certain sense to satisfy the claims of
justice towards that other in his own person.

One concluding remark has to be made here. In all sacrifices it
was specially required that the thing offered should be something
rare, and unblemished; and in like manner in all atonements and all
satisfactions, not only was the innocent taken for the guilty, but it
was a point of special importance that the victim should be spotless,
and the more manifest that spotlessness, the more efficacious was the
sacrifice. This leads me to a last principle which I shall notice as
proper to Natural Religion, and as lightening the prophecies of evil in
which it is founded; I mean the doctrine of meritorious intercession.
The man in the Gospel did but speak for the human race everywhere, when
he said, “God heareth not sinners; but if a man be a worshipper of God,
and doth His will, him He heareth.” Hence every religion has had its
eminent devotees, exalted above the body of the people, mortified men,
brought nearer to the Source of good by austerities, self-inflictions,
and prayer, who have influence with Him, and extend a shelter and
gain blessings for those who become their clients. A belief like this
has been, of course, attended by numberless superstitions; but those
superstitions vary with times and places, and the belief itself in
the mediatorial power of the good and holy has been one and the same
everywhere. Nor is this belief an idea of past times only or of heathen
countries. It is one of the most natural visions of the young and
innocent. And all of us, the more keenly we feel our own distance from
holy persons, the more are we drawn near to them, as if forgetting that
distance, and proud of them because they are so unlike ourselves, as
being specimens of what our nature may be, and with some vague hope
that we, their relations by blood, may profit in our own persons by
their holiness.

Such, then, in outline is that system of natural beliefs and
sentiments, which, though true and divine, is still possible to us
independently of Revelation, and is the preparation for it; though
in Christians themselves it cannot really be separated from their
Christianity, and never is possessed in its higher forms in any people
without some portion of those inward aids which Christianity imparts
to us, and those endemic traditions which have their first origin in a
paradisiacal illumination.


§ 2. Revealed Religion.


In determining, as above, the main features of Natural Religion, and
distinguishing it from the religion of philosophy or civilization, I
may be accused of having taken a course of my own, for which I have no
sufficient warrant. Such an accusation does not give me much concern.
Every one who thinks on these subjects takes a course of his own,
though it will also happen to be the course which others take besides
himself. The minds of many separately bear them forward in the same
direction, and they are confirmed in it by each other. This I consider
to be my own case; if I have mis-stated or omitted notorious facts in
my account of Natural Religion, if I have contradicted or disregarded
anything which He who speaks through my conscience has told us all
directly from Heaven, then indeed I have acted unjustifiably and have
something to unsay; but, if I have done no more than view the notorious
facts of the case in the medium of my primary mental experiences, under
the aspects which they spontaneously present to me, and with the aid
of my best illative sense, I only do on one side of the question what
those who think differently do on the other. As they start with one
set of first principles, I start with another. I gave notice just now
that I should offer my own witness in the matter in question; though of
course it would not be worth while my offering it, unless what I felt
myself agreed with what is felt by hundreds and thousands besides me,
as I am sure it does, whatever be the measure, more or less, of their
explicit recognition of it.

In thus speaking of Natural Religion as in one sense a matter of
private judgment, and that with a view of proceeding from it to the
proof of Christianity, I seem to give up the intention of demonstrating
either. Certainly I do; not that I deny that demonstration is possible.
Truth certainly, as such, rests upon grounds intrinsically and
objectively and abstractedly demonstrative, but it does not follow
from this that the arguments producible in its favour are unanswerable
and irresistible. These latter epithets are relative, and bear upon
matters of fact; arguments in themselves ought to do, what perhaps in
the particular case they cannot do. The fact of revelation is in itself
demonstrably true, but it is not therefore true irresistibly; else, how
comes it to be resisted? There is a vast distance between what it is in
itself, and what it is to us. Light is a quality of matter, as truth is
of Christianity; but light is not recognized by the blind, and there
are those who do not recognize truth, from the fault, not of truth, but
of themselves. I cannot convert men, when I ask for assumptions which
they refuse to grant to me; and without assumptions no one can prove
anything about anything.

I am suspicious then of scientific demonstrations in a question of
concrete fact, in a discussion between fallible men. However, let those
demonstrate who have the gift; “unusquisque in suo sensu abundet.”
For me, it is more congenial to my own judgment to attempt to prove
Christianity in the same informal way in which I can prove for certain
that I have been born into this world, and that I shall die out of it.
It is pleasant to my own feelings to follow a theological writer, such
as Amort, who has dedicated to the great Pope, Benedict XIV., what
he calls “a new, modest, and easy way of demonstrating the Catholic
Religion.” In this work he adopts the argument merely of the _greater_
probability;(40) I prefer to rely on that of an _accumulation_ of
various probabilities; but we both hold (that is, I hold with him),
that from probabilities we may construct legitimate proof, sufficient
for certitude. I follow him in holding, that, since a Good Providence
watches over us, He blesses such means of argument as it has pleased
Him to give us, in the nature of man and of the world, if we use them
duly for those ends for which He has given them; and that, as in
mathematics we are justified by the dictate of nature in withholding
our assent from a conclusion of which we have not yet a strict logical
demonstration, so by a like dictate we are not justified, in the case
of concrete reasoning and especially of religious inquiry, in waiting
till such logical demonstration is ours, but on the contrary are bound
in conscience to seek truth and to look for certainty by modes of
proof, which, when reduced to the shape of formal propositions, fail to
satisfy the severe requisitions of science.(41)

Here then at once is one momentous doctrine or principle, which enters
into my own reasoning, and which another ignores, viz. the providence
and intention of God; and of course there are other principles,
explicit or implicit, which are in like circumstances. It is not
wonderful then, that, while I can prove Christianity divine to my
own satisfaction, I shall not be able to force it upon any one else.
Multitudes indeed I ought to succeed in persuading of its truth without
any force at all, because they and I start from the same principles,
and what is a proof to me is a proof to them; but if any one starts
from any other principles but ours, I have not the power to change his
principles or the conclusion which he draws from them, any more than
I can make a crooked man straight. Whether his mind will ever grow
straight, whether I can do anything towards its becoming straight,
whether he is not responsible, responsible to his Maker, for being
mentally crooked, is another matter; still the fact remains, that, in
any inquiry about things in the concrete, men differ from each other,
not so much in the soundness of their reasoning as in the principles
which govern its exercise, that those principles are of a personal
character, that where there is no common measure of minds, there is
no common measure of arguments, and that the validity of proof is
determined, not by any scientific test, but by the illative sense.

Accordingly, instead of saying that the truths of Revelation depend
on those of Natural Religion, it is more pertinent to say that belief
in revealed truths depends on belief in natural. Belief is a state
of mind; belief generates belief; states of mind correspond to each
other; the habits of thought and the reasonings which lead us on to a
higher state of belief than our present, are the very same which we
already possess in connexion with the lower state. Those Jews became
Christians in Apostolic times who were already what may be called
crypto-Christians; and those Christians in this day remain Christian
only in name, and (if it so happen) at length fall away, who are
nothing deeper or better than men of the world, _savants_, literary
men, or politicians.

That a special preparation of mind is required for each separate
department of inquiry and discussion (excepting, of course, that of
abstract science) is strongly insisted upon in well-known passages of
the Nicomachean Ethics. Speaking of the variations which are found in
the logical perfection of proof in various subject-matters, Aristotle
says, “A well-educated man will expect exactness in every class of
subjects, according as the nature of the thing admits; for it is much
the same mistake to put up with a mathematician using probabilities,
and to require demonstration of an orator. Each man judges skilfully in
those things about which he is well-informed; it is of these, that he
is a good judge; viz. he, in each subject-matter, is a judge, who is
well-educated in that subject-matter, and he is in an absolute sense
a judge, who is in all of them well-educated.” Again: “Young men come
to be mathematicians and the like, but they cannot possess practical
judgment; for this talent is employed upon individual facts, and these
are learned only by experience; and a youth has not experience, for
experience is only gained by a course of years. And so, again, it would
appear that a boy may be a mathematician, but not a philosopher, or
learned in physics, and for this reason,—because the one study deals
with abstractions, while the other studies gain their principles from
experience, and in the latter subjects youths do not give assent, but
make assertions, but in the former they know what it is that they are
handling.”

These words of a heathen philosopher, laying down broad principles
about all knowledge, express a general rule, which in Scripture
is applied authoritatively to the case of revealed knowledge in
particular;—and that not once or twice only, but continually, as is
notorious. For instance:—“I have understood,” says the Psalmist, “more
than all my teachers, because Thy testimonies are my meditation.”
And so our Lord: “He that hath ears, let him hear.” “If any man will
do His will, he shall know of the doctrine.” And “He that is of God,
heareth the words of God.” Thus too the Angels at the Nativity announce
“Peace to men of good will.” And we read in the Acts of the Apostles
of “Lydia, whose heart the Lord opened to attend to those things which
were said by Paul.” And we are told on another occasion, that “as many
as were ordained,” or disposed by God, “to life everlasting, believed.”
And St. John tells us, “He that knoweth God, heareth us; he that is not
of God, heareth us not; by this we know the spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error.”

1.

Relying then on these authorities, human and Divine, I have no scruple
in beginning the review I shall take of Christianity by professing
to consult for those only whose minds are properly prepared for it;
and by being prepared, I mean to denote those who are imbued with the
religious opinions and sentiments which I have identified with Natural
Religion. I do not address myself to those, who in moral evil and
physical see nothing more than imperfections of a parallel nature;
who consider that the difference in gravity between the two is one of
degree only, not of kind; that moral evil is merely the offspring of
physical, and that as we remove the latter so we inevitably remove
the former; that there is a progress of the human race which tends to
the annihilation of moral evil; that knowledge is virtue, and vice is
ignorance; that sin is a bugbear, not a reality; that the Creator does
not punish except in the sense of correcting; that vengeance in Him
would of necessity be vindictiveness; that all that we know of Him, be
it much or little, is through the laws of nature; that miracles are
impossible; that prayer to Him is a superstition; that the fear of Him
is unmanly; that sorrow for sin is slavish and abject; that the only
intelligible worship of Him is to act well our part in the world, and
the only sensible repentance to do better in future; that if we do our
duties in this life, we may take our chance for the next; and that it
is of no use perplexing our minds about the future state, for it is all
a matter of guess. These opinions characterize a civilized age; and if
I say that I will not argue about Christianity with men who hold them,
I do so, not as claiming any right to be impatient or peremptory with
any one, but because it is plainly absurd to attempt to prove a second
proposition to those who do not admit the first.

I assume then that the above system of opinion is simply false,
inasmuch as it contradicts the primary teachings of nature in the human
race, wherever a religion is found and its workings can be ascertained.
I assume the Presence of God in our conscience, and the universal
experience, as keen as our experience of bodily pain, of what we call a
sense of sin or guilt. This sense of sin, as of something not only evil
in itself, but an affront to the good God, is chiefly felt as regards
one or other of three violations of His Law. He Himself is Sanctity,
Truth, and Love; and the three offences against His Majesty are
impurity, inveracity, and cruelty. All men are not distressed at these
offences alike; but the piercing pain and sharp remorse which one or
other inflicts upon the mind, till habituated to them, brings home to
it the notion of what sin is, and is the vivid type and representative
of its intrinsic hatefulness.

Starting from these elements, we may determine without difficulty the
class of sentiments, intellectual and moral, which constitute the
formal preparation for entering upon what are called the Evidences
of Christianity. These Evidences, then, presuppose a belief and
perception of the Divine Presence, a recognition of His attributes
and an admiration of His Person viewed under them, a conviction of
the worth of the soul and of the reality and momentousness of the
unseen world, an understanding that, in proportion as we partake in
our own persons of the attributes which we admire in Him, we are dear
to Him, a consciousness on the contrary that we are far from partaking
them, a consequent insight into our guilt and misery, an eager hope
of reconciliation to Him, a desire to know and to love Him, and a
sensitive looking-out in all that happens, whether in the course of
nature or of human life, for tokens, if such there be, of His bestowing
on us what we so greatly need. These are specimens of the state of mind
for which I stipulate in those who would inquire into the truth of
Christianity; and my warrant for so definite a stipulation lies in the
teaching, as I have described it, of conscience and the moral sense,
in the testimony of those religious rites which have ever prevailed
in all parts of the world, and in the character and conduct of those
who have commonly been selected by the popular instinct as the special
favourites of Heaven.

2.

I have appealed to the popular ideas on the subject of religion, and
to the objects of popular admiration and praise, as illustrating my
account of the preparation of mind which is necessary for the inquirer
into Christianity. Here an obvious objection occurs, in noticing
which I shall be advanced one step farther in the work which I have
undertaken.

It may be urged, then, that no appeal will avail me, which is made
to religions so notoriously immoral as those of paganism; nor indeed
can it be made without an explanation. Certainly, as regards ethical
teaching, various religions, which have been popular in the world, have
not supplied any; and in the corrupt state in which they appear in
history, they are little better than schools of imposture, cruelty, and
impurity. Their objects of worship were immoral as well as false, and
their founders and heroes have been in keeping with their gods. This is
undeniable, but it does not destroy the use that may be made of their
testimony. There is a better side of their teaching; purity has often
been held in reverence, if not practised; ascetics have been in honour;
hospitality has been a sacred duty; and dishonesty and injustice have
been under a ban. Here then, as before, I take our natural perception
of right and wrong as the standard for determining the characteristics
of Natural Religion, and I use the religious rites and traditions which
are actually found in the world, only so far as they agree with our
moral sense.

This leads me to lay down the general principle, which I have all
along implied:—that no religion is from God which contradicts our
sense of right and wrong. Doubtless; but at the same time we ought to
be quite sure that, in a particular case which is before us, we have
satisfactorily ascertained what the dictates of our moral nature are,
and that we apply them rightly, and whether the applying them or not
comes into question at all. The precepts of a religion certainly may
be absolutely immoral; a religion which simply commanded us to lie, or
to have a community of wives, would _ipso facto_ forfeit all claim to
a divine origin. Jupiter and Neptune, as represented in the classical
mythology, are evil spirits, and nothing can make them otherwise. And I
should in like manner repudiate a theology which taught that men were
created in order to be wicked and wretched.

I alluded just now to those who consider the doctrine of retributive
punishment, or of divine vengeance, to be incompatible with the true
religion; but I do not see how they can maintain their ground. In order
to do so, they have first to prove that an act of vengeance must, as
such, be a sin in our own instance; but even this is far from clear.
Anger and indignation against cruelty and injustice, resentment of
injuries, desire that the false, the ungrateful, and the depraved
should meet with punishment, these, if not in themselves virtuous
feelings, are at least not vicious; but, first from the certainty
that, if habitual, it will run into excess and become sin, and next
because the office of punishment has not been committed to us, and
further because it is a feeling unsuitable to those who are themselves
so laden with imperfection and guilt, therefore vengeance, in itself
allowable, is forbidden to us. These exceptions do not hold in the
case of a perfect being, and certainly not in the instance of the
Supreme Judge. Moreover, we see that even men on earth have different
duties, according to their personal qualifications and their positions
in the community. The rule of morals is the same for all; and yet,
notwithstanding, what is right in one is not necessarily right in
another. What would be a crime in a private man to do, is a crime in
a magistrate not to have done; still wider is the difference between
man and his Maker. Nor must it be forgotten, that, as I have observed
above, retributive justice is the very attribute under which God is
primarily brought before us in the teachings of our natural conscience.

And further, we cannot determine the character of particular actions,
till we have the whole case before us out of which they arise; unless,
indeed, they are in themselves distinctively vicious. We all feel
the force of the maxim, “Audi alteram partem.” It is difficult to
trace the path and to determine the scope of Divine Providence. We
read of a day when the Almighty will condescend to place His actions
in their completeness before His creatures, and “will overcome when
He is judged.” If, till then, we feel it to be a duty to suspend our
judgment concerning certain of His actions or precepts, we do no more
than what we do every day in the case of an earthly friend or enemy,
whose conduct in some point requires explanation. It surely is not too
much to expect of us that we should act with parallel caution, and
be “memores conditionis nostræ” as regards the acts of our Creator.
There is a poem of Parnell’s which strikingly brings home to us how
differently the divine appointments will look in the light of day, from
what they appear to be in our present twilight. An Angel, in disguise
of a man, steals a golden cup, strangles an infant, and throws a guide
into the stream, and then explains to his horrified companion, that
acts which would be enormities in man, are in him, as God’s minister,
deeds of merciful correction or of retribution.

Moreover, when we are about to pass judgment on the dealings of
Providence with other men, we shall do well to consider first His
dealings with ourselves. We cannot know about others, about ourselves
we do know something; and we know that He has ever been good to us,
and not severe. Is it not wise to argue from what we actually know
to what we do not know? It may turn out in the day of account, that
unforgiven souls, while charging His laws with injustice in the case of
others, may be unable to find fault with His dealings severally towards
themselves.

As to those various religions which, together with Christianity, teach
the doctrine of eternal punishment, here again we ought, before we
judge, to understand, not only the whole state of the case, but what is
meant by the doctrine itself. Eternity, or endlessness, is in itself
only a negative idea, though punishment is positive. Its fearful force,
as added to punishment, lies in what it is not; it means no change
of state, no annihilation, no restoration. But it cannot become a
quality of punishment, any more than a man’s living seventy years is a
quality of his mind, or enters into the idea of his virtues or talents.
If punishment be attended by continuity, by a sense of duration and
succession, by the mental presence of its past and its future, by
a sustained power of realizing it,(42) this must be because it is
endless and something more; such inflictions are an addition to its
endlessness, and do not necessarily belong to it because it is endless.
As I have already said, the great mystery is, not that evil has no end,
but that it had a beginning. But I submit the whole subject to the
Theological School.

3.

One of the most important effects of Natural Religion on the mind, in
preparation for Revealed, is the anticipation which it creates, that a
Revelation will be given. That earnest desire of it, which religious
minds cherish, leads the way to the expectation of it. Those who
know nothing of the wounds of the soul, are not led to deal with the
question, or to consider its circumstances; but when our attention is
roused, then the more steadily we dwell upon it, the more probable
does it seem that a revelation has been or will be given to us. This
presentiment is founded on our sense, on the one hand, of the infinite
goodness of God, and, on the other, of our own extreme misery and
need—two doctrines which are the primary constituents of Natural
Religion. It is difficult to put a limit to the legitimate force of
this antecedent probability. Some minds will feel it so powerfully,
as to recognize in it almost a proof, without direct evidence, of the
divinity of a religion claiming to be the true, supposing its history
and doctrine are free from positive objection, and there be no rival
religion with plausible claims of its own. Nor ought this trust in a
presumption to seem preposterous to those who are so confident, on _à
priori_ grounds, that the moon is inhabited by rational beings, and
that the course of nature is never crossed by miraculous agency. Any
how, very little positive evidence seems to be necessary, when the mind
is penetrated by the strong anticipation which I am supposing. It was
this instinctive apprehension, as we may conjecture, which carried on
Dionysius and Damaris at Athens to a belief in Christianity, though
St. Paul did no miracle there, and only asserted the doctrines of the
Divine Unity, the Resurrection, and the universal judgment, while, on
the other hand, it had had no tendency to attach them to any of the
mythological rites in which the place abounded.

Here my method of argument differs from that adopted by Paley in his
Evidences of Christianity. This clear-headed and almost mathematical
reasoner postulates, for his proof of its miracles, only thus much,
that, under the circumstances of the case, a revelation is not
improbable. He says, “We do not assume the attributes of the Deity,
or the existence of a future state.” “It is not necessary for our
purpose that these propositions (viz. that a future existence should be
destined by God for His human creation, and that, being so destined,
He should have acquainted them with it,) be capable of proof, or even
that, by arguments drawn from the light of nature, they can be made out
as probable; it is enough that we are able to say of them, that they
are not so violently improbable, so contradictory to what we already
believe of the divine power and character, that [they] ought to be
rejected at first sight, and to be rejected by whatever strength or
complication of evidence they be attested.” He has such confidence in
the strength of the testimony which he can produce in favour of the
Christian miracles, that he only asks to be allowed to bring it into
court.

I confess to much suspicion of legal proceedings and legal arguments,
when used in questions whether of history or of philosophy. Rules
of court are dictated by what is expedient on the whole and in the
long run; but they incur the risk of being unjust to the claims of
particular cases. Why am I to begin with taking up a position not my
own, and unclothing my mind of that large outfit of existing thoughts,
principles, likings, desires, and hopes, which make me what I am? If I
am asked to use Paley’s argument for my own conversion, I say plainly
I do not want to be converted by a smart syllogism;(43) if I am asked
to convert others by it, I say plainly I do not care to overcome
their reason without touching their hearts. I wish to deal, not with
controversialists, but with inquirers.

I think Paley’s argument clear, clever, and powerful; and there is
something which looks like charity in going out into the highways and
hedges, and compelling men to come in; but in this matter some exertion
on the part of the persons whom I am to convert is a condition of a
true conversion. They who have no religious earnestness are at the
mercy, day by day, of some new argument or fact, which may overtake
them, in favour of one conclusion or the other. And how, after all,
is a man better for Christianity, who has never felt the need of it
or the desire? On the other hand, if he has longed for a revelation
to enlighten him and to cleanse his heart, why may he not use, in
his inquiries after it, that just and reasonable anticipation of its
probability, which such longing has opened the way to his entertaining?

Men are too well inclined to sit at home, instead of stirring
themselves to inquire whether a revelation has been given; they expect
its evidences to come to them without their trouble; they act, not
as suppliants, but as judges.(44) Modes of argument such as Paley’s,
encourage this state of mind; they allow men to forget that revelation
is a boon, not a debt on the part of the Giver; they treat it as a mere
historical phenomenon. If I was told that some great man, a foreigner,
whom I did not know, had come into town, and was on his way to call
on me, and to go over my house, I should send to ascertain the fact,
and meanwhile should do my best to put my house into a condition to
receive him. He would not be pleased if I left the matter to take
its chance, and went on the maxim that seeing was believing. Like
this is the conduct of those who resolve to treat the Almighty with
dispassionateness, a judicial temper, clearheadedness, and candour. It
is the way with some men, (surely not a good way,) to say, that without
these lawyerlike qualifications conversion is immoral. It is their way,
a miserable way, to pronounce that there is no religious love of truth
where there is fear of error. On the contrary, I would maintain that
the fear of error is simply necessary to the genuine love of truth.
No inquiry comes to good which is not conducted under a deep sense of
responsibility, and of the issues depending upon its determination.
Even the ordinary matters of life are an exercise of conscientiousness;
and where conscience is, fear must be. So much is this acknowledged
just now, that there is almost an affectation, in popular literature,
in the case of criticisms on the fine arts, on poetry, and music, of
speaking about conscientiousness in writing, painting, or singing; and
that earnestness and simplicity of mind, which makes men fear to go
wrong in these minor matters, has surely a place in the most serious of
all undertakings.

It is on these grounds that, in considering Christianity, I start
with conditions different from Paley’s; not, however, as undervaluing
the force and the serviceableness of his argument, but as preferring
inquiry to disputation in a question about truth.

4.

There is another point on which my basis of argument differs from
Paley’s. He argues on the principle that the credentials, which
ascertain for us a message from above, are necessarily in their nature
miraculous; nor have I any thought of venturing to say otherwise.
In fact, all professed revelations have been attended, in one
shape or another, with the profession of miracles; and we know how
direct and unequivocal are the miracles of both the Jewish Covenant
and of our own. However, my object here is to assume as little as
possible as regards facts, and to dwell only on what is patent and
notorious; and therefore I will only insist on those coincidences
and their cumulations, which, though not in themselves miraculous,
do irresistibly force upon us, almost by the law of our nature, the
presence of the extraordinary agency of Him whose being we already
acknowledge. Though coincidences rise out of a combination of general
laws, there is no law of those coincidences;(45) they have a character
of their own, and seem left by Providence in His own hands, as the
channel by which, inscrutable to us, He may make known to us His will.

For instance, if I am a believer in a God of Truth and Avenger of
dishonesty, and know for certain that a market-woman, after calling
on Him to strike her dead if she had in her possession a piece of
money not hers, did fall down dead on the spot, and that the money was
found in her hand, how can I call this a blind coincidence, and not
discern in it an act of Providence over and above its general laws?
So, certainly, thought the inhabitants of an English town, when they
erected a pillar as a record of such an event at the place where it
occurred. And if a Pope excommunicates a great conqueror; and he,
on hearing the threat, says to one of his friends, “Does he think
the world has gone back a thousand years? does he suppose the arms
will fall from the hands of my soldiers?” and within two years, on
the retreat over the snows of Russia, as two contemporary historians
relate, “famine and cold tore their arms from the grasp of the
soldiers,” “they fell from the hands of the bravest and most robust,”
and “destitute of the power of raising them from the ground, the
soldiers left them in the snow;” is not this too, though no miracle,
a coincidence so special, as rightly to be called a Divine judgment?
So thinks Alison, who avows with religious honesty, that “there is
something in these marvellous coincidences beyond the operation of
chance, and which even a Protestant historian feels himself bound
to mark for the observation of future years.(46)” And so, too, of a
cumulation of coincidences, separately less striking; when Spelman sets
about establishing the fact of the ill-fortune which in a multitude
of instances has followed upon acts of sacrilege, then, even though
in many instances it has not followed, and in many instances he
exaggerates, still there may be a large residuum of cases which cannot
be properly resolved into the mere accident of concurrent causes,
but must in reason be considered the warning voice of God. So, at
least, thought Gibson, Bishop of London, when he wrote, “Many of the
instances, and those too well-attested, are so terrible in the event,
and in the circumstances so surprising, that no considering person can
well pass them over.”

I think, then, that the circumstances under which a professed
revelation comes to us, may be such as to impress both our reason and
our imagination with a sense of its truth, even though no appeal be
made to strictly miraculous intervention—in saying which I do not mean
of course to imply that those circumstances, when traced back to their
first origins, are not the outcome of such intervention, but that the
miraculous intervention addresses us at this day in the guise of those
circumstances; that is, of coincidences, which are indications, to
the illative sense of those who believe in a Moral Governor, of His
immediate Presence, especially to those who in addition hold with me
the strong antecedent probability that, in His mercy, He will thus
supernaturally present Himself to our apprehension.

5.

Now as to the fact; has what is so probable in anticipation actually
been granted to us, or have we still to look out for it? It is very
plain, supposing it has been granted, which among all the religions
of the world comes from God: and if it is not that, a revelation is
not yet given, and we must look forward to the future. There is only
one Religion in the world which tends to fulfil the aspirations,
needs, and foreshadowings of natural faith and devotion. It may be
said, perhaps, that, educated in Christianity, I merely judge of it
by its own principles; but this is not the fact. For, in the first
place, I have taken my idea of what a revelation must be, in good
measure, from the actual religions of the world; and as to its ethics,
the ideas with which I come to it are derived not simply from the
Gospel, but prior to it from heathen moralists, whom Fathers of the
Church and Ecclesiastical writers have imitated or sanctioned; and
as to the intellectual position from which I have contemplated the
subject, Aristotle has been my master. Besides, I do not here single
out Christianity with reference simply to its particular doctrines or
precepts, but for a reason which is on the surface of its history.
It alone has a definite message addressed to all mankind. As far as
I know, the religion of Mahomet has brought into the world no new
doctrine whatever, except, indeed, that of its own divine origin;
and the character of its teaching is too exact a reflection of the
race, time, place, and climate in which it arose, to admit of its
becoming universal. The same dependence on external circumstances is
characteristic, so far as I know, of the religions of the far East; nor
am I sure of any definite message from God to man which they convey
and protect, though they may have sacred books. Christianity, on the
other hand, is in its idea an announcement, a preaching; it is the
depositary of truths beyond human discovery, momentous, practical,
maintained one and the same in substance in every age from its first,
and addressed to all mankind. And it has actually been embraced and
is found in all parts of the world, in all climates, among all races,
in all ranks of society, under every degree of civilization, from
barbarism to the highest cultivation of mind. Coming to set right and
to govern the world, it has ever been, as it ought to be, in conflict
with large masses of men, with the civil power, with physical force,
with adverse philosophies; it has had successes, it has had reverses;
but it has had a grand history, and has effected great things, and is
as vigorous in its age as in its youth. In all these respects it has a
distinction in the world and a pre-eminence of its own; it has upon it
_primâ facie_ signs of divinity; I do not know what can be advanced by
rival religions to match prerogatives so special; so that I feel myself
justified in saying either Christianity is from God, or a revelation
has not yet been given to us.

It will not surely be objected, as a point in favour of some of the
Oriental religions, that they are older than Christianity by some
centuries; yet, should it be so said, it must be recollected that
Christianity is only the continuation and conclusion of what professes
to be an earlier revelation, which may be traced back into prehistoric
times, till it is lost in the darkness that hangs over them. As far
as we know, there never was a time when that revelation was not,—a
revelation continuous and systematic, with distinct representatives and
an orderly succession. And this, I suppose, is far more than can be
said for the religions of the East.

6.

Here, then, I am brought to the consideration of the Hebrew nation
and the Mosaic religion, as the first step in the direct evidence for
Christianity.

The Jews are one of the few Oriental nations who are known in history
as a people of progress, and their line of progress is the development
of religious truth. In that their own line they stand by themselves
among all the populations, not only of the East, but of the West. Their
country may be called the classical home of the religious principle, as
Greece is the home of intellectual power, and Rome that of political
and practical wisdom. Theism is their life; it is emphatically their
national religion, for they never were without it, and were made a
people by means of it. This is a phenomenon singular and solitary in
history, and must have a meaning. If there be a God and Providence, it
must come from Him, whether immediately or indirectly; and the people
themselves have ever maintained that it has been His direct work, and
has been recognized by Him as such. We are apt to treat pretences to a
divine mission or to supernatural powers as of frequent occurrence, and
on that score to dismiss them from our thoughts; but we cannot so deal
with Judaism. When mankind had universally denied the first lesson of
their conscience by lapsing into polytheism, is it a thing of slight
moment that there was just one exception to the rule, that there was
just one people who, first by their rulers and priests, and afterwards
by their own unanimous zeal, professed, as their distinguishing
doctrine, the Divine Unity and Government of the world, and that,
moreover, not only as a natural truth, but as revealed to them by that
God Himself of whom they spoke,—who so embodied it in their national
polity, that a Theocracy was the only name by which it could be called?
It was a people founded and set up in Theism, kept together by Theism,
and maintaining Theism for a period from first to last of 2000 years,
till the dissolution of their body politic; and they have maintained it
since in their state of exile and wandering for 2000 years more. They
begin with the beginning of history, and the preaching of this august
dogma begins with them. They are its witnesses and confessors, even
to torture and death; on it and its revelation are moulded their laws
and government; on this their politics, philosophy, and literature are
founded; of this truth their poetry is the voice, pouring itself out
in devotional compositions which Christianity, through all its many
countries and ages, has been unable to rival; on this aboriginal truth,
as time goes on, prophet after prophet bases his further revelations,
with a sustained reference to a time when, according to the secret
counsels of its Divine Object and Author, it is to receive completion
and perfection,—till at length that time comes.

The last age of their history is as strange as their first. When that
time of destined blessing came, which they had so accurately marked
out, and were so carefully waiting for—a time which found them, in
fact, more zealous for their Law, and for the dogma it enshrined, than
they ever had been before—then, instead of any final favour coming
on them from above, they fell under the power of their enemies, and
were overthrown, their holy city razed to the ground, their polity
destroyed, and the remnant of their people cast off to wander far and
away through every land except their own, as we find them at this day;
lasting on, century after century, not absorbed in other populations,
not annihilated, as likely to last on, as unlikely to be restored, as
far as outward appearances go, now as a thousand years ago. What nation
has so grand, so romantic, so terrible a history? Does it not fulfil
the idea of, what the nation calls itself, a chosen people, chosen for
good and evil? Is it not an exhibition in a course of history of that
primary declaration of conscience, as I have been determining it, “With
the upright Thou shalt be upright, and with the froward Thou shalt be
froward”? It must have a meaning, if there is a God. We know what was
their witness of old time; what is their witness now?

Why, I say, was it that, after so memorable a career, when their sins
and sufferings were now to come to an end, when they were looking
out for a deliverance and a Deliverer, suddenly all was reversed for
once and for all? They were the favoured servants of God, and yet a
peculiar reproach and note of infamy is affixed to their name. It was
their belief that His protection was unchangeable, and that their
Law would last for ever;—it was their consolation to be taught by an
uninterrupted tradition, that it could not die, except by changing into
a new self, more wonderful than it was before;—it was their faithful
expectation that a promised King was coming, the Messiah, who would
extend the sway of Israel over all people;—it was a condition of their
covenant, that, as a reward to Abraham, their first father, the day at
length should dawn when the gates of their narrow land should open,
and they should pour out for the conquest and occupation of the whole
earth;—and, I repeat, when the day came, they did go forth, and they
did spread into all lands, but as hopeless exiles, as eternal wanderers.

Are we to say that this failure is a proof that, after all, there was
nothing providential in their history? For myself, I do not see how a
second portent obliterates a first; and, in truth, their own testimony
and their own sacred books carry us on towards a better solution
of the difficulty. I have said they were in God’s favour under a
covenant,—perhaps they did not fulfil the conditions of it. This indeed
seems to be their own account of the matter, though it is not clear
what their breach of engagement was. And that in some way they did sin,
whatever their sin was, is corroborated by the well-known chapter in
the Book of Deuteronomy, which so strikingly anticipates the nature
of their punishment. That passage, translated into Greek as many as
350 years before the siege of Jerusalem by Titus, has on it the marks
of a wonderful prophecy; but I am not now referring to it as such,
but merely as an indication that the disappointment, which actually
overtook them at the Christian era, was not necessarily out of keeping
with the original divine purpose, or again with the old promise made to
them, and their confident expectation of its fulfilment. Their national
ruin, which came instead of aggrandizement, is described in that book,
in spite of all promises, with an emphasis and minuteness which prove
that it was contemplated long before, at least as a possible issue of
the fortunes of Israel. Among other inflictions which should befall the
guilty people, it was told them that they should fall down before their
enemies, and should be scattered throughout all the kingdoms of the
earth; that they never should have quiet in those nations, or have rest
for the sole of their foot; that they were to have a fearful heart and
languishing eyes, and a soul consumed with heaviness; that they were
to suffer wrong, and to be crushed at all times, and to be astonished
at the terror of their lot; that their sons and daughters were to be
given to another people, and they were to look and to sicken all the
day, and their life was ever to hang in doubt before them, and fear to
haunt them day and night; that they should be a proverb and a by-word
of all people among whom they were brought; and that curses were to
come on them, and to be signs and wonders on them and their seed for
ever. Such are some portions, and not the most terrible, of this
extended anathema; and its partial accomplishment at an earlier date of
their history was a warning to them, when the destined time drew near,
that, however great the promises made to them might be, those promises
were dependent on the terms of the covenant which stood between them
and their Maker, and that, as they had turned to curses at that former
time, so they might turn to curses again.

This grand drama, so impressed with the characters of supernatural
agency, concerns us here only in its bearing upon the evidence for
the divine origin of Christianity; and it is at this point that
Christianity comes upon the historical scene. It is a notorious fact
that it issued from the Jewish land and people; and, had it no other
than this historical connexion with Judaism, it would have some share
in the prestige of its original home. But it claims to be far more
than this; it professes to be the actual completion of the Mosaic Law,
the promised means of deliverance and triumph to the nation, which
that nation itself, as I have said, has since considered to be, on
account of some sin or other, withheld or forfeited. It professes to
be, not the casual, but the legitimate offspring, heir, and successor
of the Mosaic covenant, or rather to be Judaism itself, developed and
transformed. Of course it has to prove its claim, as well as to prefer
it; but if it succeeds in doing so, then all those tokens of the Divine
Presence, which distinguish the Jewish history, at once belong to it,
and are a portion of its credentials.

And at least the _primâ facie_ view of its relations towards Judaism
is in favour of these pretensions. It is an historical fact, that, at
the very time that the Jews committed their unpardonable sin, whatever
it was, and were driven out from their home to wander over the earth,
their Christian brethren, born of the same stock, and equally citizens
of Jerusalem, did also issue forth from the same home, but in order to
subdue that same earth and make it their own; that is, they undertook
the very work which, according to the promise, their nation actually
was ordained to execute; and, with a method of their own indeed, and
with a new end, and only slowly and painfully, but still really and
thoroughly, they did it. And since that time the two children of the
promise have ever been found together—of the promise forfeited and the
promise fulfilled; and whereas the Christian has been in high place,
so the Jew has been degraded and despised—the one has been “the head,”
and the other “the tail;” so that, to go no farther, the fact that
Christianity actually has done what Judaism was to have done, decides
the controversy, by the logic of facts, in favour of Christianity.
The prophecies announced that the Messiah was to come at a definite
time and place; Christians point to Him as coming then and there, as
announced; they are not met by any counter claim or rival claimant on
the part of the Jews, only by their assertion that He did not come at
all, though up to the event they had said He was then and there coming.
Further, Christianity clears up the mystery which hangs over Judaism,
accounting fully for the punishment of the people, by specifying their
sin, their heinous sin. If, instead of hailing their own Messiah,
they crucified Him, then the strange scourge which has pursued them
after the deed, and the energetic wording of the curse before it, are
explained by the very strangeness of their guilt;—or rather, their
sin is their punishment; for in rejecting their Divine King, they
_ipso facto_ lost the living principle and tie of their nationality.
Moreover, we see what led them into error; they thought a triumph and
an empire were to be given to them at once, which were given indeed
eventually, but by the slow and gradual growth of many centuries and a
long warfare.

On the whole, then, I observe, on the one hand, that, Judaism having
been the channel of religious traditions which are lost in the depth
of their antiquity, of course it is a great point for Christianity
to succeed in proving that it is the legitimate heir to that former
religion. Nor is it, on the other, of less importance to the
significance of those early traditions to be able to determine that
they were not lost together with their original store-house, but were
transferred, on the failure of Judaism, to the custody of the Christian
Church. And this apparent correspondence between the two is in itself a
presumption for such correspondence being real. Next, I observe, that
if the history of Judaism is so wonderful as to suggest the presence
of some special divine agency in its appointments and fortunes, still
more wonderful and divine is the history of Christianity; and again
it is more wonderful still, that two such wonderful creations should
span almost the whole course of ages, during which nations and states
have been in existence, and should constitute a professed system of
continued intercourse between earth and heaven from first to last amid
all the vicissitudes of human affairs. This phenomenon again carries on
its face, to those who believe in a God, the probability that it has
that divine origin which it professes to have; and, (when viewed in the
light of the strong presumption which I have insisted on, that in God’s
mercy a revelation from Him will be granted to us, and of the contrast
presented by other religions, no one of which professes to be a
revelation direct, definite, and integral as this is,)—this phenomenon,
I say, of cumulative marvels raises that probability, both for Judaism
and Christianity, in religious minds, almost to a certainty.

7.

If Christianity is connected with Judaism as closely as I have
been supposing, then there have been, by means of the two, direct
communications between man and his Maker from time immemorial down
to this day—a great prerogative such, that it is nowhere else even
claimed. No other religion but these two professes to be the organ of
a formal revelation, certainly not of a revelation which is directed
to the benefit of the whole human race. Here it is that Mahometanism
fails, though it claims to carry on the line of revelation after
Christianity; for it is the mere creed and rite of certain races,
bringing with it, as such, no gifts to our nature, and is rather a
reformation of local corruptions, and a return to the ceremonial
worship of earlier times, than a new and larger revelation. And while
Christianity was the heir to a dead religion, Mahometanism was little
more than a rebellion against a living one. Moreover, though Mahomet
professed to be the Paraclete, no one pretends that he occupies a place
in the Christian Scriptures as prominent as that which the Messiah
fills in the Jewish. To this especial prominence of the Messianic idea
I shall now advert; that is, to the prophecies of the Old Scriptures,
and to the argument which they furnish in favour of Christianity; and
though I know that argument might be clearer and more exact than it is,
and I do not pretend here to do much more than refer to the fact of its
existence, still so far forth as we enter into it, will it strengthen
our conviction of the claim to divinity both of the Religion which
is the organ of those prophecies, and of the Religion which is their
object.

Now that the Jewish Scriptures were in existence long before the
Christian era, and were in the sole custody of the Jews, is undeniable;
whatever then their Scriptures distinctly say of Christianity, if
not attributable to chance or to happy conjecture, is prophetic. It
is undeniable too, that the Jews gathered from those books that a
great Personage was to be born of their stock, and to conquer the
whole world and to become the instrument of extraordinary blessings
to it; moreover, that he would make his appearance at a fixed date,
and that, the very date when, as it turned out, our Lord did actually
come. This is the great outline of the prediction, and if nothing more
could be said about them than this, to prove as much as this is far
from unimportant. And it is undeniable, I say, both that the Jewish
Scriptures contain thus much, and that the Jews actually understood
them as containing it.

First, then, as to what Scripture declares. From the book of Genesis
we learn that the chosen people was set up in this one idea, viz. to
be a blessing to the whole earth, and that, by means of one of their
own race, a greater than their father Abraham. This was the meaning and
drift of their being chosen. There is no room for mistake here; the
divine purpose is stated from the first with the utmost precision. At
the very time of Abraham’s call, he is told of it:—“I will make of thee
a great nation, and in thee shall all tribes of the earth be blessed.”
Thrice is this promise and purpose announced in Abraham’s history; and
after Abraham’s time it is repeated to Isaac, “In thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed;” and after Isaac to Jacob, when a
wanderer from his home, “In thee and in thy seed shall all the tribes
of the earth be blessed.” And from Jacob the promise passes on to his
son Judah, and that with an addition, viz. with a reference to the
great Person who was to be the world-wide blessing, and to the date
when He should come. Judah was the chosen son of Jacob, and his staff
or sceptre, that is, his patriarchal authority, was to endure till a
greater than Judah came, so that the loss of the sceptre, when it took
place, was the sign of His near approach. “The sceptre,” says Jacob
on his death-bed, “shall not be taken away from Judah, until He come
for whom it is reserved,” or “who is to be sent,” “and He shall be the
expectation of the nations.(47)”

Such was the categorical prophecy, literal and unequivocal in its
wording, direct and simple in its scope. One man, born of the chosen
tribe, was the destined minister of blessing to the whole world; and
the race, as represented by that tribe, was to lose its old self in
gaining a new self in Him. Its destiny was sealed upon it in its
beginning. An expectation was the measure of its life. It was created
for a great end, and in that end it had its ending. Such were the
initial communications made to the chosen people, and there they
stopped;—as if the outline of promise, so sharply cut, had to be
effectually imprinted on their minds, before more knowledge was given
to them; as if, by the long interval of years which passed before the
more varied prophecies in type and figure, after the manner of the
East, were added, the original notices might stand out in the sight of
all in their severe explicitness, as archetypal truths, and guides in
interpreting whatever else was obscure in its wording or complex in its
direction.

And in the second place it is quite clear that the Jews did thus
understand their prophecies, and did expect their great Ruler, in
the very age in which our Lord came, and in which they, on the other
hand, were destroyed, losing their old self without gaining their
new. Heathen historians shall speak for the fact. “A persuasion had
possession of most of them,” says Tacitus, speaking of their resistance
to the Romans, “that it was contained in the ancient books of the
priests that at that very time the East should prevail, and that men
who issued from Judea should obtain the empire. The common people, as
is the way with human cupidity, having once interpreted in their own
favour this grand destiny, were not even by their reverses brought
round to the truth of facts.” And Suetonius extends the belief:—“The
whole East was rife with an old and persistent belief, that at that
time persons who issued from Judea, should possess the empire.” After
the event of course the Jews drew back, and denied the correctness of
their expectation, still they could not deny that the expectation had
existed. Thus the Jew Josephus, who was of the Roman party, says that
what encouraged them in the stand they made against the Romans was “an
ambiguous oracle, found in their sacred writings, that at that date
some one of them from that country should rule the world.” He can but
pronounce that the oracle was ambiguous; he cannot state that they
thought it so.

Now, considering that at that very time our Lord did appear as a
teacher, and founded not merely a religion, but (what was then quite
a new idea in the world) a system of religious warfare, an aggressive
and militant body, a dominant Catholic Church, which aimed at the
benefit of all nations by the spiritual conquest of all; and that
this warfare, then begun by it, has gone on without cessation down
to this day, and now is as living and real as ever it was; that that
militant body has from the first filled the world, that it has had
wonderful successes, that its successes have on the whole been of
extreme benefit to the human race, that it has imparted an intelligent
notion about the Supreme God to millions who would have lived and
died in irreligion, that it has raised the tone of morality wherever
it has come, has abolished great social anomalies and miseries, has
elevated the female sex to its proper dignity, has protected the poorer
classes, has destroyed slavery, encouraged literature and philosophy,
and had a principal part in that civilization of human kind, which,
with some evils still, has on the whole been productive of far greater
good,—considering, I say, that all this began at the destined,
expected, recognized season when the old prophecy said that in one
Man, born of the tribe of Judah, all the tribes of the earth were to
be blessed, I feel I have a right to say (and my line of argument does
not lead me to say more), that it is at the very least a remarkable
coincidence,—that is, one of those coincidences which, when they are
accumulated, come close upon the idea of miracle, as being impossible
without the Hand of God directly and immediately in them.

When we have got as far as this, we may go on a great deal farther.
Announcements, which could not be put forward in the front of the
argument, as being figurative, vague, or ambiguous, may be used validly
and with great effect, when they have been interpreted for us, first by
the prophetic outline, and still more by the historical object. It is a
principle which applies to all matters on which we reason, that what is
only a maze of facts, without order or drift prior to the explanation,
may, when we once have that explanation, be located and adjusted with
great facility in all its separate parts, as we know is the case as
regards the motions of the heavenly bodies since the hypothesis of
Newton. In like manner the event is the true key to prophecy, and
reconciles conflicting and divergent descriptions by embodying them
in one common representative. Thus it is that we learn how, as the
prophecies said, the Messiah could both suffer, yet be victorious; His
kingdom be Judaic in structure, yet evangelic in spirit; and His people
the children of Abraham, yet “sinners of the Gentiles.” These seeming
paradoxes, are only parallel and akin to those others which form so
prominent a feature in the teaching of our Lord and His Apostles.

As to the Jews, since they lived before the event, it is not wonderful,
that, though they were right in their general interpretation of
Scripture as far as it went, they stopped short of the whole truth;
nay, that even when their Messiah came, they could not recognize Him as
the promised King as we recognize Him now;—for we have the experience
of His history for nearly two thousand years, by which to interpret
their Scriptures. We may partly understand their position towards those
prophecies, by our own at present towards the Apocalypse. Who can deny
the superhuman grandeur and impressiveness of that sacred book! yet,
as a prophecy, though some outlines of the future are discernible,
how differently it affects us from the predictions of Isaiah! either
because it relates to undreamed-of events still to come, or because
it has been fulfilled long ago in events which in their detail and
circumstance have never become history. And the same remark applies
doubtless to portions of the Messianic prophecies still; but, if their
fulfilment has been thus gradual in time past, we must not be surprised
though portions of them still await their slow but true accomplishment
in the future.

8.

When I implied that in some points of view Christianity has not
answered the expectations of the old prophecies, of which it claims
to be the fulfilment, I had in mind principally the contrast which is
presented to us between the picture which they draw of the universality
of the kingdom of the Messiah, and that partial development of it
through the world, which is all the Christian Church can show; and
again the contrast between the rest and peace which they said He was to
introduce, and the Church’s actual history,—the conflicts of opinion
which have raged within its pale, the violent acts and unworthy lives
of many of its rulers, and the moral degradation of great masses of its
people. I do not profess to meet these difficulties here, except by
saying that the failure of Christianity in one respect in corresponding
to those prophecies cannot destroy the force of its correspondence to
them in others; just as we may allow that the portrait of a friend is a
faulty likeness to him, and yet be quite sure that it is his portrait.
What I shall actually attempt to show here is this,—that Christianity
was quite aware from the first of its own prospective future, so
unlike the expectations which the prophets would excite concerning it,
and that it meets the difficulty thence arising by anticipation, by
giving us its own predictions of what it was to be in historical fact,
predictions which are at once explanatory comments upon the Jewish
Scriptures, and direct evidences of its own prescience.

I think it observable then, that, though our Lord claims to be the
Messiah, He shows so little of conscious dependence on the old
Scriptures, or of anxiety to fulfil them; as if it became Him, who was
the Lord of the Prophets, to take His own course, and to leave their
utterances to adjust themselves to Him as they could, and not to be
careful to accommodate Himself to them. The evangelists do indeed show
some such natural zeal in His behalf, and thereby illustrate what I
notice in Him by the contrast. They betray an earnestness to trace in
His Person and history the accomplishment of prophecy, as when they
discern it in His return from Egypt, in His life at Nazareth, in the
gentleness and tenderness of His mode of teaching, and in the various
minute occurrences of His passion; but He Himself goes straight forward
on His way, of course claiming to be the Messiah of the Prophets,(48)
still not so much recurring to past prophecies, as uttering new ones,
with an antithesis not unlike that which is so impressive in the
Sermon on the Mount, when He first says, “It has been said by them
of old time,” and then adds, “But I say unto you.” Another striking
instance of this is seen in the Names under which He spoke of Himself,
which have little or no foundation in any thing which was said of
Him beforehand in the Jewish Scriptures. They speak of Him as Ruler,
Prophet, King, Hope of Israel, Offspring of Judah, and Messiah; and
His Evangelists and Disciples call Him Master, Lord, Prophet, Son of
David, King of Israel, King of the Jews, and Messiah or Christ; but He
Himself, though, I repeat, He acknowledges these titles as His own,
especially that of the Christ, chooses as His special designations
these two, Son of God and Son of Man, the latter of which is only once
given Him in the Old Scriptures, and by which He corrects any narrow
Judaic interpretation of them; while the former was never distinctly
used of Him before He came, and seems first to have been announced to
the world by the Angel Gabriel and St. John the Baptist. In those two
Names, Son of God and Son of Man, declaratory of the two natures of
Emmanuel, He separates Himself from the Jewish Dispensation, in which
He was born, and inaugurates the New Covenant.

This is not an accident, and I shall now give some instances of it,
that is, of what I may call the independent autocratic view which He
takes of His own religion, into which the old Judaism was melting, and
of the prophetic insight into its spirit and its future which that view
involves. In quoting His own sayings from the Evangelists for this
purpose, I assume (of which there is no reasonable doubt) that they
wrote before any historical events had happened of a nature to cause
them unconsciously to modify or to colour the language which their
Master used.

1. First, then, the fact has been often insisted on as a bold
conception, unheard of before, and worthy of divine origin, that He
should even project a universal religion, and that to be effected by
what may be called a propagandist movement from one centre. Hitherto
it had been the received notion in the world, that each nation had its
own gods. The Romans legislated upon that basis, and the Jews had held
it from the first, holding of course also, that all gods but their
own God were idols and demons. It is true that the Jews ought to have
been taught by their prophecies what was in store for the world and
for them, and that their first dispersion through the Empire centuries
before Christ came, and the proselytes which they collected around them
in every place, were a kind of comment on the prophecies larger than
their own; but we see what was, in fact, when our Lord came, their
expectation from those prophecies, in the passages which I have quoted
above from the Roman historians of His day. But He from the first
resisted those plausible, but mistaken interpretations of Scripture. In
His cradle indeed He had been recognized by the Eastern sages as their
king; the Angel announced that He was to reign over the house of Jacob;
Nathanael, too, owned Him as the Messiah with a regal title; but He,
on entering upon His work, interpreted these anticipations in His own
way, and that not the way of Theudas and Judas of Galilee, who took the
sword, and collected soldiers about them,—nor the way of the Tempter,
who offered Him “all the kingdoms of the world.” In the words of the
Evangelists, He began, not to fight, but “to preach;” and further, to
“preach the kingdom of heaven,” saying, “The time is accomplished, and
the kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe the Gospel.” This is
the significant title, “the kingdom of heaven,”—the more significant,
when explained by the attendant precept of repentance and faith,—on
which He founds the polity which He was establishing from first to
last. One of His last sayings before He suffered was, “My kingdom is
not of this world.” And His last words, before He left the earth, when
His disciples asked Him about His kingdom, were that they, preachers
as they were, and not soldiers, should “be His witnesses to the end of
the earth,” should “preach to all nations, beginning with Jerusalem,”
should “go into the world and preach the Gospel to every creature,”
should “go and make disciples of all nations till the consummation of
all things.”

The last Evangelist of the four is equally precise in recording the
initial purpose with which our Lord began His ministry, viz. to create
an empire, not by force, but by persuasion. “Light is come into the
world; every one that doth evil, hateth the light, but he that doth
truth, cometh to the light.” “Lift up your eyes, and see the countries,
for they are white already to harvest.” “No man can come to Me, except
the Father, who hath sent Me, draw him.” “And I, if I be lifted up from
the earth, will draw all things to Myself.”

Thus, while the Jews, relying on their Scriptures with great appearance
of reason, looked for a deliverer who should conquer with the sword, we
find that Christianity, from the first, not by an after-thought upon
trial and experience, but as a fundamental truth, magisterially set
right that mistake, transfiguring the old prophecies, and bringing to
light, as St. Paul might say, “the mystery which had been hidden from
ages and generations, but now was made manifest in His saints, the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you,” not
simply over you, but in you, by faith and love, “the hope of glory.”

2. I have partly anticipated my next remark, which relates to the
means by which the Christian enterprise was to be carried into effect.
That preaching was to have a share in the victories of the Messiah
was plain from Prophet and Psalmist; but then Charlemagne preached,
and Mahomet preached, with an army to back them. The same Psalm which
speaks of those “who preach good tidings,” speaks also of their King’s
“foot being dipped in the blood of His enemies;” but what is so grandly
original in Christianity is, that on its broad field of conflict its
preachers were to be simply unarmed, and to suffer, but to prevail.
If we were not so familiar with our Lord’s words, I think they would
astonish us. “Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves.”
This was to be their normal state, and so it was; and all the promises
and directions given to them imply it. “Blessed are they that suffer
persecution;” “blessed are ye when they revile you;” “the meek shall
inherit the earth;” “resist not evil;” “you shall be hated of all
men for My Name’s sake;” “a man’s enemies shall be they of his own
household;” “he that shall persevere to the end, he shall be saved.”
What sort of encouragement was this for men who were to go about an
immense work? Do men in this way send out their soldiers to battle, or
their sons to India or Australia? The King of Israel hated Micaiah,
because he always “prophesied of him evil.” “So persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you,” says our Lord. Yes, and the Prophets
failed; they were persecuted and they lost the battle. “Take, my
brethren,” says St. James, “for an example of suffering evil, of labour
and patience, the Prophets, who spake in the Name of the Lord.” They
were “racked, mocked, stoned, cut asunder, they wandered about,—of whom
the world was not worthy,” says St. Paul. What an argument to encourage
them to aim at success by suffering, to put before them the precedent
of those who suffered and who failed!

Yet the first preachers, our Lord’s immediate disciples, saw no
difficulty in a prospect to human eyes so appalling, so hopeless. How
connatural this strange, unreasoning, reckless courage was with their
regenerate state is shown most signally in St. Paul, as having been a
convert of later vocation. He was no personal associate of our Lord’s,
yet how faithfully he echoes back our Lord’s language! His instrument
of conversion is “the foolishness of preaching;” “the weak things of
the earth confound the strong;” “we hunger and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffeted, and have no home;” “we are reviled and bless, we are
persecuted, and blasphemed, and are made the refuse of this world, and
the offscouring of all things.” Such is the intimate comprehension,
on the part of one who had never seen our Lord on earth, and knew
little from His original disciples of the genius of His teaching;—and
considering that the prophecies, upon which he had lived from his
birth, for the most part bear on their surface a contrary doctrine, and
that the Jews of that day did commonly understand them in that contrary
sense, we cannot deny that Christianity, in tracing out the method
by which it was to prevail in the future, took its own, independent
line, and, in assigning from the first a rule and a history to its
propagation, a rule and a history which have been carried out to this
day, rescues itself from the charge of but partially fulfilling those
Jewish prophecies, by the assumption of a prophetical character of its
own.

3. Now we come to a third point, in which the Divine Master explains,
and in a certain sense corrects, the prophecies of the Old Covenant, by
a more exact interpretation of them from Himself. I have granted that
they seemed to say that His coming would issue in a period of peace
and religiousness. “Behold,” says the Prophet, “a king shall reign in
justice, and princes shall rule in judgment. The fool shall no more
be called prince, neither shall the deceitful be called great. The
wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard lie down with the kid.
They shall not hurt nor kill in all My holy mountain, for the earth is
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the covering waters of the
sea.”

These words seem to predict a reversal of the consequences of the
fall, and that reversal has not been granted to us, it is true; but
let us consider how distinctly Christianity warns us against any such
anticipation. While it is so forcibly laid down in the Gospels that the
history of the kingdom of heaven begins in suffering and sanctity, it
is as plainly said that it results in unfaithfulness and sin; that is
to say, that, though there are at all times many holy, many religious
men in it, and though sanctity, as at the beginning, is ever the life
and the substance and the germinal seed of the Divine Kingdom, yet
there will be many too, there will be more, who by their lives are a
scandal and injury to it, not a defence. This again, is an astonishing
announcement, and the more so when viewed in contrast with the precepts
delivered by our Lord in His Sermon on the Mount, and His description
to the Apostles of their weapons and their warfare. So perplexing to
Christians was the fact when fulfilled, as it was in no long time on a
large scale, that three of the early heresies more or less originated
in obstinate, unchristian refusal to readmit to the privileges of the
Gospel those who had fallen into sin. Yet our Lord’s words are express:
He tells us that “Many are called, few are chosen;” in the parable of
the Marriage Feast, the servants who are sent out gather together “all
that they found, both bad and good;” the foolish virgins “had no oil in
their vessels;” amid the good seed an enemy sows seed that is noxious
or worthless; and “the kingdom is like to a net which gathered together
all kind of fishes;” and “at the end of the world the Angels shall go
forth, and shall separate the wicked from among the just.”

Moreover, He not only speaks of His religion as destined to possess a
wide temporal power, such, that, as in the case of the Babylonian, “the
birds of the air should dwell in its branches,” but He opens on us the
prospect of ambition and rivalry in its leading members, when He warns
His disciples against desiring the first places in His kingdom; nay, of
grosser sins, in His description of the Ruler, who “began to strike his
fellow-servants, and to eat and drink and be drunken,”—passages which
have an awful significance, considering what kind of men have before
now been His chosen representatives, and have sat in the chair of His
Apostles.

If then it be objected that Christianity does not, as the old prophets
seem to promise, abolish sin and irreligion within its pale, we may
answer, not only that it did not engage to do so, but that actually in
a prophetical spirit it warned its followers against the expectation of
its so doing.

9.

According to our Lord’s announcements before the event, Christianity
was to prevail and to become a great empire, and to fill the earth; but
it was to accomplish this destiny, not as other victorious powers had
done, and as the Jews expected, by force of arms or by other means of
this world, but by the novel expedient of sanctity and suffering. If
some aspiring party of this day, the great Orleans family, or a branch
of the Hohenzollern, wishing to found a kingdom, were to profess, as
their only weapon, the practice of virtue, they would not startle us
more than it startled a Jew eighteen hundred years ago, to be told that
his glorious Messiah was not to fight, like Joshua or David, but simply
to preach. It is indeed a thought so strange, both in its prediction
and in its fulfilment, as urgently to suggest to us that some Divine
Power went with him who conceived and proclaimed it. This is what I
have been saying;—now I wish to consider the fact, which was predicted,
in itself, without reference to its being the subject whether of a
prediction or of a fulfilment; that is, the history of the rise and
establishment of Christianity; and to inquire whether it is a history
that admits of being resolved, by any philosophical ingenuity, into the
ordinary operation of moral, social, or political causes.

As is well known, various writers have attempted to assign human causes
in explanation of the phenomenon: Gibbon especially has mentioned five,
viz. the zeal of Christians, inherited from the Jews, their doctrine
of a future state, their claim to miraculous power, their virtues, and
their ecclesiastical organization. Let us briefly consider them.

He thinks these five causes, when combined, will fairly account for the
event; but he has not thought of accounting for their combination. If
they are ever so available for his purpose, still that availableness
arises out of their coincidence, and out of what does that coincidence
arise? Until this is explained, nothing is explained, and the question
had better have been let alone. These presumed causes are quite
distinct from each other, and, I say, the wonder is, what made them
come together. How came a multitude of Gentiles to be influenced with
Jewish zeal? How came zealots to submit to a strict, ecclesiastical
_régime_? What connexion has a secular _régime_ with the immortality
of the soul? Why should immortality, a philosophical doctrine, lead
to belief in miracles, which is a superstition of the vulgar? What
tendency had miracles and magic to make men austerely virtuous? Lastly,
what power was there in a code of virtue, as calm and enlightened
as that of Antoninus, to generate a zeal as fierce as that of
Maccabæus? Wonderful events before now have apparently been nothing
but coincidences, certainly; but they do not become less wonderful by
cataloguing their constituent causes, unless we also show how these
came to be constituent.

However, this by the way; the real question is this,—are these
historical characteristics of Christianity, also in matter of fact,
historical causes of Christianity? Has Gibbon given proof that they
are? Has he brought evidence of their operation, or does he simply
conjecture in his private judgment that they operated? Whether they
were adapted to accomplish a certain work, is a matter of opinion;
whether they did accomplish it is a question of fact. He ought to
adduce instances of their efficiency before he has a right to say that
they are efficient. And the second question is, what is this effect, of
which they are to be considered as causes? It is no other than this,
the conversion of bodies of men to the Christian faith. Let us keep
this in view. We have to determine whether these five characteristics
of Christianity were efficient causes of bodies of men becoming
Christians? I think they neither did effect such conversions, nor were
adapted to do so, and for these reasons:—

1. For first, as to zeal, by which Gibbon means party spirit, or
_esprit de corps_; this doubtless is a motive principle when men
are already members of a body, but does it operate in bringing them
into it? The Jews were born in Judaism, they had a long and glorious
history, and would naturally feel and show _esprit de corps_; but how
did party spirit tend to transplant Jew or Gentile out of his own
place into a new society, and that a society which as yet scarcely
was formed in a society? Zeal, certainly, may be felt for a cause,
or for a person; on this point I shall speak presently; but Gibbon’s
idea of Christian zeal is nothing better than the old wine of Judaism
decanted into new Christian bottles, and would be too flat a stimulant,
even if it admitted of such a transference, to be taken as a cause of
conversion to Christianity without definite evidence in proof of the
fact. Christians had zeal for Christianity after they were converted,
not before.

2. Next, as to the doctrine of a future state. Gibbon seems to mean by
this doctrine the fear of hell; now certainly in this day there are
persons converted from sin to a religious life, by vivid descriptions
of the future punishment of the wicked; but then it must be recollected
that such persons already believe in the doctrine thus urged upon
them. On the contrary, give some Tract upon hell-fire to one of the
wild boys in a large town, who has had no education, who has no faith;
and, instead of being startled by it, he will laugh at it as something
frightfully ridiculous. The belief in Styx and Tartarus was dying out
of the world at the time that Christianity came in, as the parallel
belief now seems to be dying out in all classes of our own society. The
doctrine of eternal punishment does only anger the multitude of men in
our large towns now, and make them blaspheme; why should it have had
any other effect on the heathen populations in the age when our Lord
came? Yet it was among those populations, that He and His made their
way from the first. As to the hope of eternal life, that doubtless, as
well as the fear of hell, was a most operative doctrine in the case of
men who had been actually converted, of Christians brought before the
magistrate, or writhing under torture, but the thought of eternal glory
does not keep bad men from a bad life now, and why should it convert
them then from their pleasant sins, to a heavy, mortified, joyless
existence, to a life of ill-usage, fright, contempt, and desolation?

3. That the claim to miracles should have any wide influence in favour
of Christianity among heathen populations, who had plenty of portents
of their own, is an opinion in curious contrast with the objection
against Christianity which has provoked an answer from Paley, viz.
that “Christian miracles are not recited or appealed to, by early
Christian writers themselves, so fully or so frequently as might have
been expected.” Paley solves the difficulty as far as it is a fact,
by observing, as I have suggested, that “it was their lot to contend
with magical agency, against which the mere production of these facts
was not sufficient for the convincing of their adversaries:” “I do
not know,” he continues, “whether they themselves thought it quite
decisive of the controversy.” A claim to miraculous power on the part
of Christians, which was so unfrequent as to become now an objection to
the fact of their possessing it, can hardly have been a principal cause
of their success.

4. And how is it possible to imagine with Gibbon that what he calls
the “sober and domestic virtues” of Christians, their “aversion to
the luxury of the age,” their “chastity, temperance, and economy,”
that these dull qualities were persuasives of a nature to win and
melt the hard heathen heart, in spite too of the dreary prospect of
the _barathrum_, the amphitheatre, and the stake? Did the Christian
morality by its severe beauty make a convert of Gibbon himself?
On the contrary, he bitterly says, “It was not in this world that
the primitive Christians were desirous of making themselves either
agreeable or useful.” “The virtue of the primitive Christians, like
that of the first Romans, was very frequently guarded by poverty and
ignorance.” “Their gloomy and austere aspect, their abhorrence of the
common business and pleasures of life, and their frequent predictions
of impending calamities, inspired the Pagans with the apprehension of
some danger which would arise from the new sect.” Here we have not only
Gibbon hating their moral and social bearing, but his heathen also. How
then were those heathen overcome by the amiableness of that which they
viewed with such disgust? We have here plain proof that the Christian
character repelled the heathen; where is the evidence that it converted
them?

5. Lastly, as to the ecclesiastical organization, this, doubtless, as
time went on, was a special characteristic of the new religion; but
how could it directly contribute to its extension? Of course it gave
it strength, but it did not give it life. We are not born of bones and
muscles. It is one thing to make conquests, another to consolidate an
empire. It was before Constantine that Christians made their great
conquests. Rules are for settled times, not for time of war. So much
is this contrast felt in the Catholic Church now, that, as is well
known, in heathen countries and in countries which have thrown off her
yoke, she suspends her diocesan administration and her Canon Law, and
puts her children under the extraordinary, extra-legal jurisdiction of
Propaganda.

This is what I am led to say on Gibbon’s Five Causes. I do not deny
that they might have operated now and then; Simon Magus came to
Christianity in order to learn the craft of miracles, and Peregrinus
from love of influence and power; but Christianity made its way, not by
individual, but by broad, wholesale conversions, and the question is,
how they originated?

It is very remarkable that it should not have occurred to a man of
Gibbon’s sagacity to inquire, what account the Christians themselves
gave of the matter. Would it not have been worth while for him to have
let conjecture alone, and to have looked for facts instead? Why did he
not try the hypothesis of faith, hope, and charity? Did he never hear
of repentance towards God, and faith in Christ? Did he not recollect
the many words of Apostles, Bishops, Apologists, Martyrs, all forming
one testimony? No; such thoughts are close upon him, and close upon the
truth; but he cannot sympathize with them, he cannot believe in them,
he cannot even enter into them, _because_ he needs the due formation
of mind.(49) Let us see whether the facts of the case do not come out
clear and unequivocal, if we will but have the patience to endure them.

A Deliverer of the human race through the Jewish nation had been
promised from time immemorial. The day came when He was to appear,
and He was eagerly expected; moreover, One actually did make His
appearance at that date in Palestine, and claimed to be He. He left the
earth without apparently doing much for the object of His coming. But
when He was gone, His disciples took upon themselves to go forth to
preach to all parts of the earth with the object of preaching _Him_,
and collecting converts _in His Name_. After a little while they are
found wonderfully to have succeeded. Large bodies of men in various
places are to be seen, professing to be His disciples, owning Him as
their King, and continually swelling in number and penetrating into
the populations of the Roman Empire; at length they convert the Empire
itself. All this is historical fact. Now, we want to know the farther
historical fact, viz. the cause of their conversion; in other words,
what were the topics of that preaching which was so effective? If
we believe what is told us by the preachers and their converts, the
answer is plain. They “preached Christ;” they called on men to believe,
hope, and place their affections, in that Deliverer who had come and
gone; and the moral instrument by which they persuaded them to do so,
was a description of the life, character, mission, and power of that
Deliverer, a promise of His invisible Presence and Protection here,
and of the Vision and Fruition of Him hereafter. From first to last to
Christians, as to Abraham, He Himself is the centre and fulness of the
dispensation. They, as Abraham, “see His day, and are glad.”

A temporal sovereign makes himself felt by means of his subordinate
administrators, who bring his power and will to bear upon every
individual of his subjects who personally know him not; the universal
Deliverer, long expected, when He came, He too, instead of making and
securing subjects by a visible graciousness or majesty, departs;—_but_
is found, through His preachers, to have imprinted the Image(50) or
Idea of Himself in the minds of His subjects individually; and that
Image, apprehended and worshipped in individual minds, becomes a
principle of association, and a real bond of those subjects one with
another, who are thus united to the body by being united to that Image;
and moreover that Image, which is their moral life, when they have been
already converted, is also the original instrument of their conversion.
It is the Image of Him who fulfils the one great need of human nature,
the Healer of its wounds, the Physician of the soul, this Image it is
which both creates faith, and then rewards it.

When we recognize this central Image as the vivifying idea both of the
Christian body and of individuals in it, then, certainly, we are able
to take into account at least two of Gibbon’s causes, as having, in
connexion with that idea, some influence both in making converts and
in strengthening them to persevere. It was the Thought of Christ, not
a corporate body or a doctrine, which inspired that zeal which the
historian so poorly comprehends; and it was the Thought of Christ which
gave a life to the promise of that eternity, which without Him would
be, in any soul, nothing short of an intolerable burden.

Now a mental vision such as this, perhaps will be called cloudy,
fanciful, unintelligible; that is, in other words, miraculous. I
think it is so. How, without the Hand of God, could a new idea, one
and the same, enter at once into myriads of men, women, and children
of all ranks, especially the lower, and have power to wean them from
their indulgences and sins, and to nerve them against the most cruel
tortures, and to last in vigour as a sustaining influence for seven
or eight generations, till it founded an extended polity, broke the
obstinacy of the strongest and wisest government which the world has
ever seen, and forced its way from its first caves and catacombs to the
fulness of imperial power?

In considering this subject, I shall confine myself to the proof, as
far as my limits allow, of two points,—first, that this Thought or
Image of Christ was the principle of conversion and of fellowship;
and next, that among the lower classes, who had no power, influence,
reputation, or education, lay its principal success.(51)

As to the vivifying idea, this is St. Paul’s account of it: “I make
known to you the gospel which I preached to you, which also you have
received, and wherein you stand; by which also you are saved. For I
delivered to you first of all that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,” &c., &c. “I am
the least of the Apostles; but, whether I or they, so we preached, and
so you believed.” “It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching
to save them that believe.” “We preach Christ crucified.” “I determined
to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.” “Your
life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is your life, shall
appear, then you also shall appear with Him in glory.” “I live, but now
not I, but Christ liveth in me.”

St. Peter, who has been accounted the master of a separate school, says
the same: “Jesus Christ, whom you have not seen, yet love; in whom you
now believe, and shall rejoice.”

And St. John, who is sometimes accounted a third master in
Christianity: “It hath not yet appeared what we shall be; but we know
that, when He shall appear, we shall be like to Him, because we shall
see Him as He is.”

That their disciples followed them in this sovereign devotion to an
Invisible Lord, will appear as I proceed.

And next, as to the worldly position and character of His disciples,
our Lord, in the well-known passage, returns thanks to His Heavenly
Father “because,” He says, “Thou hast hid these things”—the mysteries
of His kingdom—“from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to
little ones.” And, in accordance with this announcement, St. Paul says
that “not many wise men according to the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble,” became Christians. He, indeed, is one of those few; so
were others his contemporaries, and, as time went on, the number of
these exceptions increased, so that converts were found, not a few, in
the high places of the Empire, and in the schools of philosophy and
learning; but still the rule held, that the great mass of Christians
were to be found in those classes which were of no account in the
world, whether on the score of rank or of education.

We all know this was the case with our Lord and His Apostles. It seems
almost irreverent to speak of their temporal employments, when we are
so simply accustomed to consider them in their spiritual associations;
but it is profitable to remind ourselves that our Lord Himself was a
sort of smith, and made ploughs and cattle-yokes. Four Apostles were
fishermen, one a petty tax collector, two husbandmen, and another is
said to have been a market gardener.(52) When Peter and John were
brought before the Council, they are spoken of as being, in a secular
point of view, “illiterate men, and of the lower sort,” and thus they
are spoken of in a later age by the Fathers.

That their converts were of the same rank as themselves, is reported,
in their favour or to their discredit, by friends and enemies, for
four centuries. “If a man be educated,” says Celsus in mockery, “let
him keep clear of us Christians; we want no men of wisdom, no men of
sense. We account all such as evil. No; but, if there be one who is
inexperienced, or stupid, or untaught, or a fool, let him come with
good heart.” “They are weavers,” he says elsewhere, “shoemakers,
fullers, illiterate, clowns.” “Fools, low-born fellows,” says Trypho.
“The greater part of you,” says Cæcilius, “are worn with want, cold,
toil, and famine; men collected from the lowest dregs of the people;
ignorant, credulous women;” “unpolished, boors, illiterate, ignorant
even of the sordid arts of life; they do not understand even civil
matters, how can they understand divine?” “They have left their tongs,
mallets, and anvils, to preach about the things of heaven,” says
Libanius. “They deceive women, servants, and slaves,” says Julian.
The author of Philopatris speaks of them as “poor creatures, blocks,
withered old fellows, men of downcast and pale visages.” As to their
religion, it had the reputation popularly, according to various
Fathers, of being an anile superstition, the discovery of old women, a
joke, a madness, an infatuation, an absurdity, a fanaticism.

The Fathers themselves confirm these statements, so far as they relate
to the insignificance and ignorance of their brethren. Athenagoras
speaks of the virtue of their “ignorant men, mechanics, and old
women.” “They are gathered,” says St. Jerome, “not from the Academy or
Lyceum, but from the low populace.” “They are whitesmiths, servants,
farm-labourers, woodmen, men of sordid trades, beggars,” says
Theodoret. “We are engaged in the farm, in the market, at the baths,
wine-shops, stables, and fairs; as seamen, as soldiers, as peasants,
as dealers,” says Tertullian. How came such men to be converted? and,
being converted, how came such men to overturn the world? Yet they went
forth from the first, “conquering and to conquer.”

The first manifestation of their formidable numbers is made just about
the time when St. Peter and St. Paul suffered martyrdom, and was the
cause of a terrible persecution. We have the account of it in Tacitus.
“Nero,” he says, “to put an end to the common talk [that Rome had
been set on fire by his order], imputed it to others, visiting with a
refinement of punishment those detestable criminals who went by the
name of Christians. The author of that denomination was Christus, who
had been executed in Tiberius’s time by the procurator, Pontius Pilate.
The pestilent superstition, checked for a while, burst out again, not
only throughout Judea, the first seat of the evil, but even throughout
Rome, the centre both of confluence and outbreak of all that is
atrocious and disgraceful from every quarter. First were arrested those
who made no secret of their sect; and by this clue a vast multitude of
others, convicted, not so much of firing the city, as of hatred to the
human race. Mockery was added to death; clad in skins of beasts, they
were torn to pieces by dogs; they were nailed up to crosses; they were
made inflammable, so that, when day failed, they might serve as lights.
Hence, guilty as they were, and deserving of exemplary punishment, they
excited compassion, as being destroyed, not for the public welfare, but
from the cruelty of one man.”

The two Apostles suffered, and a silence follows of a whole generation.
At the end of thirty or forty years, Pliny, the friend of Trajan, as
well as of Tacitus, is sent as that Emperor’s Proprætor into Bithynia,
and is startled and perplexed by the number, influence, and pertinacity
of the Christians whom he finds there, and in the neighbouring province
of Pontus. He has the opportunity of being far more fair to them than
his friend the historian. He writes to Trajan to know how he ought to
deal with them, and I will quote some portions of his letter.

He says he does not know how to proceed with them, as their religion
has not received toleration from the state. He never was present at any
trial of them; he doubted whether the children among them, as well as
grown people, ought to be accounted as culprits, whether recantation
would set matters right, or whether they incurred punishment all the
same; whether they were to be punished, merely because Christians, even
though no definite crime was proved against them. His way had been to
examine them, and put questions to them; if they confessed the charge,
he gave them one or two chances, threatening them with punishment;
then, if they persisted, he gave orders for their execution. “For,” he
argues, “I felt no doubt that, whatever might be the character of their
opinions, stubborn and inflexible obstinacy deserved punishment. Others
there were of a like infatuation, whom, being citizens, I sent to Rome.”

Some satisfied him; they repeated after him an invocation to the
gods, and offered wine and incense to the Emperor’s image, and in
addition, cursed the name of Christ. “Accordingly,” he says, “I let
them go; for I am told nothing can compel a real Christian to do any
of these things.” There were others, too, who sacrificed; who had been
Christians, some of them for as many as twenty years.

Then he is curious to know something more definite about them. “This,
the informers told me, was the whole of their crime or mistake, that
they were accustomed to assemble on a stated day before dawn, and to
say together a hymn to Christ as a god, and to bind themselves by an
oath [sacramento] (not to any crime, but on the contrary) to keep from
theft, robbery, adultery, breach of promise, and making free with
deposits. After this they used to separate, and then to meet again for
a meal, which was social and harmless. However, they left even that
off, after my Edict against their meeting.”

This information led him to put to the torture two maid-servants, “who
were called ministers,” in order to find out what was true, what was
false in it; but he says he could make out nothing, except a depraved
and excessive superstition. This is what led him to consult the
Emperor, “especially because of the number who were implicated in it;
for these are, or are likely to be, many, of all ages, nay, of both
sexes. For the contagion of this superstition has spread, not only
in the cities, but about the villages and the open country.” He adds
that already there was some improvement. “The almost forsaken temples
begin to be filled again, and the sacred solemnities after a long
intermission are revived. Victims, too, are again on sale, purchasers
having been most rare to find.”

The salient points in this account are these, that, at the end of
one generation from the Apostles, nay, almost in the lifetime of St.
John, Christians had so widely spread in a large district of Asia, as
nearly to suppress the Pagan religions there; that they were people of
exemplary lives; that they had a name for invincible fidelity to their
religion; that no threats or sufferings could make them deny it; and
that their only tangible characteristic was the worship of our Lord.

This was at the beginning of the second century; not a great many
years after, we have another account of the Christian body, from an
anonymous Greek Christian, in a letter to a friend whom he was anxious
to convert. It is far too long to quote, and difficult to compress; but
a few sentences will show how strikingly it agrees with the account
of the heathen Pliny, especially in two points,—first, in the numbers
of the Christians, secondly, on devotion to our Lord as the vivifying
principle of their association.

“Christians,” says the writer, “differ not from other men in country,
or speech, or customs. They do not live in cities of their own, or
speak in any peculiar dialect, or adopt any strange modes of living.
They inhabit their native countries, but as sojourners; they take their
part in all burdens, as if citizens, and in all sufferings, as if they
were strangers. In foreign countries they recognize a home, and in
every home they see a foreign country. They marry like other men, but
do not disown their children. They obey the established laws, but they
go beyond them in the tenor of their lives. They love all men, and are
persecuted by all; they are not known, and they are condemned; they
are poor, and make many rich; they are dishonoured, yet in dishonour
they are glorified; they are slandered, and they are cleared; they are
called names, and they bless. By the Jews they are assailed as aliens,
by the Greeks they are persecuted, nor can they who hate them say why.

“Christians are in the world, as the soul in the body. The soul
pervades the limbs of the body, and Christians the cities of the
world. The flesh hates the soul, and wars against it, though suffering
no wrong from it; and the world hates Christians. The soul loves
the flesh that hates it, and Christians love their enemies. Their
tradition is not an earthly invention, nor is it a mortal thought
which they so carefully guard, nor a dispensation of human mysteries
which is committed to their charge; but God Himself, the Omnipotent
and Invisible Creator, has from heaven established among men His Truth
and His Word, the Holy and Incomprehensible, and has deeply fixed the
same in their hearts; not, as might be expected, sending any servant,
angel, or prince, or administrator of things earthly or heavenly, but
the very Artificer and Demiurge of the Universe. Him God hath sent to
man, not to inflict terror, but in clemency and gentleness, as a King
sending a King who was His Son; He sent Him as God to men, to save
them. He hated not, nor rejected us, nor remembered our guilt, but
showed Himself long-suffering, and, in His own words, bore our sins. He
gave His own Son as a ransom for us, the just for the unjust. For what
other thing, except His Righteousness, could cover our guilt? In whom
was it possible for us, lawless sinners, to find justification, save
in the Son of God alone? O sweet interchange! O heavenly workmanship
past finding out! O benefits exceeding expectation! Sending, then, a
Saviour, who is able to save those who of themselves are incapable of
salvation, He has willed that we should regard Him as our Guardian,
Father, Teacher, Counsellor, Physician; our Mind, Light, Honour, Glory,
Strength, and Life.(53)”

The writing from which I have been quoting is of the early part of
the second century. Twenty or thirty years after it St. Justin Martyr
speaks as strongly of the spread of the new Religion: “There is not
any one race of men,” he says, “barbarian or Greek, nay, of those who
live in waggons, or who are Nomads, or Shepherds in tents, among whom
prayers and eucharists are not offered to the Father and Maker of the
Universe, through the name of the crucified Jesus.”

Towards the end of the century, Clement:—“The word of our Master did
not remain in Judea, as philosophy remained in Greece, but has been
poured out over the whole world, persuading Greeks and Barbarians
alike, race by race, village by village, every city, whole houses, and
hearers one by one, nay, not a few of the philosophers themselves.”

And Tertullian, at the very close of it, could in his _Apologia_
even proceed to threaten the Roman Government:—“We are a people of
yesterday,” he says; “and yet we have filled every place belonging to
you, cities, islands, castles, towns, assemblies, your very camp, your
tribes, companies, palaces, senate, forum. We leave you your temples
only. We can count your armies, and our numbers in a single province
will be greater. In what war with you should we not be sufficient and
ready, even though unequal in numbers, who so willingly are put to
death, if it were not in this Religion of ours more lawful to be slain
than to slay?”

Once more, let us hear the great Origen, in the early part of the
next century:—“In all Greece and in all barbarous races within our
world, there are tens of thousands who have left their national laws
and customary gods for the law of Moses and the word of Jesus Christ;
though to adhere to that law is to incur the hatred of idolaters, and
the risk of death besides to have embraced that word. And considering
how, in so few years, in spite of the attacks made on us, to the loss
of life or property, and with no great store of teachers, the preaching
of that word has found its way into every part of the world, so that
Greek and barbarians, wise and unwise, adhere to the religion of Jesus,
doubtless it is a work greater than any work of man.”

We need no proof to assure us that this steady and rapid growth of
Christianity was a phenomenon which startled its contemporaries, as
much as it excites the curiosity of philosophic historians now; and
they too then had their own ways of accounting for it, different indeed
from Gibbon’s, but quite as pertinent, though less elaborate. These
were principally two, both leading them to persecute it,—the obstinacy
of the Christians and their magical powers, of which the former was the
explanation adopted by educated minds, and the latter chiefly by the
populace.

As to the former, from first to last, men in power magisterially
reprobate the senseless obstinacy of the members of the new sect, as
their characteristic offence. Pliny, as we have seen, found it to be
their only fault, but one sufficient to merit capital punishment. The
Emperor Marcus seems to consider obstinacy the ultimate motive-cause
to which their unnatural conduct was traceable. After speaking of the
soul, as “ready, if it must now be separated from the body, to be
extinguished, or dissolved, or to remain with it;” he adds, “but the
readiness must come of its own judgment, not from simple perverseness,
as in the case of Christians, but with considerateness, with gravity,
and without theatrical effect, so as to be persuasive.” And Diocletian,
in his Edict of persecution, professes it to be his “earnest aim to
punish the depraved persistence of those most wicked men.”

As to the latter charge, their founder, it was said, had gained a
knowledge of magic in Egypt, and had left behind him in his sacred
books the secrets of the art. Suetonius himself speaks of them as “men
of a magical superstition;” and Celsus accuses them of “incantations
in the name of demons.” The officer who had custody of St. Perpetua,
feared her escape from prison “by magical incantations.” When St.
Tiburtius had walked barefoot on hot coals, his judge cried out that
Christ had taught him magic. St. Anastasia was thrown into prison as
dealing in poisons; the populace called out against St. Agnes, “Away
with the witch! away with the sorceress!” When St. Bonosus and St.
Maximilian bore the burning pitch without shrinking, Jews and heathen
cried out, “Those wizards and sorcerers!” “What new delusion,” says
the magistrate concerning St. Romanus, in the Hymn of Prudentius, “has
brought in these sophists who deny the worship of the Gods? how doth
this chief sorcerer mock us, stilled by his Thessalian charm to laugh
at punishment?(54)”

It is indeed difficult to enter into the feelings of irritation and
fear, of contempt and amazement, which were excited, whether in the
town populace or in the magistrates in the presence of conduct so
novel, so unvarying, so absolutely beyond their comprehension. The
very young and the very old, the child, the youth in the heyday of
his passions, the sober man of middle age, maidens and mothers of
families, boors and slaves as well as philosophers and nobles, solitary
confessors and companies of men and women,—all these were seen equally
to defy the powers of darkness to do their worst. In this strange
encounter it became a point of honour with the Roman to break the
determination of his victim, and it was the triumph of faith when his
most savage expedients for that purpose were found to be in vain.
The martyrs shrank from suffering like other men, but such natural
shrinking was incommensurable with apostasy. No intensity of torture
had any means of affecting what was a mental conviction; and the
sovereign Thought in which they had lived was their adequate support
and consolation in their death. To them the prospect of wounds and
loss of limbs was not more terrible than it is to the combatant of
this world. They faced the implements of torture as the soldier takes
his post before the enemy’s battery. They cheered and ran forward to
meet his attack, and as it were dared him, if he would, to destroy the
numbers who kept closing up the foremost rank, as their comrades who
had filled it fell. And when Rome at last found she had to deal with a
host of Scævolas, then the proudest of earthly sovereignties, arrayed
in the completeness of her material resources, humbled herself before a
power which was founded on a mere sense of the unseen.

In the colloquy of the aged Ignatius, the disciple of the Apostles,
with the Emperor Trajan, we have a sort of type of what went on for
three, or rather four centuries. He was sent all the way from Antioch
to Rome to be devoured by the beasts in the amphitheatre. As he
travelled, he wrote letters to various Christian Churches, and among
others to his Roman brethren, among whom he was to suffer. Let us
see whether, as I have said, the Image of that Divine King, who had
been promised from the beginning, was not the living principle of his
obstinate resolve. The old man is almost fierce in his determination
to be martyred. “May those beasts,” he says to his brethren, “be my
gain, which are in readiness for me! I will provoke and coax them to
devour me quickly, and not to be afraid of me, as they are of some whom
they will not touch. Should they be unwilling, I will compel them.
Bear with me; I know what is my gain. Now I begin to be a disciple. Of
nothing of things visible or invisible am I ambitious, save to gain
Christ. Whether it is fire or the cross, the assault of wild beasts,
the wrenching of my bones, the crunching of my limbs, the crushing of
my whole body, let the tortures of the devil all assail me, if I do but
gain Christ Jesus.” Elsewhere in the same Epistle he says, “I write
to you, still alive, but longing to die. My Love is crucified! I have
no taste for perishable food. I long for God’s Bread, heavenly Bread,
Bread of life, which is Flesh of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I long
for God’s draught, His Blood, which is Love without corruption, and
Life for evermore.” It is said that, when he came into the presence
of Trajan, the latter cried out, “Who are you, poor devil, who are so
eager to transgress our rules?” “That is no name,” he answered, “for
Theophorus.” “Who is Theophorus?” asked the Emperor. “He who bears
Christ in his breast.” In the Apostle’s words, already cited, he had
“Christ in him, the hope of glory.” All this may be called enthusiasm;
but enthusiasm affords a much more adequate explanation of the
confessorship of an old man, than do Gibbon’s five reasons.

Instances of the same ardent spirit, and of the living faith on which
it was founded, are to be found wherever we open the _Acta Martyrum_.
In the outbreak at Smyrna, in the middle of the second century, amid
tortures which even moved the heathen bystanders to compassion, the
sufferers were conspicuous for their serene calmness. “They made it
evident to us all,” says the Epistle of the Church, “that in the midst
of those sufferings they were absent from the body, or rather, that the
Lord stood by them, and walked in the midst of them.”

At that time Polycarp, the familiar friend of St. John, and a
contemporary of Ignatius, suffered in his extreme old age. When, before
his sentence, the Proconsul bade him “swear by the fortunes of Cæsar,
and have done with Christ,” his answer betrayed that intimate devotion
to the self-same Idea, which had been the inward life of Ignatius.
“Eighty and six years,” he answered, “have I been His servant, and
He has never wronged me, but ever has preserved me; and how can I
blaspheme my King and my Saviour?” When they would have fastened him to
the stake, he said, “Let alone; He who gives me to bear the fire, will
give me also to stand firm upon the pyre without your nails.”

Christians felt it as an acceptable service to Him who loved them, to
confess with courage and to suffer with dignity. In this chivalrous
spirit, as it may be called, they met the words and deeds of their
persecutors, as the children of men return bitterness for bitterness,
and blow for blow. “What soldier,” says Minucius, with a reference to
the invisible Presence of our Lord, “does not challenge danger more
daringly under the eye of his commander?” In that same outbreak at
Smyrna, when the Proconsul urged the young Germanicus to have mercy
on himself and on his youth, to the astonishment of the populace he
provoked a wild beast to fall upon him. In like manner, St. Justin
tells us of Lucius, who, when he saw a Christian sent off to suffer, at
once remonstrated sharply with the judge, and was sent off to execution
with him; and then another presented himself, and was sent off also.
When the Christians were thrown into prison, in the fierce persecution
at Lyons, Vettius Epagathus, a youth of distinction who had given
himself to an ascetic life, could not bear the sight of the sufferings
of his brethren, and asked leave to plead their cause. The only answer
he got was to be sent off the first to die. What the contemporary
account sees in his conduct is, not that he was zealous for his
brethren, though zealous he was, nor that he believed in miracles,
though he doubtless did believe; but that he “was a gracious disciple
of Christ, following the Lamb whithersoever He went.”

In that memorable persecution, when Blandina, a slave, was seized for
confessorship, her mistress and her fellow-Christians dreaded lest,
from her delicate make, she should give way under the torments; but
she even tired out her tormentors. It was a refreshment and relief
to her to cry out amid her pains, “I am a Christian.” They remanded
her to prison, and then brought her out for fresh suffering a second
day and a third. On the last day she saw a boy of fifteen brought
into the amphitheatre for death; she feared for him, as others had
feared for her; but he too went through his trial generously, and
went to God before her. Her last sufferings were to be placed in the
notorious red-hot chair, and then to be exposed in a net to a wild
bull; they finished by cutting her throat. Sanctus, too, when the
burning plates of brass were placed on his limbs, all through his
torments did but say, “I am a Christian,” and stood erect and firm,
“bathed and strengthened,” say his brethren who write the account,
“in the heavenly well of living water which flows from the breast of
Christ,” or, as they say elsewhere of all the martyrs, “refreshed with
the joy of martyrdom, the hope of blessedness, love towards Christ, and
the spirit of God the Father.” How clearly do we see all through this
narrative what it was which nerved them for the combat! If they love
their brethren, it is in the fellowship of their Lord; if they look for
heaven, it is because He is the Light of it.

Epipodius, a youth of gentle nurture, when struck by the Prefect on
the mouth, while blood flowed from it, cried out, “I confess that
Jesus Christ is God, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost.”
Symphorian, of Autun, also a youth, and of noble birth, when told
to adore an idol, answered, “Give me leave, and I will hammer it to
pieces.” When Leonidas, the father of the young Origen, was in prison
for his faith, the boy, then seventeen, burned to share his martyrdom,
and his mother had to hide his clothes to prevent him from executing
his purpose. Afterwards he attended the confessors in prison, stood
by them at the tribunal, and gave them the kiss of peace when they
were led out to suffer, and this, in spite of being several times
apprehended and put upon the rack. Also in Alexandria, the beautiful
slave, Potamiæna, when about to be stripped in order to be thrown into
the cauldron of hot pitch, said to the Prefect, “I pray you rather let
me be dipped down slowly into it with my clothes on, and you shall
see with what patience I am gifted by Him of whom you are ignorant,
Jesus Christ.” When the populace in the same city had beaten out
the aged Apollonia’s teeth, and lit a fire to burn her, unless she
would blaspheme, she leaped into the fire herself, and so gained her
crown. When Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, was led to martyrdom, his deacon,
Laurence, followed him weeping and complaining, “O my father, whither
goest thou without thy son?” And when his own turn came, three days
afterwards, and he was put upon the gridiron, after a while he said to
the Prefect, “Turn me; this side is done.” Whence came this tremendous
spirit, scaring, nay, offending, the fastidious criticism of our
delicate days? Does Gibbon think to sound the depths of the eternal
ocean with the tape and measuring-rod of his merely literary philosophy?

When Barulas, a child of seven years old, was scourged to blood for
repeating his catechism before the heathen judge—viz. “There is but
one God, and Jesus Christ is true God”—his mother encouraged him to
persevere, chiding him for asking for some drink. At Merida, a girl
of noble family, of the age of twelve, presented herself before the
tribunal, and overturned the idols. She was scourged and burned with
torches; she neither shed a tear, nor showed other signs of suffering.
When the fire reached her face, she opened her mouth to receive it, and
was suffocated. At Cæsarea, a girl, under eighteen, went boldly to ask
the prayers of some Christians who were in chains before the Prætorium.
She was seized at once, and her sides torn open with the iron rakes,
preserving the while a bright and joyous countenance. Peter, Dorotheus,
Gorgonius, were boys of the imperial bedchamber; they were highly in
favour with their masters, and were Christians. They too suffered
dreadful torments, dying under them, without a shadow of wavering. Call
such conduct madness, if you will, or magic: but do not mock us by
ascribing it in such mere children to simple desire of immortality, or
to any ecclesiastical organization.

When the persecution raged in Asia, a vast multitude of Christians
presented themselves before the Proconsul, challenging him to proceed
against them. “Poor wretches!” half in contempt and half in affright,
he answered, “if you must die, cannot you find ropes or precipices
for the purpose?” At Utica, a hundred and fifty Christians of both
sexes and all ages were martyrs in one company. They are said to have
been told to burn incense to an idol, or they should be thrown into a
pit of burning lime; they without hesitation leapt into it. In Egypt
a hundred and twenty confessors, after having sustained the loss of
eyes or of feet, endured to linger out their lives in the mines of
Palestine and Cilicia. In the last persecution, according to the
testimony of the grave Eusebius, a contemporary, the slaughter of men,
women, and children, went on by twenties, sixties, hundreds, till the
instruments of execution were worn out, and the executioners could
kill no more. Yet he tells us, as an eye-witness, that, as soon as any
Christians were condemned, others ran from all parts, and surrounded
the tribunals, confessing the faith, and joyfully receiving their
condemnation, and singing songs of thanksgiving and triumph to the last.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Thus was the Roman power overcome. Thus did the Seed of Abraham, and
the Expectation of the Gentiles, the meek Son of man, “take to Himself
His great power and reign” in the hearts of His people, in the public
theatre of the world. The mode in which the primeval prophecy was
fulfilled is as marvellous, as the prophecy itself is clear and bold.

“So may all Thy enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love Thee
shine, as the sun shineth in his rising!”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

I will add the memorable words of the two great Apologists of the
period:—

“Your cruelty,” says Tertullian, “though each act be more refined
than the last, doth profit you nothing. To our sect it is rather an
inducement. We grow up in greater numbers, as often as you cut us down.
The blood of the martyrs is their seed for the harvest.”

Origen even uses the language of prophecy. To the objection of Celsus
that Christianity from its principles would, if let alone, open the
whole empire to the irruption of the barbarians, and the utter ruin of
civilization, he replies, “If all Romans are such as we, then too the
barbarians will draw near to the Word of God, and will become the most
observant of the Law. And every worship shall come to nought, and that
of the Christians alone obtain the mastery, for the Word is continually
gaining possession of more and more souls.”

One additional remark:—It was fitting that those mixed unlettered
multitudes, who for three centuries had suffered and triumphed by
virtue of the inward Vision of their Divine Lord, should be selected,
as we know they were, in the fourth, to be the special champions of His
Divinity and the victorious foes of its impugners, at a time when the
civil power, which had found them too strong for its arms, attempted,
by means of a portentous heresy in the high places of the Church, to
rob them of that Truth which had all along been the principle of their
strength.

10.

I have been forestalling all along the thought with which I shall close
these considerations on the subject of Christianity; and necessarily
forestalling it, because it properly comes first, though the course
which my argument has taken has not allowed me to introduce it in its
natural place. Revelation begins where Natural Religion fails. The
Religion of Nature is a mere inchoation, and needs a complement,—it can
have but one complement, and that very complement is Christianity.

Natural Religion is based upon the sense of sin; it recognizes the
disease, but it cannot find, it does but look out for the remedy. That
remedy, both for guilt and for moral impotence, is found in the central
doctrine of Revelation, the Mediation of Christ. I need not go into a
subject so familiar to all men in a Christian country.

Thus it is that Christianity is the fulfilment of the promise made to
Abraham, and of the Mosaic revelations; this is how it has been able
from the first to occupy the world and gain a hold on every class of
human society to which its preachers reached; this is why the Roman
power and the multitude of religions which it embraced could not
stand against it; this is the secret of its sustained energy, and its
never-flagging martyrdoms; this is how at present it is so mysteriously
potent, in spite of the new and fearful adversaries which beset its
path. It has with it that gift of staunching and healing the one
deep wound of human nature, which avails more for its success than
a full encyclopedia of scientific knowledge and a whole library of
controversy, and therefore it must last while human nature lasts. It is
a living truth which never can grow old.

Some persons speak of it as if it were a thing of history, with only
indirect bearings upon modern times; I cannot allow that it is a mere
historical religion. Certainly it has its foundations in past and
glorious memories, but its power is in the present. It is no dreary
matter of antiquarianism; we do not contemplate it in conclusions
drawn from dumb documents and dead events, but by faith exercised in
ever-living objects, and by the appropriation and use of ever-recurring
gifts.

Our communion with it is in the unseen, not in the obsolete. At this
very day its rites and ordinances are continually eliciting the active
interposition of that Omnipotence in which the Religion long ago began.
First and above all is the Holy Mass, in which He who once died for us
upon the Cross, brings back and perpetuates, by His literal presence
in it, that one and the same sacrifice which cannot be repeated. Next,
there is the actual entrance of Himself, soul and body, and divinity,
into the soul and body of every worshipper who comes to Him for the
gift, a privilege more intimate than if we lived with Him during His
long-past sojourn upon earth. And then, moreover, there is His personal
abidance in our churches, raising earthly service into a foretaste of
heaven. Such is the profession of Christianity, and, I repeat, its very
divination of our needs is in itself a proof that it is really the
supply of them.

Upon the doctrines which I have mentioned as central truths, others,
as we all know, follow, which rule our personal conduct and course
of life, and our social and civil relations. The promised Deliverer,
the Expectation of the nations, has not done His work by halves. He
has given us Saints and Angels for our protection. He has taught us
how by our prayers and services to benefit our departed friends, and
to keep up a memorial of ourselves when we are gone. He has created a
visible hierarchy and a succession of sacraments, to be the channels
of His mercies, and the Crucifix secures the thought of Him in every
house and chamber. In all these ways He brings Himself before us. I
am not here speaking of His gifts as gifts, but as memorials; not as
what Christians know they convey, but in their visible character; and I
say, that, as human nature itself is still in life and action as much
as ever it was, so He too lives, to our imaginations, by His visible
symbols, as if He were on earth, with a practical efficacy which even
unbelievers cannot deny, to be the corrective of that nature, and its
strength day by day, and that this power of perpetuating His Image,
being altogether singular and special, and the prerogative of Him
and Him alone, is a grand evidence how well He fulfils to this day
that Sovereign Mission which, from the first beginning of the world’s
history, has been in prophecy assigned to Him.

I cannot better illustrate this argument than by recurring to a deep
thought on the subject of Christianity, which has before now attracted
the notice of philosophers and preachers,(55) as coming from the
wonderful man who swayed the destinies of Europe in the first years
of this century. It was an argument not unnatural in one who had that
special passion for human glory, which has been the incentive of so
many heroic careers and of so many mighty revolutions in the history
of the world. In the solitude of his imprisonment, and in the view of
death, he is said to have expressed himself to the following effect:—


    “I have been accustomed to put before me the examples of Alexander
    and Cæsar, with the hope of rivalling their exploits, and living
    in the minds of men for ever. Yet, after all, in what sense does
    Cæsar, in what sense does Alexander live? Who knows or cares
    anything about them? At best, nothing but their names is known;
    for who among the multitude of men, who hear or who utter their
    names, really knows anything about their lives or their deeds, or
    attaches to those names any definite idea? Nay, even their names
    do but flit up and down the world like ghosts, mentioned only on
    particular occasions, or from accidental associations. Their chief
    home is the schoolroom; they have a foremost place in boys’
    grammars and exercise-books; they are splendid examples for
    themes; they form writing-copies. So low is heroic Alexander
    fallen, so low is imperial Cæsar, ‘ut pueris placeant et
    declamatio fiant.’

    “But, on the contrary” (he is reported to have continued), “there
    is just One Name in the whole world that lives; it is the Name of
    One who passed His years in obscurity, and who died a malefactor’s
    death. Eighteen hundred years have gone since that time, but still
    it has its hold upon the human mind. It has possessed the world,
    and it maintains possession. Amid the most varied nations, under
    the most diversified circumstances, in the most cultivated, in the
    rudest races and intellects, in all classes of society, the Owner
    of that great Name reigns. High and low, rich and poor,
    acknowledge Him. Millions of souls are conversing with Him, are
    venturing on His word, are looking for His presence. Palaces,
    sumptuous, innumerable, are raised to His honour; His image, as in
    the hour of his deepest humiliation, is triumphantly displayed in
    the proud city, in the open country, in the corners of streets, on
    the tops of mountains. It sanctifies the ancestral hall, the
    closet, and the bedchamber; it is the subject for the exercise of
    the highest genius in the imitative arts. It is worn next the
    heart in life; it is held before the failing eyes in death. Here,
    then, is One who is _not_ a mere name, who is not a mere fiction,
    who is a reality. He is dead and gone, but still He lives,—lives
    as the living, energetic thought of successive generations, as the
    awful motive-power of a thousand great events. He has done without
    effort what others with life-long struggles have not done. Can He
    be less than Divine? Who is He but the Creator Himself; who is
    sovereign over His own works, towards whom our eyes and hearts
    turn instinctively, because He is our Father and our God?(56)”


Here I end my specimens, among the many which might be given, of the
arguments adducible for Christianity. I have dwelt upon them, in order
to show how I would apply the principles of this Essay to the proof
of its divine origin. Christianity is addressed, both as regards its
evidences and its contents, to minds which are in the normal condition
of human nature, as believing in God and in a future judgment.
Such minds it addresses both through the intellect and through the
imagination; creating a certitude of its truth by arguments too various
for enumeration, too personal and deep for words, too powerful and
concurrent for refutation. Nor need reason come first and faith second
(though this is the logical order), but one and the same teaching is in
different aspects both object and proof, and elicits one complex act
both of inference and of assent. It speaks to us one by one, and it is
received by us one by one, as the counterpart, so to say, of ourselves,
and is real as we are real.

In the sacred words of its Divine Author and Object concerning Himself,
“I am the Good Shepherd, and I know mine, and Mine know Me. My sheep
hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me. And I give them
everlasting life, and they shall never perish; and no man shall pluck
them out of My hand.”




NOTE.


1. On the first publication of this volume, a Correspondent did me
the favour of marking for me a list of passages in Chillingworth’s
celebrated work, besides that which I had myself quoted, in which the
argument was more or less brought forward, on which I have animadverted
in ch. vii. § 2, p. 226. He did this with the purpose of showing, that
Chillingworth’s meaning, when carefully inquired into, would be found
to be in substantial agreement with the distinction I had myself made
between infallibility and certitude; those inaccuracies of language
into which he fell, being necessarily involved in the _argumentum
ad hominem_, which he was urging upon his opponent, or being the
accidental result of the peculiar character of his intellect, which,
while full of ideas, was wanting in the calmness and caution which are
conspicuous in Bishop Butler. Others more familiar with Chillingworth
than I am must decide on this point; but I can have no indisposition to
accept an explanation, which deprives controversialists of this day of
the authority of a vigorous and acute mind in their use of an argument,
which is certainly founded on a great confusion of thought.

I subjoin the references with which my Correspondent has supplied me:—


    (1.) Passages tending to show an agreement of Chillingworth’s
    opinion on the distinction between certitude and infallibility
    with that laid down in the foregoing essay:—

    1. “Religion of Protestants,” ch. ii. § 121 (vol. i. p. 243, Oxf.
    ed. 1838), “For may not a private man,” &c.

    2. _Ibid._ § 152 (p. 265). The last sentence, however, after “when
    they thought they dreamt,” is a fall into the error which he had
    been exposing.

    3. _Ibid._ § 160 (p. 275).

    4. Ch. iii. § 26 (p. 332), “Neither is your argument,” &c.

    5. _Ibid._ § 36 (p. 346).

    6. _Ibid._ § 50 (p. 363), “That Abraham,” &c.

    7. Ch. v. § 63 (vol ii. p. 215).

    8. _Ibid._ § 107 (p. 265).

    9. Ch vii. § 13 (p. 452). _Vide_ also vol. i. pp. 115, 121, 196,
    236, 242, 411.

    (2.) Passages inconsistent with the above:—

    1. Ch. ii. § 25 (vol. i. p. 177). _An argumentum ad hominem._

    2. _Ibid._ § 28 (p. 180).

    3. _Ibid._ § 45 (p. 189). _An argumentum ad hominem._

    4. _Ibid._ § 149 (p. 263). _An argumentum ad hominem._

    5. _Ibid._ § 154 (p. 267). Quoted in the text, p. 226.

    6. Ch. v. § 45 (vol. ii. p. 391). He is arguing on his opponent’s
    principles.


2. Also, I have to express my obligation to another Correspondent,
who called my attention to a passage of Hooker (“Eccles. Pol.” ii.
7) beginning “An earnest desire,” &c., which seemed to anticipate
the doctrine of Locke about certitude. It is so difficult to be sure
of the meaning of a writer whose style is so foreign to that of our
own times, that I am shy of attempting to turn this passage into
categorical statements. Else, I should ask, does not Hooker here assume
the absolute certainty of the inspiration and divine authority of
Scripture, and believe its teaching as the very truth unconditionally
and without any admixture of doubt? Yet what had he but probable
evidence as a warrant for such a view of it? Again, did he receive the
Athanasian Creed on any logical demonstration that its articles were in
Scripture? Yet he felt himself able without any misgiving to say aloud
in the congregation, “Which faith except every one do keep whole and
undefiled, _without doubt_ he shall perish everlastingly.” In truth it
is the happy inconsistency of his school to be more orthodox in their
conclusions than in their premisses; to be sceptics in their paper
theories, and believers in their own persons.

3. Also, a friend sends me word, as regards the controversy on the
various readings of Shakespeare to which I have referred (_supra_,
ch. viii. §1, p. 271) in illustration of the shortcomings of Formal
Inference, that, since the date of the article in the magazine,
of which I have there availed myself, the verdict of critics has
been unfavourable to the authority and value of the Annotated
Copy, discovered twenty years ago. I may add, that, since my first
edition, I have had the pleasure of reading Dr. Ingleby’s interesting
dissertation on the “Traces of the Authorship of the Works attributed
to Shakespeare.”




FOOTNOTES


  1 “The Oxford Spy,” 1818; by J. S. Boone, p. 107.

  2 Vide “Discussions and Arguments on Various Subjects,” art. 4.

  3 On the Formation of Images, _vide supr._ ch. iii. 1, pp. 27, 28.

  4 Liberty of Prophesying, § 2.

  5 This passage is already quoted in my “Essay on Development of
    Doctrine,” vi. 1, § 2.

  6 Gambier on Moral Evidence, p. 6.

  7 “Supernaturalis mentis assensus, rebus fidei exhibitus, cùm præcipuè
    dependeat à gratiâ Dei intrinsecus mentem illuminante et commovente,
    potest esse, et est, major quocunque assensu certitudini naturali
    præstito, seu ex motivis naturalibus orto,” &c.—Dmouski, Instit. t.
    i. p. 28.

  8 “Hoc [viz. multo certior est homo de eo quod audit à Deo qui falli
    non potest, quàm de eo quod videt propriâ ratione quâ falli potest]
    intelligendum est de certitudine fidei secundum appretiationem, non
    secundum intentionem; nam sæpe contingit, ut scientia clariùs
    percipiatur ab intellectu, atque ut connexio scientiæ cum veritate
    magis appareat, quàm connexio fidei cum eâdem; cognitiones enim
    naturales, utpote captui nostro accommodatæ, magis animum quietant,
    delectant, et veluti. satiant.”—Scavini, Theol. Moral. t. ii. p.
    428.

  9 “Suppono enim, veritatem fidei non esse certiorem veritate
    metaphysicâ aut geometricâ quoad modum assensionis, sed tantum quoad
    modum adhæsionis; quia utrinque intellectus absolutè sine modo
    limitante assentitur. Sola autem adhæsio voluntatis diversa est;
    quia in actu fidei gratia seu habitus infusus roborat intellectum et
    voluntatem, ne tam facilè mutentur aut perturbentur.”—Amort, Theol.
    t. i. p. 312.

    “Hæc distinctio certitudinis [ex diversitate motivorum] extrinsecam
    tantum differentiam importat, cùm omnis naturalis certitudo,
    formaliter spectata, sit æqualis; debet enim essentialiter erroris
    periculum amovere, exclusio autem periculi erroris in indivisibili
    consistit; aut enim babetur aut non habetur.”—Dmouski, ibid. p. 27.

 10 “Fides est certior omni veritate naturali, etiam geometricè aut
    metaphysicè certâ; idque non solum certitudine adhæsionis sed etiam
    assentionis.... Intellectus sentit se in multis veritatibus etiam
    metaphysicè certis posse per objectiones perturbari, e. g. si legat
    scepticos.... E contrà circa ea, quæ constat esse revelata à Deo,
    nullus potest perturbari.”—Amort, ibid. p. 367.

 11 ii. n. 154. _Vide_ Note at the end of the volume.

 12 I have assumed throughout this Section that all verbal argumentation
    is ultimately syllogistic; and in consequence that it ever requires
    universal propositions and comes short of concrete fact. A friend
    refers me to the dispute between Des Cartes and Gassendi, the latter
    maintaining against the former that “Cogito ergo sum” implies the
    universal “All who think exist.” I should deny this with Des Cartes;
    but I should say (as indeed he said), that his dictum was not an
    argument, but was the expression of a ratiocinative instinct, as I
    explain below under the head of “Natural Logic.”

    As to the instance “Brutes are not men; therefore men are not
    brutes,” there seems to me no consequence here, neither a _præter_
    nor a _propter_, but a tautology. And as to “It was either Tom or
    Dick that did it; it was not Dick, ergo,” this may be referred to
    the one great principle on which all logical reasoning is founded,
    but really it ought not to be accounted an inference any more than
    if I broke a biscuit, flung half away, and then said of the other
    half, “This is what remains.” It does but state a fact. So, when the
    1st, 2nd, or 3rd proposition of Euclid II. is put before the eyes in
    a diagram, a boy, before he yet has learned to reason, sees with his
    eyes the fact of the thesis, and this _seeing_ it even makes it
    difficult for him to master the mathematical proof. Here, then, a
    _fact_ is stated in the form of an _argument_.

    However, I have inserted parentheses at pp. 277 and 283, in order to
    say “transeat” to the question.

 13 “Aids to Reflection,” p. 59, ed. 1839.

 14 Taylor’s Translation, p. 131.

 15 Ibid. pp. 108-110.

 16 Ibid. pp. 429-436.

 17 “North and South.”

 18 Serm. xi. init.

 19 Vide supr._ ch. v. § 1, pp. 109, 113.

 20 Pp. 84, 85.

 21 “Analogy,” pp. 329, 330, ed. 1836.

 22 Ibid. p. 278.

 23 “Mechanics,” p. 31.

 24 Phillipps’ “Law of Evidence,” vol. i. p. 456.

 25 “Orley Farm.”

  26 Guardian_, June 28, 1865.

 27 History, vol. x. pp. 286, 287.

 28 “Peveril of the Peak.”

 29 “Life of Mother Margaret M. Hallahan,” p. vii.

 30 Eth. Nicom. vi. 11, fin.

 31 Though Aristotle, in his Nicomachean Ethics, speaks of φρόνησις as
    the virtue of the δοξαστικὸν generally, and as being concerned
    generally with contingent matter (vi. 4), or what I have called the
    concrete, and of its function being, as regards that matter,
    ἀληθεύειν τῷ καταφάναι ἢ ἀποφάναι (_ibid._ 3), he does not treat of
    it in that work in its general relation to truth and the affirmation
    of truth, but only as it bears upon τὰ πρακτά.

 32 Niebuhr, “Roman History,” vol. i. p. 177; vol. iii. pp. 262. 318.
    322. “Lectures,” vol. iii. App. p. xxii. Lewis, “Roman History,”
    vol. i. pp. 11-17; vol. ii. pp. 489-492. F. W. Newman, “Regal Rome,”
    p. v. Grote, “Greece,” vol. ii. pp. 67, 68. 218. 630-639. Mure,
    “Greece,” vol. iii. p. 503; vol. iv. p. 318. Clinton, ap. Grote,
    suprà.

 33 “Prophetical Office of the Church,” pp. 347, 348, ed. 1837.

 34 Supra_, p. 105, &c. _Vide_ also Univ. Serm. ii. 7-13.

 35 Penny Cyclopædia_, art. “Atonement” (abridged).

 36 On these various subjects I have written in “University Sermons”
    (Oxford), No. vi. “Idea of the University,” Disc. viii. “History of
    Turks,” ch. iv. “Development of Doctrine,” ch. i. sect. 3.

 37 Vide_ “Apologia,” p. 241.

 38 Vide_ “Callista,” ch. xix.

 39 “Analogy,” Pt. ii. ch. 5 (abridged).

 40 “Scopus operis est, planiorem Protestantibus aperire viam ad veram
    Ecclesiam. Cùm enim hactenus Polemici nostri insudarint toti in
    demonstrandis singulis Religionis Catholicæ articulis, in id ego
    unum incumbo, ut hæc tria evincam. Primo: Articulos fundamentales
    Religionis Catholicæ esse evidenter credibiliores oppositis, &c.
    &c.... Demonstratio autem hujus novæ, modestæ, ac facilis viæ, quâ
    ex articulis fundamentalibus solùm probabilioribus adstruitur summa
    Religionis certitudo, hæc est: Deus, cùm sit sapiens ac providus,
    tenetur, Religionem à se revelatam reddere evidenter credibiliorem
    religionibus falsis. Imprudenter enim vellet, suam Religionem ab
    hominibus recipi, nisi eam redderet evidenter credibiliorem
    religionibus cæteris. Ergo illa religio, quæ est evidenter
    credibilior cæteris, est ipsissima religio a Deo revelata, adeoque
    certissimè vera, seu demonstrata. Atqui, &c.... Motivum aggrediendi
    novam hanc, modestam, ac facilem viam illud præcipuum est, quòd
    observem, Protestantium plurimos post innumeros concertationum
    fluctus, in iis tandem consedisse syrtibus, ut credant, nullam dari
    religionem undequaque demonstratam, &c.... Ratiociniis denique
    opponunt ratiocinia; præjudiciis præjudicia ex majoribus sua,” &c.

 41 “Docet naturalis ratio, Deum, ex ipsâ naturâ bonitatis ac
    providentiæ suæ, si velit in mundo habere religionem puram, eamque
    instituere ac conservare usque in finem mundi, teneri ad eam
    religionem reddendam evidenter credibiliorem ac verisimiliorem
    cæteris, &c. &c.... Ex hoc sequitur ulterius; certitudinem moralem
    de verâ Ecclesiâ elevari posse ad certitudinem metaphysicam, si homo
    advertat, certitudinem moralem absolutè fallibilem substare in
    materiâ religionis circa ejus constitutiva fundamentalia speciali
    providentiæ divinæ, præservatrici ab omni errore.... Itaque homo
    semel ex serie historicâ actorum perductus ad moralem certitudinem
    de auctore, fundatione, propagatione, et continuatione Ecclesiæ
    Christianæ, per reflexionem ad existentiam certissimam providentiæ
    divinæ in materiâ religionis, à priori lumine naturæ certitudine
    metaphysicâ notam, eo ipso eadem infallibili certitudine intelliget,
    argumenta de auctore,” &c.—Amort. Ethica Christiana, p. 252.

 42 “De hac damnatorum saltem hominum respiratione, nihil adhuc certi
    decretum est ab Ecclesiâ Catholicâ: ut propterea non temerè, tanquam
    absurda, sit explodenda sanctissimorum Patrum hæc opinio: quamvis à
    communi sensu Catholicorum hoc tempore sit aliena.”—Petavius de
    Angelis, fin.

 43 Vide supra_, p. 302.

 44 Vide_ the author’s Occasional Sermons, No. 5.

 45 Vide supra_, p. 84.

 46 History, vol. viii.

 47 Before and apart from Christianity, the Samaritan Version reads,
    “donec veniat Pacificus, et ad ipsum congregabuntur populi.” The
    Targum, “donec veniat Messias, cujus est regnum, et obedient
    populi.” The Septuagint, “donec veniant quæ reservata sunt illi” (or
    “donec veniat cui reservatum est”), “et ipse expectatio gentium.”
    And so again the Vulgate, “donec veniat qui mittendus est, et ipse
    erit expectatio gentium.”

    The ingenious translation of some learned men (“donec venerit Juda
    Siluntem,” i. e. “the tribe-sceptre shall not depart from Judah till
    Judah comes to Shiloh”), with the explanation that the tribe of
    Judah had the leadership in the war against the Canaanites, _vide_
    Judges i. 1, 2; xx. 18 (i. e. after Joshua’s _death_), and that
    possibly, and for what we know, the tribe gave up that war-command
    at Shiloh, _vide_ Joshua xviii. 1 (i. e. in Joshua’s _life-time_),
    labours under three grave difficulties: 1. That the patriarchal
    sceptre is a temporary war-command. 2. That this command belonged to
    Judah at the very time that it belonged to Joshua. And 3. That it
    was finally lost to Judah (Joshua living) before it had been
    committed to Judah (Joshua dead).

 48 He appeals to the prophecies in evidence of His Divine mission, in
    addressing the Nazarites (Luke iv. 18), St. John’s disciples (Matt.
    xi. 5), and the Pharisees (Matt. xxi. 42, and John v. 39), but not
    in details. The appeal to details He reserves for His disciples.
    _Vide_ Matt. xi. 10; xxvi. 24, 31, 54: Luke xxii. 37; xxiv. 27, 46.

 49 Vide supra, pp. 341, 375, 413-416.

 50 Vide supra.

 51 Had my limits allowed it, I ought, as a third subject, to have
    described the existing system of impure idolatry, and the wonderful
    phenomenon of such multitudes, who had been slaves to it, escaping
    from it by the power of Christianity,—under the guidance of the
    great work (“On the Gentile and the Jew”) of Dr. Döllinger.

 52 On the subjects which follow, _vide_ Lami, _De Eruditione
    Apostolorum_; Mamachius, _Origines Christ._; Ruinart, _Act. Mart._;
    Lardner, _Credibility_, &c.; Fleury, _Eccles. Hist._; Kortholt,
    _Calumn. Pagan._; and _De Morib. Christ._, &c.

 53 Ep. ad Diognet.

 54 Essay on Development of Doctrine, ch. iv. § 1.

 55 Fr. Lacordaire and M. Nicolas.

 56 Occas. Serm., pp. 49-51.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY IN AID OF A GRAMMAR
OF ASSENT***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact.

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

