CHAPTER XIX.

CONCERNING THE PRACTICAL EFFECTS OF THE SYSTEM.


The evidence which the Lord Jesus Christ proposed as proof of the
Divinity of the gospel system was its practical effect upon
individuals who receive and obey the truth. 'If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God.' If a sick
man calls a physician, who prescribes a certain medicine, which, by
his receiving it according to the directions, cures him, he then knows
both the efficacy of the medicine and the skill of the physician.
Experience is evidence to the saints of the Divinity of the system;
and its effects, in restoring the soul to moral health, is evidence to
the world of the Divine efficacy and power of its doctrines: 'By their
fruits ye shall know them.' In closing our volume, therefore, we have
now only briefly to inquire what are the ascertained practical effects
of faith in Christ?

We shall not refer to the moral condition of man in countries under
the influence of the gospel, compared with his condition in pagan
lands. We will not dwell upon the fact which, of itself, is sufficient
to establish at once and for ever the Divine origin of evangelical
religion, and the truth of the distinctive views developed in the
preceding chapters--that the most holy men and woman that have ever
lived have been those who exercised most constant and implicit faith
in Christ. Passing these facts, important in themselves, we will close
our volume by a statement of facts concerning the present influence of
faith in Christ upon individuals now living, and subject to the
examination of any one who might be sceptical upon the subject.

The following is a true statement of the influence of the religion of
Jesus upon several individual members of a village church in one of
the United States. It is composed of members of common intelligence,
and those in the common walks of life. Other churches might have been
selected in which, perhaps, a greater number of interesting cases
might have been found. And there are other individuals in this church
that would furnish as good an illustration of the power of the gospel
as some of those which are noticed below. This church has been
selected, because the writer had a better opportunity of visiting it
in order to obtain the facts than any other in which he knew the power
of the religion of Christ was experienced.

With the individuals spoken of I am well acquainted, having frequently
conversed with them all on the subjects of which I shall speak. Their
words in all cases may not have been remembered, but the sense is
truly given.

CASE 1.--An old man who has been a professor of religion from early
life. He was once a deacon, or elder, of the church. Twenty years ago he
was struck with paralysis, by which he has been ever since confined
almost entirely to his room. His situation is one that, to a mind which
had no inward consolation, would be irksome in the extreme. His books
are the Bible and one or two volumes of the old divines. He is patient
and happy; and speaking of the love of Christ almost invariably suffuses
his eyes with tears. He delights to dwell on religious subjects; and to
talk with a pious friend of the topics which his heart loves gives him
evident delight. Recently, his aged wife, who had trodden the path of
life with him, from youth to old age, died in his presence. She died,
what is called by Christians, a triumphant death; her last words were
addressed to her children who stood around--'I see the cross,'--a gleam
of pleasure passed over her features, her eyes lighted up with peculiar
brightness; she said, 'Blessed Jesus, the last hour is come: I am
ready;' and thus she departed. At her death, the old man wept freely,
and wept aloud; but his sorrow, he said, was mingled with a sweet joy.
How desolate would have been the condition of this poor cripple for the
last twenty years without the consolations of faith in Christ! And when
his aged wife died, who had for years sat by his side, how appalling
would have been the gloom that would have settled upon his soul, had not
his mind been sustained by heavenly hope! His case shows that the
religion of Christ will keep the affections warm and tender even to the
latest periods of old age, and give happiness to the soul under
circumstances of the most severe temporal bereavement.

CASE 2.--A converted atheist. I knew that there were those in the world
who professed to doubt the existence of a God; but I had met with no one
in all my intercourse with mankind who seemed so sincerely and so
entirely an atheist as the individual whose case is now introduced. The
first time that I met him was at the house of his son-in-law, a
gentleman of piety and intelligence. His appearance was that of a
decrepid, disconsolate old man. In the course of conversation he
unhesitatingly expressed his unbelief of the existence of a God, and his
suspicion of the motives of most of those who professed religion. I
learned from others that he had ceased in some measure to have
intercourse with men--had become misanthropic in his feelings, regarding
mankind in the light of a family of sharks, preying upon each other; and
his own duty in such a state of things, he supposed to be to make all
_honest_ endeavours to wrest from the grasp of others as much as he
could. He used profane language, opposed the temperance reformation, and
looked with the deepest hatred upon the ministers of religion. His
social affections seemed to be withered, and his body, sympathizing, was
distorted and diseased by rheumatic pains.

1. This old man had for years been the subject of special prayer on the
part of his pious daughter and his son-in-law; and he was finally
persuaded by them to attend a season of religious worship in the church
of which they were members. During these services, which lasted several
days, he passed from a state of atheism to a state of faith. The change
seemed to surprise every one, and himself as much as any other. From
being an atheist, he became the most simple and implicit believer. He
seemed like a being who had waked up in another world, the sensations of
which were all new to him; and although a man of sound sense in business
affairs, when he began to express his religious ideas, his language
seemed strange and incongruous, from the fact that, while his soul was
now filled with new thoughts and feelings, he had no knowledge of the
language by which such thoughts are usually expressed. The effects
produced by his conversion were as follows--stated at one time to
myself, and upon another occasion to one of the most eminent medical
practitioners in this country:--One of the first things which he did
after his conversion, was to love, in a practical manner, his worst
enemy. There was one man in the village who had, as he supposed, dealt
treacherously with him in some money transactions which had occurred
between them. On this account, personal enmity had long existed between
the two individuals. When converted, he sought his old enemy--asked his
forgiveness--and endeavoured to benefit him by bringing him under the
influence of the gospel.

2. His benevolent feelings were awakened and expanded. His first
benevolent offering was twenty-five cents, in a collection for
charitable uses. He now gives very liberally, in proportion to his
means, to all objects which he thinks will advance the interests of
the gospel of Christ. Besides supporting his own church and her
benevolent institutions, no enterprise of any denomination which he
really believes will do good fails to receive something from him, if
he has the means. During the last year, he has given more with the
design of benefiting his fellow-men than he had done in his whole
lifetime before.

3. His affections have received new life. He said to me, in conversation
upon the subject: 'One part of the Scriptures I feel to be true--that
which says, "I will take away the hard and stony heart, and give you a
heart of flesh." Once I seemed to have no feeling; now, thank God, I can
feel. I have buried two wives and six children, but I never shed a
tear--I felt hard and unhappy; now my tears flow at the recollection of
these things.' The tears at that time wet the old man's cheeks. It is
not probable that, since his conversion, there has been a single week
that he has not shed tears; before conversion he had not wept since the
age of manhood. An exhibition of the love of Christ will, at any time,
move his feelings with gratitude and love, until the tears moisten his
eyes.

4. Effect upon his life. Since his conversion he has not ceased to do
good as he has had opportunity. Several individuals have been led to
repent and believe in Christ through his instrumentality. Some of
these were individuals whose former habits rendered a change of
character very improbable in the eyes of most individuals. One of
them, who had fallen into the habit of intemperance, is now a
respectable and happy father of a respectable Christian family. He has
been known to go to several families on the same day, pray with them,
and invite them to attend religious worship on the Sabbath. And when
some difficulty was stated as a hindrance to their attendance, he has
assisted them to buy shoes, and granted other little aids of the kind,
in order that they might be induced to attend divine service. Since
the first edition was issued, a most remarkable fact concerning this
old man has come to the knowledge of the author. When converted, one
of his first acts, although he had heard nothing of any such act in
others, was to make out a list of all his old associates then living
within reach of his influence. For the conversion of these he
determined to labour as he had opportunity, and pray daily. On his
list were one hundred and sixteen names, among whom were sceptics,
drunkards, and other individuals as little likely to be reached by
Christian influence as any other men in the region. Within two years
from the period of the old man's conversion, one hundred of these
individuals had made a profession of religion. We can hardly suppose
that the old man was instrumental in the conversion of all these
persons, yet the fact is one of the most remarkable that has been
developed in the progress of Christianity.

5. Effect upon his happiness. In a social meeting of the church where
he worships, I heard him make such an expression as this: 'I have
rejoiced but once since I trusted in Christ--that has been all the
time.' His state of mind may be best described in his own characteristic
language. One day he was repairing his fence. An individual passing
addressed him: 'Mr. ----, you are at work all alone.' 'Not alone,' said
the old man, 'God is with me.' He said that his work seemed easy to him,
and his peace of mind continued with scarcely an interruption. I saw him
at a time when he had just received intelligence that a son who had gone
to the south had been shot in a personal altercation in one of the
southern cities. The old man's parental feelings were moved, but he
seemed, even under this sudden and most distressing affliction, to
derive strong consolation from trust in God.

6. Physical effects of the moral change. As soon as his moral nature had
undergone a change, his body, by sympathy, felt the benign influence.
His countenance assumed a milder and more intelligent aspect. He became
more tidy in his apparel, and his 'thousand pains,' in a good measure,
left him. In his case, there seemed to be a renovation both of soul and
body.

This case is not exaggerated: the old man is living, and there are
a thousand living witnesses to this testimony, among whom is an
intelligent physician, who, hearing the old man's history of his
feelings, and having known him personally for years, the obvious
effects which the faith in Christ had produced in this case, combined
with other influences by which he was surrounded, led him seriously to
examine the subject of religion, as it concerned his own spiritual
interest. By this examination he was led to relinquish the system of
'rational religion' (as the Socinian system is most inappropriately
called by its adherents), and profess his faith in orthodox religion.

CASE 3.--Two individuals, who had always been poor in this world's
goods but who are rich in faith. Many years ago, they lived in a new
settlement where there were no religious services. The neighbourhood,
at the suggestion of one of its members, met together on the Sabbath,
to sing sacred music, and to hear a sermon read. Those sermons were
the means of the conversion of the mother of the family. She lived an
exemplary life, but her husband still continued impenitent, and became
somewhat addicted to intemperance. Some of the children of the family,
as they reached mature years, were converted; the husband, and
finally, after a few years, all the remaining children, embraced
religion. From the day of the husband's conversion he drank no more
liquor, and, he says, he always afterwards thought of the habit with
abhorrence. The old people live alone. The old woman's sense of
hearing has so failed that she hears but imperfectly. When the weather
will allow, she attends church regularly, but sometimes hears but
little of the sermon. She sits on the Sabbath and looks up at the
minister, with a countenance glowing with an interested and happy
expression. She has joy to know that the minister is preaching about
Christ. The minister once described religion possessed as a spring of
living water, flowing from the rock by the way-side, which yields to
the weary traveller refreshment and delight; the old lady, at the
close, remarked, with meekness, 'I hope I have drunk, many times, of
those sweet waters.'

Except what concerns their particular domestic duties, the conversation
of this aged pair is almost entirely religious. They are devout, and
very happy in each other's society; and sometimes in their family
devotions and religious conversations their hearts glow with love for
God. They look forward to death with the consoling hope that they will
awake in the likeness of the glorious Saviour, and so 'be for ever with
the Lord.'

CASE 4.--A female was early in life united with the church, and
conscientiously performed the external duties of Christian life. She
had for many years little if any happiness in the performance of her
religious duties, yet would have been more unhappy if she had not
performed them. She married a gentleman who, during the last years of
his life, was peculiarly devoted. During this period, in attending
upon the means of grace she experienced an entire change in her
religious feelings. She felt, as she says, that 'now she gave up all
for Christ. She felt averse to everything which she believed to be
contrary to his will.--To the will of Jesus she could now submit for
ever, with joyful and entire confidence.--She now loved to pray, and
found happiness in obeying the Saviour.' She made, as she believes, at
that time an entire surrender of all her interests, for time and
eternity, to Christ, and since then her labours in his service have
been happy labours. Before they were constrained by conscience, now
they are prompted by the affections. She does not think she was not a
Christian before. She had repented in view of the law, but she had
not, till the time mentioned, exercised affectionate faith in
Christ.[43] She now often prays most solicitously for the conversion
of sinners and the sanctification of the church. She loves to meet
weekly in the female circle for prayer, and labours to induce others
to attend with her. Her little son, nine years of age, is, as she
hopes, a Christian; and her daughter, just approaching the years of
womanhood, has recently united with the church. Two years since her
husband died under circumstances peculiarly afflicting. She prayed for
resignation, and never felt any disposition to murmur against the
providence of God. She sometimes blamed herself that she had not
thought of other expedients to prolong, if possible, the life of one
that she loved so tenderly; but to God she looked up with submission,
and said in spirit: 'The cup which my Father hath given me, shall I
not drink it?' Her husband she views as a departed saint, whom she
expects to meet in a better world. She cherishes his memory with an
affection that seems peculiarly sacred, and the remembrance of his
piety is a consoling association connected with the recollections of
one now in heaven.[44]

    [43] Are there not many in all the churches who have been
    convicted of sin, and who have perhaps repented, but have not
    exercised full faith in Christ?

    [44] That the marriage bond becomes more sacred, and the
    reciprocal duties of affection more tender, between two hearts
    that both love Jesus, I have no doubt. The feelings of this pious
    widow favour the supposition; and the facts recorded in the
    biographies of Edwards, Fletcher, and Corvosso, fully confirm it.

A single incident develops the secret of that piety which gives her
peace, and makes her useful. One of the last times that I saw her she
stated, in conversation upon the subject, that a short time before she
had read a Sabbath school book, which one of her children had received,
in which was a representation of Christ bearing his cross to Calvary.
While contemplating this scene, love and gratitude sprang up in her
heart, which were subduing, sweet, and peaceful beyond expression. How
is it, reader, that the contemplation of such a scene of suffering
should cause such blessed emotions to spread like a rich fragrance
through the soul, and rise in sweet incense to God? It is the holy
secret of the cross of Christ, which none but the saints know, and
even they cannot communicate.[45]

    [45] Thomas à Kempis endeavoured to give expression to the
    consciousness of the Divine life in the soul--'Frequens Christi
    visitatio cum homine interno, dulcis sermocinatio, grata
    consolatio, multa pax,' etc. ['The frequent presence of Christ in
    the inner man is sweet converse, grateful consolation, much
    peace,' etc.]




CONCLUSION.


Allow the author to say, in closing, that it is his opinion that, in
view of the reasonings and facts presented in the preceding pages,
every individual who reads the book intelligently, and who is in
possession of a sound and unprejudiced reason, will come to the
conclusion that the religion of the Bible is from God, and Divinely
adapted to produce the greatest present and eternal spiritual good
of the human family. And if any one should doubt its Divine origin
(which, in view of its adaptations and its effects as herein
developed, would involve the absurdity of doubting whether an
intelligent design had an intelligent designer), still, be the
origin of the gospel where it may, in heaven, earth, or hell, the
demonstration is conclusive that it is the only religion possible
for man, in order to perfect his nature, and restore his lapsed
powers to harmony and holiness.


THE END.


BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD AND LONDON.




PUBLICATIONS OF THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY.


  The Present Saviour; or, Great Truths for Earnest Times.
    By the Rev. J. S. Nutter. In large type. 1s. cloth boards.

  Saving Faith: what is it?
    A Scriptural Inquiry and Appeal. By the Rev. J. Tanner. Small 8vo.
    8d. cloth boards.

  Salvation Sought, Found, and Enjoyed.
    Fcap. 8vo, 1s. cloth boards.

  Persuasives to Early Piety.
    By the Rev. J. G. Pike. 24mo. 1s. cloth boards.

  An Alarm to the Unconverted.
    By Joseph Alleine. Fcap. 8vo. 1s. cloth boards.

  The Anxious Inquirer after Salvation Directed and Encouraged. By
    the Rev. J. A. James. 32mo. 6d. neat cover; 8d. cloth boards;
    fcap. 8vo. 1s. cloth boards.

  The Golden Treasury.
    By Bogatzky. 24mo. 1s. cloth boards.

  The Bright City and the Way there.
    Large type. 24mo. 8d. cloth limp; 1s. cloth boards.

  Plain Paths: Onward and Heavenward.
    18mo. 8d. limp; 1s. cloth boards.

  What do I Believe?
    By the Rev. S. G. Green, D.D. Fcap. 8vo. 1s. cloth boards.

  Why do I Believe? or, The Bible Historically True and Divinely
    Inspired. By Mrs. J. B. Patterson. Fcap. 8vo. 1s. cloth boards.

  A Call to the Unconverted.
    By Richard Baxter. 18mo. 1s. cloth boards.

  Meditations on the Miracles of Christ.
    First and Second Series. By the Rev. J. S. Howson, Dean of
    Chester. Each crown 8vo. 3s. cloth, red edges.

  Bible Readings from the Gospel.
    For Mothers' Meetings, etc. By Mrs. Frederick Lockyer. Crown 8vo.
    In clear type. 2s. cloth boards.

  Bible Readings from the Acts.
    For Mothers' Meetings, etc. By Mrs. Frederick Lockyer. Crown 8vo.
    2s. cloth boards.

  Home to God: a Guide on the Way.
    By Samuel Pearson, M.A., of Liverpool. Fcap. 8vo, 1s. 6d. cloth
    boards.

  Experiences of the Inner Life.
    Lessons from its Duties, Joys, and Conflicts. A Sequel to "The
    Soul's Life." By the Rev. Canon Garbett, M.A. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.
    cloth boards.

  The Soul's Life.
    Its Commencement, Progress, and Maturity. By the Rev. Canon
    Garbett, M.A. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. cloth boards.

  Symbols of Christ.
    By the Rev. Charles Stanford, D.D. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.
    cloth boards.

  The Lord is my Shepherd.
    A Popular Exposition of the Twenty-third Psalm. By the Rev. J.
    Stuart. 2s. 6d. cloth boards.


The Religious Tract Society,

London: 56, Paternoster Row; 65, St. Paul's Churchyard; And 164,
Piccadilly.




Transcriber's Note

Variations in spelling are preserved as printed.

Minor punctuation and typographic errors have been repaired.

The Hebrew text of the footnote on page 51 has an error where it appears
that a samech has been used instead of a mem (final). On the assumption
that this is a printer error, it has been fixed: שס amended to שם.

The asterism in the preface is represented with *** in this version of
the e-book.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosophy of the Plan of Salvation, by 
An American Citizen

