
AN ESSAY ON THE SLAVERY AND COMMERCE OF THE HUMAN SPECIES,
PARTICULARLY THE AFRICAN,

TRANSLATED FROM A LATIN DISSERTATION, WHICH WAS HONOURED WITH
THE FIRST PRIZE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, FOR THE YEAR 1785,
WITH ADDITIONS.

       *        *        *        *        *


_Neque premendo alium me extulisse velim_.--LIVY.



M.DCC.LXXXVI.

       *        *        *        *        *



TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE
WILLIAM CHARLES COLYEAR,
EARL OF PORTMORE,
VISCOUNT MILSINTOWN.


MY LORD,

The dignity of the subject of this little Treatise, not any persuasion
of its merits as a literary composition, encourages me to offer it to
your Lordship's patronage. The cause of freedom has always been found
sufficient, in every age and country, to attract the notice of the
generous and humane; and it is therefore, in a more peculiar manner,
worthy of the attention and favour of a personage, who holds a
distinguished rank in that illustrious island, the very air of which has
been determined, upon a late investigation of its laws, to be an
antidote against slavery. I feel a satisfaction in the opportunity,
which the publication of this treatise affords me, of acknowledging your
Lordship's civilities, which can only be equalled by the respect, with
which I am,

Your Lordship's,
much obliged,
and obedient servant,

THOMAS CLARKSON.

       *        *        *        *        *



Books Printed and Sold by J. PHILLIPS,

ESSAY on the TREATMENT and CONVERSION of
AFRICAN SLAVES in the BRITISH Sugar Colonies.
By the Rev. J. RAMSAY, Vicar of Teston in
Kent, who resided many Years in the West-Indies.
In One Volume, Octavo. Price 5s bound,
or 4s in Boards.

An INQUIRY into the Effects of putting a Stop
to the African Slave Trade, and of granting Liberty
to the Slaves in the British Sugar Colonies.
By J. RAMSAY. Price 6d.

A REPLY to the Personal Invectives and Objections
contained in two Answers, published by
certain anonymous Persons, to an Essay on the
Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves, in
the British Colonies. By JAMES RAMSAY. Price 2s.

A LETTER from Capt. J.S. SMITH, to the
Rev. Mr. HILL, on the State of the Negroe Slaves;
to which are added an Introduction, and Remarks
on Free Negroes, &c. by J. RAMSAY. Price 6d.

THOUGHTS on the Slavery of the Negroes.
Price 4d.

The CASE of our Fellow-Creatures, the Oppressed
Africans, respectfully recommended to the serious
Consideration of the Legislature of Great-Britain,
by the People called Quakers. Price 2d.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS to the Rulers of America,
on the Inconsistency of their Conduct respecting
Slavery. Price 3d.

A CAUTION to GREAT BRITAIN and her
Colonies, in a short Representation of the calamitous
State of the enslaved Negroes in the British
Dominions. By ANTHONY BENEZET. Price 6d.

A Description of Guinea, its Situation, Produce,
and the general Disposition of its Inhabitants; with
an Inquiry into the Rise and Progress of the Slave
Trade, &c. By ANTHONY BENEZET. Bound 2s. 6d.



       *        *        *        *        *


THE PREFACE.


As the subject of the following work has fortunately become of late a
topick of conversation, I cannot begin the preface in a manner more
satisfactory to the feelings of the benevolent reader, than by giving an
account of those humane and worthy persons, who have endeavoured to draw
upon it that share of the publick attention which it has obtained.

Among the well disposed individuals, of different nations and ages, who
have humanely exerted themselves to suppress the abject personal slavery,
introduced in the original cultivation of the _European_ colonies
in the western world, _Bartholomew de las Casas_, the pious bishop
of _Chiapa_, in the fifteenth century, seems to have been the
first. This amiable man, during his residence in _Spanish America_,
was so sensibly affected at the treatment which the miserable Indians
underwent that he returned to _Spain_, to make a publick remonstrance
before the celebrated emperor _Charles_ the fifth, declaring, that
heaven would one day call him to an account for those cruelties, which
he then had it in his power to prevent. The speech which he made on the
occasion, is now extant, and is a most perfect picture of benevolence
and piety.

But his intreaties, by opposition of avarice, were rendered ineffectual:
and I do not find by any books which I have read upon the subject, that
any other person interfered till the last century, when _Morgan
Godwyn_, a _British_ clergyman, distinguished himself in the
cause.

The present age has also produced some zealous and able opposers of the
_colonial_ slavery. For about the middle of the present century, _John
Woolman_ and _Anthony Benezet_, two respectable members of the
religious society called Quakers, devoted much of their time to the
subject. The former travelled through most parts of _North America_
on foot, to hold conversations with the members of his own sect, on the
impiety of retaining those in a state of involuntary servitude, who had
never given them offence. The latter kept a free school at
_Philadelphia_, for the education of black people. He took every
opportunity of pleading in their behalf. He published several treatises
against slavery,[001] and gave an hearty proof of his attachment to the
cause, by leaving the whole of his fortune in support of that school, to
which he had so generously devoted his time and attention when alive.

Till this time it does not appear, that any bodies of men, had
collectively interested themselves in endeavouring to remedy the evil.
But in the year 1754, the religious society, called Quakers, publickly
testified their sentiments upon the subject,[002] declaring, that "to
live in ease and plenty by the toil of those, whom fraud and violence
had put into their power, was neither consistent with Christianity nor
common justice."

Impressed with these sentiments, many of this society immediately
liberated their slaves; and though such a measure appeared to be
attended with considerable loss to the benevolent individuals, who
unconditionally presented them with their freedom, yet they adopted it
with pleasure: nobly considering, that to possess a little, in an
honourable way, was better than to possess much, through the medium of
injustice. Their example was gradually followed by the rest. A general
emancipation of the slaves in the possession of Quakers, at length took
place; and so effectually did they serve the cause which they had
undertaken, that they denied the claim of membership in their religious
community, to all such as should hereafter oppose the suggestions of
justice in this particular, either by retaining slaves in their
possession, or by being in any manner concerned in the slave trade: and
it is a fact, that through the vast tract of North America, there is not
at this day a single slave in the possession of an acknowledged Quaker.

But though this measure appeared, as has been observed before, to be
attended with considerable loss to the benevolent individuals who
adopted it, yet, as virtue seldom fails of obtaining its reward, it
became ultimately beneficial. Most of the slaves, who were thus
unconditionally freed, returned without any solicitation to their former
masters, to serve them, at stated wages; as free men. The work, which
they now did, was found to better done than before. It was found also,
that, a greater quantity was done in the same time. Hence less than the
former number of labourers was sufficient. From these, and a variety of
circumstances, it appeared, that their plantations were considerably
more profitable when worked by free men, than when worked, as before, by
slaves; and that they derived therefore, contrary to their expectations,
a considerable advantage from their benevolence.

Animated by the example of the Quakers, the members of other sects began
to deliberate about adopting the same measure. Some of those of the
church of England, of the Roman Catholicks, and of the Presbyterians and
Independants, freed their slaves; and there happened but one instance,
where the matter was debated, where it was not immediately put in force.
This was in _Pennsylvania_. It was agitated in the synod of the
Presbyterians there, to oblige their members to liberate their slaves.
The question was negatived by a majority of but one person; and this
opposition seemed to arise rather from a dislike to the attempt of
forcing such a measure upon the members of that community, than from any
other consideration. I have the pleasure of being credibly informed,
that the manumission of slaves, or the employment of free men in the
plantations, is now daily gaining ground in North America. Should
slavery be abolished there, (and it is an event, which, from these
circumstances, we may reasonably expect to be produced in time) let it
be remembered, that the Quakers will have had the merit of its
abolition.

Nor have their brethren here been less assiduous in the cause. As there
are happily no slaves in this country, so they have not had the same
opportunity of shewing their benevolence by a general emancipation. They
have not however omitted to shew it as far as they have been able. At
their religious meetings they have regularly inquired if any of their
members are concerned in the iniquitous _African_ trade. They have
appointed a committee for obtaining every kind of information on the
subject, with a view to its suppression, and, about three or four years
ago, petitioned parliament on the occasion for their interference and
support. I am sorry to add, that their benevolent application was
ineffectual, and that the reformation of an evil, productive of
consequences equally impolitick and immoral, and generally acknowledged
to have long disgraced our national character, is yet left to the
unsupported efforts of piety morality and justice, against interest
violence and oppression; and these, I blush to acknowledge, too strongly
countenanced by the legislative authority of a country, the basis of
whose government is _liberty_.

Nothing can be more clearly shewn, than that an inexhaustible mine of
wealth is neglected in _Africa_, for prosecution of this impious
traffick; that, if proper measures were taken, the revenue of this
country might be greatly improved, its naval strength increased, its
colonies in a more flourishing situation, the planters richer, and a
trade, which is now a scene of blood and desolation, converted into one,
which might be prosecuted with _advantage_ and _honour_.

Such have been the exertions of the Quakers in the cause of humanity
and virtue. They are still prosecuting, as far as they are able, their
benevolent design; and I should stop here and praise them for thus
continuing their humane endeavours, but that I conceive it to be
unnecessary. They are acting consistently with the principles of
religion. They will find a reward in their own consciences; and they
will receive more real pleasure from a single reflection on their
conduct, than they can possibly experience from the praises of an host
of writers.

In giving this short account of those humane and worthy persons, who
have endeavoured to restore to their fellow creatures the rights of
nature, of which they had been unjustly deprived, I would feel myself
unjust, were I to omit two zealous opposers of the _colonial_ tyranny,
conspicuous at the present day.

The first is Mr. _Granville Sharp_. This Gentleman has particularly
distinguished himself in the cause of freedom. It is a notorious fact,
that, but a few years since, many of the unfortunate black people, who
had been brought from the colonies into this country, were sold in the
metropolis to merchants and others, when their masters had no farther
occasion for their services; though it was always understood that every
person was free, as soon as he landed on the British shore. In
consequence of this notion, these unfortunate black people, refused to
go to the new masters, to whom they were consigned. They were however
seized, and forcibly conveyed, under cover of the night, to ships then
lying in the _Thames_, to be retransported to the colonies, and to be
delivered again to the planters as merchantable goods. The humane Mr.
_Sharpe_, was the means of putting a stop to this iniquitous traffick.
Whenever he gained information of people in such a situation, he caused
them to be brought on shore. At a considerable expence he undertook
their cause, and was instrumental in obtaining the famous decree in the
case of _Somersett_, that as soon as any person whatever set his foot in
this country, he came under the protection of the _British_ laws, and was
consequently free. Nor did he interfere less honourably in that cruel
and disgraceful case, in the summer of the year 1781, when _an hundred
and thirty two_ negroes, in their passage to the colonies, were thrown
into the sea alive, to defraud the underwriters; but his pious
endeavours were by no means attended with the same success. To enumerate
his many laudable endeavours in the extirpation of tyranny and
oppression, would be to swell the preface into a volume: suffice it to
say, that he has written several books on the subject, and one
particularly, which he distinguishes by the title of "_A Limitation of
Slavery_."

The second is the _Rev. James Ramsay_. This gentleman resided for
many years in the _West-Indies_, in the clerical office. He perused
all the colonial codes of law, with a view to find if there were any
favourable clauses, by which the grievances of slaves could be
redressed; but he was severely disappointed in his pursuits. He
published a treatise, since his return to England, called _An Essay on
the Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves in the British Sugar
Colonies_, which I recommend to the perusal of the humane reader.
This work reflects great praise upon the author, since, in order to be
of service to this singularly oppressed part of the human species, he
compiled it at the expence of forfeiting that friendship, which he had
contracted with many in those parts, during a series of years, and at
the hazard, as I am credibly informed, of suffering much, in his private
property, as well as of subjecting himself to the ill will and
persecution of numerous individuals.

This Essay _on the Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves_,
contains so many important truths on the colonial slavery, and has come
so home to the planters, (being written by a person who has a thorough
knowledge of the subject) as to have occasioned a considerable alarm.
Within the last eight months, two publications have expressly appeared
against it. One of them is intitled "_Cursory Remarks_ on Mr.
Ramsay's Essay;" the other an "_Apology for Negroe Slavery_." On
each of these I am bound, as writing on the subject, to make a few
remarks.

The _cursory remarker_ insinuates, that Mr. Ramsay's account of the
treatment is greatly exaggerated, if not wholly false. To this I shall
make the following reply. I have the honour of knowing several
disinterested gentlemen, who have been acquainted with the West Indian
islands for years. I call them disinterested, because they have neither
had a concern in the _African_ trade, nor in the _colonial_
slavery: and I have heard these unanimously assert, that Mr.
_Ramsay's_ account is so far from being exaggerated, or taken from
the most dreary pictures that he could find, that it is absolutely below
the truth; that he must have omitted many instances of cruelty, which he
had seen himself; and that they only wondered, how he could have written
with so much moderation upon the subject. They allow the _Cursory
Remarks_ to be excellent as a composition, but declare that it is
perfectly devoid of truth.

But the _cursory remarker_ does not depend so much on the
circumstances which he has advanced, (nor can he, since they have no
other existence than in his own, brain) as on the instrument
_detraction_. This he has used with the utmost virulence through
the whole of his publication, artfully supposing, that if he could bring
Mr. _Ramsay's_ reputation into dispute, his work would fall of
course, as of no authenticity. I submit this simple question to the
reader. When a writer, in attempting to silence a publication, attacks
the character of its author, rather than the principles of the work
itself, is it not a proof that the work itself is unquestionable, and
that this writer is at a loss to find an argument against it?

But there is something so very ungenerous in this mode of replication,
as to require farther notice. For if this is the mode to be adopted in
literary disputes, what writer can be safe? Or who is there, that will
not be deterred from taking up his pen in the cause of virtue? There are
circumstances in every person's life, which, if given to the publick in
a malevolent manner, and without explanation, might essentially injure
him in the eyes of the world; though, were they explained, they would be
even reputable. The _cursory remarker_ has adopted this method of
dispute; but Mr. _Ramsay_ has explained himself to the satisfaction
of all parties, and has refuted him in every point. The name of this
_cursory remarker_ is _Tobin_: a name, which I feel myself
obliged to hand down with detestation, as far as I am able; and with an
hint to future writers, that they will do themselves more credit, and
serve more effectually the cause which they undertake, if on such
occasions they attack the work, rather than the character of the writer,
who affords them a subject for their lucubrations.

Nor is this the only circumstance, which induces me to take such
particular notice of the _Cursory Remarks_. I feel it incumbent
upon me to rescue an injured person from the cruel aspersions that have
been thrown upon him, as I have been repeatedly informed by those, who
have the pleasure of his acquaintance, that his character is
irreproachable. I am also interested myself. For if such detraction is
passed over in silence, my own reputation, and not my work, may be
attacked by an anonymous hireling in the cause of slavery.

The _Apology for Negroe Slavery_ is almost too despicable a
composition to merit a reply. I have only therefore to observe, (as is
frequently the case in a bad cause, or where writers do not confine
themselves to truth) that the work refutes itself. This writer, speaking
of the slave-trade, asserts, that people are never kidnapped on the
coast of _Africa_. In speaking of the treatment of slaves, he
asserts again, that it is of the very mildest nature, and that they live
in the most comfortable and happy manner imaginable. To prove each of
his assertions, he proposes the following regulations. That the
_stealing_ of slaves from _Africa_ should be felony. That the
_premeditated murder_ of a slave by any person on board, should
come under the same denomination. That when slaves arrive in the
colonies, lands should be allotted for their provisions, _in
proportion to their number_, or commissioners should see that a
_sufficient_ quantity of _sound wholesome_ provisions is
purchased. That they should not work on _Sundays_ and _other_
holy-days. That extra labour, or _night-work, out of crop_, should
be prohibited. That a _limited number_ of stripes should be
inflicted upon them. That they should have _annually_ a suit of
clothes. That old infirm slaves should be _properly cared for_,
&c.--Now it can hardly be conceived, that if this author had tried to
injure his cause, or contradict himself, he could not have done it in a
more effectual manner, than by this proposal of these salutary
regulations. For to say that slaves are honourably obtained on the
coast; to say that their treatment is of the mildest nature, and yet to
propose the above-mentioned regulations as necessary, is to refute
himself more clearly, than I confess myself to be able to do it: and I
have only to request, that the regulations proposed by this writer, in
the defence of slavery, may be considered as so many proofs of the
assertions contained in my own work.

I shall close my account with an observation, which is of great
importance in the present case. Of all the publications in favour of the
slave-trade, or the subsequent slavery in the colonies, there is not
one, which has not been written, either by a chaplain to the African
factories, or by a merchant, or by a planter, or by a person whose
interest has been connected in the cause which he has taken upon him to
defend. Of this description are Mr. _Tobin_, and the _Apologist
for Negroe Slavery_. While on the other hand those, who have had as
competent a knowledge of the subject, but not the _same interest_
as themselves, have unanimously condemned it; and many of them have
written their sentiments upon it, at the hazard of creating an
innumerable host of enemies, and of being subjected to the most
malignant opposition. Now, which of these are we to believe on the
occasion? Are we to believe those, who are parties concerned, who are
interested in the practice?--But the question does not admit of a
dispute.

Concerning my own work, it seems proper to observe, that when, the
original Latin Dissertation, as the title page expresses, was honoured
by the University of Cambridge with the first of their annual prizes for
the year 1785, I was waited upon by some gentlemen of respectability and
consequence, who requested me to publish it in English. The only
objection which occurred to me was this; that having been prevented, by
an attention to other studies, from obtaining that critical knowledge of
my own language, which was necessary for an English composition, I was
fearful of appearing before the publick eye: but that, as they flattered
me with the hope, that the publication of it might be of use, I would
certainly engage to publish it, if they would allow me to postpone it
for a little time, till I was more in the habit of writing. They
replied, that as the publick attention was now excited to the case of
the unfortunate _Africans_, it would be serving the cause with
double the effect, if it were to be published within a few months. This
argument prevailed. Nothing but this circumstance could have induced me
to offer an English composition to the inspection of an host of
criticks: and I trust therefore that this circumstance will plead much
with the benevolent reader, in favour of those faults, which he may find
in the present work.

Having thus promised to publish it, I was for some time doubtful from
which of the copies to translate. There were two, the original, and an
abridgement. The latter (as these academical compositions are generally
of a certain length) was that which was sent down to Cambridge, and
honoured with the prize. I was determined however, upon consulting with
my friends, to translate from the former. This has been faithfully done
with but few[003] additions. The reader will probably perceive the Latin
idiom in several passages of the work, though I have endeavoured, as far
as I have been able, to avoid it. And I am so sensible of the
disadvantages under which it must yet lie, as a translation, that I wish
I had written upon the subject, without any reference at all to the
original copy.

It will perhaps be asked, from what authority I have collected those
facts, which relate to the colonial slavery. I reply, that I have had
the means of the very best of information on the subject; having the
pleasure of being acquainted with many, both in the naval and military
departments, as well as with several others, who have been long
acquainted with _America_ and the _West-Indian_ islands. The
facts therefore which I have related, are compiled from the
disinterested accounts of these gentlemen, all of whom, I have the
happiness to say, have coincided, in the minutest manner, in their
descriptions. It mud be remarked too, that they were compiled, not from
what these gentlemen heard, while they were resident in those parts, but
from what they actually _saw_. Nor has a single instance been taken
from any book whatever upon the subject, except that which is mentioned
in the 235th page; and this book was published in _France_, in the
year 1777, by _authority_.

I have now the pleasure to say, that the accounts of these disinterested
gentlemen, whom I consulted on the occasion, are confirmed by all the
books which I have ever perused upon slavery, except those which have
been written by _merchants, planters, &c_. They are confirmed by
Sir _Hans Sloane's_ Voyage to Barbadoes; _Griffith Hughes's_
History of the same island, printed 1750; an Account of North America,
by _Thomas Jeffries_, 1761; all _Benezet's_ works, &c. &c. and
particularly by Mr. _Ramsay's_ Essay on the Treatment and
Conversion of the African Slaves in the British Sugar Colonies; a work
which is now firmly established; and, I may add in a very extraordinary
manner, in consequence of the controversy which this gentleman has
sustained with the _Cursory Remarker_, by which several facts which
were mentioned in the original copy of my own work, before the
controversy began, and which had never appeared in any work upon the
subject, have been brought to light. Nor has it received less support
from a letter, published only last week, from Capt. J.S. Smith, of the
Royal Navy, to the Rev. Mr. Hill; on the former of whom too high
encomiums cannot be bestowed, for standing forth in that noble and
disinterested manner, in behalf of an injured character.

I have now only to solicit the reader again, that he will make a
favourable allowance for the present work, not only from those
circumstances which I have mentioned, but from the consideration, that
only two months are allowed by the University for these their annual
compositions. Should he however be unpropitious to my request, I must
console myself with the reflection, (a reflection that will always
afford me pleasure, even amidst the censures of the great,) that by
undertaking the cause of the unfortunate _Africans_, I have
undertaken, as far as my abilities would permit, the cause of injured
innocence.

London, June 1st 1786.

       *        *        *        *        *

FOOTNOTES


[Footnote 001: A Description of Guinea, with an Inquiry into the Rise
and Progress of the Slave Trade, &c.--A Caution to Great Britain and her
Colonies, in a short Representation of the calamitous State of the
enslaved Negroes in the British Dominions. Besides several smaller
pieces.]


[Footnote 002: They had censured the _African Trade_ in the year
1727, but had taken no publick notice of the _colonial_ slavery
till this time.]


[Footnote 003: The instance of the _Dutch_ colonists at the Cape,
in the first part of the Essay; the description of an African battle, in
the second; and the poetry of a negroe girl in the third, are the only
considerable additions that have been made.]


       *        *        *        *        *


CONTENTS.


       *       *       *       *       *


PART I.

The History of Slavery.

    CHAP. I. Introduction.--Division of slavery into voluntary and
    involuntary.--The latter the subject of the present work.--Chap. II.
    The first class of involuntary slaves among the ancients, from
    war.--Conjecture concerning their antiquity.--Chap. III. The second
    class from piracy.--Short history of piracy.--The dance
    carpoea.--Considerations from hence on the former topick.--Three
    orders of involuntary slaves among the ancients.--Chap. IV. Their
    personal treatment.--Exception in Ægypt.--Exception at
    Athens.--Chap. V. The causes of such treatment among the ancients in
    general.--Additional causes among the Greeks and Romans.--A
    refutation of their principles.--Remarks on the writings of
    Æsop.--Chap. VI. The ancient slave-trade.--Its antiquity.--Ægypt
    the first market recorded for this species of traffick.--Cyprus the
    second.--The agreement of the writings of Moses and Homer on the
    subject.--The universal prevalence of the trade.--Chap. VII. The
    decline of this commerce and slavery in Europe.--The causes of
    their decline.--Chap. VIII. Their revival in Africa.--Short history
    of their revival.--Five classes of involuntary slaves among the
    moderns.--Cruel instance of the Dutch colonists at the Cape.


       *       *       *       *       *


