PART II.

The African Commerce or Slave-Trade.

    CHAP. I. The history of mankind from their first situation to a
    state of government.--Chap. II. An account of the first
    governments.--Chap. III. Liberty a natural right.--That of
    government adventitious.--Government, its nature.--Its end.--Chap.
    IV. Mankind cannot be considered as property.--An objection
    answered.--Chap. V. Division of the commerce into two parts, as it
    relates to those who sell, and those who purchase the human species
    into slavery.--The right of the sellers examined with respect to
    the two orders of African slaves, "of those who are publickly seized
    by virtue of the authority of their prince, and of those, who are
    kidnapped by individuals."--Chap. VI. Their right with respect to
    convicts.--From the proportion of the punishment to the
    offence.--From its object and end.--Chap. VII. Their right with
    respect to prisoners of war.--The jus captivitatis, or right of
    capture explained.--Its injustice.--Farther explication of the
    right of capture, in answer to some supposed objections.--Chap.
    VIII. Additional remarks on the two orders that were first
    mentioned.--The number which they annually contain.--A description
    of an African battle.--Additional remarks on prisoners of war.--On
    convicts.--Chap. IX. The right of the purchasers
    examined.--Conclusion.


       *       *       *       *       *


PART III.

The Slavery of the Africans in the European
Colonies.

    CHAP. I. Imaginary scene in Africa.--Imaginary conversation with an
    African.--His ideas of Christianity.--A Description of a body of
    slaves going to the ships.--Their embarkation.--Chap. II. Their
    treatment on board.--The number that annually perish in the
    voyage.--Horrid instance at sea.--Their debarkation in the
    colonies.--Horrid instance on the shore.--Chap. III. The condition
    of their posterity in the colonies.--The lex nativitatis
    explained.--Its injustice.--Chap. IV. The seasoning in the
    colonies.--The number that annually die in the seasoning.--The
    employment of the survivors.--The colonial discipline.--Its
    tendency to produce cruelty.--Horrid instance of this
    effect.--Immoderate labour, and its consequences.--Want of food
    and its consequences.--Severity and its consequences.--The forlorn
    situation of slaves.--An appeal to the memory of Alfred.--Chap. V.
    The contents of the two preceding chapters denied by the
    purchasers.--Their first argument refuted.--Their second
    refuted.--Their third refuted.--Chap. VI. Three arguments, which
    they bring in vindication of their treatment, refuted.--Chap. VII.
    The argument, that the Africans are an inferiour link of the chain
    of nature, as far as it relates to their genius, refuted.--The
    causes of this apparent inferiority.--Short dissertation on African
    genius.--Poetry of an African girl.--Chap. VIII. The argument, that
    they are an inferiour link of the chain of nature, as far as it
    relates to colour, &c. refuted.--Examination of the divine writings
    in this particular.--Dissertation on the colour.--Chap. IX. Other
    arguments of the purchasers examined.--Their comparisons
    unjust.--Their assertions, with respect to the happy situation of
    the Africans in the colonies, without foundation.--Their happiness
    examined with respect to manumission.--With respect to
    holy-days.--Dances, &c.--An estimate made at St. Domingo.--Chap. X.
    The right of the purchasers over their slaves refuted upon their own
    principles.--Chap. XI. Dreadful arguments against this commerce and
    slavery of the human species.--How the Deity seems already to punish
    us for this inhuman violation of his laws.--Conclusion.


       *       *       *       *       *


ERRATA.

    For _Dominique_, (Footnote 107) read _Domingue_.

    N. B. In page 18 a Latin note has been inserted by mistake, under
    the quotation of Diodorus Siculus. The reader will find the original
    Greek of the same signification, in the same author, at page 49.
    Editio Stephani.


       *        *        *        *        *



AN ESSAY

ON THE SLAVERY and COMMERCE

OF THE HUMAN SPECIES.


IN THREE PARTS.


       *       *       *       *       *



