CHAPTER XXIII

  ACTS OF FORNICATION WITH CHILDREN, INCEST, ACTS OF FORNICATION WITH
  CORPSES AND ANIMALS (BESTIALITY), EXHIBITIONISM, AND OTHER SEXUAL
  PERVERSITIES. APPENDIX: THE TREATMENT OF SEXUAL PERVERSITIES.


  “_But what a source of devastation is a public or private teacher of
  youth, when his heart is impure!_... _What a tragic example of
  misleading is he who, himself in a position imposing upon him the duty
  of leading others towards virtue, is animated by the most detestable
  of all passions._”--JOHANN PETER FRANK.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXIII

  Acts of fornication on the part of adults with children -- “Pædophilia
  erotica” -- Superstitious motives -- Shunammitism -- As a popular
  custom -- Opportunity as a cause of pædophilia -- Its frequency among
  menservants and schoolmasters -- Acts of fornication with children
  less than six years of age -- Examples -- With children between the
  ages of six and fourteen years -- Alluring influence of _fruits verts_
  upon debauchees -- Causes -- The mania for defloration -- Other causal
  factors of acts of fornication with children -- Examples.

  Early appearance of the sexual impulse in children -- Causes -- In the
  country -- The _demi-vierge_ type -- Early puberty in girls --
  Examples of sexual intercourse between children -- Child prostitution
  -- Parisian flower-girls -- Match-selling girls and “music pupils” of
  Berlin -- Blackmail -- Causes of child prostitution.

  Incest -- Causes -- Incest in France -- Sexual relationship with a
  third individual on the part of two persons closely related to one
  another.

  Acts of fornication with animals (zoophilia, bestiality) -- Genuine
  zoophilia -- A remarkable case thereof -- Causes of bestiality -- Its
  frequency in the country -- Report of cases -- Bestiality on the part
  of a woman -- Reputed seduction of human beings by animals.

  Acts of fornication with corpses (necrophilia) -- Motives -- Symbolic
  necrophilia -- Love of statues -- Influence of museums on uncultured
  individuals -- Sexual intercourse with statues -- Pygmalionism -- Acts
  of fornication with objects resembling the human body -- “Dames et
  hommes de voyage” -- Exhibitionism -- Morbid foundation of this --
  Other motives -- Masturbation as a cause -- A remarkable case of
  exhibitionism -- “Frotteurs” -- Example -- Voyeurs -- Secret sexual
  clubs -- “Essayeurs” -- “Stercoraires platoniques” -- Pædication --
  Opium, hashish, and ether employed for sexual purposes -- Use of these
  drugs in Paris -- Sexual fantasies of the opium smoker.

  _Appendix: The Treatment of Sexual Perversions._ -- Importance of
  psychological factors in the treatment of sexual perversions --
  Management of the primary trouble -- Psycho-therapeutics and
  suggestive therapeutics -- Verbal suggestions -- Confidence in the
  knowledge of the physician -- Sexual perversions as diseases of the
  will -- Need for the education of the will -- Suggestion in the waking
  state -- Suggestion by means of letters -- By means of hypnosis --
  Special prescriptions.


CHAPTER XXIII

One of the most tragic, but unfortunately one of the most frequent, of
occurrences is =premature sexual intercourse on the part of
children=--partly resulting from =acts of fornication by adults with
children=, partly resulting from =premature awakening of the sexual
impulse in children, and premature sexual activity on their part=. These
two varieties of premature sexual intercourse in children must be
sharply distinguished each from the other.

The alleged increase of sexual offences in which children are concerned
is by von Krafft-Ebing wrongly associated with the more widely diffused
nervousness of recent generations. As a matter of fact, such offences
have occurred at all times and among all peoples, with no less frequency
than at the present day. “Erotic pædophilia” is a very widely diffused
phenomenon. It arises from superstitious[638] grounds; as, for example,
from the belief which prevails in many countries that venereal and
other diseases are cured by copulation with an intact child. The
primeval belief that intercourse with immature girls prolonged life,
that an emanation from them rejuvenated old men (the so-called
“=Shunammitism=”[639]), led in former times, and leads even at the
present day, to acts of fornication with children. Less commonly do
timidity and impotence on the part of adult men, rendering intercourse
with adult women difficult or impossible, give rise to the seduction or
rape of defenceless and unsuspicious children. The act of fornication
with children as a =popular custom= is a symptom of a primitive degree
of civilization, and is therefore met with, even at the present day,
among savage nations, a matter regarding which Ploss-Bartels gives
detailed accounts.

Passing to consider the cause of acts of fornication with children =at
the present day=, and the means by which such acts are effected,
unquestionably =opportunity= plays an important part in their
production. All those persons who by their occupation are brought into
prolonged diurnal and nocturnal association with children, and are
frequently alone with them, such as menservants, nursemaids,
governesses, housekeepers, schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, the
directors and other officials of orphan asylums, etc., constitute a
disproportionately large contingent of those who commit offences under §
176^{3} and § 182 of the Criminal Code. This does not arise from
exceptional criminality on the part of these persons as compared with
those belonging to other professions, but simply and solely from the
fact that they are continually alone with children, and that any sexual
excitement which may arise is thus directed towards these, because no
adult is there. Sometimes a morbid neuropathic or psychopathic
constitution plays a part; but more commonly we have to do simply with
lasciviousness and sensuality, which avails itself of the opportunity
thus offered.

Rétif de la Bretonne warned parents regarding menservants and nursemaids
as seducers of children. These persons are apt to execute unchaste acts
with children =in the very first years of life=; in order to gratify
their own voluptuousness, they play with the genital organs of these
poor innocents, and thus prematurely awaken sexual sensibility, and
often give rise to premature onanistic habits. These acts of impropriety
carried on with small children--which must be sharply distinguished from
those with older children, the cases being classified as relating in the
first place to children under six years of age, and in the second place
to children between the ages of six and fourteen years--are far commoner
than is usually imagined, and perhaps even more dangerous in respect of
the bodily and mental development of the child, than the second variety
of unchaste acts, with older children. In most cases it is persons of
the female sex who misuse small children in this way, and often this
arises from the fear of impregnation resulting from intercourse with an
adult man. Generally we have to do with a lascivious disposition, as,
for example, in the following cases, which came under my own
observation:

  In one of these cases a woman seduced a boy four years of age to the
  performance of systematic improper acts; in the other case, a boy of
  five years of age was taken (_horribile dictu_) by his own mother into
  her bed, and taught to perform coitus with her, in so far as this was
  possible, and also to perform manipulations with her genital organs.
  The little boy repeated this practice with his sister, three years of
  age, and, being caught in the act, he confessed the whole history.

  A boy aged four played freely with his own genital organs, and also
  made peculiar coitus-like movements in bed, and in contact with his
  mother. When the latter, greatly alarmed, asked him how he had learned
  to do this, he explained that a young woman twenty years of age,
  living in the house, had performed these manipulations with him.

Magnan also reports (“Lectures on Mental Disorders,” Nos. 2 and 3, p.
41) the case of a lady, twenty-nine years of age, who performed sexual
acts with her nephew, aged five.

These cases rarely attain publicity, because they usually remain
undiscovered. Fornicatory acts with children, such as are frequently
alluded to in the newspapers, chiefly concern children between the ages
of six and fourteen years. In these cases the offences are most often
committed by schoolmasters and schoolmistresses, or by private tutors
and governesses. We further often find other women undertaking such
acts, displaying a sexual activity which they have no opportunity of
satisfying in intercourse with full-grown men. In the third place,
debauchees and exhausted _roués_ seek new and piquant excitement by
intercourse with such _fruits verts_. Of such Laurent writes:[640]

  “They have used and misused woman; they have explored all the stages
  of natural and unnatural love; they have visited Lesbos and Paphos;
  and they have experienced every possible sexual artificiality. Their
  sexual desires have become torpid, their manliness is on the decline,
  and sexual death approaches. But the more exhausted they are, the less
  willing are they patiently to acquiesce in their loss. It is with them
  as with inebriates who are full to the throat and still continue to
  drink. One day they notice a little girl in the street and feel
  stimulated by her youthful charms. Thus their love begins.”

The =blameless=, the =natural=, and the =pure=, in the essence of the
child and of the intact virgin, has a stimulating influence upon such
perverted individuals: it acts as a =contrast= to their own sexual
shamelessness and artificiality. The contrast, in fact, has the effect
of a most powerful stimulus. Nor can we fail to recognize the existence
in such cases also of a =sadistic= element in the performance of coitus
with a defenceless child, and in the sanguinary act of defloration of an
immature individual. In the eighties there flourished in England such a
“=mania for defloration=,” the scandalous details of which were
illustrated in a lurid light by the revelations of the _Pall Mall
Gazette_.[641] With regard to this sadistic element in acts of
fornication with children, we must take into account the possibility
that in the corporal punishment of children by the teacher may have
originated the awakening of the latter’s sexual activities,[642] and
that in this we may find the cause of the beginning of sexual
relationships between teacher and pupil.

Other not infrequent causes of the sexual misuse of children are to be
found in =alcoholic intoxication= and in =senile dementia=. =Tramps=,
also, who have for a long time been deprived of the opportunity of
intercourse with women, are apt to gratify their long-repressed libido
on the body of the first child they meet. =Child labour in factories=
also offers opportunities for fornicatory acts with children.

A few especially striking instances of acts of fornication with children
are appended:

  1. The son of a greengrocer, A., twenty years of age, living in the
  Keibelstrasse, had for a long time immoral intercourse with the
  eight-year-old daughter of the milkman W., in the same street. He had
  not only violated her, but had committed other injuries. The young
  fellow continued his immoral conduct after he had become infected with
  venereal disease, and therefore naturally infected the girl. She
  became so ill that she had to be confined to bed, and the doctor who
  was called in diagnosed venereal infection. Notwithstanding this, the
  little girl continued to lie about the matter, and only after a
  whipping did she admit having had intercourse with A. The latter, a
  man with a crippled foot, as soon as he saw that his misconduct had
  been discovered, concealed himself in an outhouse, and was only
  arrested by the police after a prolonged search. He is now in prison.

  2. The model and friend of a painter, during the absence of the latter
  from home, seduced his son, twelve years of age, after preliminary
  repeated masturbation, to coitus and cunnilinctus.

  3. A celebrated actress, now in advanced age, in the case of a boy who
  sought a situation in her house, gave rise by various manipulations to
  an erection of the penis, and seduced him to coitus; she invited him
  repeatedly to visit her, and continued this scandalous practice with
  him for eight years.

  4. The governess Friederike B. was accused of improper conduct and
  seduction of the little boy Szepsan, and was condemned to six months’
  rigorous imprisonment. In April, 1900, Szepsan disappeared through her
  connivance; she had him confined under false names in various
  cloisters. The accused denied all blame, and declared that she was the
  benefactress of Szepsan, whom she intended to bring up as a priest.
  The evidence, however, sufficed for her conviction.

  5. A very scandalous affair is reported by _Le Matin_. Some time ago
  the Parisian police arrested a young fellow on account of an offence
  against certain civil and natural laws. The accused thereupon
  denounced an old Count W., and others of his friends, and also Baron
  A., who daily waited the coming out of the boys from certain Parisian
  schools, and then took them in his automobile to his own house or to
  that of Count W. The police, having received information, kept under
  observation the sons of certain distinguished families attending the
  school in question, and ascertained that the statements were true. The
  Count and his friends carried off the boys, among whom were three sons
  of an engineer, the eldest thirteen years of age, to the Avenue
  MacMahon or the Avenue Friedland. A., who is engaged to a young lady
  belonging to the Parisian aristocracy, was arrested; Count W. has
  escaped. The examination of their dwelling disclosed all kinds of
  compromising materials.

In view of the wide diffusion of acts of fornication with children, we
must always keep one point clearly before our minds, on account of the
great forensic importance of the matter. That is the question whether
the initiative to the improper act proceeded in the first place =from
the child=, in consequence of a =premature awakening of the sexual
impulse=. [See, for example, Emil Schultze-Malkowsky, “The Sexual
Impulse in Childhood,” in the periodical _Sex and Society_, 1907, No. 7,
pp. 370-373. He reports five sexual scenes dating from the year 1864,
the heroine of which was a little girl seven years of age!]

In a certain proportion only of such cases have we to do with a
degenerative, morbid, inherited state; in many instances this sexual
perversity occurs in children who in other respects are perfectly
healthy,[643] and is evoked by seduction, bad education, and chance
causes, such as intestinal worms, etc. This is to be observed also in
children of savage races, among whom this phenomenon of sexual
prematurity is perhaps more frequent, in part owing to climatic
conditions. In the country the observation of sexual acts on the part of
animals, frequently occurring under their very eyes, makes children
early acquainted with the fact of sexual intercourse. In large towns
prostitution and overcrowded dwellings, in ways to which we have already
alluded in detail, give rise in many cases to a very early initiation of
children into a knowledge of the facts of sexual life.

Apart from the question of child prostitution, to which we shall allude
presently, we can observe such early mature types of children also in
every class of the population of large towns. Among the circles of the
middle classes, and among the “upper ten thousand,” we have the type of
the _demi-vierge_, which recently Hans von Kahlenberg has so admirably
described in his “Nixchen.” In the female sex this early sexual maturity
is much more clearly manifest. In an essay entitled “The Zoo as an
Educator,” in the weekly newspaper _Der Roland von Berlin_ (No. 27, July
5, 1906), we find a striking description of such a type:

  “We find definite types of early-ripe girls, which we must regard as a
  peculiar acquirement of the twentieth century. We distinguish without
  difficulty the simple, hot-blooded, sensual variety from the
  thoroughly developed perverse types. A short-legged, buxom type is the
  most predominant. Such girls seem extraordinarily energetic, and
  appear also to excel in mental powers their pale-cheeked and
  half-alive male companions. Their dress is extremely conspicuous, and
  they wear highly ornamented hats. Whilst, when we look at them from
  behind, their whole figure suggests the age of fifteen or seventeen
  years, the front view suggests that they are at least eight years
  older. They prefer to lace very tightly, in order to display their
  rounded hips, and to make their already strongly developed breasts all
  the more imposing. But this development displays their mental and
  physical corruption, especially when undeveloped shoulders and thin
  arms show beyond question that they are really of a very tender age.
  The sharply-cut features, with the sparkling black eyes, which at once
  fascinate us, plainly indicate the lines which the passions are about
  to engrave on their features; we discern, also, that by the age of
  thirty they will already be old women.”

Sexual intercourse on the part of children with one another, or with
grown persons in cases in which the invitation has proceeded from the
child, are by no means rare occurrences. The following remarkable cases
may illustrate this:

  1. Some years ago a schoolboy, K. J., thirteen years of age, was
  accused in Berlin of several acts of sexual intercourse with girls of
  from six to eight years. The guilt of the accused was fully proved. He
  was sent to a reformatory.

  2. A young man made the acquaintance of a girl sixteen years of age.
  Although greatly impassioned, he did not dare to touch the girl,
  because he was deceived by her sweet and blameless demeanour, and did
  not wish to be her first seducer. Soon afterwards he learned that this
  angel had had sexual intercourse for several years with a married man
  forty years of age!

  3. Legroux showed in 1890, at the weekly meeting of the physicians of
  the Hospital St. Louis, a boy, eleven years of age, who, after three
  months’ sexual intercourse with a syphilitic girl aged seven years,
  had been infected in the ordinary manner, _per vias naturales_
  (reference in _Unna’s Monatsheft für Dermatologie_, 1890, vol. x., p.
  335).

  4. In Paris, in December, 1906 (according to the _Vossische Zeitung_
  of December 15, 1906, No. 558), a band of youthful street and shop
  thieves, ten in number, of ages varying from eleven to fourteen years,
  were arrested. Their leaders were a boy of twelve and a girl of
  thirteen years, the latter, Eliza Cailles by name, known generally by
  the nickname of “Beautiful Aliette.” This Aliette, a strikingly pretty
  little person, in a long dress of extremely fashionable cut, with a
  wonderful hat and most elegant gloves, ruled her band with the most
  exemplary self-confidence. They were all smart fellows; =they were all
  of them her lovers, and with these ten husbands she was the happiest
  of wives=.

Acts of fornication with children also explain the melancholy phenomenon
of the existence of a widely diffused =child prostitution= in all large
towns of the old and new world, regarding which, in the previously
mentioned works on prostitution in these towns, detailed accounts will
be found.[644] The little flower-girls of Paris, the Berlin
match-sellers and wax-candle-sellers or “music pupils”--all these
provide a large contingent to child prostitution. To a great extent they
are associated with equally youthful criminals and _souteneurs_, and
avail themselves for blackmailing purposes of the existence of § 176^{3}
and § 186 of the Criminal Code. Among them there are even individuals
given to peculiar sexual “specialities,” who gratify perverse lusts in
various artificial ways. Social misery, bad example, and seduction are,
indeed, often to be blamed as causes of this early sexual depravity, but
it is precisely in respect of child prostitution that Lombroso’s
doctrine of the born prostitute has considerable justification.

       *       *       *       *       *

In exceptional cases only does =incest=--sexual intercourse between
those nearly related by blood, either in the same generation, as between
brother and sister, or in the ascending and descending line--depend upon
pathological causes. The origin of the dread and horror inspired by
incest remains “a moot question of historical research.”[645] Within
historical times and among savage peoples incestuous intercourse was
permitted and widely diffused. Without doubt, racial hygienic experience
regarding the pernicious effects of this extreme form of incest gave
rise to the recognition of the fact that incest must be forbidden. At
the present day incest occurs almost exclusively as the result of chance
associations--as, for example, in alcoholic intoxication, in consequence
of close domestic intimacy in small dwellings, in the absence of other
opportunity for sexual intercourse. In such circumstances not
infrequently among the lower classes of the population we observe, as a
favouring factor, a complete absence of any conception of the immorality
of incest.

Remarkable is the tendency to incestuous unions in certain epochs--as,
for example, in the period of the French Rococo, when it was introduced
by suggestion on a large scale, and manifested itself with alarming
frequency. Numerous credible historical examples of this I have recorded
in my “Recent Researches concerning the Marquis de Sade” (pp. 165-168).
Mirabeau, and especially Rétif de la Bretonne (see my work on Rétif, pp.
381-382), luxuriated in horribly blasphemous incestuous ideas.[646]
According to Theodor Mundt, who speaks of these tendencies in his
sketches of “Paris during the Second Empire” (vol. i., pp. 141, 142;
Berlin, 1867), it appears that the French nature is not repelled to the
same degree as the German by the idea of sexual union between those
nearly related by blood. Eugene Sue relates, in his “Mysteries of
Paris,” that among the lowest strata of the population fathers often
have intercourse with their own daughters.

But such things also happen in Germany. In August, 1907, a manual
labourer, forty-seven years of age, was condemned to three years’
imprisonment because he had had incestuous intercourse with his
daughter, now twenty-seven years of age, during the previous fifteen
years (!), and had continued this incestuous relationship after he had
himself remarried. The girl had been for several years living in
intimate sexual relationship with her father, who watched jealously to
prevent his daughter having anything to do with another man. Among many
Indian tribes of Central America incest is said to be always practised
when the eldest daughter accompanies the father for a few days into the
mountains, in order to prepare his maize bread for him.

Relations somewhat analogous are those in which parent and child have
sexual intercourse with the same person--when, for example, mother and
daughter have the same lover. Other peculiar combinations are possible,
and are actually observed. Unique, however, would appear to be the case
reported by d’Estoc (“Paris-Eros,” p. 209), in which a young man had
sexual intercourse with a woman, with her two daughters, and also
utilized the father of this family as a passive pæderast! In a
manuscript novel, which I once saw, a man was made the lover of both
husband and wife.

One of the most remarkable of sexual aberrations, in the reality of
which, as Mirabeau[647] remarked, it is hardly possible to believe, is
=fornication with animals--zoophilia and bestiality=.[648]

We will first describe zoophilia, a sexual inclination towards animals
without actual sexual intercourse. Genuine zoophilia, or “=animal
fetichism=,” as a perversion =monopolizing= the human being’s circle of
sexual ideas, is very rare. Until recently, only a single case has been
published--that recorded by Dr. Hanc in 1887, in the _Wiener
Medizinische Blâtter_, and quoted also by von Krafft-Ebing. But I
myself, in the year 1905, observed a second case of genuine zoophilia,
and have recorded it elsewhere.[649] This extraordinarily rare case may
as well be once more detailed here:

  The person concerned was a farmer, forty-two years of age, of a large
  and imposing appearance, a healthy aspect, and normal conformation.
  His family history did not show any points of importance throwing
  light on the peculiar development of his _vita sexualis_. In the
  family several unhappy marriages had occurred. The patient’s parents
  had also lived in such an inharmonious marriage. His mother had a
  masterful manner; he felt no love for her. He knew nothing of any
  sexual abnormalities in his family. He lays especial stress upon the
  fact that when an infant he was brought up on the bottle, and that in
  this way he missed the first unconscious natural sexual stimulations
  which, according to the theory propounded by S. Freud, proceed from
  the suckling at the maternal breast. To this he mainly ascribes his
  lack of sexual sensibility towards the female sex. When he was a boy
  twelve years of age, the patient experienced sexual excitement for the
  first time when riding on a fine horse. Since that time his sexual
  sensibility as a whole has been closely connected with the idea of
  fine horses, in this way, that merely to look at them produced
  libidinous excitement, so that for years, once a week, while riding,
  he had an ejaculation, accompanied by intense voluptuous sensations.
  It is, however, remarkable that he never had any erotic dreams
  connected with horses. As already stated, his sexual sensibility
  regarding the human female, and also the human male, is non-existent.
  His views regarding women are Schopenhauerian. The few attempts he had
  made at intimate intercourse with women--in most cases these were
  _puellæ publicæ_--were repulsive to him; he had on these occasions no
  erection at all, or only a very slight one. The _vita sexualis_ of the
  patient is, speaking generally, by no means an active one. He does not
  experience nocturnal pollutions, and is completely satisfied sexually
  by the weekly ejaculations and libidinous excitement which occurs when
  riding on horseback. For several years the patient has suffered from
  frequent insomnia, the cause of which he considered to be material
  troubles combined with gloomy thoughts about his abnormal sexual
  condition. Bromides, veronal, and other hypnotic drugs, are of little
  use to him, for habituation soon sets in; on the other hand, cold
  foot-baths have a better effect. The patient, who, as he himself says,
  has a strong antipathy to normal sexual intercourse, which he regards
  as a “bestial act,” believes that he might perhaps attain a normal
  sexual condition if he could meet with a wife who would be
  sympathetic, and would be in harmony with him mentally and physically.
  He is, however, in this respect extremely sceptical, since he is well
  aware of the rarity of that complete harmony which is the
  indispensable prerequisite of a happy marriage. The patient exhibited
  no symptoms whatever of “degeneration.” The genital organs were
  normal, and nervous sleeplessness in a man forty-two years of age,
  dependent upon material cares and emotional depression, cannot be
  regarded as a symptom of degeneration, when we reflect how frequently
  in persons who are otherwise quite healthy such nervous insomnia may
  make its appearance, as a result of the struggle for life, at or near
  the age of forty years.

True zoophilia is a typical sexual perversion, and appears to occur
principally in men. The use of animals (dogs) for purely onanistic
purposes, in the way of licking the female genital organs, cannot be
included in this connexion. In French novels and moral studies of recent
times such types of zoophilous women are, indeed, described; thus, for
example, in Octave Mirbeau’s “Badereise eines Neurasthenikers” (1902) we
find a description of Princess Karagnine as such a perverse woman,
endowed with a peculiar “passion for animals,” especially for stallions,
who caresses them with obvious signs of sexual excitement. And in the de
Goncourts’ “Diary” I find the following remark:

  “Every time I visit the Zoological Gardens, I am struck by the number
  of bizarre, remarkably eccentric, exotic, indefinable women we meet
  here, to whom the contact with the animal world of this place appears
  to constitute an adventure of physical love” (Edmond and Jules de
  Goncourt, “Leaves from a Diary,” 1851 to 1895).

R. Schwaeblé also gives an interesting account of the zoophilous
tendencies of Frenchwomen (“Les Détraquées de Paris,” pp. 203-212).

Unquestionably, modern zoological gardens offer even more than country
life opportunities to women of zoophilous instincts, and can in this
respect become dangerous. I remember from my own schooldays in Hanover
remarkable scenes in the much-visited zoological gardens of that
town--scenes which at that time we naturally did not really understand,
but on which the above remarks and observations throw a clear light.

Thus we shall no longer be surprised by the following extremely
remarkable case of zoophilia in the female sex:

  _Kleptomania in a Girl aged Thirteen._--A girl thirteen years of age,
  who is incurably affected with kleptomania, and who at the same time
  has a morbid inclination towards horses, is the most recent phenomenon
  in the province of decadence. The unfortunate child is the daughter,
  Frida, of a married couple living in the Höchstestrasse. She had
  committed a number of thefts of vehicles, which might have been
  attributed only to skilled professional thieves. The morbid tendency
  compels the child to take the horse by the bridle and lead it away.
  She does not appear to have any tendency to sell the animal, or to
  steal anything from the carriage. Her love for horses led her in
  earlier years to unusual acts. Thus she took the horse of a dairyman
  in the Elbingerstrasse out of its stall, mounted it, and rode away.
  The child has been under medical treatment for a long time on account
  of her extremely unusual tendency, and we understand that the medical
  evidence shows that she cannot be held legally responsible for the
  offences she has committed (_Berliner Tageblatt_, No. 352, July 14,
  1906).

Passing now to consider definite acts of fornication with animals
(_Sodomie_--see note ^{648} to p. 640, bestiality),[650] there is
hardly any animal which has not been in some way and at some time
utilized for the gratification of human lust; but naturally in most
cases the animals always available were employed, such as dogs, cats,
sheep, goats, hens, geese, ducks, horses. Martin Schurig, as early as
1730, in his “Gynæcologia” (pp. 380-387), recorded a large number of
cases of bestial aberrations in which, in addition to the animals above
mentioned, apes, bears, and even fishes were employed. In antiquity
snakes were often the objects of unnatural lust on the part of women,
playing the part of the modern lap-dog. Bestiality is very widely
diffused.[651] Countries especially celebrated for the frequency of this
practice are China and Italy; in the former country =geese=, in the
latter =goats=, are preferred for sexual malpractices. In India, and
also among the Southern Slavs, horses and donkeys play the principal
part as objects of bestial love.[652]

Acts of fornication with animals are due to various causes; in
exceptional cases only can they be referred to morbid predisposition. In
the lower classes of the population, and among many races--as, for
example, among the Southern Slavs and among the Persians--the
superstitious belief that venereal disease can be cured by intercourse
with animals occasionally gives rise to bestiality. More frequently the
=lack of opportunity for normal gratification= of the sexual impulse is
the cause of bestiality; and it is naturally of more frequent occurrence
in the country, for the reason that there human beings live in closer
association with animals than they do in the town. The herdsman alone
with his herd in a solitary place, the groom who in the stable suddenly
finds himself in a state of sexual excitement, the peasant whose wife is
perhaps ailing--all these indulge in bestiality simply from opportunity.
Friedrich S. Krauss learned from a trustworthy authority that in the
Austrian cavalry Slavonic soldiers frequently gratified their sexual
impulse upon mares. When they are caught doing this, they excuse
themselves by saying that they are too poor to pay a woman. Commonly
these fellows escape punishment. In brothels, also, bestial practices
are common; in some cases debauchees themselves take part in these
practices, in others prostitutes make a display of bestial intercourse.
Frequently, also, sadistic impulses, similar to those which find
expression in the torturing or slaughtering of animals during coitus,
play a part in bestial intercourse.

  An eyewitness describes such a brothel scene, which took place in the
  Via San Pietro all’ Orto at Milan. An old roué played the principal
  part in this; he had become so depraved that he had sexual intercourse
  with a duck, the throat of which was cut during the bestial act!

Some forty years ago, in the Karntnerstrasse in Vienna, a prostitute was
found in her room, murdered, and her chambermate and professional
companion was condemned to imprisonment as guilty of the murder. After
some years, however, the real murderer was discovered, and he was
detected by the fact that he was only able to have an erection of the
penis when he killed a =hen=. He was known among the prostitutes as “the
hen-man.”

Another case of sadistic bestiality was recently reported by the
veterinary surgeon Grundmann, at Marienburg in Saxony (the reference
will be found in the _Berliner Tierärztliche Wochenschrift_ for
September 14, 1906):

  A man, thirty-eight years of age, of bad reputation, one night found
  his way into a byre in order to gratify his sexual desires by
  intercourse with a cow. First he introduced his penis into the vagina
  of a heifer nine months old; then he tried the same thing on a cow,
  which threw him off, and he fell to the ground. In a rage at this, he
  seized a pitchfork and forcibly thrust one of the prongs, first into
  the anus of the heifer, and then into that of the cow. The cow died
  speedily, whilst the heifer had to be slaughtered next day. In the
  cow, in addition to a laceration of the rectum about 1-1/2 inches in
  length, there was found laceration of the capsules of the right and
  left kidneys, perforation of the mesentery, of the colon, of the
  liver, and of the diaphragm, also a laceration 1-1/2 inches long and
  equally deep in the right lung. These extensive injuries showed that
  the pitchfork must have been thrust in repeatedly. The appearances in
  the body of the slaughtered heifer were similar to those found in the
  cow. The accused was condemned to imprisonment for two years and three
  months, part of this term being for the offence against morality and
  part for the injury to property.

The following extremely rare case of bestiality on the part of a woman
was seen by Krauss (_op. cit._, p. 281):

  “If I can venture to credit the reports I have so frequently heard
  (and it is difficult to believe that they are pure inventions), among
  the Southern Slavs intercourse between women and horses or asses is
  comparatively common. How they go to work in this matter I do not know
  from personal observation. I did, however, once see a Chrowot woman of
  ideal beauty, who =stood= at night completely naked in front of a
  lighted lamp, and in this position had intercourse with a tom cat. She
  experienced so intense an orgasm that she did not notice me, although
  I watched the scene barely two paces from the window.”

The part played by lap-dogs in the case of many ladies has been
previously mentioned.

Formerly the question was quite seriously discussed, whether a human
being could be seduced or violated by an animal, and Hufeland relates a
fantastic story of copulation between a dog and a sleeping little girl,
which I have criticized in another work;[653] but there are, as a matter
of fact, no proofs of such an occurrence, or of its possibility. In
brothels, certainly, dogs are from time to time _trained_ to have
intercourse with prostitutes.[654]

Much rarer than acts of fornication with animals are similar acts with
=corpses=, the so-called “=necrophilia=.” In the works of de Sade, we
find references to the algolagnistic factor of this rare sexual
aberration, to the sadistic or masochistic element in necrophilia,
inasmuch as in the case of the dead individual we have to do with a
completely helpless and defenceless being, who is totally unable to
resist the act; sadism is also manifested in the not uncommon mutilation
of the corpses;[655] and the sadistic impulse further obtains
gratification from the idea of decomposition, from the smell, the cold,
and the horror. In the case of necrophilia opportunity also plays a
part. Soldiers and monks who are occupied in watching the dead, and who
chance to be seized with sexual excitement, have gratified themselves
with female corpses.

Sexual acts with corpses are, indeed, not so rare as was formerly
assumed, but they belong to the class of sexual aberrations regarding
which we have but few authentic observations, most of these derived
from French authors. Remarkable is the following recent case, which
occurred in April, 1901:[656]

  The following hardly credible case of necrophilia is reported from
  Schonau: In the cemetery of that place Frau Maschke, thirty years of
  age, was buried in the morning, but the grave was not completely
  filled in. In the evening an inhabitant visited the grave of a
  relative, which was close to that of Frau Maschke, and she noticed
  with alarm that the top of the coffin in which the corpse of Frau
  Maschke was lying was moving up and down. The discoverer of this
  alarming occurrence hastened to the sexton, and reported the fact. The
  sexton hurried to the cemetery with several workmen, and there, to
  their horror, they surprised an inmate of the poorhouse named Wokatsch
  as he was in the act of violating the woman’s corpse. The bestial
  criminal was at once arrested. Soon afterwards a judicial
  investigation took place, for which purpose the corpse was removed
  from the grave and taken to the mortuary in order to determine how far
  the criminal had actually proceeded in his attempt on the body.

In folk-lore, mythology, and belles-lettres, necrophilia plays a large
part, a matter to which I have referred at greater length in another
work (“Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol.
ii., pp. 288-296). The =idea= of intercourse with a dead body, and also
that of intercourse with an insensible human being, somewhat frequently
gives rise to peculiar forms of sexual aberration. First of all in this
connexion we have to consider =symbolic necrophilia=, in which the
person concerned contents himself with the simple appearance of death. A
prostitute or some other woman must clothe herself in a shroud, lie in a
coffin, or on the “bed of death,” or in a room draped as a “chamber of
death,” and during the whole time must pretend to be dead, whilst the
necrophilist satisfies himself sexually by various acts. Cases of such a
nature are reported by de Sade, Neri, Taxil, Tarnowsky, etc.

Closely allied to these necrophilist tendencies is the remarkable
“=Venus statuaria=,” =the love for and sexual intercourse with statues
and other representations of the human person=. Here also, apart from
certain =aesthetic= motives,[657] which may predominate in the case of
statues of exceptional artistic perfection, we have to do, for the most
part, with the same motives that give rise to necrophilia--sadistic,
masochistic, and fetichistic. In the case of individuals who are
sexually extremely excitable, a walk through a museum containing many
statues may suffice to give rise to libido. Of this we have examples.
Generally, however, we have to do with immature, youthful, and, above
all, =uncultured= individuals, who are devoid of all æsthetic
sensibility, and have grown up also in a state of prudery and horror of
the nude. It is of similar persons that the Catholic moral theologian
Bouvier speaks, when, in his “Manuel des Confesseurs” (Verviers, 1876),
he discusses the case of masturbation before a statue of the Holy
Virgin. We have previously given examples of the fact that direct sexual
intercourse with a statue occurs as part of a religious fetichism and
phallus cult (p. 101). In such cases the statue is taken for the
divinity, but in a profane statue-love it is taken for the living human
being, as in the celebrated case of the gardener who attempted coitus
with the statue of the Venus of Milo. The idea of the life of the statue
is even more distinctly manifest in the so-called “=pygmalionism=,” an
imitation of the ancient legend of Pygmalion and Galatea, and a
utilization of this legend for erotic ends. Naked living women, in such
cases, stand as “statues” upon suitable pedestals, and are watched by
the pygmalionist, whereupon they gradually come to life. The whole scene
induces sexual enjoyment in the pygmalionist, who is generally an old,
outworn debauchee. Canler has described such practices as going on in
Parisian brothels, on one occasion three prostitutes appearing
respectively as the goddesses Venus, Minerva, and Juno.[658]

In this connexion we may refer to fornicatory acts effected with
=artificial imitations= of the human body, or of individual parts of
that body. There exist true Vaucansons in this province of pornographic
technology, clever mechanics who, from rubber and other plastic
materials, prepare entire male or female bodies, which, as _hommes_ or
_dames de voyage_, subserve fornicatory purposes. More especially are
the genital organs represented in a manner true to nature. Even the
secretion of Bartholin’s glands is imitated, by means of a “pneumatic
tube” filled with oil. Similarly, by means of fluid and suitable
apparatus, the ejaculation of the semen is imitated. Such artificial
human beings are actually offered for sale in the catalogue of certain
manufacturers of “Parisian rubber articles.” A more precise account of
these “fornicatory dolls” is given by Schwaeblé (“Les Détraquées de
Paris,” pp. 247-263). The most astonishing thing in this department is
an erotic romance (“La Femme Endormie,” by Madame B.; Paris, 1899), the
love heroine of which is such an artificial doll, which, as the author
in the introduction tells us, can be employed for all possible sexual
artificialities, without, like a living woman, resisting them in any
way. The book is an incredibly intricate and detailed exposition of this
idea.

A comparatively common sexual aberration is “=exhibitionism=,” first
described by Lasègue,[659] the exposure of the genital organs, or other
naked parts of the body, or the performance of sexual acts =in public
places=, either in order, by the public exposure, to produce sexual
excitement, or else as a result of the blind yielding to sexual impulse,
regardless of the fact of publicity. In these cases we have =almost
always= to do with a =morbid= phenomenon, dependent upon =epileptic= or
other mental disorders. Thus, Seiffer, among eighty-six exhibitionists,
found eighteen epileptics, seventeen dements, thirteen “degenerates,”
eight neurasthenics, eight alcoholics, eleven “habitual” exhibitionists,
and in ten cases =various= other morbid conditions. Of the eighty-six
cases, eleven concerned persons of the female sex.[660] Recently, Burgl,
in a careful and critical work upon exhibitionism,[661] has suggested
the terms “exhibition” and “exhibitionism,” the former to be employed to
denote an =isolated= act of exhibition, the latter to denote the
=repeated= or =customary= act of exposure of the genital organs _coram
publico_. This distinction is important, because exhibition occurs in
mentally healthy persons, as well as in those suffering from mental
disorder; exhibitionism, on the other hand, is, if we except extremely
rare instances in debauchees not suffering from mental disorder, met
with only in insane or mentally defective individuals.

In the case of these latter we have always to do with the actions of
weak-minded persons; or with impulsive actions in persons in a state of
epileptic or alcoholic confusion; or, finally, with coercive ideas in
neurasthenic or hysterical persons, in paranoia, in general paralysis of
the insane, or in some other form of insanity. But cases of exhibition
or exhibitionism may sometimes occur from other motives in more or less
healthy persons. Among the Slavonic peoples, exposure of the genital
organs or of the buttocks is frequently an expression of =contempt=
towards some one, or also an act of =superstition= (Krauss).
Exhibitionism as a =popular custom= occurred at medieval festivals, and
also in connexion with the “obscene gestures” of the ancients.[662] By
=habituation in early childhood= the tendency to exhibitionism can be
favoured, we learn from the case reported by von Schrenck-Notzing,[663]
in which the person concerned had as a boy taken part in childish games
in which the children passed by one another with bared genital organs.
In his monograph upon the anomalies of the sexual impulse, which abounds
in fine touches, Hoche (_op. cit._, p. 488) very rightly refers to the
manner in which the exhibitionist tendency is favoured by habitual
=masturbation=. Through the practice of masturbation the =sense of shame
in respect to one’s own body= is certainly destroyed, and thus, in the
case of an onanist, when some unusual impulse impells him, for example,
to expose his genital organs in the presence of a person of the other
sex, =certain powerful inhibitory impulses are lacking=, which, in
non-onanists, would immediately overcome this impulse.

Of the two following cases of exhibitionism, that of a homosexual
officer, twenty-five years of age, is certainly the most remarkable. In
youth this patient had also masturbated to great excess, and he gives
the following report of his exhibitionist tendencies:

  “As a boy seven to ten years of age (that is, before I began to
  masturbate), it was a pleasure to me to go barefoot, and to show
  myself to others in this way. This impulse suddenly disappeared. But
  at about the age of fifteen or sixteen years (the time when I began to
  masturbate) this impulse reappeared, and has continued down to the
  present time. Inasmuch as time and opportunity were generally wanting,
  I could only satisfy these desires in my own home, when I went home on
  furlough. Since in the neighbourhood of my home I was very well known,
  I endeavoured by taking extremely long walks, or by little journeys to
  neighbouring parts, to reach places where I might hope to remain
  unrecognized. I was accustomed on these occasions to wear a shooting
  jacket and knickerbockers; the knickerbockers were wide and loose, and
  of as thin cloth as possible, so that I could easily roll them up in
  order that my thighs might be bare (for if the thighs remained covered
  the whole affair would have given me no pleasure). Further, on these
  occasions I was accustomed to wear no ordinary underclothing, but only
  a nightshirt. As soon as I reached the desired place, and had hidden
  the jacket, stockings, and shoes in a suitable place, the nightshirt
  was arranged as a blouse. Usually I had beforehand tried the
  arrangement of the dress at home. Often I went up to people who were
  engaged in field labours (I was especially fond of haymakers), and
  begged them to allow me to help them, which they were usually willing
  enough to do. I then took off my coat and bared my feet, and then,
  although there seemed no apparent reason for that, I took off my
  knickerbockers, until ultimately I was in the costume above described.
  I must, however, as already said, =be seen=; common people or workmen
  had usually to suffice me; but when people of education (for example,
  visitors at health resorts) saw me, this was what I greatly preferred.
  When once one gentleman said to another, ‘Look at his beautiful legs!
  what lovely legs he has!’ and I heard this by chance, I was extremely
  happy. I was then eighteen years of age, but even now I look back upon
  that incident with great pleasure. I also =loved to show myself
  entirely naked=; in such cases I always remained quite close to a pond
  or a stream, in order, if necessary, to be able to make the excuse
  that I had just been bathing. Frequently, however, I lay down close to
  a railway in a suitable place quite naked in an artistic posture, and
  enjoyed the pleasure of seeing the trains go by.

  “I commonly did this only in warm, fine weather; but I also did it
  sometimes in snowy weather. When going about like this in very little
  clothing, or entirely naked, I had extremely agreeable sensations. The
  affair usually ended in my masturbating until ejaculation occurred;
  =after which I returned, as it were, to reality. Otherwise I believe I
  should never have been able to bring myself to resume my normal
  clothing. For in this state I was almost insensitive to hunger,
  thirst, fatigue, heat, etc.; it was, in fact, a trance-like, extremely
  happy state.=

  “The desire to be photographed naked came later. I should have been
  extremely delighted to play the part of a naked model. I tried with
  great energy in various places (Vienna, Leipzig, and Hamburg) to get
  such a photograph as I wanted; but I was always turned away with a
  shrug of the shoulders or a shake of the head. Finally I succeeded in
  Erfurt, at a small photographer’s, in having my wish fulfilled.” (The
  patient sent a copy of this photograph.)

As the description clearly shows, we have here to do with exhibitionism
upon an epileptic or neurasthenic basis. The patient describes the
“confusional state,” out of which he awakens to “reality,” very vividly.
An objection, however, to the idea of epilepsy is to be found in his
very complete memory of these transactions.

Without doubt, in the following case, reported by von Schrenck-Notzing
(_op. cit._, p. 96), we have to do with a case of neurasthenic
exhibitionism:

  The patient, a portrait-painter thirty-one years of age, was accused
  in the law-courts of repeated acts of exhibitionism. The imagination
  and sensuality of the accused have been abnormally excitable since
  earliest youth. For the last twenty years he has masturbated to
  excess almost every day, with imaginative representation, when
  masturbating, of male and female genital organs. In coitus he obtained
  no gratification. He preferred to expose his own genital organs to
  persons of the female sex, in the belief that he would in this way
  produce in them sexual excitement. This exhibitionism is a central
  point in his sexual life, and has acquired the character of a coercive
  impulse. He is profoundly neurasthenic, and exhibits extensive changes
  of character, loss of energy, lachrymosity, ideas of suicide, etc.
  Exhibits signs of mental weakness. Exhibitionism is to him a complete
  equivalent to ordinary sexual enjoyment, and is performed owing to an
  organic compulsion. Ethically, his personality is weakened. The
  accused was discharged on account of greatly diminished criminal
  responsibility.

As a sub-variety of exhibitionists, we must refer to the so-called
“=frotteurs=,” individuals who rub their genital organs, either bared or
covered, against persons of the opposite sex, and thus obtain sexual
gratification. In their case also we almost always have to do with
morbid conditions. The following case (_Vossische Zeitung_, No. 258,
June 6, 1906) was recently observed in Berlin:

  The architect, Eduard P., was accused of offences committed in the
  opera-house of Berlin. In February and March, 1906, he had repeatedly
  soiled ladies’ clothing in a disgusting manner. At a time when the
  ladies had their whole attention directed to the stage, the offender,
  standing or sitting behind them, contaminated their clothing, and
  disappeared in the next interval. The whole mode of procedure
  suggested the activity of a man with an abnormal morbid
  predisposition, who in this place yielded to certain perverse
  impulses. Several complaints having been made, some detectives were
  dispersed through the audience, until finally the accused was caught
  in the act. During the second act of a performance of “Lohengrin,” the
  detective Brumme observed the accused pressing up from behind against
  a lady, and, in the semi-obscurity of the performance, acting in the
  manner already mentioned. P. was arrested, and admitted that he had
  repeatedly acted in this way. Before the judge the accused also
  confessed that he had done the same thing on other occasions. How he
  had been led to do it he could not say. Each time after committing the
  offence he had suffered very bitter remorse.

The accused was acquitted of the criminal charge on the ground of mental
disorder.

The psychical element of exhibitionism also plays a part in the practice
of the so-called “=voyeurs=”[664] and “=voyeuses=,” that numerous group
of male and female individuals who are sexually excited by =regarding=
the sexual acts of other persons (active _voyeurs_), or who =allow
themselves to be watched= by others when themselves performing sexual
acts (passive _voyeurs_). In many brothels, apertures in the wall or
other arrangements have been made for these _voyeurs_ or _gagas_,
through which they watch sexual scenes. In fashionable dressmakers’
shops, men are also said to watch ladies trying on dresses--at least, so
I have been informed by a Parisian. Recently women also have been more
and more inclined to see such spectacles, so that Schwaeblé devotes a
special chapter to the _voyeuses_ in his book on the perverse women of
Paris. Messalina compelled her court ladies to prostitute themselves in
her presence. Not infrequently male and female _voyeurs_ unite to form
societies and =secret sexual clubs=, in which all the sexual acts are
performed in public.

  Thus, in the end of September, 1906, in Graz, a “Secret Society for
  Immoral Purposes” was discovered by the police. At the head of this
  club was a merchant, thirty years of age, B----, jun. A number of
  other persons of good position belonged to this sexual club. They met
  in the great restaurant “Zum Königstiger.” Under the title of “An
  Assembly of Beauty,” festivals were held in the magnificent garden of
  this restaurant, which were concluded as orgies behind closed doors.
  The beautiful gardens of the Schlossberg were also the scene of many
  meetings of the club.[665]

A remarkable category of _voyeurs_ is constituted by the so-called
“=stercoraires platoniques=,”[666] individuals who obtain sexual
enjoyment by observing the acts of defæcation and micturition performed
by persons of the other sex, and seek opportunities for such
observations in brothels or public lavatories. In the closet of one of
the Berlin railway-stations such a _stercoraire_ recently made a small
artificial opening in the wall, through which he was able to watch other
persons when engaged in the act of defæcation!

Here also we may refer to =heterosexual pædication=, to _coitus analis_,
which, according to the reports of French authors (Tardieu, Martineau,
and Taxil), appears to be especially common in France, but which is by
no means rare also in other countries. It becomes comprehensible only in
view of the fact that the anus may itself be an erogenic zone. Details
regarding this matter are given by Freud.[667] Krauss, also, in the
second volume of his “Anthropophyteia” (p. 392 _et seq._), has given
numerous examples of pædication. Among others, he reports two cases
related to him by the ethnologist Friedrich Müller, in which men had
coitus with their wives only _per anum_.

Finally, we must refer to a practice which appears to be confined to
France, the =customary use of opium, hashish, and ether, for the purpose
of inducing sexual excitement=, regarding which Schwaeblé (_op. cit._,
pp. 19-36) and d’Estoc (_op. cit._, pp. 151-158) give very interesting
reports. There exist in Paris special opium-houses, hashish-houses, and
ether-houses, some for men and some for women. Three opium-houses are to
be found, for example, in the Avenue Hoche, the Avenue Jéna, and the Rue
Lauriston; there is an ether-restaurant in Neuilly; one for opium,
hashish, and ether in the Rue de Rivoli. All these means of enjoyment
evoke after a time sexual ideas and fantasies of an extremely peculiar
character, associated with actual voluptuous sensations. Opium gives
rise to “ardent, brilliant pictures of an excessively stimulated
imagination,”[668] frequently of a perverse character; hashish has a
similar but even stronger influence; and ether gives rise to a more
powerful stimulation of the sexual organs, to a “vibration of the flesh
and of the soul.” The interior of these unwholesome places of exotic
enjoyment, in which frequently homosexual acts also occur, is vividly
described by both the above-named French authors.[669]


APPENDIX

THE TREATMENT OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS

In the treatment of sexual perversions and anomalies, always a matter of
great difficulty, knowledge of mankind, tact, and the finer
understanding of the physician for the psychological peculiarities of
each individual case, must play a greater part than any definite method
of medical treatment. An exact understanding of the true =nature= of the
sexually abnormal personality is the indispensable preliminary to our
exercising a favourable influence upon morbid impulses and practices.
Unquestionably, the physician must in the first place treat all =actual
diseases underlying the sexual abnormalities=, by means of the physical
and pharmacological therapeutical methods open to us in such abundance.
Bodily and mental =repose= is here often the first need we have to
satisfy; and for this purpose a change of environment, climatic cures,
and such drugs as bromide and camphor may be very useful. But the
principal matter must remain =psychical, suggestive= treatment. The mere
=discussion= of the matter with the physician, the possibility at length
of confiding in one capable of taking a thoroughly objective, calm,
comprehensive view of the matter, one who by his profession is
instructed in all secrets of the human spiritual and impulsive life, and
who is aware of all the bodily necessities--this by itself suffices to
restore to these unhappy beings, who are tortured by the evil demon of
their unhappy impulse, who are often in a state of spiritual despair and
hypochondria, to restore to them an inward confidence and a healing
repose. This is the great triumph of medical research in this hitherto
tabooed, and yet so enormously important, department, which only crass
ignorance or evil-minded hypocrisy could designate as “improper” or
“unworthy.” We have passed beyond the fruitless and dangerous method of
“moral preaching,” to attain a =scientific understanding= of sexual
anomalies; we have exposed the roots of these anomalies, lying deep in
the physical and psychical nature of humanity, and we have recognized
their connexion with so many other phenomena of the civilization of our
time. When I speak of a “treatment” of the common, widely diffused
sexual anomalies, it appears to me that that standpoint is the best
which regards them as pure =diseases of the will=, which have been
diffused in all times, but have never been more distinctly manifest, and
never have possessed more importance, than they do at the present day,
when will, energy, has become the most important weapon in the ever
more violent struggle for existence. As Napoleon III. said, it is not to
the apathetic man, but to the =energetic= man, that the future belongs,
to the man with the will of iron. But nothing paralyzes the will so much
as the dominance of blind and, above all, of =abnormal=, impulses.
Unquestionably they conceal within themselves, when frequently
gratified, feelings rather of pain than of pleasure, and become the
unconquerable source of hypochondria and self-contempt. The stronger the
impulse becomes, the longer the habit has lasted of yielding to that
impulse, the greater is the loss of will from which the individual
suffers. The first and most important task of the physician is,
therefore, to weaken the impulse by means of strengthening the will. He
must consistently and methodically =educate the will=, in order to
assist the patient to obtain the victory over his impulse. As Goethe
says in his “Epimenides”:

   “Noch ist vieles zu erfüllen,
    Noch ist manches nicht vorbei:
    Doch wir alle, durch den =Willen=
    Sind wir schon von Banden frei.”

  [“Much there remains to fulfil,
    Many things have yet to be endured:
    Still, all of us, by the exercise of =will=
    Can to a large extent free ourselves from our fetters.”]

The best way to attain this is to employ =personal influence= by means
of =suggestion=. We must recommend frequent =conversations= on the part
of the patient with the physician, which can be powerfully supplemented
by =epistolary communications= on the part of the physician, of which an
excellent example will be found in the “Psychotherapeutic Letters” by H.
Oppenheim (Berlin, 1906).[670] =Hypnosis= is also of value, although it
does not appear to do any more in these cases than is effected by
suggestion in the waking state.[671]

It is not so easy to transform a Hamlet into a man of action. We must
impose tasks upon the will, tasks both mental and physical; we must
regulate the mode of life; we must give to the individuality special
prescriptions adapted to the particular case, and we must call to our
assistance, whenever advisable, the friends and associates of our
patient. The great enemy of the will, alcohol, must be absolutely
prohibited; on the other hand, the taste for finer enjoyment and also
for easy sports and pastimes must be stimulated.[672] The _vita
sexualis_ needs repose in every case, and, above all, masturbation must
be energetically resisted. If we succeed in diminishing the intensity of
the impulse, and in increasing the power of the will, we have already
done much. In isolated cases, we must also always make the attempt to
conduct the libido and its activity very gradually into normal channels,
perhaps with the assistance of suggestive ideas _in coitu_, for which,
above all, the assistance of the sexual partner is indispensable. Only
an experienced physician can here hit the mark.

  [638] The Public Prosecutor Amschl reports in the _Archives for
  Criminal Anthropology_, 1904, vol. xvi., p. 173, a gross case of this
  character, in which a peasant affected with venereal ulcers, having
  been advised that a cure could only be obtained by intercourse with a
  pure virgin, had sexual intercourse with his own daughter, and--was
  cured!!

  [639] See 1 Kings i. 1-4.

  [640] E. Laurent, “Morbid Love: A Psycho-Pathological Study,” pp. 183,
  184 (Leipzig, 1895). _Cf._ also P. Bernard, “Des Attendants à la
  Pudeur sur les Petites Filles” (Paris, 1886).

  [641] A detailed description of this affair is given in my “Sexual
  Life in England,” vol. i., pp. 350-381 (Charlottenburg, 1901).

  [642] Compare in this connexion more especially the apt remarks of J.
  P. Frank, “System of a Medical Polity,” vol. vi., pp. 94, 95
  (Frankenthal, 1792).

  [643] _Cf._ Sollier’s remarks on this subject in Von
  Schrenck-Notzing’s “Die Suggestions-Therapie,” p. 7.

  [644] Regarding child prostitution in Berlin, numerous details are to
  be found in the work, “Child Prostitution in Berlin: Unvarnished
  Revelations and Moral Pictures by an Initiate” (Leipzig, 1895).

  [645] G. Schmoller, “Elements of General Political Economy,” vol. i.,
  p. 233 (Leipzig, 1901).

  [646] Such relations can become actual, even at the present day, as we
  learn from the case reported by the Public Prosecutor, Dr. Kersten, in
  the _Archives for Criminal Anthropology_ (1904, vol. xvi., p. 330), of
  a Moor, sixty-five years of age, who, in intercourse with his
  step-daughter, procreated a daughter, and later with this daughter of
  his own, when she was thirteen years of age, had sexual intercourse!

  [647] G. Mirabeau, “Erotika Biblion,” p. 91 (Brussels, 1868).

  [648] German authors use the word _Sodomie_ to denote sexual
  relationships between human beings and animals. Mr. Havelock Ellis
  informs me (in a private letter) “the German use of ‘sodomy’ to
  include ‘bestiality’ is quite ancient, and no doubt had a theological
  origin. I imagine the confusion was made with the idea of throwing on
  to ‘bestiality’ the same reprobation as the Bible metes out to
  ‘sodomy.’” There is, of course, no mention of bestiality in connexion
  with the destruction of Sodom. The sin for which the city was
  destroyed was the desire for carnal knowledge of the two angels in the
  house of Lot (Gen. xix. 5). The signification of the various terms
  used to denote unnatural intercourse is thus defined by Mann, in his
  work on “Forensic Medicine”: =Sodomy= means unnatural sexual
  intercourse between two human beings, usually of the male sex....
  =Tribadism=, the gratification of the sexual instinct between two
  human beings of the female sex.... =Pederastia= is that form of sodomy
  in which the passive rôle is played by a boy, the active agent being
  man or boy. =Bestiality= means sexual intercourse between mankind and
  the lower animals. Generally speaking, in this translation the terms
  mentioned are used as above defined. If there is any variation from
  that use, the context will manifest it. In any case, =Sodomy= has
  never been employed in the translation as an equivalent of the German
  _Sodomie_, the latter term having been invariably rendered by
  =Bestiality=.--TRANSLATOR.

  [649] Iwan Bloch, “A Remarkable Case of Sexual Perversion
  (Zoophilia),” published in _Medizinische Klinik_, 1906, No. 2.

  [650] Of the recent literature on this subject I may refer to G.
  Dubois-Dessaulle, “Étude sur la Bestialité au Point de Vue Historique,
  Médical, et Juridique” (Paris, 1905); F. Reichert, “The Significance
  of Sexual Psychopathy in Human Beings, in Relation to Veterinary
  Practice,” Inaugural Dissertation (Bern and Munich, 1902); Franz Hora,
  “A Case of Unnatural Fornication with a Goose,” published in the
  _Tierärztliches Zentralblatt_, 1903, No. 13, p. 197; R. Froehner,
  “Sadistic Injuries to Animals,” published in the _Deutsche
  Tierärztliche Wochenschrift_, No. 1, 1903, p. 153; same author in _Der
  Preussische Kreistierarzt_, vol. i., pp. 487-491 (Berlin, 1904);
  Grundmann, “A Case of Bestiality and Sadism,” published in the
  _Deutsche Tierärztliche Wochenschrift_, 1905, No 45. A very
  painstaking and critical study of unnatural fornication with animals
  is published by Haberda in the _Vierteljahrsschrift für Gerichtliche
  Medizin_, 1907, vol. xxxiii., supplementary number. It deals with 162
  medico-legal cases. Among these, two only concern girls of sixteen and
  twenty-nine years of age respectively, persons who have had improper
  relations with dogs. Most of the male offenders were =persons whose
  occupations brought them much into contact with domestic animals=;
  about half of them were under twenty years of age. The animals
  concerned were cattle, goats, horses, dogs, pigs, sheep, and hens. In
  the majority of cases there were fornicatory acts--acts analogous to
  sexual intercourse--less commonly other sexual contacts. The girl of
  sixteen was caught in the act of intercourse with a dog. The majority
  of male offenders made use of female animals. In two cases young men
  allowed dogs to have intercourse with them _per anum_, the dogs having
  been trained to do this, and in both of them were found lacerations of
  the anus and rectum. Only in a few of the 172 cases of bestiality was
  there any reason to doubt the mental integrity of the person
  concerned. In those cases there was senile dementia, epilepsy, or
  alcoholism. The principal causes for the practice of bestiality were
  enhanced opportunities, the lack of possibility in the country for
  conjugal or extra-conjugal normal sexual intercourse, or, finally,
  superstition (belief in the possibility of curing of venereal disease
  by intercourse with animals).

  [651] Regarding the ethnology of bestiality, consult my “Etiology of
  Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. ii., pp. 272-276.

  [652] _Cf._ F. S. Krauss, “Bestial Aberrations,” published in
  “Anthropophyteia,” vol. iii., pp. 265-322.

  [653] Iwan Bloch, “The Origin of Syphilis,” part i., p. 22 (Jena,
  1901).

  [654] The following authentic case, which occurred in the year 1902,
  appears to be unique. A man compelled his wife, who was amiable but
  somewhat weak-minded, to have intercourse with a male pointer, which
  he himself prepared for the act, and in course of time he made the
  animal complete coitus with his wife five or six times whilst he
  looked on (“A Horrible Case,” published in the _Archives for Criminal
  Anthropology_, vol. xiii., pp. 320, 321). A case of bestiality with a
  rabbit is reported by Boëteau (“Un Cas de Bestialité,” published in
  _France Médicale_, 1891, vol. xxxviii., p. 593). Regarding passive
  bestiality with dogs, _cf._ A. Montalti, “La pederastia tra il cane a
  l’ uomo,” published in _Sperimentale_, 1887, vol. lx., p. 285;
  Delastre et Linas, “Sodomie Bestiale” (_Societe de Médecine Lègale_,
  1873-74, vol. cxi., p. 165); Brouardel, “Pédérastie d’un Chien à
  l’Homme,” (published in the _Semaine Médicale_, 1887, vol. vii., p.
  318); Féré, “Note sur un Cas de Bestialité chez la Femme” (published
  in _Archives de Neurologie_, 1903, p. 90).

  [655] The belief in vampires is in part dependent upon necrophilia. In
  Southern Slavonic countries the corpses of young women and girls were
  sometimes found which had been disinterred. The necrophilist had
  misused them sexually, and had then cut off the breasts and torn out
  the intestines (F. S. Krauss, “Anthropophyteia,” vol. ii., p. 391). In
  the fifth decade of the nineteenth century the notorious necrophilist
  Sergeant Bertrand performed similar acts.

  [656] Reported by A. Eulenburg, “Sadism and Masochism,” p. 56. Another
  case of necrophilia, with subsequent mutilation, occurred during the
  night of December 21-22, 1901, in the mortuary at Weiher, on the
  corpse of the wife of a day-labourer. The offender, who was arrested,
  had, on account of intense sexual hyperæsthesia, committed other
  sexual offences, among them bestiality (_cf._ “A Case of Necrophilia,”
  published in the _Archives of Criminal Anthropology_, 104, vol. xvi.,
  pp. 289-303).

  [657] These æsthetic motives were predominant in the cases of
  statue-love reported from antiquity.

  [658] _Cf._ L. Fiaux “Les Maisons de Tolérance,” pp. 176, 177 (Paris,
  1892). Moreover, the well-known tableaux vivants of the variety
  theatre can be regarded as a lesser form of such pygmalionistic
  spectacles.

  [659] Ch. Lasègue, “Les Exhibitionistes,” published in _L’Union
  Médicale_, 1877, No. 50.

  [660] _Cf._ A. Hoche, “Elements of a General Forensic
  Psycho-Pathology,” published in the “Handbook of Forensic Psychiatry,”
  p. 502 (Berlin, 1901).

  [661] G. Burgl, “Exhibitionists before the Law-Courts,” published in
  the _Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie_, 1903, vol. lx., Nos. 1, 2, pp.
  119-144.

  [662] Regarding this custom of obscene gestures, which is extremely
  remarkable from the point of view of the history of civilization, see
  the second volume, now in course of preparation, of my work on “The
  Origin of Syphilis.”

  [663] Von Schrenck-Notzing, “Crimino-Psychological and
  Psycho-Pathological Studies,” pp. 50-57 (Leipzig, 1902).

  [664] Not to be confused with the “=essayeurs=,” a speciality of the
  brothels of Paris. These are male individuals who are hired by the
  owner of the brothel, in order, in the presence of clients, to carry
  out indecent manipulations in association with the prostitutes, and
  thus to induce sexual excitement in the guests, and stimulate them to
  fornication (_cf._ L. Fiaux, “Lee Maisons de Tolérance,” p. 177).

  [665] Regarding secret sexual clubs, see also my “Sexual Life in
  England,” vol. i., pp. 400-415.

  [666] _Cf._ L. Taxil, “La Corruption Fin de Siècle,” p. 226 (Paris,
  1904).

  [667] S. Freud, “Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory,” pp. 40-42.

  [668] L. Lewin, the article “Opium,” in Eulenburg’s “Realenzyklopädie
  der Heilkunde,” vol. xvii., p. 629 (Vienna, 1898).

  [669] The following interesting reports, given by A. Wernichs
  (“Geographico-Medical Studies,” pp. 48-50), elucidate very exactly the
  nature of the sexual fantasies of the opium-smoker, which have the
  character of an indeterminate and by no means coercive sexual desire:
  “It is not necessary to proceed to gratification; one is almost
  disinclined to bring the series of beautiful pictures to an end in
  this way. All the joyful sexual experiences follow one another in a
  peculiar and fanciful admixture. Alluring forms appear in the most
  stimulating postures. Often one does not seem to take part in the
  matter oneself. Beautiful women whom one has seen in any part of the
  world, at the theatre, etc., move before one’s eyes, in the most
  beloved games of our youth. Everything that memory and the half-dream
  brings us is naked, shining, delicate, luxurious--and for us alone;
  for me these groupings, these fountains with bathing forms, these
  gestures, these embraces.” It is, therefore, not simply by chance that
  the majority of Chinese brothels have arrangements for opium-smokers,
  and that, contrariwise, many opium-dens provide opportunities for
  sexual enjoyment. Indeed, prostitutes are said to prefer
  opium-smokers, precisely because the latter, as long as the effect of
  the opium persists, do not come to an end of their enjoyment.

  [These sexual fantasies of the opium-smoker probably occur only in the
  initial stages of indulgence in the drug. The =confirmed=
  opium-smoker, like the man habituated to the hypodermic injection of
  morphine, is probably, with rare exceptions, completely impotent.
  Sexual appetite and power return, however, when the habit is
  cured.--TRANSLATOR.]

  [670] I refer more especially to the last letter, one directed to an
  onanist (pp. 42-44), as instructive in this connexion.

  [671] _Cf._ also Alfred Fuchs, “Therapeutics of the Abnormal Sexual
  Life in Men” (Stuttgart, 1899).

  [672] In such cases music, more especially the more emotional music of
  Wagner, must be employed only with great care.

  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE.--With regard to offences against morality, see the
  comprehensive work by Mittermaier, “Crimes and Offences against
  Morality” (Berlin, 1906) (gives a comparative description of the
  legislation of various countries). See also J. Werthauer, “Offences
  against Morality in Large Towns” (Berlin, 1907).




