CHAPTER XXX

PORNOGRAPHIC LITERATURE AND ART


  “_Wer will das Höchste aus Wollust machen, der krönt ein Schwein in
  wüster Lache._” [“_He who devotes his talents to the glorification of
  lust is like one who crowns a pig in the midst of a dismal
  swamp._”]--HANS BURGKMAIR.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXX

  Distinction between pornography and eroticism -- An old medical thesis
  concerning obscene books, dating from the year 1688 -- Definition of
  obscenity in this thesis -- Modern definition of an obscene book --
  Treatment of purely sexual relationships from the artistic and
  scientific standpoints respectively -- Summary of the general tendency
  -- Morality-fanaticism and medical authorship -- The artistic
  treatment of sexual matters -- Humorous mode of treatment -- The
  erotic in caricature -- The mystic-satanic conception of the sexual --
  The importance of the individuality and the age of the reader or
  onlooker -- Danger of Bible-reading for children -- A remark of John
  Milton upon this subject -- Importance of the standard of the time,
  and of contemporary moral ideas, in our judgment of an erotic work --
  Example of the works of Nicolas Chorier and of the Marquis de Sade --
  Observation regarding the recent German translations of pornographic
  works -- Comparison of obscene books with natural poisons -- Recent
  obscene literature -- Remarkable fondness of great artists and poets
  for the pornographic-erotic element -- French celebrities as
  pornographists (Voltaire, Mirabeau, de Musset, Gautier, Droz, etc.) --
  Goethe and Schopenhauer as erotic writers -- Schiller’s and Goethe’s
  fondness for French erotic writings -- Occupation of women with
  pornographic literature -- Obscene pictures by great painters, from
  Lucas Cranach to the present time -- Pornographic garbage literature
  and garbage art -- Origin of these -- Dangers of hawkers’ literature
  -- Futility of the efforts of Purity Societies -- Historical examples
  of this -- The true means to render pornography harmless.


CHAPTER XXX

What is an obscene, pornographic book or picture? In order to obtain an
accurate and objective definition of this idea, we must always keep
clearly before our minds the distinction between “=pornography=” and
“=eroticism=.” The confusion between these two ideas explains the great
conflict of opinion on the part of expert witnesses in connexion with
the question whether any specified book or picture is to be regarded as
“immoral” or “indecent.”

The obscene differs _toto cœlo_ from the erotic. In my own possession is
a rare work which is probably the first monograph regarding obscene
books. It dates from the year 1688, and is the thesis of a Leipzig
doctor.[776] At that time it was still possible to compose =academic=
essays upon such topics. To-day this would only be possible in the legal
faculty and from the criminal standpoint. In respect of the unprejudiced
scientific and historical consideration of pornography, we have
experienced a notable retrogression, and at the present day a certain
degree of courage is needed to make these things an object of scientific
study, to consider in an unprejudiced and objective manner these
peculiar outgrowths of the human soul.

In the above-mentioned essay the learned writer gives, on p. 5, a
definition of the obscene, which shows that he had not thoroughly
differentiated it from the erotic, but confused the two ideas under the
same term. In his view, obscene writings are “all such writings whose
authors use distinctly improper language, and speak plainly about the
sexual organs, or describe the shameless acts of voluptuous and impure
human beings, in such words that chaste and tender ears would shudder to
hear them.”

But such improper descriptions might occur in a work without its being
possible to designate this as obscene. =A book can justly be called
obscene only when it has been composed simply, solely, and exclusively
for the purpose of producing sexual excitement=--when its contents aim
at inducing in its readers a condition of coarse and brutish sensuality.

This definition clearly excludes all those literary products which,
notwithstanding the existence of isolated erotic, or even obscene,
passages, =are yet composed for purposes radically different from that
above described=--it excludes, for example, artistic, religious, and
scientific works (the history of civilization, poetry, belles-lettres,
medicine, folk-lore, etc.).

The question, namely, whether =simple sexual relationships= can properly
be made the object of =artistic= or =scientific= representation, may be
answered with an unconditional affirmative, if we presuppose a purely
artistic or scientific critical representation and consideration of
erotic objects; that is to say, in the work of art, or the scientific
work, as the case may be, the purely sexual must completely disappear
behind the higher artistic or scientific conception. This is possible
only when that which is represented is =completely devoid of actuality=;
when time and place are entirely ignored, so that the object is regarded
rather from its =general human= aspect; and when, further, in the
artistic representation of the purely sexual we find expression also, on
the part of the artist, of a conception enlightening and to a degree
=overcoming= the purely physical; or when, finally, on the part of the
man of science, we recognize a critical point of view, by means of which
the =causal= relationships of the sexual find expression.

The =general tendency= is determinative, not the shocking individual
detail. I need not waste any more words upon the importance of medical,
ethnological, psychological, and historical works upon the sexual
life.[777] This fact is, fortunately, now fully recognized even by the
greatest morality fanatics, and it would hardly now be possible in
Germany that a law-court--as recently in Belgium[778]--should witness
proceedings against a medical undertaking on account of pornographic (!)
illustrations.[779]

The same is true of the artistic consideration of sexual matters. For
example, how readily everything sexual lends itself to the =humorous=
point of view! How short here is the step from the sublime to the
ridiculous! In a copy which lies before me of Fr. Th. Vischers’ first
work, “The Sublime and the Ridiculous” (Stuttgart, 1837), which was once
in the possession of a friend of Goethe, the Driburg physician, Anton
Theobald Brück, we find on p. 203, in his handwriting, the apt marginal
note: “Wit gilds the nickel of the obscene.” Sexual matters actually
provoke humour. This fact was enunciated by Schopenhauer, and was
ascribed by him to the profound earnestness which underlies the sexual
(“Welt als Wille und Vorstellung,” i., 330). For this reason, as Eduard
Fuchs[780] rightly insists, the majority of all erotic creations are of
the nature of caricatures. The most brilliant advocate of this humorous
view of sexual matters is the brilliant English artist Thomas
Rowlandson, whose works, both in England and in Germany, have long been
kept under lock and key.

The =mystic-satanic= element in the sexual also stimulates artistic
representations, and in the works of Baudelaire, Barbey d’Aurevilly,
Félicien Rops, Aubrey Beardsley, Toulouse Lautrec, etc., we see that the
“perverse” also is thoroughly capable of erotic representation. But even
pure obscenity, without any underlying idea--as, for example, we see it
to-day in the obscene drawings of Carracci--may have the effect of a
simple artistic product, if the taste of the onlooker is so far matured
that the purely sexual can recede completely behind the artistic
conception. We must, generally speaking, not fail to take into account
the individuality and the age of the spectator or reader. For =children=
and =immature= persons, even works that are obviously =not obscene=,
such as artistic, religious, and scientific literature, may, in certain
circumstances, be dangerous--works which adults regard and judge in the
spirit of their own time, as, for example, the =Bible= and the writings
of the =Fathers of the Church=. John Milton, who was certainly not
lacking in piety, wrote: “The Bible often relates =blasphemies= in no
very delicate manner; it describes the =fleshly lusts of vicious men=
not without elegance.”[781] =Books which are to be read by children=
cannot be chosen too carefully, for a very large proportion also of the
literature which is not, properly speaking, obscene, but which deals
with sexual matters, has =upon the childish imagination= an effect
equivalent to that of true pornography upon the adult.

In passing judgment on an erotic work, we must, finally, take into
consideration the =standard of the epoch= to which the work belongs; we
must bear in mind the nature of the =contemporary moral ideas=. Much
which to us to-day appears obscene was not so in the middle ages. On
the other hand, we must not excuse everything on this plea, for our
forefathers were also familiar with pornographic and utterly obscene
books. Works such as those of the Marquis de Sade or of Nicolas Chorier
(“Gespräche der Aloysia Sigaea”) have not only an importance in the
history of civilization: they also have an interest for anthropologists
and medical men. They constitute remarkable documents of the nature and
mode of manifestation of sexual perversities in earlier times. Moreover,
all pornographic writings afford us valuable assistance in our study of
the genesis of sexual perversions. But while we admit the importance of
such writings--for example, those of de Sade--to learned men and
bibliophiles, we cannot condemn in sufficiently strong terms the insane
undertaking of translating de Sade’s books in our own day. This is
simply pornology; for all those who, as medical men, psychologists, or
historians of civilization, are occupied with pornographic literature,
are--or, at any rate, should be--competent to read these authors in the
original tongue.[782] I feel therefore that the mass of recently
published German translations of the pornographic writings of John
Cleland, Mirabeau, Nerciat, de Sade, of the “Antijustine” of Rétif de la
Bretonne, of the “Portier des Chartreux,” of Alfred de Musset’s
“Gamiani,” etc., can only be described as pornography, although I must
admit that the original editions are often inaccessible to the
scientific student interested in the matter, who in such cases must,
_faute de mieux_, content himself with translations.

These obscene writings may be compared with =natural poisons, which must
also be carefully studied=, but which can be entrusted =only to those=
who are fully acquainted with their dangerous effects, who know how to
control and counteract these effects, and who regard them as an object
of natural research by means of which they will be enabled to obtain an
understanding of other phenomena.

The pornographic element of literature and art[783] has an ancient
history. In Greece, Rome, and Egypt, but more especially in India,
Japan, and China, there existed an extensive obscene literature. In
Europe the =French=, =Italian=, and =English= obscene literature
occupies the first place as regards comprehensiveness and wide
diffusion. Exceptionally dangerous in their effect are French
pornographic writings, because their mode of expression is so elegant,
whereas the English obscene books, with the single exception of
Cleland’s “Fanny Hill,” are positively deterrent, on account of the
coarse phraseology employed in them. The German writings in this
department are not much better than the English, and consist to a large
extent of bad translations of foreign pornographic works--if we except a
few older writings, which are repeatedly reissued, such as the
“Denkwürdigkeiten des Herrn von H.,” by Schilling, or the “Memoiren
einer Sängerin,” the first part of which is ascribed to the celebrated
Wilhelmine Schröder-Devrient. Speaking generally, it is a remarkable
phenomenon (and one which is in flat contradiction to the assertion so
frequently made that pornography and true art cannot possibly be
associated) that so many spirits of the first rank, great artists either
in literature or plastic art, have enriched pornography themselves by
works of their own, or, failing this, have at least been notorious
lovers of pornography. This fact was clearly manifested at the time of
the Italian renascence, but it can be traced down to the present day.
Men like Voltaire (“La Pucelle d’Orléans”), Mirabeau (“L’Éducation de
Laure,” “Ma Conversion,” etc.), Alfred de Musset (“Gamiani”), Guy de
Maupassant (“Les Cousines de la Colonelle”), Théophile Gautier (“Lettre
à la Présidente”), and Gustave Droz (“Un Été à la Campagne”), have
written indubitably pornographic books. But the heroes of our own German
literature have not been free from such tendencies. Goethe not only
wrote the “Tagebuch,” but composed other (=still completely unknown=)
erotica, which, by command of the Grand Duchess Sophie, were sealed and
hidden away.[784] Schopenhauer,[785] who said to Frauenstädt that a
philosopher must be active, “not only with his head, but also with his
genital organs,” was a lover of pornography, even of a skatological
character, and was fond of telling “bawdy stories which will not bear
repetition”--for example, he would enumerate the different kinds of
kissing, describe the varieties of the sexual impulse, etc.[786]
Schiller and Goethe enjoyed reading Diderot’s “The Nun” (“La
Religieuse”) and his “Bijoux Indiscrets,” Rétif’s “Monsieur Nicolas,”
and the “Liaisons Dangereuses” of Choderlos de Laclos, books which would
nowadays be suppressed as “immoral.” Lichtenberg also was a very zealous
reader, and a connoisseur, not only of erotic, but also of pornographic
literature. In his letters he alludes to reading such pornographic works
as Cleland’s “Woman of Pleasure” (“Letters,” edition Leitzmann and
Schüddekopf, vol. ii., p. 187) and “Lyndamine,” etc. Talented women of
that period also read pornographic works. Pauline Wiesel, the beloved of
Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, greatly admired Mirabeau’s obscene
writings, as we learn from a letter of Friedrich Gentz, in which the
latter decries them as “cold libertinage,” and recommends to his friend
similar products of Voltaire, Crébillon, and Grécourt.[787]

These facts do not excuse pornography, but they refute the assertion
that pornography and true artistic perception are incompatible. As
Schopenhauer truly says, many contrasts can exist side by side in the
same human being. This is even more clearly manifest in pictorial art.
Anyone who turns over the leaves of Eduard Fuchs’ book upon the erotic
element in caricature will learn that the greatest painters have
occasionally painted deliberately =improper, obscene= pictures. I need
mention only the names of Lucas Cranach, Annibale Carracci, H. S. Beham,
Rembrandt, G. Aldegrever, Adrian van Ostade, Watteau, Boucher,
Fragonard, Vivan-Denon, Gillray, Lawrence, Rowlandson, Heinrich Ramberg,
Wilhelm von Kaulbach, Schadow, Otto Greiner, Willette, Kubin, Julius
Pascin,[788] Beardsley, etc.[789]

Side by side with these higher pornographic works there exists also a
lower kind--obscene garbage writings and pornographic pictures of the
worst possible kind, such as picture postcards, “act-photographs,” etc.,
in which all possible sexual perversities are represented, either in
printed matter or by pictures (masturbation, _poses lubriques_,
representations of nude portions of the body, copralagnistic and
urolagnistic acts, bestiality, sadism, masochism, pæderasty, incest,
fornicatory acts with children, orgies, obscene paraphrases of proverbs,
rape, etc.). Kemmer (_op. cit._, pp. 31-45) gives a detailed account of
the sale of these obscenities, and of the way in which they are
advertised in catalogues, etc. They are manufactured in France, Germany,
Belgium, and Spain (especially in Barcelona). The dangerous character of
these articles is indisputable; they have a suggestive influence, and
stimulate those who look at them to imitative acts. They may thus
directly give rise to sexual perversities.[790] But they are not so
dangerous as the true =hawkers’ literature=[791] and =popular garbage
writings= about “secret sins.” These inflame the imagination, and thus
lead to crime and sexual infamies. This is an old experience. In the
year 1901, at the trial of the boy murderers Thärigen and Kroft
(_Vossische Zeitung_, No. 161, April 5, 1901), the two murderers
confessed that they had been incited to the commission of crime by
backstairs romances, and by tales of Indians and robbers. The same cause
was alleged, in December, 1906, in Kottbus, by a boy fourteen years of
age, who was accused of murder.

How are we to counteract the moral harm done by such literature? I
consider all the efforts of societies for the suppression of immorality
to be illusory and two-edged, for they =always fail= to attain their
end; and in addition, unfortunately--a matter of which there is no
doubt--they endanger the freedom of art and science.[792] All measures
calculated to keep away from children and immature persons books which
might serve to give rise to sexual stimulation are worthy of support;
and it must be remembered that =for children and immature persons
scientific books, religious writings--as, for example, the unexpurgated
Bible--and also illustrated comic papers, etc., may be dangerous=. But,
for the most part, all prohibitions, and the whole campaign against
immorality, =serve only to favour pornography=. The stricter the
measures taken against it, =the wider becomes its diffusion=. This is a
=very old experience=, an incontrovertible fact. Tacitus (“Ann.,” XIV.,
c. 50) rightly explained this peculiar phenomenon: “_Libros exuri
jussit_, =conquisitos lectitatosque, donec cum periculo parabantur=:
_mox licentia habendi oblivionem attulit_” (“He issued a decree that the
books were to be burned; =but as long as it was dangerous to publish
them they were in great request, and were eagerly read=: whereas as soon
as people were permitted to possess them they passed into oblivion”).
The pornographic books which during the last five hundred years have
been burned by the public executioner, which have been confiscated, and
which have been repeatedly destroyed to the last copy, the obscene
engravings of which the plates have been destroyed--have all these
disappeared from the surface of the earth, have all these confiscations
and condemnations[793] of _livres défendus_ been of any use whatever?
No. All the pornographic writings, confiscated and destroyed a thousand
times over, =reappear again and again=; indeed, they become more
numerous the more the attempt is made to suppress them. The campaign
against them has always been a campaign against a hydra, a labour of the
Danaïdes, which has no object, and only entails the disadvantage that,
in the general zeal to put an end to immoral literature, scientific and
artistic interests are most seriously endangered. Happily, this campaign
is to-day less vigorous than it was of yore. In proportion to the
population, immoral literature in Germany was before 1870 far more
widely diffused than it is at the present day. During the sixth and
seventh decades of the nineteenth century it flourished more
luxuriantly; even during the time of the war of liberation numerous
original obscene books were printed in Germany. To-day the interest in
social, scientific, technical, and philosophic questions, and in sport,
has become so great, and the interest in sexual questions has become so
much =more profound=, that an overgrowth of pornography is no longer to
be feared. From these facts we recognize at once =the only way=, and
=the right way=, which we must follow in order to paralyze the evil
influences of pornography. This is to take a proper care for =genuine
popular culture, to increase educational opportunities=, and to =reduce
the price of books=. A single undertaking such as that of A. Reimann,
who, in his _Deutsche Bücherei_, publishes for threepence a volume a
collection of choice literature, containing not only the best fiction,
but also popularly written scientific works from the pens of leading men
of science and essayists--such an enterprise is far more effective in
the suppression of garbage literature than all the Unions for the
Promotion of Morality.

  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE TO CHAPTER XXX.--In connexion with the questions
  discussed in this chapter, the reader may profitably consult the
  recently published book of Willy Schindler (written, however, from an
  unduly subjective standpoint), “The Erotic Element in Literature and
  Art” (Berlin, 1907).

  [English readers interested in the question of the dangers of
  pornographic literature and art in relation to that “liberty of
  unlicensed printing” which is so essential to the welfare of the
  modern social democratic State, should read the thoughtful and
  luminous discussion of the topic by H. G. Wells, in one of the later
  chapters of his admirable “Mankind in the Making.”--TRANSLATOR.]

  [776] Johannes David Schreber (of Meissen), “De libris obscoenis”
  (Leipzig, 1688, quarto).

  [777] _Cf._ Iwan Bloch, “The Lex Heinze and Medical Authorship,”
  published in _Die Medizinsche Woche_, No. 9, March 12, 1900.

  [778] _Cf._, regarding this matter, the _Aerztlicher
  Zentral-Anzeiger_, No. 24, June 10, 1901.

  [779] Unfortunately, I was mistaken in this optimistic assumption. In
  the _Journal of the German Book Trade_, No. 77, April 3, 1906, I find
  among the list of confiscated works “Means for the Prevention of
  Conception”--a separate impression of the _Deutsche Medizinische
  Presse_, Berlin, No. 7, April 5, 1899. By the decision of one of the
  Berlin courts the further issue of this work, and the further use of
  the stereotype forms from which it was printed, were forbidden.

  [780] Eduard Fuchs, “The Erotic Element in Caricature,” p. 10 (Berlin,
  1904), _Cf._ also Paul Leppin, “The Ludicrous in the Erotic,”
  published in _Das Blaubuch_, edited by Ilgenstein and Kalthoff, No 4,
  February 1, 1906, pp. 149-155.

  [781] John Milton’s “Areopagitica.”

  [782] An exception must be made of the work of Aretino, which in the
  Italian original is extremely difficult to understand. I, therefore,
  regard the masterly translation published by the Insel-Verlag as a
  justifiable undertaking.

  [783] To those desirous of obtaining information regarding modern
  pornography, I can recommend, above all, the work of Ludwig Kemmer,
  based upon official material, “Die graphische Reklame der
  Prostitution,” Munich, 1906. _Cf._ also Heinrich Stümcke, “The Immoral
  Literature of the Present Day,” published in “_Zwischen den Garben_,”
  pp. 100-107 (Leipzig, 1899); same author, “Literary Sins and Affairs
  of the Heart,” pp. 30-34 (Berlin, 1894); Sebastian Brant,
  “Prostitution as displayed in the Great Art Exhibition of Berlin,
  1895” (second edition, Berlin, 1895). Consult also the chapter
  concerning erotic literature and art in my “Recent Researches
  regarding the Marquis de Sade,” 1904 (pp. 237-272), and my “Sexual
  Life in England,” vol. iii., pp. 235-473.

  [784] _Cf._ G. Hirth, “Ways to Love,” p. 352. This fact has been
  confirmed to me by Herr F. von Biedermann. When Frauenstädt once said
  to Schopenhauer that Goethe, when away from the Court, gladly made use
  of coarse expressions, Schopenhauer replied: “Yes, many contrasts can
  exist side by side in the same human being,” and he confirmed the fact
  from his own experience that Goethe was fond of gross phrases. _Cf._
  Sohopenhauer’s “Gespräche und Selbstgespräche,” edited by E.
  Grisebach, p. 40 (Berlin, 1902). Certain “Secret Epigrams of Goethe”
  have recently been privately printed (forty copies only were issued).
  Many similar erotic poems of Goethe’s are still carefully preserved in
  Goethe-Archives, and withheld from publication.

  [785] “Arthur Schopenhauer,” by E. O. Lindner, and “Memorabilia,
  Letters, and Posthumous Pieces,” edited by Julius Frauenstädt, p. 270
  (Berlin, 1862).

  [786] Schopenhauer’s “Gespräche und Selbstgespräche,” pp. 42, 53, 106.

  [787] Rudolf von Gottschall, “The German National Literature of the
  Nineteenth Century,” vol. i., p. 255 (fifth edition, Breslau, 1881).

  [788] Julius Pascin. Regarding this painter of the perverse, who has
  recently become more widely known, see Max Ludwig, “Erregungen und
  Beruhigungen,” published in _Welt am Montag_, December, 21, 1906.

  [789] The name of Hokusai may well be added to this list. There exists
  a series of outline drawings by this great Japanese artist, in which
  the beauty of the draughtmanship is only equalled by the ingenuity
  with which sexual perversions are depicted.--TRANSLATOR.

  [790] _Cf._, regarding this matter, my “Contributions to the Etiology
  of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. i., pp. 194-200.

  [791] _Cf._ Paul Dehn, “Modern Hawkers’ Literature” (Stuttgart, 1894);
  “The Repression of Garbage Literature,” published in the
  _Nationalzeitung_, No. 683, December 11, 1906; Johannes Liebert, “Das
  Indianerbuch und die Backfischerzählung,” published in _Der
  Zeitgeist_, No. 51, of December 17, 1906.

  [792] The literature dealing with the campaign against pornography is
  very extensive. I may mention: Francisque Sarcey, “La Presse
  Pornographique,” published in _Le Livre: Bibliographie Moderne_,
  November, 1880, pp. 287-289 (Paris, 1880); Hermann Roeren, “Public
  Immorality and its Repression” (Cologne, 1903); F. S. Schultze,
  “Immorality and the Christian Family” (Leipzig, 1892); Jacques
  Jolowicz, “The Campaign against Immorality” (Leipzig, 1904). Works of
  an opposite tendency: Karl Frenzel, “Art and the Criminal Law”
  (Berlin, 1885); rejoinder to this by Max Heinemann, “The Graef Trial
  and German Art” (Berlin, 1885); “The Moral Salvation Army in Berlin: a
  Union of Men for the Repression of Public Immorality. A Contemporary
  Picture by * * *” (Berlin, 1889); “Against Prudery and Lying” (Munich,
  1892), contains, _inter alia_; “The Campaign against Immorality on the
  Part of the Pietists, and Free Literature,” by Dr. Oskar Panizza;
  Georg Keben, “The Pons Asinorum of Morality” (Berlin, 1900); Heinrich
  Schneegans, “Prudery and Science,” published in the _Frankfurter
  Zeitung_, No. 123, May 5, 1906; “Punishment and Morality,” published
  in the _Vossische Zeitung_, No. 447, September 24, 1903 (condemning
  the confiscation of Hans von Kahlenberg’s “Nixchen”).

  [793] With regard to the extent of this campaign against pornography,
  consult: “Catalogue des Ecrits, Gravures et Dessins condamnés depuis
  1814 jusqu’au 1^{er} Janvier, 1850, suivi de la Liste des Individus
  condamnés pour délits de Presse” (Paris, 1850); “Catalogue des
  Ouvrages condamnés comme contraire à la Morale publique et aux bonnes
  Mœurs du 1^{er} Janvier, 1814, au 31 Decembre, 1873” (Paris, 1874);
  Fernand Drujon, “Catalogue des Ouvrages, écrits et Dessins de toute
  Nature poursuivis, supprimés ou condamnés depuis le 21 Octobre, 1814,
  jusqu’au 31 Juillet, 1877, etc.” (Paris, 1878); Index Librorum
  Prohibitorum Sanctissimi Domini, Pii IX. Pont. Max. Jussu editus.
  Editio novissima in qua libri omnes ab Apostolica Sede usque ad annum
  1786, proscripti suis locis recensentur (Rom, 1876); Catalogue des
  Livres défendus par la Commission Impériale et Royale jusqu’à l’année
  1786 (Brüssel, 1788); O. Delepierre, “Des Livres condamnés au Feu en
  Angleterre.” For Germany, see the recorded reports regarding forbidden
  and confiscated matter contained in the _Journal of the German
  Book-Trade_.




