CHAPTER XI

FREE LOVE


“_The transformation of coercive marriage into a free and equal
marriage, one more closely approaching perfection, both naturally and
morally, can only be effected in conjunction with social arrangements
providing for the complete economic independence of woman, and giving
security for her material means of subsistence. Unless this
indispensable preliminary is fulfilled, the highest ideal of free
morality will be debased to the level of a gross caricature._”--E.
DÜHRING.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XI

  Free love as a burning question of our time -- Definition -- Free love
  not equivalent to extra-conjugal sexual intercourse -- Defamation of
  free love and sanction of extra-conjugal sexual intercourse by the
  coercive-marriage-morality -- The immoral duplex morality for man and
  woman -- Its momentous influence upon the sexual corruption of the
  present day -- Free love as the only source of help -- Actual
  realization of free love among the proletariat -- Strengthening of the
  sense of responsibility in consequence of free love.

  History of free love in the nineteenth century -- William Godwin’s
  fight against coercive marriage -- His free union with Mary
  Woolstonecraft -- Shelley’s polemic against conventional sexual
  morality -- John Ruskin on free love -- Goethe’s marriage of
  conscience -- His “Wahlverwandtschaften” (“Elective Affinities”) --
  The remarkable proposal for a temporary marriage in this romance --
  Perhaps based upon a Japanese custom -- Malayan temporary marriage --
  Influence of Schlegel’s “Lucinde” -- Karoline’s marriage wanderings --
  Free love in Jena and Berlin -- Communistic-socialistic ideas
  regarding free love -- Rétif de la Bretonne, Saint-Simon, Enfantin,
  and Fourier -- George Sand’s “Jacques” -- The “Es-geht-an-Idea” of the
  Swedish author Almquist -- Schopenhauer’s fight against coercive
  marriage -- His one-sided standpoint -- His description of the
  disastrous effects of monogamic coercive marriage -- His apology for
  concubinage -- Criticism of his view of the rôle of women in marriage
  reform -- His theory of tetragamy -- =First communication of a
  hitherto unpublished note of Schopenhauer’s on tetragamy= -- Criticism
  of this theory.

  Free love based upon =only-love=, the watchword of the future --
  Bohemian love -- Does not correspond to the ideal of free love --
  Importance of social and economic factors in the sexual relationships
  of the present day -- Efforts for sexual reform -- The literature of
  free love -- Charles Albert’s communistic foundation of free love --
  Liberation of love from the dominion of the state and of capital --
  Ladislaus Gumplowicz -- Bebel’s “Die Frau und der Sozialismus” (“Woman
  and Socialism”) -- The psychologico-individual foundation of free love
  -- Eugen Dühring -- Edward Carpenter’s “Love’s Coming of Age” -- His
  ideas regarding self-control and spiritual procreation -- Ellen Key’s
  work, “Ueber Liebe und Ehe” (“Love and Marriage”) -- Detailed analysis
  of this work -- Her critique of nominal “monogamy” -- Her idea of
  “spiritualized sensuality” -- “Erotic monism” -- The unity of marriage
  and love -- Sexual dualism owing to coercive marriage and prostitution
  -- General diffusion of erotic scepticism -- Recognition of love as
  the spiritual force of life -- Importance of relative asceticism --
  Love’s choice -- Medical certificates of fitness for marriage --
  Immoral love -- The right to motherhood -- Preliminary conditions --
  Necessity for free divorce -- Unfortunate marriages -- Importance of
  divorce to children -- New programme of the rights of children --
  Ellen Key’s new marriage law -- Endowment of motherhood --
  Authorities for the protection of children -- Division of the property
  of husband and wife -- Discontinuance of the coercion to live together
  -- Secret marriages -- Conditions under which marriage is to be
  contracted -- Divorce -- Council of Divorce -- Jury for the care of
  children -- Sexual responsibility -- “Marriages of conscience” --
  Examples from Sweden -- Public notification of “free” unions -- Legal
  recognition of “free” unions in Sweden -- Increase in the number of
  “marriage protestants” -- Importance of free love to the vital advance
  of humanity -- General characterization of Ellen Key’s book -- Its
  importance in connexion with sexual reform in Germany -- Formation of
  “The Association for the Protection of Mothers” -- Directors and
  committee of this society -- Preliminary appeal and programme of the
  association -- The periodical _Mutterschutz_ -- The formation of local
  groups -- The “Umwertungs-Gesellschaft” (Revaluation Society) of the
  United States -- Its characterization of modern marriage -- The Berlin
  “Union for Sexual Reform” -- Helene Stöcker’s “Love and Woman” --
  Conception of the sexual problem in the sense of Nietzsche -- No
  revolution, but evolution and reform -- Deepening of woman’s soul by
  means of the older love -- The affirmation of life of the new love --
  The economic and social grounds for the necessity of social reform --
  Friedrich Naumann, Lily Braun, and others, on this subject -- Increase
  in enforced abstinence from marriage -- The “maintenance question” a
  crying scandal of our time -- A characteristic letter -- The radical
  evil of conventional morality -- Insurance of motherhood -- Homes for
  pregnant women and for infants -- The rights of the “illegitimate”
  child -- Suggestions regarding a statistical inquiry relating to free
  love and illegitimate offspring in the upper classes -- Examples of
  celebrated personalities.


CHAPTER XI

The problem of “free love” is the burning question of our time. Upon its
proper solution depends the future of civilization, and our ultimate
liberation from the ignominious conditions of the amatory life of the
present day, dependent as these are upon coercive marriage. This is our
firm conviction, our profound belief, one which we share with many, and
those not the worst minds of our day.

Free love is neither, as malevolent opponents maintain, the abolition of
marriage, nor is it the organization of extra-conjugal sexual
intercourse. Free love and extra-conjugal sexual intercourse have
nothing whatever to do one with the other. Indeed, I go so far as to
maintain that true free love, as it must and will prevail, will limit
casual and unregulated extra-conjugal sexual intercourse =to a far
greater extent= than coercive marriage has ever succeeded in doing.
Above all, free love will ennoble sexual intercourse.

For the longer, in existing economic conditions, we cling to the
antiquated “coercive marriage,” which has so long been in need of
reform, the smaller is the number of those who desire to marry, the more
advanced becomes the age of marriage, the greater becomes the general
sexual wretchedness, the deeper shall we sink into the mephitic slough
of prostitution, towards which the increasing promiscuity of
extra-conjugal sexual intercourse inevitably leads us.

For this is the peculiar, hypocritical, and absurd mode of argument of
those who uphold conventional marriage; they despise and brand with
infamy every sexual relationship of two adult independent persons based
upon free love, and sanction quite openly casual transitory
extra-conjugal sexual intercourse, devoid of all personal relationships,
not only with prostitutes, but also with respectable women.

  “Bachelorhood,” says Max Nordau, “is very far from being equivalent to
  sexual continence. The bachelor receives from society the tacit
  permission to indulge in the convenience of intercourse with woman,
  when and where he can; it calls his self-seeking pleasures
  ‘successes,’ and surrounds them with a kind of poetic glory; and the
  amiable vice of Don Juan arouses in society a feeling composed of
  envy, sympathy, and secret admiration.”[186]


On the other hand, =this same= conventional coercive marriage morality
demands from the girl complete sexual continence and intactness until
the time of her marriage!

But every reasonable and just man must ask the question, Where, then,
are the unmarried men to gratify their sexual impulse if at the same
time the unmarried girls are condemned to absolute chastity?

It is merely necessary to place these two facts =side by side= in order
to expose the utter mendacity and shamelessness of the coercive marriage
morality, and to display the true cancer of our sexual life, the sole
cause of the increasing diffusion of =prostitution=, of =wild sexual
promiscuity=, and of =venereal diseases=.

When hereafter, before the judgment-seat of history, the dreadful
“_j’accuse_” is uttered against the sexual corruption of our time, then
there will be a good defence for those of us who, under the device,
“Away with prostitution! away with the brothels! away with all ‘wild’
love! away with venereal diseases!” were the first to indicate =free
love= as the one and only means of rescue from these miseries.

We are always told that men are not yet ready for the free, independent
management of their sexual life; mankind is not yet ripe for the
necessary responsibility. Our opponents point especially to the danger
of such an opinion and such reforms for the lower classes.

But human beings are better than the defenders of the obsolete
conventional morality would have us believe, and above all, it is the
members of the lower classes whom we may quietly allow to follow the
dictates of their own hearts. They, indeed, give us the example that
freedom is not equivalent to immorality and pleasure-seeking; that, on
the contrary, it is freedom that awakens and keeps active the
consciousness of duty and the sense of responsibility.

Alfred Blaschko rightly draws attention to the fact that among the
proletariat for a long time already the idea of free love has been
actually realized. In a large majority of cases men and women of these
classes have sexual intercourse with one another, especially between the
ages of eighteen and twenty-five, without marrying.[187]

  “Among the proletariat free love has never been regarded as sinful.
  Where there is no property which is capable of being left to a
  legitimate heir, where the appeal of the heart draws man and woman
  together, from the very earliest times people have troubled themselves
  little about the blessing of the priest; and had it not been that at
  the present day the civil form of marriage is so simple, whilst, on
  the other hand, there are so many difficulties placed in the path of
  unmarried mothers and illegitimate children, =who can tell if the
  modern proletariat would not long ago, as far as they themselves are
  concerned, have abolished marriage=?”[188]

Blaschko adduces proofs that in all places in which free love is not
possible =prostitution takes its place=.

This fact affords a striking proof of the necessity of free love. For
there can be no doubt as to the correct answer to the question which is
better, prostitution or free love.

Max Marcus and other physicians have recently discussed the question
whether the medical man is justified in recommending extra-conjugal
sexual intercourse. I myself, as a physician, and as an ardent supporter
of the efforts for the suppression of venereal diseases, in view of the
enormous increase of professional prostitution (both public and
private), and in view also of the extraordinarily wide diffusion of
venereal diseases, feel compelled to answer this question, generally
speaking, =in the negative=. Yet I look to the introduction of free
love, and in association with free love of a new sexual morality, in
accordance with which man and woman are regarded as two free
personalities, with equal rights and also equal responsibilities, as the
only possible rescue from the misery of prostitution and of venereal
disease.

Place the free woman beside the free man, inspire both with the profound
sense of =responsibility= which will result from the activity of the
love of two free personalities, and you will see that to them and to
their children such love will bring true happiness.

Before going further into this problem of free love, I will give a brief
account of the history of the question during the nineteenth century. We
shall see that quite a number of leading spirits, morally lofty natures,
were occupied with the question, because they were deeply impressed with
the intolerable character of existing conditions in the sexual sphere,
and were convinced that help was only to be found in a relaxation of
those conditions in the sense of a =freer= conception of sexual
relationships.

In addition to the romanticists (_vide supra_, pp. 169 and 175) in the
beginning of the nineteenth century in England, William Godwin, the
lover and husband of Mary Wollstonecraft (the celebrated advocate of
woman’s rights), in his “Political Justice,” declared the conventional
coercive marriage to be an obsolete institution, by which the freedom of
the individual was seriously curtailed. Marriage is a question of
property, and one person ought not to become the property of another.
Godwin maintained that the abolition of marriage would have no evil
consequences. The free love and subsequent marriage of Godwin and Mary
Wollstonecraft deserves a short description. Godwin was of opinion that
the members of a family should not see too much of one another. He also
believed that they would interfere with one another’s work if they lived
in the same house. For this reason he furnished some rooms for himself
at a little distance from Mary Wollstonecraft’s dwelling, and often
first appeared at her house at a late lunch; the intervening hours were
spent by both in literary work. They exchanged letters also during the
day.[189]

Doubtless under the influence of the views of Godwin, Shelley, in the
notes to “Queen Mab,” writes a violent polemic against coercive
marriage. He says:

  “Love withers under constraint; its very essence is liberty; it is
  compatible neither with obedience, jealousy, nor fear; it is there
  most pure, perfect, and unlimited, where its votaries live in
  confidence, equality, and unreserve. How long, then, ought the sexual
  connexion to last? What law ought to specify the extent of the
  grievances which should limit its duration? A husband and wife ought
  to continue so long united as they love each other; any law which
  should bind them to cohabitation for one moment after the decay of
  their affection would be a most intolerable tyranny.”[190]

He then proceeds to attack the conventional morality so intimately
associated with coercive marriage, and concludes with the words:

  “Chastity is a monkish and evangelical superstition, a greater foe to
  natural temperance even than unintellectual sensuality; it strikes at
  the root of all domestic happiness, and consigns more than half of the
  human race to misery, that some few may monopolize according to law. A
  system could not well have been devised more studiously hostile to
  human happiness than marriage. I conceive that from the abolition of
  marriage, the fit and natural arrangement of sexual connexion would
  result. =I by no means assert that the intercourse would be
  promiscuous=; on the contrary, it appears, from the relation of parent
  to child, that this union is generally of long duration, and marked
  above all others with generosity and self-devotion.”[191]

Here, also, we find the expression of the firm conviction that in the
freedom of love is to be found an assured guarantee for its durability!

Later, also, the English Pre-Raphaelites, especially John Ruskin,
advocated free love, and maintained that the sacredness of these natural
bonds lay in their very essence. It is love which first makes marriage
legal, not marriage which legalizes love (_cf._ Charlotte Broicher,
“John Ruskin and his Work,” vol. i., pp. 104-106; Leipzig, 1902).

In Germany, at the commencement of the nineteenth century, a lively
discussion of the problems of love and marriage ensued upon the
publication of Friedrich Schlegel’s “Lucinde” and Goethe’s
“Wahlverwandtschaften”--“Elective Affinities” (1809).

Goethe, in his very rich amatory life, especially in his relationship to
Charlotte von Stein and to Christiane Vulpius, with the latter of whom
he lived for eighteen years in a free “marriage of conscience,”[192] and
whose son, August, the offspring of this union, he adopted long before
the marriage was legitimized, realized the ideal of free love more than
once. Although in his book “Wahlverwandtschaften” (“Elective
Affinities”) he at length gave the victory to the moral conception of
monogamic marriage, and propounded it as an illuminating ideal for
civilization (which “ideal standpoint” we ourselves, as we have shown in
the previous chapters, fully share), yet in this novel he has
represented conjugal struggles, from which it appears how profoundly he
was impressed by the importance of a transformation of amatory life in
the direction of freedom. It is especially by the mouth of the Count in
this work that he gives utterance to such ideas. The latter records the
advice of one of his friends that every marriage should be contracted
for the term of five years only.

  “This number,” he said, “is a beautiful, sacred, odd number, and such
  a period of time would be sufficient for the married pair to learn to
  know one another, for them to bring a few children into the world, to
  separate, and, what would be most beautiful of all, to come together
  again.”

Often he would exclaim:

  “How happily would the first portion of the time pass! Two or three
  years at least would pass very happily. Then very likely one member of
  the pair would wish that the union should be prolonged; and this
  desire would increase the more nearly the terminus of the marriage
  approached. An indifferent, even an unsatisfied, member of such a
  union would be pleased by such a demeanour on the part of the other.
  One is apt to forget how in good society the passing of time is
  unnoticed; one finds with agreeable surprise, when the allotted time
  has passed away, =that it has been tacitly prolonged=. It is precisely
  this voluntary, tacit prolongation of sexual relationship, freely
  undertaken by both parties without any extraneous compulsion, to which
  Goethe ascribes =a profound moral significance=.”

I should like to draw the attention of students of Goethe to the fact
that this recommendation of a temporary marriage for the term of five
years, with tacit prolongation of the term, is a very ancient Japanese
custom, or, at any rate, was so thirty years ago.

Wernich, who for several years was Professor of Medicine at the Imperial
University of Japan, remarks:

  “Marriages were concluded for a term only: in the case of persons of
  standing for =five= years; among the lower classes for a shorter term.
  It was =very rare=, however, only in cases in which the marriage was
  manifestly unhappy, for a separation to take place when the term
  expired. If there were healthy living children such a separation
  hardly ever occurred--most of these temporary marriages were, in fact,
  extremely happy, and the same is true of Jewish marriages, in which
  divorce is easily effected by a very simple ceremonial, closely
  resembling that of the Japanese.”[193]


In view of the remarkable coincidence between the proposal in Goethe’s
“Elective Affinities” and the Japanese custom, we are probably justified
in assuming that Goethe was acquainted with the latter.

“Lucinde” gave expression to the feelings and moods of the time in
respect of love and marriage on behalf of a circle far wider than that
of the romanticists. At no time were the ideals of free love so deeply
felt, so enthusiastically presented, as then; above all, by the
beautiful Karoline, who, after long “marriage wanderings,” especially
with A. W. Schegel, finally found the happiness of her life in a free
marriage with Schelling, which subsequently became a legally recognized
union.

  “In her letters,” says Kuno Fischer, “she praises again and again the
  man of her choice and of her heart, in whose love she had really
  attained the goal which she had longed and sought in labyrinthine
  wanderings.... And that Schelling was the man who was able completely
  to master the heart of this woman and to make her his own, gives to
  his features also an expression which beautifies them.”[194]

Rahel, Dorothea Schlegel, and Henriette Herz, extolled, under the
influence of “Lucinde,” the happiness of free love. For this period of
genius in Jena and Berlin, as Rudolph von Gottschall calls it, the
free-love relationship of Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia and Frau
Pauline Wiesel was typical. This relationship is more intimately known
to us from the letters exchanged between the two, published by Alexander
Büchner in 1865. In these letters, to quote a saying of Ludmilla Assing,
we find “the most passionate expression of all that it is possible to
express in writing.”

In France the discussion of the question of free love was to an
important extent associated with the communistic-socialistic ideas of
Saint Simon, Enfantin, and Fourier. Before this, Rétif de la Bretonne,
in his “Découverte Australe” (a work which exercised a great influence
upon Charles Fourier),[195] demanded that the duration of marriage
should be in the first instance two years, with which period the
contract should spontaneously terminate. Saint Simon and Barrault
proclaimed the “free wife,” Père Enfantin proclaimed the “free union,”
and Fourier proclaimed “free love” in the phalanstery.

A reflection of this idea is to be found in the novels of George Sand,
especially “Lelia” and “Jacques,” these tragedies of marriage; in
“Jacques,” for example, we find the following passage:

  “I continue to believe that marriage is one of the most hateful of
  institutions. I have no doubt whatever that when the human race has
  advanced further towards rationality and the love of justice, marriage
  will be abolished. =A human and not less sacred union= would then
  replace it, and the existence of the children would be not less cared
  for and secured, without therefore binding in eternal fetters the
  freedom of the parents.”

We must mention Hortense Allart de Méritens (1801-1879) as a
contemporary of the much-loving George Sand, and, like her, a
theoretical and practical advocate of free love. She was cousin to the
well-known authoress Delphine Gay, and herself wrote a _roman à clef_,
published in 1872, “Les Enchantements de Prudence,” in which she records
the history of her own life, devoted to free love. First the beloved of
a nobleman, she ran away when she discovered she was pregnant, and then
lived successively with the Italian statesman Gino Capponi (1826-1829);
with the celebrated French author Chateaubriand (1829-1831); with the
English novelist and poet Bulwer (1831-1836); the Italian Mazzini
(1837-1840); the critic Sainte-Beuve (1840-1841); these being all free
unions. From 1843 to 1846 she was the perfectly legitimate and extremely
unhappy wife of an architect named Napoléon de Méritens, whereas with
her earlier lovers she had lived most happily. Léon Séché, in the _Revue
de Paris_ of July 1, 1907, has recently described the life of this
notable priestess of free love, to whose above-mentioned romance George
Sand wrote a preface (_cf._ _Literarisches Echo_ of August 1, 1907, pp.
1612, 1613).

In Sweden at about the same time the celebrated poet C. J. L. Almquist
was a powerful advocate for free love. In the numbers for July and
August, 1900, of the monthly review, _Die Insel_, Ellen Key has
published a thoughtful essay, containing an analysis of Almquist’s views
on this subject.

In the novel “Es Geht An” Almquist advocates the thesis that true love
needs no consecration by a marriage ceremony. On the contrary, a
ceremony of this kind belies the very nature of marriage, for it forms
and cements false unions; and any relationship concluded on the lowest
grounds, if it has only been preceded by a marriage ceremony, is
regarded as pure, whilst a union based upon true love without marriage
is regarded as unchaste. In the sense of free love Lara Widbeck, in “Es
Geht An,” arranges her own life and that of her husband Albert. Both are
to be masters of their respective persons and of their respective
property; they are to live for themselves, the work of each is to be
pursued independently of the other, and in this way it will be possible
to preserve a lifelong love, instead of seeing love transformed into
lifelong indifference or hate.

Even at the present day in Sweden the idea of free love is known, after
this romance of Almquist’s, as the “Es-geht-an idea” and also as
“briar-rose morality.” It was, above all, Ellen Key who revived
Almquist’s idea, and enlarged it to the extensive programme of marriage
reform in the direction of free love, which we shall consider more fully
below.

In his last writings Schopenhauer occupied himself at considerable
length with the problems of love, but entirely from the standpoint of
misogyny and of duplex sexual morality. Still, he recognized the great
dangers and disasters which the traditional coercive marriage entails
upon society, and rightly regarded this formal marriage as the principal
source of sexual corruption.

In his essay “Concerning Women” (“Parerga and Paralipomena,” vol. xi.,
pp. 657-659), ed. Grisebach, he writes:

  “Whereas among the polygamist nations every woman is cared for, among
  monogamic peoples the number of married women is limited, and there
  remains an enormous number of unsupported superfluous women.[196]
  Among the upper classes these vegetate as useless old maids; among the
  lower classes they are forced to earn their living by immeasurably
  severe toil, or else they become prostitutes. These latter lead a life
  equally devoid of pleasure and of honour; but in the circumstances
  they are indispensable for the gratification of the male sex, and
  hence they constitute a publicly recognized profession, the especial
  purpose of which is to safeguard against seduction those women more
  highly favoured by fortune, who have found husbands, or may reasonably
  hope to do so. In London alone there are 80,000 such women. =What else
  are these women than human sacrifices on the altar of
  monogamy=--=sacrifices rendered inevitable by the very nature of the
  monogamic institution?= All the women to whom we now allude--women in
  this miserable position--form the inevitable counterpoise to the
  ladies of Europe, with their pretension and their pride. For the
  female sex, regarded as a whole, polygamy is a real benefit. On the
  other hand, from the rationalistic point of view, it is impossible to
  see why a man whose wife is suffering from a chronic disease, or
  remains unfruitful, or has gradually become too old for him, should
  not take a second wife. That which produces so many converts to
  Mormonism appears to be the rejection by the Mormons of the unnatural
  institution of monogamy. In addition, moreover, the allotment to the
  wife of unnatural rights has imposed upon her unnatural duties, whose
  neglect, nevertheless, makes her unhappy. To many a man considerations
  of position, of property, make marriage inadvisable, unless the
  conditions are exceptionally favourable. He would then wish to obtain
  a wife of his own choice, under conditions which would leave him free
  from obligations to her and her children. However economical,
  reasonable, and suitable these conditions may be, if she agrees to
  them, and does not insist upon the immoderate rights which marriage
  alone secures to her, she will, because marriage is the basis of every
  society, find herself compelled to lead an unhappy life, one which, to
  a certain degree, is dishonourable; because human nature involves
  this, that we assign a quite immeasurable value to the opinion of
  others. If, on the other hand, she does not comply, she runs the
  danger either of being compelled to belong as a wife to a man
  repulsive to her, or else of withering as an old maid, for the period
  in which she can realize her value is very short. In relation to this
  aspect of our monogamic arrangement, the profoundly learned treatise
  of Thomasius, _De Concubinatu_, is of the greatest possible value, for
  we learn from it =that among all cultured people, and in all times,
  until the date of the Lutheran Reformation, concubinage was permitted,
  and even to a certain extent legally recognized, and was an
  institution not involving any dishonour=. From this position it was
  degraded only by the Lutheran Reformation, for the degradation of
  concubinage was regarded as a means by which the marriage of priests
  could be justified; and, on the other hand, after the Lutheran
  denunciation of concubinage, the semi-official recognition of that
  institution by the Roman Catholic Church was no longer possible.

  “Regarding polygamy there need be =no dispute=, for it is a
  universally existing fact, and the only question is regarding its
  =regulation=. Where are the true monogamists? We all live =at least=
  for a time, but most of us continually, in a state of polygamy. Since,
  consequently, every man makes use of many wives, nothing could be more
  just than to leave him free, and even to compel him, to provide for
  many wives.”

Just as are these views of Schopenhauer’s regarding the necessity of a
freer conception and a freer configuration of sexual relations, and
regarding the shamefulness of exposing to infamy the unmarried mother
and the illegitimate child, so much the more dangerous is his view of
the part to be played by women in this reform of marriage. Woman as an
inferior being, without freedom, is once more to lose all her rights,
instead of standing beside man as a free personality with equal rights
and equal duties. The result of a rearrangement of amatory life on this
basis would inevitably be a new and a worse sexual slavery.

As Julius Frauenstädt records, Schopenhauer, in a separate manuscript
found amongst his papers, has described the evil conditions of monogamy,
and has recommended, as a step to reform, the practice of “tetragamy.”
This peculiar and unquestionably very interesting essay has not found
its way into the Royal Library of Berlin. With regard to the whereabouts
of the manuscript we are uncertain; perhaps Frauenstädt destroyed it.

However, we find a brief, hitherto unpublished, extract from this essay
in Schopenhauer’s manuscript book, “Die Brieftasche,” written in 1823,
which is preserved in the Royal Library in Berlin.[197]

I publish here, for the first time, the summary account of tetragamy
contained on pp. 70-77 of the aforesaid manuscript book:


SKETCH OF SCHOPENHAUER’S “TETRAGAMY”

(HITHERTO UNPUBLISHED).

  “Inasmuch as Nature makes the number of women nearly identical with
  that of men, whilst women retain only about half as long as men their
  capacity for procreation and their suitability for masculine
  gratification, the human sexual relationship is disordered at the very
  outset. By the equal numbers of the respective sexes, Nature appears
  to point to monogamy; on the other hand, a man has =one= wife for the
  satisfaction of his procreative capacity only for half the time for
  which that capacity endures; he must, then, take a second wife when
  the first begins to wither; but for each man only one woman is
  available. The tendency exhibited by woman in respect of the duration
  of her sexual capacity is compensated, on the other hand, by the
  quantity of that capacity: she is capable of gratifying two or three
  vigorous men simultaneously, without suffering in any way. In
  monogamy, woman employs only half of her sexual capacity, and
  satisfies only half of her desires.

  “If, now, this relationship were arranged in accordance with purely
  physical considerations (and we are concerned here with a physical,
  extremely urgent need, the satisfaction of which is the aim of
  marriage, alike among the Jews and among the Christians), if matters
  were to be equalized as completely as possible, it would be necessary
  for two men always to have one wife in common: let them take her when
  they are both young. After she has become faded, let them take another
  young woman, who will then suffice for their needs until both the men
  are old. Both women are cared for, and each man is responsible for the
  care of one only.

  “In the monogamic state, the man has for a single occasion too much,
  and for a permanency too little; with the woman it is the other way
  about.

  “If the proposed institution were adopted in youth, a man, at the
  time when his income is usually smallest, would have to provide only
  for half a wife, and for few children, and those young. Later, when he
  is richer, he would have to provide for one or two wives and for
  numerous children.

  “Since this institution has not been adopted--for half their life men
  are whoremongers, and for the other half cuckolds; and women must be
  correspondingly classified as betrayed and betrayers--he who marries
  young is tied later to an elderly wife; he who marries late in youth
  acquires venereal disease, and in age has to wear the horns. Woman
  must either sacrifice the bloom of her youth to a man already
  withered; or else must discover that to a still vigorous man she is no
  longer an object of desire. The institution we propose would cure all
  these troubles; the human race would lead happier lives. The
  objections are the following:

  “1. That a man would not know his own children. Answer: This could, as
  a rule, be determined by likeness and other considerations; in
  existing conditions it is not always a matter of certainty.

  “2. Such a _menage à trois_ would give rise to brawls and jealousy.
  Answer: Such things are already universal; people must learn to behave
  themselves.

  “3. What is to be done as regards property? Answer: This will have to
  be otherwise arranged; absolute _communio bonorum_ will not occur. As
  we have already said, Nature has arranged the affair badly. It will,
  therefore, be impossible to overcome all disadvantages.

  “As matters are at present, Duty and Nature are continually in
  conflict. For the man it is impossible from the beginning to the end
  of his career to satisfy his sexual impulse in a legal manner. Imagine
  his condition if he is widowed quite young. For the woman, to be
  limited to a =single= man during the short period of her full bloom
  and sexual capacity, is an unnatural condition. She has to preserve
  for the use of one individual what he is unable to utilize, and what
  many others eagerly desire from her; and she herself, in thus
  refusing, must curb her own desires. Just think of it!

  “More especially we have to remember that always the number of men
  competent for sexual intercourse is double the number of functionally
  capable women, for which reason every woman must continually repel
  advances; she prepares for defence immediately a man comes near her.”

When we consider this suggestion of tetragamy of Schopenhauer’s from our
own standpoint, we find an accurate exposition of the evils arising from
monogamic coercive marriage, and a clear-sighted presentation of the
physiological disharmonies of the sexual life arising from the
difference between man and woman, upon which recently Metchnikoff also
has laid so much stress. In other respects Schopenhauer’s views are for
us not open to discussion, for, as already pointed out, he regards woman
from the first simply as a chattel, and denies to her any individuality
or soul; and, secondly, because he rejects the principle of the
=only-love=--a principle so intimately associated with the idea of woman
as individual. For the watchword of the future must be: Free love, based
upon the only-love! and, indeed, the only-love manifesting itself
reciprocally in the full struggle for existence.

For this reason, also, the characteristic free love of the Bohemians of
Paris during the second half of the nineteenth century, and more
especially during the period 1830 to 1860, can only be regarded as a
truly poetic love-idyll, when compared with that grand and earnest love
consecrated wholly to =work=, and to the =inward spiritual development=
which presents itself to modern humanity as an ideal love, as the united
conquest of existence. Grisette love, which Sebastian Mercier described
with great force, and which found its classic representation in Henry
Murger’s “Vie de Bohème,” was characterized by the enduring
life-in-common of the loving couples, who belonged for the most part to
the circle of artists and students. Thus it stood high as heaven above
our modern “intimacy,” which, for the most part, has a quite transitory
character; and yet the Bohemian free love corresponded in no way to the
conception and ideal of free love as a community of spirit and of life.

The development of modern civilization, in association with the
awakening of individualism, and with the economic revolution of our
time, has created entirely new foundations for sexual relationships, and
has made continually more apparent the injurious and destructive effects
of our long outworn sexual morality. These changes have taught us to
understand that in the so-called social question the sexual problem
possesses as much importance as the economic problem--perhaps more. They
have shown us the necessity for a new love of the future, for the reason
that to cling to the old, outlived forms would be equivalent to a
continuous increase in sexual corruption in the widest sense of the
word, combined with a general disease contamination of civilized
nations--as the threatening spread of prostitution, and more especially
of secret prostitution, and the increased diffusion of venereal
diseases, demonstrate before our eyes.

Almost at the same time, during recent years, among the various
civilized nations of Europe there have originated efforts for a radical
transformation of conventional sexual morality, and for a reform,
adapted to modern conditions, of marriage and of the entire amatory
life. In France, England, Sweden, and Germany, writers have appeared,
producing books, many of which have been important, full of matter, and
comprehensive, entirely devoted to this object. Societies for marriage
reform and sexual reform have been founded in North America, France,
Austria, and Germany; parliamentary commissions for the investigation of
these questions have been established. Several newspapers have been
founded for the reform of sexual ethics. In short, a general interest
has been aroused in this central question of life, and theoretical and
practical activity have been directed towards its solution.

All at once, as if by general agreement, civilized humanity asked itself
the earnest and solemn question, How was it possible that to hundreds
and thousands the simple right to love was refused, so that they were
condemned to a joyless existence, in which all the beautiful blossoms of
life withered away; that hundreds of thousands of others were condemned
to the hideous misery of prostitution; that, finally, the =community at
large= was delivered up in ever-increasing degree to devastation by
venereal diseases and their consequences?

How is it possible, asks Karl Federn, in the preface to his translation
of Carpenter’s “Wenn die Menschen reif zur Liebe werden” (“Love’s
Coming-of-Age”)--how is it possible that we sing love-songs, and yet
have an amatory life like that which we lead to-day, and have a moral
doctrine such as that which is dominant to-day?

All honour to the men and women who have dared to give an answer to
these questions, who have opposed conventional lies with the truth of
love, and who point out the new way along which mankind will go--will
go, because it =must=.

It is impossible here to mention by name all the writings dealing with
the reform of sexual relationships which have appeared within recent
years. Their name is legion. We must content ourselves with an allusion
to those books which most of all deserve the name of epoch-making, which
have aroused the interest of the community, and which may probably be
said to have first stimulated the discussion of the problem, and to have
been principally effective in starting the flowing current of reform.

In France, Charles Albert has treated the problem of free love from the
communistic standpoint.[198] In the first two chapters of his book, he
describes the development of the primitive sexual impulse, to become
the most supreme individual love, and then gives an interesting account
of the struggle of middle-class society against love, which to-day is
endangered to an equal extent both by the =state= and by =capital=.

  “Capitalistic society represents one fact, love another. It suffices
  to place them one beside the other in order to notice how sharp a
  contrast there is between them, an eternal state of war.”

It is only money that dominates the thought and feeling of modern
humanity; for love and its idealism there is no longer any room; social
economy recognizes only a sexual relationship, but not the higher
feeling of love. Capital subjects the whole of the sexual life to its
laws. In prostitution this great social crime finds its conclusion. The
majority of marriages are nothing more than “sexual bargains.”

Free love is simply love liberated from the dominion of the state and of
capital. It can, therefore, be realized only by an economic revolution,
which will put an end to the economic struggle for existence. Free love
means the independence of the sexual from the material life. =Economic
reform= is the only way to the higher love. This is the author’s
conviction. But he is not subject to any deceptive delusion that with
this all will become beautiful and good; with this all problems will be
solved, all incompleteness at an end.

  “We do not,” Albert continues, “regard the province of the sexual life
  in the society of the future as an Eden, wherein those individuals
  best suited one to the other will come together with mathematical
  certainty, to lead a cloudless existence. Just as to-day, there will
  be unrequited love, uncertain search and endeavour, errors and
  deceptions, misunderstandings, satiety, aberrations, and sorrows.
  However great the material prosperity may be which mankind in the
  future will enjoy, the life of feeling will always remain the source
  of incalculable disturbances, and love will not be the rarest cause of
  such disturbances; but still a large proportion of the existing causes
  of pain can and must disappear.”

The indispensable preliminary to free love is the complete equality of
man and woman. This, however, can only be attained by means of
communism--that is to say, by that ordering of society in which property
and wages cease to exist, in which not only the means of production, but
also all the articles of consumption, are appropriated to the common
use, and woman will no longer possess a commercial value, as she does at
the present day.

Like Albert, Ladislaus Gumplowicz[199] also believes that free love can
only be realized in a collectivist community.

However important it is to draw attention to the economic point of view,
as was done before Albert and Gumplowicz by Bebel, in his celebrated
“Woman and Socialism” (thirty-fourth edition, Stuttgart, 1903), still,
it appears to me that the communistic solution is not the only possible
solution, and that free love can very well be associated with the
preservation of private property.[200]

While the progressive changes in the economic structure of society
powerfully influence sexual relationships and lay down the rules for
their existing forms, still, physiological individual factors play a
great part also in the matter. The first to insist on this fact were the
Englishman Carpenter and the Swedish writer Ellen Key.[201]

Edward Carpenter,[202] at one time a priest in the Anglican Church, in
his study of the question of free love, without ignoring the economic
factor, lays stress above all on the psychical factor, the inward
spiritual relationship between man and wife.

He writes (_op. cit._, p. 120):

  “It is in the very nature of Love that as it realizes its own aim it
  should rivet always more and more towards a durable and distinct
  relationship, nor rest till the permanent mate and equal is found. As
  human beings progress, their relations to each other must become much
  =more= definite and distinct, instead of less so--and there is no
  likelihood of society in its onward march lapsing backwards, so to
  speak, to formlessness again.”

Above all, Carpenter has introduced into the discussion of free love an
element which to me appears of great importance from the medical
standpoint: the question of relative asceticism, of =self-control=. He
rightly considers that the duty of the love of the future does not
subsist merely in the common physical union, but also in =spiritual
procreation=. From the intimate spiritual contact between two
differentiated personalities, the highest spiritual values proceed. Only
self-control leads us to this highest love.

  “It is a matter of common experience that the unrestrained outlet of
  merely physical desire leaves the nature drained of its higher
  love-forces.... Any one who has once realized how glorious a thing
  Love is in its essence, and how indestructible, will hardly need to
  call anything that leads to it a sacrifice” (_op. cit._, pp. 7, 8).

The indispensable prerequisites to the reform of love and marriage are,
according to Carpenter, the following (_op. cit._, p. 100):

  (1) The furtherance of the freedom and self-dependence of women. (2)
  The provision of some rational teaching, of heart and of head, for
  both sexes during the period of youth. (3) The recognition in marriage
  itself of a freer, more companionable, and less pettily exclusive
  relationship. (4) The abrogation or modification of the present odious
  law which binds people together for =life=, without scruple, and in
  the most artificial and ill-assorted unions.

Carpenter accepts Letourneau’s view, that, in a more or less distant
future, the institution of marriage will undergo transformation into
monogamic unions, freely entered on, and when necessary freely
dissolved, by simple mutual consent, as is already done in several
European countries--in Canton Geneva, in Belgium, in Roumania, as
regards divorce; and in Italy as regards separation. State and society
should take part in the matter only so far as the safety of the children
demands, concerning whom =more extensive duties= should be expected from
the parents. Carpenter also points out, as was shown seventy years ago
by Gutzkow, that, as regards the development of the children, it is
better, in unhappy marriages, that their parents should separate than
that the children should grow up amid the miseries of such marriages.

  “Love”--thus Carpenter concludes his dissertation on marriage in the
  future--“is doubtless the last and most difficult lesson that humanity
  has to learn; in a sense, it underlies all the others. Perhaps the
  time has come for the modern nations when, ceasing to be children,
  they may even try to learn it” (_op. cit._, p. 113).

A greater vogue even than Carpenter’s book had was obtained by the
essays of the Swedish writer Ellen Key, “Love and Marriage,” which in
1894 appeared in a German translation,[203] and had an unusual success
in the book-market. It is without exception the most interesting and
pregnant work on the sexual question which has ever appeared. Written
from the heart, and inspired by the observations of a free and lofty
spirit, it avoids none of the numerous difficulties and by-paths in this
department of thought; and the reproach of libertinism which has been
cast at the author must be emphatically rejected. Ellen Key is the most
outspoken realist of all the writers on the subject of free love. She
takes her arguments from actual life; she associates her ideas of reform
always with the real; she writes as an earnest evolutionist. Thus, in
her book, her first aim is to establish “the course of the evolution of
sexual morality” and the “evolution of love.”

Ellen Key starts from the fact that no one has ever offered any proof
that monogamy is that form of the sexual life which is =indispensable=
to the vital force and civilization of the nations. Even among the
Christian nations =it has never yet really existed=, and its
legalization as the only permissible form of sexual morality has
hitherto been rather harmful than helpful to general morality.

The writer then develops the idea, no less beautiful than true, that the
genuine character of love can be proved only by the lovers actually
living together for a considerable time; only thus is it possible to
demonstrate that it is moral for them to live together, and that their
union will have an elevating influence on themselves and their
generation. Consequently, of no conjugal relationship can we
=beforehand= affirm or deny its success. Every new pair, whatever form
they may have chosen for their common life, =must first of all prove for
themselves that they are morally justified in living together=.

Ellen Key then proceeds to maintain a view, which I myself also regard
as an integral constituent of the programme of the love of the future,
and one which I have advanced in earlier writings: that love is not
merely, as Schopenhauer thought, an affair of the =species=, but is, at
least in equal degree, the concern of the loving =individuals=. This is
the result and the meaning of civilization, which, as I have proved in
earlier chapters, exhibits a =progressive= individualization and an
increasing spiritual enrichment of love (the “spiritualized sensuality”
of Ellen Key), and thus gives to love a thoroughly independent
importance for each individual.

  “In view of the manner in which civilization has now developed
  personal love, this latter has become so composite, so comprehensive
  and far-reaching, that =not only in and by itself=--independently of
  the species--=does it constitute a great life-value, but it also
  increases or diminishes all other values=. In addition to its
  primitive importance, it has gained a new significance: to carry the
  flame of life from sex to sex. No one names that person immoral who,
  deceived in his love, abstains in his married life from procreating
  the species; that husband and wife also we shall not call immoral, who
  continue their married life rendered happy by love, although their
  marriage has proved childless. But in both cases =these human beings
  follow their subjective feelings at the expense of the future
  generations, and treat their love as an independent aim=. The right
  already recognized in these individual cases, as belonging to the
  individual at the expense of the species, will continue to undergo
  enlargement in proportion as the importance of love continues to
  increase. On the other hand, the new morality will demand from love an
  ever-increasing =voluntary limitation of rights at those times when
  the growth of a new life renders it necessary=. It will also demand a
  =voluntary or enforced renunciation of the right to procreate new life
  under conditions which would make this new life deficient in value=.”

Ellen Key terms this new, modern love “erotic monism,” because it
comprehends the =entire unitary personality=, including the spiritual
being, not merely the body. George Sand gave the first definition of
this love as being of such a kind that “neither had the soul betrayed
the senses, nor had the senses betrayed the soul.”

This erotic monism proclaims as its indestructible foundation the =unity
of marriage and love=.

The idea of unity gives to the human being the right to arrange his
sexual life according to his personal wishes, subject to the condition
that he does not consciously injure the unity, and therewith, mediately
or immediately, the right, of possible posterity.

Thus, according to Ellen Key, love “=will continually become to a
greater extent a private affair of human beings, whilst children, on the
contrary, will become more and more a vital problem of society=.” From
this it follows that the two “most debased and socially sanctioned
manifestations of sexual subdivision (of dualism), =coercive marriage=
and =prostitution=, will gradually become =impossible=, because, after
the victory of the idea of unity, they will cease to correspond to human
needs.”

Ellen Key rightly insists that among the young men of the present day
there is an increasing hostility to socially protected immorality (both
in the form of coercive marriage and in that of prostitution); whilst
they increasingly exhibit a monistic yearning for love. The general
diffusion, which we shall describe at length in a special chapter, of
ascetic moods and of misogyny among men and of misandry among women, is
partly connected with the feeling that the present social forms of the
sexual relationship limit to an equal extent the worth and the freedom
of mankind.

To-day the “purity fanatics and the frantic sensualists” meet in common
mistrust of the developmental possibilities of love, because they do not
believe in the possible ennoblement of the blind natural impulse. In
contrast to these, Ellen Key reminds us of the fact of the “mystical
=yearning for perfection=, which in the course of evolution has raised
impulse to become passion, and passion to become love, and which is now
striving =to raise love to an ever greater love=.”

We must recognize love as =the spiritual force of life=. Love, like the
artist, like the man of science, has a right to the peculiar, original
activity of its own poietic force, to the production of new spiritual
values. The more perfect race that is to come must, in the fullest
meaning of the words, =be brought forth by love=.

For this, however, the indispensable preliminary is the inward =freedom=
of love; the free-love union is the watchword of the future. Ellen Key
also shows that among the lower classes free love has long been
customary, and that there the dangerous utilization of prostitution is
far more limited than among the higher classes, with which view
Blaschko’s statistical data regarding the far greater diffusion of
venereal diseases among the higher classes of society are in substantial
agreement.

No less indispensable to free love, however, is the full, mature
development of the loving individual. For this reason, Ellen Key demands
self-control and sexual continence at least until the age of twenty
years. She regards the indiscriminate sexual intercourse which is to-day
an established custom among all young men as the murder of love. But too
early marriages are no less dangerous. She demands for the woman at
least an age of twenty; for the man, an age of twenty-five years; and
=until these respective ages are attained, sexual continence should be
observed as fully as possible by both sexes=.

This self-command is good for the physical development, “steels the
will, gives the joy of power to the personality; and these qualities are
later of importance in all other spheres of activity.”

With wonderful beauty, Ellen Key describes the happiness of the =power
of waiting= in love, and quotes in this connexion the lovely phrases of
the Swedish poet Karlfeldt:

  “There is nothing on earth like the times of waiting,
   The days of springtime, the days of blossoming;
   Not even May can diffuse a light
   Like the clear light of April.”

On the other hand, it is a demand of true morality that healthy men and
women between the ages of twenty and thirty years should enjoy the
possibility of marriage--of free marriage. This possibility can,
however, be secured only by economic reforms.

The author then considers the very important point of love’s choice, and
demands above all the compulsory provision of a =medical certificate of
health= before entering on marriage.

  “It is absolutely beyond question that the healthy self-seeking which
  wishes to safeguard the personal ego, in conjunction with the
  increasing valuation of a healthy posterity, will hinder the
  contraction of many unsuitable marriages. In other cases, love might
  overcome these considerations, as far as husband and wife are
  themselves concerned; but they must then renounce parentage. In those
  cases, on the contrary, in which the law would distinctly forbid
  marriage, one could naturally not prevent the sick persons from
  procreating independently of marriage; but the same is true of all
  laws: the best do not need them, the worst do not obey them, but the
  majority are guided by them in the formation and development of their
  ideas of what is right.”

As =immoral=, Ellen Key indicates:

  “Parentage without love.

  “Irresponsible parentage.

  “Parentage on the part of immature or degenerate human beings.

  “Voluntary unfertility on the part of a married pair who are competent
  to reproduce their kind.

  “All manifestations of the sexual life resulting from force or
  seduction, or from the disinclination or the incapacity for the proper
  fulfilment of sexual intercourse.”

It is interesting to note that Ellen Key prophesies as the result of the
progressive improvement of the species by love’s selection, the
attainment of a state wherein =every= man and =every= woman will be
suited for the reproduction of the species. Then would the ideal of
monogamy, one husband for one wife, one wife for one husband, be for the
first time realized.

Very beautifully, and with a prudent insight into the actual
relationships, Ellen Key discusses the question of the “right to
motherhood,” where she finds occasion to describe the new and very
various types of women which the evolution of modern life has brought
into being. She recognizes only with reservation the general right to
motherhood, but she does not regard it as a desirable example to follow
when a woman becomes a mother without love, either in marriage or out of
it. It is not right to do what is generally done to-day by the
man-haters--namely, to demand from the majority of unmarried women that
they should produce a child without love. This should not even happen
when love exists, but a permanent life-in-common with the father of the
child is impossible. An unmarried woman who determines on motherhood
should be fully =mature=, and already have behind her “the second
springtime” of her life; she must “not only be pure as snow, pure as
fire, but also must be possessed of the full conviction that with the
child of her love she will produce a radiance in her own life and will
endow humanity with new wealth.”

=Such= an unmarried woman really =makes a present= of her child to
humanity, and is quite different from the unmarried woman who “has a
child.”

Indeed, for the =majority=, the ideal always remains that of the ancient
proverb, that man is only half a human being, woman only half; and only
the father and the mother with their child become a whole one!

With regard to divorce, Ellen Key demands that it should be perfectly
free, and should depend only upon the definite desire, held for a
certain lapse of time, of either or both parties. The dissolution of
marriage must be no less easy than the breaking off of an engagement.

  “Whatever drawbacks,” she says, “free divorce may involve, they can
  hardly be worse than those which marriage has entailed, and still
  continues to entail. Marriage has been degraded to the coarsest sexual
  customs, the most shameless practices, the most distressing spiritual
  murders, the most cruel ill-treatment, and the grossest impairment of
  personal freedom, that any province of modern life has exhibited! One
  need not go back to the history of civilization; one need simply turn
  to the physician and magistrate, in order to learn for what purpose
  the ‘sacrament of marriage’ is employed, and frequently employed by
  the very same men and women who are professed enthusiasts as to its
  moral value!”

Just as little as the relations between friends, between parents and
children, or between brothers and sisters, necessarily give rise to
lasting sentiments of affection, is it possible to expect this of two
lovers. The “marriage fetters,” described with such horrible truth by
John Stuart Mill and Björnstjerne Björnsen, are to-day felt to be
intolerable. The love of the modern man flourishes only in freedom.

  “The delicate erotic sentiment of the present day shrinks from
  becoming a fetter; it shuns the possibility of becoming a hindrance.”

Free divorce, in a case of unhappy marriage, is no less necessary when
there are children to the marriage. The =duties= of the parents to the
children remain in such cases unaltered, without, however, thus
rendering it necessary that the parents should continue to live
together. For the sorrows of such a union, and the harm done thereby to
the children, are greater than those that would result from divorce.

Human love has its phases of development. It does not remain for ever
the same, but it alters _pari passu_ with the evolution of the
individual. Lifelong love is an ideal, but it is not a duty. Such a
demand would as inevitably destroy personality as would the demand for
the unconditional belief in a doctrine, or for the unconditional pursuit
of a profession.

Very interesting is Ellen Key’s description of the numerous disillusions
of love, which become still more perceptible in a coercive marriage.
There is a whole series of “typical unhappy fates” in marriage, often
with no blame properly attaching to either party, dependent merely upon
incompatibility of temperament, but also upon faults of one or both
parties to the marriage.

Frequently a man or a woman of a thoroughly sympathetic temperament
lives with a woman or a man of such faultless excellence that the home
seems filled with icicles. One day the husband or the wife runs away
because the air has become so thin as to be irrespirable. The general
sentiment is one of commiseration for the--superlatively excellent man
or woman!

In the case of earnest, mature human beings, free divorce will not
increase the number of dissolutions of marriage. On the contrary, the
obligations imposed by a free relationship are greater than those of
legal coercive marriage. The fear also that with the granting of free
divorce every one will enter upon numerous free marriages one after
another is groundless. It is precisely those who are united in free love
to whom such a separation, when it does become necessary, is so
profoundly painful, that life itself forbids the frequent repetition of
such unhappiness.

Very beautiful, and based upon lofty ethical conceptions, are the
writer’s views regarding the necessity for divorce precisely in view of
the existence of children. She says:

  “Men and women of earlier times went on patching up for ever and ever.
  The psychologically developed generation of to-day is more inclined to
  let the broken remain broken. For, except in those cases in which
  objective misfortunes, or a retarded evolution, gave rise to a
  rupture, patched-up marriage, like patched-up engagements, seldom
  prove durable. Often it was owing to profound instincts that the
  rupture became inevitable; reconciliations fortify these instincts,
  and sooner or later they once more find free vent.

  “Thus it happens that even an exceptional nature is strained by the
  burden it has to bear, and the children are not then witnesses of
  their parents living together, but of their dying together.

  “Neither religion nor law, neither society nor a family, can determine
  what it is that marriage is killing in a man, or what he finds it
  possible to rescue in that state--=he himself alone= knows the one and
  suspects the other. He alone can delineate the boundaries, can decide
  whether he is satisfied to regard his own existence as closed, and to
  remain contented in the life of his children; whether he is able so to
  endure the sorrows of a continued married life with such fortitude as
  to make it increase his own powers and those of his children.”

The conviction of the rights of love, and the consciousness of the
rights of the children, are to-day unmistakably on the increase. There
is no danger that the latter right, the right of the children, will
suffer in comparison with the rights of love. It is, on the contrary,
characteristic, that out of the very same feeling by which the freer
configuration of the amatory life is demanded, there has also arisen a
=new programme of the rights of children=. This same Ellen Key who
proclaims the inalienable rights of free love, speaks also of the
“=century of the child=,” and devotes to this subject an admirable book.

The most important point with regard to free divorce, in respect to the
children, is that the father and the mother must not separate from one
another in hatred, but in friendship, and that, in the interest of the
children, they should continue to meet one another from time to time.
Ellen Key here rightly condemns the conduct of the good friends and
relatives who simply lay down the law that the separated pair must hate
one another, and must in every relationship torment and cheat one
another. It is precisely such “enmity” of the parents after divorce that
is so full of bad consequences in respect of the children.

We also have to consider this point of view, that sometimes the new
husband or the new wife has a better influence over the children than
their own parents, and that in this way divorce may have brought the
children greater happiness, may have been for them a true blessing.

The closing chapter of her work is devoted by Ellen Key to the
formulation of practical recommendations regarding the new marriage
laws. She indicates as a starting-point of her dissertation that the
ideal form of marriage is the perfectly free union between a man and a
woman. But this ideal can in the meanwhile only be attained through
=transitional forms=. In this the opinion of society regarding the
morality of the sexual relationship must find expression, and thus
remain as the support for undeveloped personalities; but at the same
time, these transitional forms must be sufficiently free to favour a
progressive development of the higher erotic consciousness of the
present day.

There always remains, therefore, the necessity for laws, to some extent
limiting individual freedom; but these laws must admit of an advance
towards perfection in respect of the freer gratification of individual
needs. =The sense of solidarity demands a new marriage law adapted to
new modern erotic needs, since the majority are not yet prepared for
complete freedom.= But it is only the needs of modern civilized human
beings, and not abstract theories concerning the idea of the family or
the “historic origin” of marriage, that should be determinative in this
matter.

In the marriage of the future, above all, the economic and legal
subordination of woman must be abolished. Woman must supervise her own
property and arrange her own work, and she must in the main care for
herself in so far as this is compatible with her maternal duties. She
must, however, have this assurance--that =during the first years of the
life of every child she shall be cared for by society=, and this under
the following conditions:

She must be of full age.

She must have performed her feminine “military service” by a one year’s
course of instruction in the care of children, in the general care of
health, and, whenever possible, in sick-nursing.

She must either care for her child herself or provide another thoroughly
competent nurse.

She must bring proof that she does not possess sufficient personal
property, or sufficient income from her work, in order to provide for
her own support and half of her child’s support, or else that the care
for her children compels her to discontinue her professional occupation.

Only in exceptional cases should this support of motherhood be provided
for a longer time than =during the three first and most important years
of the life of the child=.

The funds for this most necessary of all kinds of insurance must be
provided in the form of a graduated income tax, graduated so as to make
the wealthier classes pay the most, and the =unmarried= should pay just
as much as the married.

In every community the central authorities of this insurance should
consist of “=boards for the care of children=.” The members of these
boards should be two-thirds women and one-third men; they should
distribute the funds and supervise the care of the infants and older
children; in cases in which the mother was not properly fulfilling her
duties to the child, they could cut off supplies, or remove the child
from the mother’s care.

The mother should receive yearly the same sum, but, in addition, she
should receive for each child =half of the cost of its support=, as long
as the number of children is not exceeded which the society has laid
down as desirable. Children born in excess of this number would be a
private concern of the parents. Every father must, from the time of
birth until the child attains the age of =eighteen years=, provide
one-half of the money needed for its support.

The existing immoral distinction between legitimate and illegitimate
children is practically equivalent to freeing unmarried fathers from
their natural responsibility, and drives unmarried mothers to death,
prostitution, or infanticide.

All this would be done away with by a law ensuring from the State
support for the mother during the first, most difficult years, and
ensuring the child a right to support from =both= parents, a right also
to the name of both, and to inheritance from both.

Legal expression is also demanded for the right of each member of a
married couple to possess his or her property; those who wish to make
any other arrangement can do so by special contract after a definite
valuation of their property. And in respect of the right of inheritance,
the =domestic work= of the wife (housekeeping and the care of the
children) must receive due economic consideration--a matter hitherto
ignored. Not only in respect of her property, but also in respect of all
civil rights, and of the right of control over her own person, the
married woman must be placed in the same position as the unmarried.

Ellen Key’s remarks on the removal of the =coercion= exercised at
present on husband and wife =in respect of living together= are very
interesting. She writes:

  “There are persons who would have continued to love one another
  throughout the whole of their life had they not been compelled--day
  after day, year after year--to adapt their customs, their volitions,
  and their inclinations entirely according to one another’s tastes. So
  much unhappiness depends, indeed, upon matters of almost no
  importance, difficulties which two human beings endowed with moral
  courage and insight would easily have overcome, had it not been that
  the instinct towards happiness was overpowered by regard for ordinary
  opinion. The more personal freedom a woman (or man) has had before
  marriage, the more does she (or he) suffer in a home in which she does
  not possess an hour or a corner for her own undisturbed use. And the
  more the modern human being gains an increase in his individual
  freedom of movement, the more he feels the need for privacy in other
  relations, the more also will man and wife need these things in the
  married state....

  “But at present custom (and law) demand from the married pair that
  they should lead a life in common, which often ends in a permanent
  separation, merely because conventional considerations prevented them
  from living apart!

  “Also for those otherwise constituted, the narrow dependence, the
  compulsory belonging each to the other, the daily adaptation, the
  unceasing mutual consideration, may become oppressive. In continually
  increasing numbers people are beginning quietly to transform conjugal
  customs, so that they may correspond to the new needs. For instance,
  each goes for a journey by himself, when he feels the need for
  privacy; one of the pair seeks alone pleasures which the other does
  not value; in former times both would have ‘enjoyed’ them together,
  against the will of one, or both would have renounced what one could
  have genuinely enjoyed. More and more married people have separate
  bedrooms, and after a generation, it is probable that =separate
  dwelling-houses= for husband and wife will be sufficiently common to
  arouse no particular attention.”

With regard to the question of personal freedom in marriage, Ellen Key
takes into account the possibility of marriage being =kept secret= on
urgent grounds; also the introduction of new forms of divorce, the
present procedure giving rise to such detestable practices in the
law-courts--for example, the detailed statement of the grounds for
divorce, or an account of the refusal or the misuse of “conjugal
rights,” or an account of the malicious desertion of one party by the
other.

The author, therefore, makes proposals for a new marriage law and a new
divorce law.

As conditions preliminary to marriage, the new law should insist--

That man and wife should be of full age;

That neither should be more than twenty-five years older than the other;

That neither should be closely related or connected with the other, as
the present law already forbids. The new law must in this respect be
modified in the sense either of greater severity or of relaxation,
according as the scientific knowledge of the future may direct.

Finally, neither party should simultaneously enter upon another
marriage. On both parties will be imposed the duty of providing a
medical certificate regarding the state of their health; a proposed
marriage must be forbidden when either party is suffering from a disease
transmissible to the children (also when suffering from a disease which
would infect the other party?). With regard to other illnesses, the
matter may be left to the free judgment of those wishing to be married.

Marriage will take place before the marriage assessor of the commune,
and before four other witnesses, without any special ceremony; the
contracting parties will enter their names in the register, and their
signatures will be witnessed by those present. When for any reason the
marriage is to be kept secret, the witnesses will, of course, be bound
to secrecy.

This civil marriage is all that the law will direct; the religious
ceremony will be a voluntary affair, and will have no legal force.

In marriage, husband and wife will retain all the =personal= rights
which they had before marriage, over their bodies, their names, their
property, their work, their wages, also the right to choose their own
place of residence, and all other civil rights. For =common= expenses
and debts they will have a common responsibility; whilst each will be
personally responsible for personal expenditure and debts. In case of
divorce, each will retain his or her property. In the event of death,
the widower or widow will inherit half the property, the remainder going
to the children.

For divorce, Ellen Key suggests there should be a “=council of
divorce=,” consisting of four persons, men or women. The first aim of
this council will be, somewhat like that of a court of honour before a
duel, to attempt to reconcile the parties, to adjust any cause of
quarrel. If this attempt fails, the matter must go before the marriage
assessor of the commune; but this cannot take place until the expiration
of =six months= from the time when it was brought before the council of
divorce. The council of divorce must testify before the assessor that
six months before =each party was fully informed regarding the wish of
the other that the marriage should be dissolved, and regarding the
reasons for that wish=. If there are no children, if a division of the
property has been arranged, and if husband and wife have lived
=completely apart= for one year, the divorce will be effected one year
after the commencement of proceedings. When there are children to the
marriage, there will be needed a special “=jury for the care of
children=” to deal with the custody of the children. If either party is
found by the jury and the judge to be =unworthy= for or =incapable= of
the custody of the children, on the ground of his (or her) =morals= or
=character=, he (or she) loses his (or her) rights. If either father or
mother is deprived of the custody of the children, a guardian must be
appointed--a man to represent the father, a woman to represent the
mother--and this guardian will supervise the education of the children
in association with the remaining parent. If both parents are found to
be unfitted for the custody of the children, the education of the latter
must be supervised by a guardian only. If both parents are =equally=
fitted and worthy for the custody of the children, the latter should
remain with the mother until the age of fifteen, and would then have the
right to choose between their parents.

Ellen Key demands severe laws against the seduction and abandonment of
girls =under age=, on the part of unconscientious men; and she considers
that the witting transmission of any infective disorder by means of
sexual intercourse should be punished by imprisonment for a minimum term
of six months. Speaking generally, the law should always come to the
assistance of the weaker party, above all, to the assistance of the
children, and in most cases to the assistance of the mother.

Although the new marriage law is to give to =adult= citizens complete
freedom to arrange their erotic relationships at their own
=responsibility= and risk, =with= or =without= marriage, it remains
necessary that double marriages (bigamy), sexual relationships within
forbidden degrees, or on the part of persons suffering from
transmissible disease, which the law has declared to be a hindrance to
marriage, and also intercourse with persons under eighteen years of age,
should be regarded as punishable offences. The same is true of
homosexual and other perverse manifestations. The =trial= in such cases
will be conducted by a judge, with the assistance of a jury of
=physicians= and =crimino-psychologists=.

The writer does not believe that marriage will be transformed by legal
changes in the way outlined above, but she is of opinion that what will
happen is that “men and women will refuse to submit themselves to the
unworthy forms of marriage, which will remain established by law, and
will form free unions, the so-called ‘=marriage of conscience=,’” such
as those which the Belgian sociologist Mesnil has recommended in his
work, “Le Libre Mariage.”

It is, in fact, in Sweden, Ellen Key’s fatherland, in which these free
marriages of conscience appear to have first obtained adherents. She
records the free union of the professor of national economics at Lund,
Knut Wicksell. Additional reports of free marriages in Sweden are given
by the Swedish physician Anton Nyström.[204] He mentions among those who
have formed free unions, without legal or ecclesiastical ceremony, but
simply by public notification, in addition to the already mentioned
university professor, also the editor of a leading newspaper, a
physician and doctor of philosophy, and a candidate of philosophy. The
latter is engaged in study with his wife at the high school at Göteborg.
In February, 1904, they made a public announcement in the newspaper that
they were entering on a “marriage of conscience,” since they had a
conscientious objection to the ecclesiastical form of marriage. The
principal of the college wrote an address to the young couple, stating
that, although this union was not entered upon on immoral grounds, and
therefore could not be regarded as a punishable offence, still, such a
free union, unrecognized by the State, between man and woman, was not
compatible with the good order of society, that it was injurious to the
general ethical conception of the sacramental character of marriage, and
also constituted a dangerous example, which others might be led to
imitate. The principal therefore urged the young people most earnestly
“to place their union as soon as possible on a legitimate footing.” This
exhortation, however, led to no result.

Moreover, the University of Upsala was more free-thinking than that of
Göteborg, for the above-mentioned professor and his wife were, for a
long time =after= they had become united in free love, matriculated
students at the University of Upsala, and the university authorities
favoured them with no attention with regard to this matter.

In recent years, the public declaration of “free marriages” has also
found observance in other European countries. Thus, not long ago the
author who writes under the pseudonym of “Roda-Roda” announced in the
newspapers his free union with the Baroness von Zeppelin; and in the
_Vossische Zeitung_, No. 410, September 2, 1906, we find the following
announcement:

  “Dr. Alfred Rahmer
  Wilhelmine Ruth Rahmer
  geb. Prinz-Flohr
  Frei-Vermählte”
  (Free-Wedlock).

Similar public announcements are reported from Holland. Moreover,
according to Nyström, it has since 1734 been legally established in
Sweden, that in certain cases engagement is =equivalent to
marriage=--namely, when the engaged woman becomes pregnant. “When a man
impregnates his fiancée, =the engagement becomes a marriage.... If the
man refuse to go through the ceremony of marriage=, and wishes to break
off the engagement, the woman is legally declared to be his wife, and
enjoys full conjugal rights in his house.” So runs this law.

We can predict with certainty that the adherents of free marriage, the
number of “marriage protestants,” as Ellen Key happily calls them, will
continue to increase. To such will belong all those who have an equal
antipathy to coercive marriage, to the debasing intercourse with
prostitutes, and to the transient casual love, such as is experienced in
ordinary extra-conjugal sexual intercourse, the true “wild” love.

  “It is only a question of time”--thus Ellen Key concludes her remarks
  on marriage reform--“when the respect felt by society for the sexual
  union will not depend upon the form of the life in common, by which
  two human beings become parents, but only on the worth of the children
  which these two are producing as new links in the chain of the
  generations. Men and women will then devote to their spiritual and
  physical preparation for sexual intercourse the same religious
  earnestness that the Christians devote to the welfare of their souls.
  No longer will divine laws regarding the morality of sexual
  relationships be considered the mainstay of morality; in place of
  these the desire to elevate the human race and a sense of personal
  responsibility will be the safeguards of conduct. But the conviction
  on the part of the parents =that the purpose of life is also their own
  proper life--that is, that they do not exist only for the sake of
  children=--should free them from certain other duties of conscience
  which at present bind them in respect of children--above all, from the
  duty of maintaining a union in which they themselves are perishing.
  The home will perhaps become more than it is at present; something at
  unity with the mother, something which--far from excluding the
  father--carries within itself the germ of a new and higher ‘family
  right.’...

  “A greater and healthier will-to-live in respect of erotic feelings
  and demands--this it is that our time needs! Here from the feminine
  side real dangers threaten; and one of several ways in which these
  dangers must be averted is by the construction of new forms of
  marriage.

  “Human material of ever higher worth and capable of higher
  evolution--it is this which in the first place we have to create. If
  we preserve coercive forms of the sexual life, the possibility of
  doing this is a diminishing one; if we adopt free forms of the sexual
  life, the possibility of doing it will increase. Not only because the
  present time asks for more freedom are its demands full of promise,
  but because those demands approximate ever more closely to the central
  point of the problem--to the conviction that love is the principal
  condition upon which depends the vital advance of the individual and
  of humanity at large.”

I have given such a lengthy analysis of Ellen Key’s book because, in the
first place, in no other work do we find so lucid an exposition of all
the points needed for the consideration of the question of free love--an
exposition based upon the richest experience of life and a really
astonishing psychical knowledge of mankind, combined with the finest
understanding of the subtle activities and sentiments of the loving
soul; and, in the second place, because as an actual fact--at any rate,
in Germany--this book has formed the true starting-point of all
endeavours towards the reform of sexual morality. Ellen Key’s “Ueber
Liebe und Ehe” (“Love and Marriage”) is a demonstration of human rights
in the matter of love; it is the evangel for those who have determined
to harmonize love with all the changes and advances attendant on the
evolution of civilization, and have resolved not to allow the forcible
retardation of progress by conditions which were perhaps still tolerable
one hundred or two hundred years ago, but to-day are unconditionally
=hostile to civilization=.

In Germany these endeavours have been centralized in the Bund für
Mutterschutz (the Association for the Protection of Mothers), founded in
the beginning of 1906, whose purpose it is to protect unmarried mothers
and their children from economic and moral dangers, to counteract the
dominant condemnation of such mothers, and thereby also indirectly to
bring about the reform of the existing views on sexual morality. Those
who initiated this most important movement were indeed high-minded
women. I mention, among many, only the names of Ruth Bré, Helene
Stöcker, Maria Lischnewska, Adele Schreiber, Gabriele Reuter, and
Henriette Fürth.

By the preparatory committee to which Maria Lischnewska, Dr. Borgius,
Dr. Max Marcuse, Ruth Bré, and Dr. Helene Stöcker belonged, a committee
meeting was called on January 5, 1905, and the Association for the
Protection of Mothers was founded, its programme having already received
the support of a number of leading personalities from all parts of the
German Empire.

In addition to this committee, to which, besides the above-named members
of the preparatory committee, there belonged Lily Braun, Georg Hirth,
and Werner Sombart, a further committee was formed, the members of which
were: Alfred Blaschko, Iwan Bloch, Hugo Böttger, Lily Braun, Gräfin
Gertrud Bülow von Dennewitz, M. G. Conrad, A. Damaschke, Hedwig Dohm,
Frieda Duensing, Chr. v. Ehrenfels, A. Erkelenz, W. Erb, A. Eulenburg,
Max Flesch, Flechsig, A. Forel, E. Francke, Henriette Fürth, Agnes
Hacker, Hegar, Willy Hellpach, Clara Hirschberg, Georg Hirth, Graf Paul
von Hoensbroech, Bianca Israel, Josef Kohler, Landmann, Hans Leuss,
Maria Lischnewska, R. von Liszt, Lucas, Max Marcuse, Mensinga, Bruno
Meyer, H. Meyer, Metta Meinken, Klara Muche, Moesta, A. Moll, Müller,
Friedrich Naumann, A. Neisser, Franz Oppenheimer, Pelman, Alfred Ploetz,
Heinrich Potthoff, Lydia Rabinowitsch, Gabriele Reuter, Karl Ries, Adele
Schreiber, Heinrich Sohnrey, Werner Sombart, Helene Stöcker, Marie
Stritt, Irma von Troll-Borostyani, Max Weber, Bruno Wille, L. Wilser, L.
Woltmann.

In the programme which the newly founded Association for the Protection
of Mothers speedily published, we are told:

  One hundred and eighty thousand illegitimate children are born in
  Germany every year, approximately one-tenth of all births. This
  important source of our strength as a people, children who at the time
  of birth are usually endowed with powerful vitality (for their parents
  are commonly in the bloom of youth and health), we allow to go to ruin
  because a rigorous moral view bans unmarried mothers, undermines their
  economic existence, and compels them to entrust their children for
  payment to strange hands.

  The momentous consequences of this state of affairs are shown by the
  fact that the average number of still-births, in the case of
  illegitimate children, amounts to 5 per cent., as compared with 3 per
  cent. of still-births among the total number of births; the mortality
  of illegitimate children during the first year of life is 28·5 per
  cent., as compared with 16·7 per cent. for the mortality of all
  children born. And whilst only a diminishing percentage of
  illegitimate children ever become fitted for military service, the
  world of criminals, prostitutes, and vagabonds, is recruited to an
  alarming extent from their ranks. Thus, by unfounded moral prejudices,
  we produce artificially an army of enemies to society. At the same
  time the birth-rate of Germany is relatively declining. In the year
  1876 the number of births per 1,000 living was 41; in the year 1900 it
  was only 35-1/2!

  To put an end to this robbery of the strength of our people is the aim
  of the

  ASSOCIATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF MOTHERS.

  The attempt has already been made by means of crèches, foundling
  institutions, and the like, to deal with this matter. =But the
  protection of children without the protection of mothers is, and must
  remain, no more than patchwork=; for the mother is the principal
  source of life for the child, and is indispensable to the child’s
  prosperity. Whatever ensures rest and care to the mother in her most
  difficult hours, whatever secures her economic existence for the
  future, and protects her from the contempt of her fellow-beings, by
  which her health is endangered and her life embittered, will serve to
  provide a secure foundation for the bodily and mental prosperity of
  the child, and will simultaneously give the mother herself a stronger
  moral hold. Therefore the Association for the Protection of Mothers
  will, above all, make the mothers’ position safe, by assisting them
  to the attainment of

  ECONOMIC INDEPENDENCE

  --especially such as are prepared to bring up their own children--by
  the formation in country and in town of

  HOMES FOR MOTHERS,

  in which, in addition, arrangements will be made for the necessary
  care and upbringing of the children, the granting of legal protection,
  and the provision of medical aid. Experience has shown that such
  provision also corresponds to the wish of many of the fathers, and
  assists in retaining their help and interest for mother and child.

  The Association will, however, above all, close the sources from which
  the present poverty of unmarried mothers arises, and these are more
  especially the moral prejudices which at the present day defame them
  socially, and the legal regulations which burden them almost
  exclusively with the economic care and responsibility for the child,
  and which entail on the father not at all, or in a quite insufficient
  degree, his contribution to the burden.

  THE MORAL DEFAMATION

  of unmarried mothers would, perhaps, be comprehensible if we lived in
  economic and social conditions rendering it possible for every one to
  marry soon after attaining sexual maturity, so that the involuntary
  celibacy of adult persons was an abnormal state. In such a time as
  ours, however, in which no less than 45 per cent. of all women
  competent to bear children are unmarried, and those who actually marry
  do so for the most part at a comparatively late age, we must regard as
  untenable the view which considers the unmarried woman giving birth to
  a child to be an outcast, thrusts her out of society like the basest
  criminal, and gives her up to despair. Equally untenable appears

  THE PRESENT-DAY LEGAL VIEW,

  which, when the actual father has not gone through the forms
  prescribed by the State for a marriage, does not regard him as father
  in the legal sense, ascribes to him no relationship with the child
  procreated by him, and imposes on him no responsibility for the child
  or its mother, although in the majority of cases the mother is
  economically the weaker, and he himself economically the stronger
  party. There must, therefore, be a legal reform in the direction of
  equalizing as far as possible the position of the illegitimate and the
  legitimate child in relation to the father.

  Finally, however, motherhood--legitimate and illegitimate alike--is a
  factor of such profound importance to society, that it appears
  urgently desirable not to leave it exclusively to private care, with
  all the results that private care entails. In the interest of the
  community it is desirable that there should be

  A GENERAL INSURANCE OF MOTHERHOOD,

  the cost of which should be defrayed by contributions from both sexes,
  as well as supplemented by grants from public sources. This assurance
  must not only suffice to provide for every woman sufficient medical
  assistance and skilled care during pregnancy and delivery, but should
  also furnish a provision for the education of the child until it is of
  an age to earn its own living.

  In order to propagate these views and endeavours methodically and upon
  the widest possible foundation, the active assistance and
  participation of every class in the population is indispensable. We
  therefore urge on all those who share our views the pressing demand

  TO JOIN THE ASSOCIATION FOR THE PROTECTION OF MOTHERS,

  and thus to assist in securing and accelerating the attainment of
  these ends.

As the official organ of the Association, was chosen the monthly
magazine, edited by Dr. Phil. Helene Stöcker, _Mutterschutz: Zeitschrift
zur Reform der Sexuellen Ethik_ (_The Protection of Mothers: a Journal
for the Reform of Sexual Ethics_)--hitherto published in the year 1905
twelve numbers, in the year 1906 twelve numbers, and in the year 1907
three numbers.

The foundation of the Association was followed on February 26, 1905, by
the holding of its first public meeting, in the Architektenhaus, under
the presidency of Helene Stöcker; and the meeting was extensively
attended by the general population of Berlin. The aims and endeavours of
the new union were explained, in longer and shorter speeches, by Ruth
Bré, Max Marcuse, Maria Lischnewska, Justizrat Sello, Helene Stöcker,
Ellen Key, Lily Braun, Adele Schreiber, Iwan Bloch, and Bruno Meyer; and
from the standpoint of the advocates of woman’s rights, of jurists, of
physicians, of sociologists, and of moralists, in equal degree, a
radical transformation and reform of the present untenable conditions
was demanded.[205]

Soon afterwards, the Association proceeded to form local groups. The
first was formed in Munich, where on March 28, 1905, the first local
meeting took place. Frau Schönfliess, Margarethe Joachimsen-Böhm, Alfred
Scheel, and Friedrich Bauer belonged to this committee. Further local
groups were founded in Berlin (May 20, 1905--members of this committee,
as distinct from the committee of the general Association: Finkelstein,
Galli, Agnes Hacker, Albert Kohn, Bruno Meyer, Adele Schreiber), and in
Hamburg (president, Regina Ruben).[206]

The first general meeting (_cf._ Helene Stöcker, “Our First General
Meeting,” published in _Mutterschutz_, 1907, No. 2) took place in
Berlin, January 12 to 14. After speeches on the practical protection of
mothers (Maria Lischnewska), the present-day form of marriage (Helene
Stöcker), prostitution and illegitimacy (Max Flesch), limitation of
marriages by economic conditions (Adele Schreiber), limitation of
marriage by hygienic factors (Max Marcuse), the position of the
illegitimate child (Böhmert and Ottmar Spann), the insurance of
motherhood (Mayet), there followed animated discussions, and various
important resolutions were passed, dealing with the equality of husband
and wife in married life, the legal recognition of free marriages, and
of the offspring of such marriages, the necessity for the provision of
certificates of health before the conclusion of marriage, the means to
be employed in the care of illegitimate children, and the insurance of
motherhood. Especially noteworthy was the address of the leading medical
statistician, Professor Mayet, regarding the introduction and management
of the insurance of motherhood. At his suggestion, proposals followed
regarding the enrolling of working-class members in the societies for
insurance against illness and for the insurance of motherhood, the
necessity for contributions on the part of the State, the inclusion of
the agricultural and forest labourers, and of domestic servants of all
kinds, in the schemes of insurance against illness and the insurance of
motherhood, the possibility of a voluntary insurance of all women, what
could be effected by the insurance of motherhood (free provision of
midwives and medical assistance, free lodging in case of need, the
provision of premiums for mothers suckling their own children, the
institution of places where advice could be given to mothers, of homes
for women during pregnancy and child-birth, and homes for women and
infants), and the further development of factory legislation with regard
to nursing mothers. The committee for 1907 was chosen: it consisted of
Helene Stöcker, Maria Lischnewska, Adele Schreiber, Wilhelm Brandt, Iwan
Bloch, Max Marcuse, Heinrich Finkelstein.

In the end of January, 1907, an Austrian Association for the Protection
of Mothers was founded in Vienna, under the presidency of Dr. Hugo
Klein. To the committee of this Society there belong, Siegmund Freud,
Rosa Mayreder, Marie Eugenie delle Grazie, Professor Schauta, and about
forty other well-known persons, physicians, lawyers, schoolmasters, and
many women. In the meeting at which the Association was founded, Dr.
Ofner spoke regarding the legal rights of illegitimate mothers and
children, and Dr. Friedjung regarding the protection of nursing infants.

In the United States also an Association for sexual reform has been
founded, the so-called “Umwertungsgesellschaft” (Revaluation Society),
the principal aim of which is the complete re-estimation of all values
in the amatory life, and the introduction of a more ideal view of love.
The President of this American Association is Emil F. Ruedebusch; the
secretary, Mrs. Lina Janssen; the meeting-place of the society is
Mayville, in the State of Wisconsin. Regular evenings of discussion are
fixed, on which questions of especial interest are debated.

[In Holland also an Association for the Protection of Mothers has been
founded; its name is “Vereeniging Onderlinge Vrouwenbescherming.”]

In the newspaper _Mutterschutz_ (1905, No. 9, pp. 375, 376), we find a
report of the meeting of the American Association held on October 8,
1905, when the topic of discussion was:

=What is the true nature of marriage?=

The answer ran as follows:

  Is it the family (parental) relationship?--No; for a married couple
  may have no children, may not desire to have children, and can, none
  the less, be thoroughly married.

  Is it the common home, domestic life?--No; for husband and wife may
  live their whole life in a hotel, and, none the less, be thoroughly
  married.

  Is it the lifelong community of material interests?--No; for man and
  wife can keep their property separate, if they wish to do so.

  Is it mutual assistance and a state of comradeship throughout
  life?--No. When a conjugal union is the exact opposite to this, we
  speak of a bad husband and a bad wife; they are, none the less, man
  and wife.

  Does it signify a contract for a lifelong exclusive love?--Certainly
  not; if marriage signified that, all Christians would be opposed to
  this institution. And yet these are the things which, according to the
  common estimation, make up the nature of marriage, whenever the
  question is discussed in a manner which is regarded as “respectable”
  and “decent.”--As a matter of fact, there is nothing respectable or
  decent in this mystification.

  What is it, then, in which the true nature of marriage is to be
  found?--It is the possession of a human being for lifelong exclusive
  sexual service.

  Very various views have prevailed on the question how many human
  beings it is legitimate for one human being to employ for his
  exclusive sexual gratification, and among different nations, and at
  various times, the most widely divergent rules and regulations have
  prevailed regarding the mode of sexual possession, and, on the other
  hand, regarding the duties towards this sexual property; but wherever
  marriage has existed, it has signified a right of property in respect
  of sexual utilization.

  If we oppose marriage, =we mean that we oppose that which actually
  constitutes marriage according to morality, and according to written
  law, that which even the most enthusiastic advocates of this
  institution regard as so debasing that they are ashamed to name it
  openly=.

  But, with the exception of the matters relating to sexual service, =we
  hold fast to and defend everything which is publicly considered as
  marriage=, and we expect that in this case we shall be “=faithful=,”
  “=constant=,” and “=trustworthy=” in all circumstances. For, according
  to our view, these most important imponderabilia, and these intimate
  associations of interest between husband and wife, are not the
  inevitable result of the longing for physical enjoyment in common, but
  are the much-to-be-desired result of a well-considered longing for any
  one or all of the relations entering into the question. According to
  our view, however, the duration of this union, and constancy while it
  lasted, would not be dependent upon the activity of sexual desires.

A special =Association for Sexual Reform= was founded in Berlin in the
year 1906, at the instance of the editor of the _Die Schönheit_, Karl
Vanselow. It is an Association of cultured men and women who also have
in view the formation of local groups, and the delivery of artistic and
scientific lectures in furtherance of their movement for reform.

In the above-mentioned monthly magazine, _Mutterschutz_, edited by
Helene Stöcker, all the modern problems of love, marriage, friendship,
parentage, prostitution, and all the associated problems of morality,
and of the entire sexual life, are discussed from their philosophical,
historical, legal, medical, social, and ethical aspects.

The editor herself, a talented disciple of Nietzsche, has since the year
1893 been chiefly occupied in the study of the psychological and ethical
aspects of the problems of higher love, and has recently published her
collected writings on this subject in a single volume.[207]

It is an interesting literary physiognomy which is offered to us in this
book; we encounter here a lofty, free, and pure conception of the love
of the future. After the first spiritual wanderings and confusions,
which no one in emotional pursuit of the ideal can escape, we see this
courageous and undismayed advocate of the eternal, inalienable rights of
love, ultimately insisting on the recognition of the lofty mission of
love, in accordance with the saying of Nietzsche, which she lovingly
quotes: “Ye shall not propagate onwards, but upwards!” (“Nicht fort
sollt Ihr Euch pflanzen, sondern hinauf!”). She especially insists on
the =duty= and =responsibility= of individual love. No one can take a
more earnest view of love than is taken here. Helene Stöcker is
throughout no radical revolutionist, but an evolutionist and reformer.
She sees quite clearly that to-day there is no panacea, no unfailing
solution of sexual problems. While she energetically contests the old
sexual morality, and demands its replacement by a new freer conception
of sexual relationships, she, none the less, recognizes throughout the
significance and the value of self-command, of relative asceticism, the
wonderful influence of which, in the deepening of emotional life, she
has most rightly emphasized. Especially the soul of woman, she believes,
has by the asceticism imposed on women by conventional morality, gained
in a high degree, depth, fulness, and comprehensiveness. The inward
development of woman will be greatly advantaged by the newer valuation
of love. This will be characterized, neither by an arid renunciation and
denial of life, nor by a coarse, egoistic search for pleasure, but by a
joyful affirmation of life and all its healthy powers and impulses.

Whilst Helene Stocker has laid especial stress upon the psychological
and ethical relationships of free love, its equal importance from
economical and social points of view has been discussed by Friedrich
Naumann,[208] W. Borgius,[209] Lily Braun,[210] Maria Lischnewska,[211]
and Henriette Fürth.[212]

Naumann rightly draws attention to the fact that our purely monetary
economic system is favourable to the production of sterility, for the
reason that in this system motherhood is equivalent to loss of money,
because the wife ceases to earn money in a degree proportionate to the
extent to which she becomes a mother. The burden of the upbringing of
children must be made an affair of the community. At the present time,
on the contrary, the producer of human beings is burdened upon all
sides. He who has children has more rent to pay, and increased school
expenses. Therefore, Naumann demands, as a first step to the recognition
of the fact that it is a public duty to educate children, that school
expenses shall no longer be demanded from the individual parent. Above
all, however, it must be made easier to the wife to be a mother.

The wife as a personality demands her right to work, and her right to
motherhood. The fact of the compulsory celibacy of an ever-increasing
number of women competent to become mothers is the problem which here
demands solution. According to the census of 1900, there were in Germany
no less than 4,210,955 women between the ages of eighteen and forty
years unmarried, the total number of women of corresponding age being
9,568,659--that is, 44 per cent. were unmarried. Among these there were
2,830,538 between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five years, the period
most suitable to child-bearing, the total number of women of
corresponding age being 3,593,644--that is, no less than 78 per cent.
According to Lily Braun, there remain from 2,000,000 to 2,500,000 German
women permanently unmarried; and we may expect the number of female
celibates to increase. The economic conditions, the previously described
unhealthy conditions of coercive marriage, and the efforts of women for
emancipation, have a combined influence hostile to marriage. On the
other hand, law and conventional morality co-operate in making life a
martyrdom for the unmarried mother and for the illegitimate child.[213]

The woman who becomes a mother, when united only in the bonds of free
love, is at the present day defamed, despised, a being without rights.
The question of “=maintenance=” is a scandal of our time! It is the
proof of the degree to which most men are devoid of conscience. An
experienced lawyer has very forcibly described the intolerable
conditions which at present obtain in this matter.[214] He published the
following characteristic letter from a young master-butcher, which shows
how meanly even a simple-minded man may endeavour to escape the duty of
maintenance. The letter runs:

  “DEAR DORA,

  “I wanted to come round to-day, and wished to deal with the matter by
  word of mouth, but I can’t do it, and so I must write to tell you that
  we cannot marry, for, in fact, I have now less money even than when I
  was a journeyman. The few hundred marks that I had I have put into the
  business; and, in fact, I really cannot marry; if I did, I couldn’t
  exist at all. I should have to shut up the shop. What should we do
  then? I shouldn’t be able to show my face in H---- again; besides, at
  best, the business is not worth very much. So, my dear Dora, write to
  me now how we can settle matters; you mustn’t draw the string too
  tight, or ask too much; if you do, you see, you will have to find your
  own way out of the trouble. Of course, I shall be glad enough to do
  what’s right, because I am as much to blame as you are. If after a
  while I get on as well as my brothers have done, I can do more for
  you. =But just now I can’t help you much.= Let’s hope you may find
  some other man with whom you may live more happily than you have lived
  with me. Dear Dora, don’t make such a fuss about it: there are plenty
  more in the same case, up and down the world; you are not the only
  one. Now, write to me directly what you want to do; let’s get the
  matter settled quietly; that’ll be better for you. Your mother won’t
  leave you in the lurch, and you will find it will all come right.

  “Best love.

  “FRITZ H.

  “P.S.--Write soon.”

Let us imagine the state of mind of the young woman who receives this
letter, characterized as it is by such crafty heartlessness! And yet
this heartlessness is no greater than that of modern European society,
which =simultaneously= makes fun of the “old maid” and condemns the
unmarried mother to infamy. This double-faced, putrescent “morality” is
profoundly =immoral=, it is =radically evil=. It is moral and good to
contest it with all our energy, to enter the lists on behalf of the
right to free love, to “unmarried” motherhood. Let us make a clearance
of this medieval bugbear of coercive marriage morality, which is a
disgrace in respect of our state of civilization and economical
development. Two million women in a condition of =compulsory= celibacy
and--coercive marriage morality. It is merely necessary to place these
two facts side by side, in order to display before our eyes the complete
ethical bankruptcy of our time in the province of sexual morality.

In addition to this necessity for a radical alteration in sexual
morality, we must, in the second place, enunciate the demand for a
general =insurance of motherhood=, for =the foundation of homes for
pregnant women, for women in child-birth, and for infants=. The
fulfilment of these demands alone will bring us a great step forward in
the restoration to health of our sexual life, and in the preparation of
a more beautiful future.[215]

If it be true, as W. B. Stevenson reports,[216] that King Charles IV.
decreed that all foundling children in Spanish America were to be
regarded as of noble birth, in order that all professions might be open
to them, we cannot but consider that this mode of thought and action, on
the part of a ruler in the country of the Inquisition, was a shining
example for our own time.

  “Society,” says Eduard Reich, “as well as the Church, =sins against
  the laws of morality, as long as= it stands in the way of the
  advancement of illegitimate children, either by the maintenance of
  miserable prejudices against these poor beings, or by positive
  decrees. We shall never be able, even should the human race enter
  Paradise, to make it impossible for extra-conjugal procreation to
  occur: love-children will always exist. Since, then, it is not the
  fault of the latter that their parents have brought them into the
  world; and, further, since, even if =all= men were married, one could
  not impute it to a man as a moral transgression, if he, in the
  plenitude of his procreative powers, had intercourse with a beautiful
  girl, instead of with his wife (suffering, for example, from cancer,
  or some other serious disease); and since, on the other hand, a wife
  still in the full bloom of youth could not be blamed for
  unfaithfulness if, her elderly husband having been impotent for
  several years, she now has intercourse with a vigorous and healthy
  young man--for such reasons, let us throw the veil of forgetfulness
  over all well-intentioned human weaknesses, and no longer ask whether
  a citizen of the world has been engendered in the marriage-bed, or has
  sprung from the well-spring of love. To the reasonable being it is the
  man himself who is of value; and only blockheads, simpletons, and
  donkeys will inquire as to his origin.”[217]


And yet one more question I will address in conclusion to the adherents
of coercive marriage morality. =How many= free-love relationships, how
many illegitimate children have there not been at all times among the
cultured classes, even among the pillars of the throne and the altar,
=precisely among those= who, on account of their higher spiritual
development, ought to possess a stronger ethical sensibility (_nota
bene_, from the standpoint of coercive marriage morality). It would be
an interesting task to collect =statistics relating to such free unions,
and the resulting= “illegitimate” offspring, in the case of notable men
and women! The marriage fanatics would be horrified! Quite apart from
the =innumerable secret relationships= of this nature, and their
consequences, a short observation and enumeration of the illegitimate
loves and parentage of men and women of high standing, alike spiritual
and moral, would alone suffice to illuminate the actual conditions, and
would enable us to draw remarkable conclusions regarding coercive
marriage. It is my intention, as soon as possible, to represent in a
brief work the rôle of free love in the history of civilization, and to
adduce proofs that free love is very well compatible with a moral life.
Who would venture to reproach with immorality a Bürger, a Jean Paul, a
Gutzkow, a Karoline Schlegel, a George Sand, or even a Goethe?[218]

It is a simple evolutionary necessity that free love, in association
with progressive differentiation and with the reshaping of economic
conditions, will find its moral justification also for those who at
present judge and condemn it from the point of view of long outworn
social conditions.

  [186] M. Nordau, “The Conventional Lies of Our Civilization.” See also
  P. Näcke, “Einiges zur Frauenfrage und zur sexuellen Abstinenz”--“A
  Contribution to the Woman’s Question and to the Question of Sexual
  Abstinence.” Näcke condemns this duplex morality, and demands for the
  woman in principle the same sexual freedom that is granted to the man.

  [187] One of the most remarkable instances of free love as a popular
  institution was the “island custom” of the (so-called) Isle of
  Portland. Here, until well on into the nineteenth century,
  experimental cohabitation was universal, and marriage did not take
  place until the woman became pregnant. But if, as a result of this
  experimental cohabitation, “the woman does not prove with child, after
  a competent time of courtship, they conclude they are not destined by
  Providence for each other; they therefore separate; and =as it is an
  established maxim=, which the Portland women observe with great
  strictness, =never to admit a plurality of lovers at one time=, their
  honour is in no way tarnished. She just as soon gets another suitor
  (after the affair is declared to be broken off) as if she had been
  left a widow, or that nothing had ever happened, but that she had
  remained an immaculate virgin” (Hutchins, “History and Antiquities of
  the County of Dorset,” vol. ii., p. 820, 1868). So faithfully was this
  “island custom” observed that, on the one hand, during a long period
  no single bastard was born on the “island,” and, on the other, every
  marriage was fertile. But when, for the further development of the
  Portland stone trade, workmen from London, with the “wild love” habits
  of the large town, came to reside in Portland, these men took
  advantage of the “island custom,” and then refused to marry the girls
  with whom they had cohabited. Thus, in consequence of freer
  intercourse with the “civilized” world, the “Portland custom” has
  gradually fallen into desuetude. But the words I have emphasized in
  the quotation show how faithfully the conditions of “free love,” as
  defined in this work, were observed in Portland. An account of
  Portland, with allusions to the local practice of “free love,” will be
  found in Thomas Hardy’s novel, “The Well Beloved.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [188] A. Blaschko, “Prostitution in the Nineteenth Century,” p. 12
  (Berlin, 1902).

  [189] _Cf._ Helen Zimmern, “Mary Wollstonecraft” in _Deutsche
  Rundschau_, 1889, vol. xv., Heft 11, pp. 259-263. Consult also C.
  Kegan Paul, “William Godwin: His Friends and Contemporaries,” 2 vols.
  (London, 1876).

  [190] “Shelley’s Poetical Works,” edited by Edward Dowden, p. 42
  (Macmillan, 1891).

  [191] _Ibid._, p. 44.

  [192] _Cf._ the admirable critical investigation by Georg Hirth,
  “Goethe’s Christiane,” published in “Ways to Love,” pp. 323-366,
  containing new and valuable aids to our judgment of this relationship.

  [193] A. Wernich, “Geographical and Medical Studies, based upon
  Experiences obtained in a Journey Round the World,” p. 137 (Berlin,
  1878). Among the Malays of the Dutch Indies divorce is very easy; it
  costs only a few gulden, and is often carried out “very much to the
  advantage of husband and wife who are not held together by love. =But
  it is by no means rare for a divorced couple to remarry after a
  certain time=” (Ernst Haeckel, “Aus Insulinde, Malayische
  Reisebriefe”--“From the Indian Archipelago, Malay Letters of Travel”),
  p. 242 (Bonn, 1901).

  [194] Kuno Fischer, “History of Recent Philosophy,” vol. vii., p. 135
  (Heidelberg, 1898).

  [195] _Cf._ in this connexion my pseudonymous work, “Rétif de la
  Bretonne: the Man, the Author, and the Reformer,” p. 500 (Berlin,
  1906).

  [196] _Cf._ George Gissing’s powerful novel, “The Odd
  Women.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [197] A brief sketch of tetragamy is also given by Schopenhauer in the
  fragments of his “Lecture on Philosophy” (“Schopenhauer’s Legacy,” ed.
  Grisebach, vol. iv., pp. 405, 406), also in the manuscript books,
  “Pandektä” and “Spicilegia” (_op. cit._, pp. 418, 419).

  [198] Charles Albert, “Free Love.”--We may also allude to the more
  generally philosophic work by Armand Charpentier, “L’Évangile du
  Bonheur. Mariage. Union Libre. Amour Libre” (Paris, 1898).

  [199] L. Gumplowicz, “Marriage and Free Love” (Berlin, 1902, second
  edition).

  [200] In this connexion English readers will do well to consult Karl
  Pearson’s admirable “The Ethic of Freethought.” In the third or
  sociological section of that book there are numerous references to the
  subject of free love in relation to the economic structure of society.
  One of these will, however, for the present, suffice for quotation:
  “The economic independence of women will, for the first time, render
  it possible for the highest human relationship to become again a
  matter of pure affection, raised above every suspicion of restraint
  and every taint of commercialism.” It will be seen that Karl Pearson,
  like Albert, Gumplowicz, Bebel, and Socialists in general, believes
  that collectivism and the economic independence of women are
  indispensable preliminaries to a far-reaching reform of our sex
  relationships in the direction of free love.--TRANSLATOR.

  [201] I must here call attention to the fact that the celebrated
  philosopher Eugen Dühring, in his notable work, “The Value of Life,”
  pp. 155-158 (Leipzig, 1881, third edition), made a violent attack on
  the coercive marriage system, and demanded on ethical grounds a
  transformation of our amatory life in the direction of freedom and of
  personal love.

  [202] Edward Carpenter, “Love’s Coming-of-Age,” third edition, London,
  1902.

  [203] Ellen Key, “Love and Marriage,” translated into German by
  Francis Maro (Berlin, 1904).

  [204] Anton Nyström, “The Sexual Life and its Laws,” pp. 244-247
  (Berlin, 1904).

  [205] The speeches on this occasion were published by Helene Stöcker
  in her pamphlet, “The Association for the Protection of Mothers” (No.
  4 of “Modern Questions of the Day,” edited by Dr. Hans Landsberg;
  Berlin, 1905).

  [206] Unfortunately, Ruth Bré, who has played such a leading part in
  the history of the movement for the protection of mothers and for
  sexual reform, has recently gone her own way, and has founded an
  association of her own for the protection of mothers, which we may
  hope will soon be reabsorbed into the general Association. Above all,
  in such a province of reform as this, open as it is to attacks of
  every kind, unity is essential.

  [207] Helene Stöcker, “Die Liebe und die Frauen”--“Love and Women”
  (Minden, 1906).

  [208] Fr. Naumann, “Women in the New Economic Life,” published in
  _Mutterschutz_, 1906, No. 4, pp. 133-149.

  [209] W. Borgius, “Mutterschafts-Rentenversicherung,” _ibid._, pp.
  149-154.

  [210] Lily Braun, “Die Mutterschaftsversicherung,” _ibid._, 1906, Nos.
  1-3, pp. 18-24, 69-76, 110-124.

  [211] M. Lischnewska, “The Economic Reform of Marriage,” _ibid._, No.
  6, pp. 215-236.

  [212] H. Fürth, “Motherhood and Marriage,” _ibid._, 1905, Nos. 7,
  10-12, pp. 165-169, 389-395, 427-435, 483-489.

  [213] The facts to which we have alluded throw a peculiar light upon
  the ever-renewed attack, made by certain writers who will not see,
  _against_ the emancipation of women, whilst at the same time they
  _advocate_ motherhood! A typical example of this is the book written
  by the gynecologist Max Runge, “Woman in her Sexual Individuality”
  (Berlin, 1896), the objectivity of which, in comparison with other
  hostile writings, must, however, be expressly recognized.

  [214] “Office Consultations of a Solicitor,” by Severserenus, p. 70
  _et seq._ (Hanover, 1902).

  [215] The question of _unmarried motherhood_, sociologically of such
  profound importance, has recently been treated by Max Marcuse in an
  admirable monograph, “Unmarried Mothers” (Berlin, 1907, vol. xxvii. of
  the “Documents of Great Towns,” edited by Hans Ostwald). Herein we
  find exact data regarding the number, religion, position, profession,
  and characteristics of unmarried mothers, also the social and
  psychological causes of unmarried motherhood, and the existing and
  future means of caring for women in this position. The same author, in
  the newspaper _Soziale Medizin und Hygiene_, 1906, vol. i., pp.
  657-667, discusses the important question of the =adoption= of
  illegitimate children. Valuable monographs concerning =illegitimate
  children= are those of Hugo Neumann, “The Illegitimate Children of
  Berlin,” Jena, 1900; Ottomar Spann, “Investigations Regarding the
  Illegitimate Population of Frankfurt-on-the-Main,” Dresden, 1906;
  Frieda Duensing, “The Legal Position of Illegitimate Children,” and
  Taube, “Illegitimate Children,” published in “The Book of the Child,”
  edited by Adele Schreiber, vol. ii., div. 2, pp. 57-61, 62-69
  (Leipzig, 1907); the practical work hitherto effected--already
  extensive, but still far less than we could wish--by the Association
  for the Protection of Mothers has been detailed by Maria Lischnewska,
  in her excellent pamphlet, “The Practical Protection of Mothers”
  (Berlin, 1907).

  [216] W. B. Stevenson, “Travels in Arauco, Chile, Peru, and Columbia,
  in the years 1804-1823,” vol. i., p. 174 (Weimar, 1826).

  [217] Eduard Reich, “Immorality and Excess, from the Point of View of
  the Medical, Hygienic, Political, and Moral Sciences,” p. 127 (Neuwied
  and Leipzig, 1866).

  [218] Apart from the study of the numerous free-love relationships of
  the poet Goethe, it would be interesting to make an investigation
  regarding his illegitimate children. Only a few years ago there died
  in Stützerbach one of the last illegitimate grandchildren of Goethe, a
  wood-cutter, a man of tall stature and proud gait, resembling in
  appearance and demeanour the beloved of all women. _Cf._ A. Trinius,
  “From the Mountain-World of Goethe,” published in the _Berliner
  Lokal-Anzeiger_, No. 453, of September 6, 1906.




