CHAPTER XXV

THE QUESTION OF SEXUAL ABSTINENCE (DIE ENTHALTSAMKEITSFRAGE)


   “_O heiliger Büsser, folg’ ich dir,_
    _Folge ich dir, Frau Minne?_”

  EDUARD GRISEBACH.


  [“_Holy Penitence, art thou my aim,_
    _Or is it thou whom I pursue, lovely woman?_”]


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXV

  Great variation in the views held regarding sexual abstinence -- Five
  groups -- The apostles of absolute asceticism -- Criticism of their
  views -- View of duplex sexual morality -- Its refutation -- The
  unfounded doubt in the possibility of abstinence -- Recommendation of
  relative temporary abstinence from the medical and moral standpoint --
  Relative abstinence as an ideal of civilization -- Recognition of this
  ideal among the ancient Israelites -- Wise prescriptions and
  utterances in the Bible and the Talmud -- Misrepresentation of this
  idea by the notion of absolute asceticism -- Reaction against the
  latter -- Rules regarding the frequency of intercourse -- Self-command
  as a principle of enjoyment -- Abstinence before the first sexual
  intercourse -- Sexual maturity and physical maturity -- Sexual tension
  of the third decade of life -- Erb’s experiences regarding the harmful
  consequences of abstinence -- Lowenfeld’s reports -- Comparison with
  the dangers of extra-conjugal sexual intercourse -- Value of
  abstinence later in life -- Influence upon intellectual activity --
  Higher civilizing value of the idea of abstinence.


CHAPTER XXV

There is no disputed question in respect of which the divergent views
are so sharply opposed as they are regarding the importance, the value,
and the consequences of =sexual abstinence=.

[The question has been recently discussed by O. Schreiber, in a paper
entitled “Sexual Abstinence,” published in _Medizinische Blätter_, 1907,
Nos. 25-27.]

I distinguish =five= groups of opinion:

1. The apostles of =absolute asceticism= during the whole of life
(Tolstoi, Weininger, Norbert Grabowsky, Kurnig, etc.).

2. The _medical_ advocates of =relative temporary continence=, until it
becomes possible to enjoy permanent hygienic intercourse, free from all
objections.

3. The advocates of “=duplex sexual morality=,” who demand from _woman_
sexual abstinence until she marries, but who regard this as impossible
in the case of _man_.

4. The “=Vera=”[687] =enthusiasts=, who on =moral= grounds demand
abstinence for =both= sexes until marriage.

5. Those who =doubt= the possibility of abstinence of =any= kind for
either sex, whether absolute =or= relative.

Regarding those mentioned under the first heading, who demand absolute,
life-long sexual abstinence, it is hardly necessary to say a word. It is
nonsense, a pious superstition, a Utopia contrary alike to nature and to
civilization, born of the belief in the “sinfulness” of sexual
intercourse.

The normal sexual impulse is a =natural= phenomenon; it is pure and
thoroughly ethical; and it is only in an insane confusion and in a
morally reprehensible falsification of his own nature that man has come
to regard it as a “sin,” as an “evil.” Man has a natural, inborn right
to the gratification of the sexual impulse. Absolute asceticism must be
rejected as a thoroughly =immoral= doctrine.

The same is true of the duplex sexual morality, alluded to under the
third heading, by which that is justified to man which is denied to
woman. This “=morality=” (_lucus a non lucendo_) presupposes for man a
natural impulse, and demands for him a right to gratify it, whilst the
existence of such an impulse and of such a right is denied to woman. We
have shown that this view is an inevitable consequence of coercive
marriage morality.[688]

The standpoint of the sceptics alluded to under § 5 is one which denies
the possibility of =any= abstinence, even merely temporary abstinence;
but this view is equally to be rejected. Man is a natural being; his
sexual impulse is a natural instinct, and as such one whose existence is
justified; but at the same time man is a =civilized being=. Civilization
is an elevation, an ennoblement, a transfiguration of nature, whose
unduly powerful impulses and powers must be tamed and harmonized by
civilization. The right to sexual gratification is therefore opposed by
the =duty= to set bounds to the sexual impulse, to conduct it into such
paths that no harm can result from its exercise, either to the
individual or to society; and in order that, like all other impulses, it
may subserve the purposes of the evolution of civilization. To this end,
however, a =relative abstinence= is of great importance (this is a
matter which has not hitherto been sufficiently recognized); but this
course it is only possible to follow when, at the same time, we
emphatically =affirm the rightness of sexuality=, and when it is our
desire to utilize it as a =civilizing factor of the first rank=. The
“individualization” of the sexual impulse has been described in detail
in an earlier chapter of this work, to which I may refer the reader. If
we fail to recognize the value of =temporary abstinence=, and the
importance of the storing up of sexual energy which is thereby effected,
and the transformation of this energy into other energies of a spiritual
nature, such an individualization becomes impossible.

Alike the medical advocates (§ 2) and the moral advocates (§ 4) of a
relative temporary abstinence for both sexes have, from their respective
standpoints, made a just demand. This is, in fact, in both cases an
“ideal standpoint,” to use the phrase of F. A. Lange; but it is also an
ideal most desirable to set before youth, and more especially before our
German youth. We cannot repeat too often, or insist with too much
emphasis, what an endless blessing results from the endeavour towards,
and from the realization of, temporary sexual abstinence, more
especially in the years of =preparation= for life, but also in the years
of =independent creative work=.

The importance of =relative= sexual abstinence was first recognized by
the ancient Israelites. Numerous wise prescriptions and utterances prove
this. Julius Preuss, the most celebrated student of ancient Jewish
medicine, has recently, in an interesting study of “Sexual Matters in
the Bible and the Talmud” (_Allgemeine Medizinische Central-Zeitung_,
1906, No. 30 _et seq._), collected the following facts bearing on the
matter:

  “Chastity was a self-evident demand for the unmarried. It is true
  that, in view of the early occurrence of puberty, they married very
  young--at the age of eighteen or twenty; and Rabbi Huna is of opinion
  that anyone who at the age of twenty is still unmarried passes his
  days in sin or--which he regards as even worse--in sinful thoughts.
  There are three whom God praises every day: an unmarried man who lives
  in a large town and does not sin; a poor man who finds an object of
  value and returns it to the owner, and a rich man who gives his tithe
  secretly. Once when this doctrine was read out in the presence of
  Rabbi Safra, who as a young man lived in a large town, his face
  lighted up with joy. But Raba said to him: ‘It is not meant such a one
  as thou art, but such a one as Rabbi Chanina and Rabbi Oschaja, who
  live in the street of the prostitutes, and make shoes for them, to
  whom, therefore, the prostitutes come, and look upon them, but who,
  notwithstanding this, do not raise their eyes to look upon the
  prostitutes.’”

After marriage also they endeavoured by valuable prescriptions to
enforce the great civilizing idea of temporary sexual abstinence. Thus,
intercourse during menstruation was strictly forbidden, and was regarded
as a deadly sin; the same was the case as regards intercourse when there
was any other hæmorrhage from the genital organs; but in this case the
abstinence must last even longer. It is remarkable that the Catholic
theologians allowed sexual intercourse without limit when such morbid
hæmorrhage was present, and allowed it also, with certain restrictions,
during menstruation. Further, among the ancient Hebrews intercourse was
forbidden during the week of mourning for parents or brothers or
sisters; it was forbidden also during the festival of atonement. Guests
in an inn when travelling were also forbidden sexual intercourse,
doubtless on grounds of decency. Intercourse was likewise forbidden in
times of famine, in order to spare the bodily forces.

Golden sayings recognize the value of moderation and of relative
abstinence.

  According to an ancient Israelitish popular saying, sexual intercourse
  is one of eight things =which are beautiful when enjoyed in strict
  moderation, but harmful when enjoyed very freely=. The others are
  walking, possessions, work, wine, sleep, warm water (for bathing and
  for drinking), and venesection.

  Rabbi Jochanan said: “Man possesses a little limb: he who satisfies it
  hungers; he who allows it to hunger is satisfied.”

  Rabbi Ilai said: “When man observes that his evil impulse is more
  powerful than he is himself, let him go to a place where people do not
  know him, let him put on dark clothes, let him wear a dark turban, and
  let him do that which his heart desires; but let him not publicly
  profane the name of God.” This can only mean that in general he only
  controls the desire who has already tasted the fruit--that is to say,
  that abstinence is the safest means against lust; but he who,
  notwithstanding this, finds that the impulse threatens to become too
  violent, still has the duty to fight against it, and in any case not
  to yield immediately.

This ancient notion of relative asceticism was, unfortunately, falsified
and thrust into the background by the Utopian and contra-natural idea of
absolute asceticism; its great value was completely obscured by the
inevitable reaction against the principle of absolute chastity. This
reaction led actually to the formation of rules regarding the frequency
of intercourse, such as that attributed to Luther--“Twice a week does
harm neither to her nor to me”; =although it is precisely in this
department of life that no rules can be given, and that the greatest
individual variations occur=, so that “twice a week” may for many
constitute by far too much, and can only be regarded as permissible to
robust constitutions. =Daily= indulgence in sexual intercourse,
continued for a =long period= of time, would be deleterious even to a
Hercules, =and in all circumstances would be harmful to both parties=.
Nature herself, by exhibiting a certain periodicity in sexual excitement
(which periodicity is admittedly far more distinct in women than it is
in men, who can “always” love), has facilitated temporary abstinence.
This is, in fact, a natural demand even of the most extreme ethical
materialism; for, as Friedrich Albert Lange[689] rightly points out,
“even though the individual sensual pleasure, as with Aristippos or
Lamettrie, is raised to a principle, =self-control= still remains a
requirement of philosophy, if only in order to assure the permanence of
the capacity for enjoyment.” So also the poet of the “New Tanhäuser”
sings:

   “Selig, der da ewig schmachtet,
    Sei gepriesen, Tantalus,
    Hätt’ er je, wonach er trachtet,
    Würd’ es auch schon Ueberdruss:
    Gib mir immer =Eine= Beere,
    Aus der vollen Traube nur,
    Und ich schmachte gern, Cythere,
    Lebenslang auf deiner Spur!”

  [“Happy is he who eternally desires.
    A happy man art thou, Tantalus!
    If he ever attained that for which he longs,
    He would instantly taste satiety:
    Let me have but a =single= grape
    From the full cluster,
    Gladly, Cytherea, will I live,
    Ever desiring, in thy courts!”]

The question of abstinence is an entirely different one, according as it
relates to the time =before= or =after= the first experience of sexual
intercourse. Experience shows that in the former case abstinence is far
easier than it is when the forbidden fruit has once been tasted. If,
with the author of this book, relative asceticism is regarded as the
most desirable ideal, we shall endeavour in =youth= to realize that
ideal for as long a time as possible, =without= any interruption by
sexual intercourse; whereas in the later period of the fully-developed
sexual life we shall practise sexual abstinence only from time to time.

With regard to the former point, it would be the greatest good fortune
for every man if he could remain sexually abstinent until the complete
maturity of body and mind--that is, until the age of twenty-five.[690]
But this is in most cases an impossibility. Yet it =is possible= for
=every= healthy man--and it is an imperative demand of individual and
social hygiene--=to abstain completely from sexual intercourse at least
until the age of twenty=. That is possible without any harm resulting,
and it is carried out by innumerable persons of both sexes. It is,
indeed, a fact that in civilized countries the physical and mental
maturity of girls and boys by no means coincides with their sexual
maturity, but, on the contrary, occurs from three to five years later.
First between the ages of twenty and twenty-two does man attain complete
development.[691] If the sexual impulse is not artificially awakened and
stimulated during these years of adolescence, it may remain very
moderate, without masturbation and without pollutions, and can be easily
controlled. Relations with the other sex have not yet become necessary
for the development of the individual personality. The human being has
still enough to do in isolation. First with the commencement of the
third decade of life do the conditions alter, and sexual tension becomes
so great as to demand the adequate and natural discharge given by the
normal sexual act. If this is impossible, pollutions form the natural,
or masturbation forms the unnatural, outlet; and when abstinence is
continued for a long time after attaining this age, the vital freshness
and the spiritual and emotional condition are more or less impaired. To
have emphasized this fact, in opposition to those authors[692] who
declared that total sexual abstinence is absolutely harmless to mature
men, was the great service of Wilhelm Erb,[693] the celebrated, widely
experienced Heidelberg neurologist.

  “It is a well-known fact,” he writes, “that healthy young men with a
  powerful sexual impulse suffer not a little from abstinence, that from
  time to time they are ‘as if possessed’ by the impulse, that erotic
  ideas press in upon them from all sides, disturb their work and their
  nocturnal repose, and imperiously demand relief. I always remember the
  remark of a friend of my youth, a young artist, who, when speaking of
  these things, was accustomed to say with intense meaning: ‘Wer nie die
  kummervollen Nächte in seinem Bette weinend sass....’ And the same man
  could not sufficiently extol the relaxing, disburdening, and
  positively refreshing influence of an occasional gratification; and
  the same thing has been said to me innumerable times by earnest and
  thoroughly moderate men.”

Women also gave him similar assurances.[694] In numerous cases Erb
observed physical and mental harm to result from abstinence--sometimes
in healthy individuals, but more especially in the neuropathic.

Important also are the investigations of L. Löwenfeld[695] regarding the
influence of abstinence. He found that in men under the age of
twenty-four any troubles worth mentioning as a result of sexual
abstinence were comparatively rare, as compared with the case of men
between the ages of twenty-four and thirty-six years, the years of
complete manly power and sexual capacity; and he found that whereas in
healthy persons these disturbances were indeed of a trifling character
(general excitability, sexual hyperæsthesia, hypochondriacal ideas,
disinclination for work, slight attacks of giddiness), in neuropathic
persons, on the contrary, there would occur coercive ideas, melancholy,
feelings of anxiety, and even hallucinations. Females, according to
Löwenfeld, bear abstinence--even absolute abstinence--much better than
men, but in them also hysterical and neurasthenic conditions may develop
as a result of sexual abstinence.

All these harmful consequences of abstinence are, however, neither in
man nor in woman, of such a nature that, where an opportunity for sexual
intercourse at once hygienic and free from ethical objections is
wanting, the gratification of the sexual impulse need be advised by the
physician as a “therapeutic measure.” No; Erb himself insists that, on
the contrary, the dangers threatened by venereal diseases =altogether
outweigh= the comparatively rare and trifling injuries to health
resulting from abstinence. “Extra-conjugal” sexual intercourse involves
the dangers of syphilitic or gonorrhœal infection, or of illegitimate
pregnancy, which latter to-day must, unfortunately, be regarded as a
kind of severe disease. In contrast with these evils, any harmful
consequences of abstinence fade away to nothing.

Later in life, when the possibility of a permanent pure love exists, the
value of temporary abstinence is to be found especially in the spiritual
sphere. Precisely for the “erotocrat,” as Georg Hirth terms one endowed
with a powerful and healthy sexual impulse, is this temporary abstinence
of a certain importance, because the stored-up quantum of sexual tension
re-enforces the inward spiritual productivity. A number of men, at once
endowed with strong sexual needs and with a noble mental capacity, have
assured me that, in consequence of abstinence, they have temporarily
experienced a peculiar deepening and concentration of their mental
capacity, by means of which they were undeniably enabled to increase
their mental output. This point in the hygiene of intellectual activity,
which seems not to have been unknown to Goethe, has been as yet too
little studied.

In any case, it is definitely established that from the standpoint of
civilization the idea of sexual abstinence is justified, if for this
reason alone: because in it we find a great means for increasing and
strengthening of the =will=; but, in the second place, because in it we
have a valuable protection against the dangers of wild love; and,
finally, because sexual abstinence emphasizes the fact that life
contains other things worth striving for besides matters of sex, that
the content of life is far from being exhausted by the sexual, even
though the sexual impulse, in addition to the impulse of
self-preservation, will always remain the most powerful of all vital
activities.

  [687] “Vera” is the heroine of a novel (“Eine für Viele: Aus dem
  Tagebuche eines Mädchens”) which attracted considerable attention in
  Germany. She demanded from men entering on marriage the same virgin
  intactitude which men are accustomed to expect in their wives. English
  readers will be reminded of Evadne, in Sarah Grand’s “The Heavenly
  Twins.” Evadne, it will be remembered, left her husband at the church
  door, owing to information she received regarding his preconjugal
  career. In England we might speak of “Evadne” enthusiasts, instead of
  “Vera” enthusiasts.--TRANSLATOR.

  [688] P. Näcke also (“A Contribution to the Woman’s Question and to
  the Question of Sexual Abstinence,” _op. cit._, p. 49) strongly
  condemns this duplex morality, which he regards as “obviously unjust.”
  _Cf._ also Max Thal, “Sexual Morality: an Attempt to solve the Problem
  of Sexual, and more Particularly of the so-called Duplex Morality”
  (Breslau, 1904).

  [689] Friedrich Albert Lange, “History of Materialism,” vol. iii., p.
  302, English edition.

  [690] “My dear young men,” thus wrote Ernst Moritz Arndt, at the age
  of eighty-nine, to the Burschenschaft (Students’ Association) of Jena,
  “I can wish nothing better for you than that you should arrange your
  course of life in Jena, and pass through it, as I heretofore passed
  through it, making a courageous, vigorous, and earnest fight against
  the lusty, overbearing impulses of youth, which in the best case are
  so easily carried to excess.... In these your most valuable years,
  between eighteen and twenty, you must, with redoubled manliness,
  courage, and chastity, strive to deserve the praise given by Caius
  Julius Cæsar to the young men of Germany.”

  [691] _Cf._, in this connexion, the remarks of A. Herzen, “Science and
  Morality,” pp. 11, 12 (Berlin, 1901). The same age for human maturity
  was fixed on also by J. C. G. Ackermann (“The Diseases of the
  Learned,” p. 268; Nürnberg, 1777).

  [692] I need mention only Seved Ribbing, Acton, Rubner, Paget, Hegar,
  Beale, Herzen, A. Eulenburg, V. Cnyrim, and Fürbringer.

  [693] Wilhelm Erb, “Remarks on the Consequences of Sexual Abstinence,”
  published in the _Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_,
  1903, vol. ii., No. I., pp. 1-18.

  [694] Theodor Mundt, in his “Madonna” (pp. 240, 241; Leipzig, 1835),
  has very vividly described the beneficial and refreshing influence of
  coitus upon women.

  [695] L. Löwenfeld, “The Sexual Life and Nervous Troubles,” pp. 62-69,
  fourth edition.




