CHAPTER IV

PHYSICAL DIFFERENTIAL SEXUAL CHARACTERS


“_We have here a_ primitive _inequality, whose primitiveness goes back
to the opposition between content and form. From this primeval
difference arise all the other secondary differences._”--ALFONS
BILHARZ.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER IV

  Sexual differentiation as the primeval fact of human sexual life --
  Waldeyer on the significance of sexual differentiation -- The
  biological law of Herbert Spencer -- Antagonism between reproductive
  and developmental tendencies -- Example of menstruation in
  illustration of this contrast -- The primitiveness of woman, and her
  greater proximity to nature -- Untenability of the notion of the
  “inferiority” of woman -- Views upon the nature of her physical
  development -- Increased differentiation of the sexes in consequence
  of civilization -- Comparison between medieval and modern pictures of
  women -- Obscuration of the sexual contrast in primitive times --
  Examples -- Change of the voice in consequence of civilization --
  Return to primitive conditions in certain phenomena of the
  emancipation of woman (the adoption of a masculine style of clothing,
  tobacco-smoking) -- Sexual indifference in the primitive history of
  mankind -- Connexion therewith of a primordial gynecocracy (according
  to Ratzel) -- Secondary sexual characters -- Principal difference
  between the masculine and the feminine body -- New researches on
  sexual differences -- Skeletal differences -- The specific sexual
  differences of the human pelvis -- Their dependence upon civilization
  and upon development of the brain -- Differences in body-size and
  body-weight -- In muscular and fatty development -- In the
  constitution of the blood -- Sexual differences in the larynx and the
  voice -- The skulls of men and women -- The weight of the brain -- No
  ground for the assumption of the inferiority of women -- Differences
  in brain-structure -- Researches of Rüdinger, Waldeyer, Broca, G.
  Retzius, etc. -- Recognition of the fact that the feminine type is
  somewhat infantile -- This type due to adaptation to the purposes of
  reproduction -- Masculine and feminine beauty -- Men and women
  different, but neither superior to the other.


CHAPTER IV

The difference between the sexes is the =original cause= of the human
sexual life, the primeval preliminary of all human civilization. The
existence of this difference can be proved, alike in physical and
psychical relations, already in the fundamental phenomenon of human
love, in which, because here the relations are simple and uncomplicated,
it is most easily visible.

Waldeyer, in his notable address on the somatic differences between the
sexes, delivered in 1895 at the Anthropological Congress in Kassel, drew
attention to the fact that the higher development of any particular
species is notably characterized by the increasing differentiation of
the sexes. The further we advance in the animal and vegetable world from
the lower to the higher forms, the more markedly are the male and the
female individuals distinguished one from another. In the human species
also, in the course of phylogenetic development, this sexual
differentiation increases in extent.

In the development of these sexual differences, the antagonism first
shown by Herbert Spencer to exist between reproduction and the higher
evolutionary tendency plays an important part. Among the higher species
of animals the males exhibit a stronger evolutionary tendency than the
females, owing to the fact that their share in the work of reproduction
has become less important. The more extensive organic expenditure
demanded by the reproductive functions limits the feminine development
to a notably greater extent than the masculine. In the human species
this retardation of growth in the female is especially increased in
consequence of menstruation, and this affords a striking example of the
truth of Spencer’s law. I quote also in this connexion the remarks of
the Würzburg anatomist Oskar Schultze, in his recently published
valuable monograph on “Woman from an Anthropological Point of View,” pp.
55, 56 (Würzburg, 1906);

  “The undulatory periodicity of the principal functions of the feminine
  organism, which depends on the processes of ovulation and
  menstruation, and is invariable in the females of the human species,
  does not occur in the other mammalia (with the exception of apes). In
  these latter, as far as we have been able to observe, the secondary
  sexual characters, in the matter of differences in muscular
  development and in strength, are not so developed, or sometimes are
  not so developed, as in the human species. We must in this connexion
  exclude the differences which appear in domestic animals as a result
  of domestication (for example, the difference between the cow and the
  bull). In the human female, the periodicity, which begins to act even
  on the youthful, still undeveloped body, has during thousands of years
  increased the secondary sexual differences. Periodicity is, in my
  opinion, an important cause of the fact that woman is inferior to man,
  more especially in the development of the muscular system and in
  strength, and that her organs, for the most part, are more closely
  approximated to the infantile type.

  “The sexually mature body of a woman has always during the
  intermenstrual period to make good the loss undergone during
  menstruation. Hardly has this been effected and the climax of vital
  energy been once more attained, when a new follicle ruptures in the
  ovary, and the menstrual hæmorrhage recurs; thus continually, month
  after month, the vital undulation and the vital energy rises and
  falls. =The energy periodically expended in woman’s principal function
  has for thousands of years ceased to be available for her own internal
  development.= The actual loss on each occasion is so trifling that
  numerous women hardly find it disagreeable. The effect depends upon
  summation. The earnings are almost immediately spent, =not for the
  purpose of her own domestic economy, but for the sake of another, in
  the service of reproduction=; this comes first, for the species must
  be preserved. =To accumulate capital for her personal needs has been
  rendered more difficult for woman than it is for man.=”

The previously quoted biological law of Spencer (regarding the
antagonism between reproduction and the higher evolutionary tendency),
of which menstruation affords so interesting an illustration, explains
also the fact pointed out by Milne Edwards, Darwin, Brooks, Lombroso,
Alfons Bilharz, and other investigators--to wit, the greater simplicity
and primitiveness of woman as compared with the more complicated and
more variable nature of man--more variable, because it oscillates within
wider boundaries. Paracelsus long ago enunciated the profound saying,
“=Woman is nearer to the world than man.=”

It would be =fundamentally erroneous= to deduce from these
considerations any inferiority or comparative inutility of woman.
Rather, indeed, the nature of her bodily structure in relation to the
purposes it has to fulfil is comparatively nearer perfection; and this
admirable adaptation has undergone an increase in the course of the
evolution of civilization. We have already noted the fact that under the
influence of the continually increasing predominance of the brain in the
male, certain retrogressive processes have also made themselves manifest
(as, for example, the increasing loss of hair); and these processes in
woman have gone farther than in man, because in her case the progressive
development is =in its very nature= less extensive. Hence recent
investigators, such as Havelock Ellis, have actually come to the
conclusion that the ideal type, towards which the bodily development of
mankind is striving, is represented by the feminine--that is, by a
youthful type.[19]

It is, however, very doubtful if this evolution will ever go so far that
the =primitive= difference between man and woman, founded as it is in
the very nature of the sexual, will ever pass away. On the contrary,
notwithstanding the retrogressive changes associated with the excessive
development of the brain, we find that there is =an increasing
differentiation of the sexes induced by civilization=. To this fact,
which possesses great importance in connexion with the discussion of the
woman’s question and the problem of homosexuality, W. H. Riehl, the
historian of civilization, in his work on the family, published in 1885,
was the first to draw attention. He devotes the second chapter of this
book to the differentiation of the sexes in the course of civilized
life. He was astonished by the fact that in almost all the portraits of
celebrated beauties of previous centuries the heads appeared to him too
=masculine= in type when compared with the ideal of feminine beauty
which now appeals to us.

  “The medieval painters, when representing the general type of angels
  and saints, van Eyck and Memmling in their Madonnas and female saints,
  paint heads exhibiting the most clearly defined individual
  characteristics, but into these feeling representations of delicate
  virginity there intrude certain harsh lineaments, so that the heads
  strike us as masculine, or as a little too old. Van Eyck’s Madonnas,
  with the Christ-child at their breast, frequently look to us like
  women of thirty years old. But the painter must have followed Nature;
  =it is Nature which since his time has changed. The tender virgin of
  three hundred years ago had more masculine lineaments than she has at
  the present day=, and he who in the portrait of a Maria Stuart expects
  to find a face like one he would meet in a modern journal of fashion
  will find himself greatly disappointed by certain traits in the
  pictures of this celebrated beauty, traits which to the nineteenth
  century would seem almost masculine.”

The contrast between the sexes becomes with advancing civilization
continually sharper and more individualized, whereas in primitive
conditions, and even at the present day among agricultural labourers and
the proletariat, it is less sharp and to some extent even obliterated.
Let the reader familiarize himself with the likenesses of modern women
of the working classes; they seem to us almost to resemble disguised
men. In the stature, also, of the sexes among savage peoples, and among
the lower classes of the civilized nations, the sexual differences are
much less marked than in our cultivated large towns. Very characteristic
of the differentiating influence of civilization is, moreover, the
effect on the voice. Riehl remarks on this subject:

  “The tone of the voice even, in simpler conditions of civilization, is
  generally far more alike in the two sexes. The high tenor, the
  feminine man’s voice, and the deep alto, the masculine woman’s voice,
  are among civilized peoples far rarer than among savage races, in whom
  masculine and feminine varieties sometimes seem hardly
  distinguishable. Our bandmasters travel to Hungary and Galicia to find
  clear high tenors, whilst deep alto voices are now increasingly
  difficult to find, for the reason that among the civilized peoples the
  masculine-feminine contraltos die out. =Dominant, on the other side,
  is the distinct contrast between the two sexual tones of
  voices--soprano and bass.= This fact has already had a determining
  influence in our school of song; it affects our vocal
  tone-teaching--to such a hidden, out-of-the-way path have we been led
  by our recognition of the continually increasing contrast between man
  and woman.”

Certain phenomena and aberrations of the movement for the emancipation
of women, such as the adoption of a masculine style of dress and the use
of tobacco, are no more than =relapses= into a primitive condition,
which among the common people has persisted unaltered to the present
day. We need merely allude to the man’s hat, the short coat, and the
high-laced boot of the Tyrolese women, and to the tobacco-smoking of the
women at the wedding festivals among the German peasantry. A false
“emancipation” of this kind is frequently encountered among peasants,
vagabonds, and gipsies, to which, moreover, the neuter designation of
the women of this class as _das Mensch_ and “woman-fellow,” etc., bears
witness; we have herein characteristic indications of the fact that
“peculiar to the woman of the people is a self-conscious, actively
progressive masculine nature.”

That the comparative obliteration of sexual contrasts among the lower
orders of modern society is a vestigial relic of primitive conditions,
is shown also by the primeval history of the nations. The idea appearing
already in the Biblical creation myth, and the thought later expressed
by Plato, and recently by Jacob Böhme, that the first human being was
originally both man and woman, and that the woman was subsequently
formed out of this primeval human being Adam--this pregnant thought
merely expresses the fact of the indifference of the sexes among savage
people and in the primitive history of mankind. The hermaphrodite of
ancient art is, like the man-woman of the modern woman’s movement, an
atavism, a retrogression to these long-past stages, of which we have
only the above-mentioned vestiges to remind us.[20]

Friedrich Ratzel, in the introduction to his great work on “The Races of
Man,” also alludes to this primitive obscuration of sexual contrasts in
earlier stages of civilization, and draws therefrom interesting
conclusions regarding the existence of a primordial gynecocracy, a
“regiment of women.” I have myself discussed this question in the second
volume of my book, “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia
Sexualis,” and shall return to the subject when dealing with masochism.

W. H. Riehl, and after him Heinrich Schurtz, have laid stress on the
dangers to civilization involved in the obliteration of sexual
differences. Sexual differentiation stands and falls with civilization.
The former is the indispensable preliminary of the latter. Destroy it,
and the whole course of development will be reversed.

Sexual differences comprise for the most part the diverse development of
the so-called “secondary sexual characters”--that is to say, all the
differential characteristics which distinguish man from woman, over and
above those strictly related to the work of sex--for instance, stature,
skeleton, muscles, skin, voice, etc.

The masculine body has evolved to a greater extent than the feminine
body as a force-producing machine, for in man the bones and the muscles
have a larger development, whereas in woman we observe a greater
development of fat, whereby the plasticity of the body is enhanced, but
its mechanical utility and energy are impaired.

According to the most recent scientific representation of sexual
differences, as we find them enumerated in the monograph of Oskar
Schultze, based upon his own observations, and also on the earlier works
of Vierordt, Quetelet, Topinard, Pfitzner, Waldeyer, C. H. Stratz, J.
Ranke, E. von Lange, Havelock Ellis, Merkel, Bischoff, Rebentisch,
Welcker, Schwalbe, Marchand, and others, the most important physical
differentiæ between man and woman are the following:

The supporting framework of the body, the osseous skeleton, exhibits
important differences in man and woman. The bones of women are on the
whole smaller and weaker. Especially extensive sexual differences are
noticeable in the pelvis. Wiedersheim regards these sexual differences
of the woman’s pelvis as a specific characteristic of the human species.
In all the anthropoid apes they are far less strongly marked than in
man. Moreover, these differences exhibit a progressive development,
which is to an important extent dependent upon advancing civilization.
For this reason, as G. Fritsch, Alsberg, and others, point out, among
the majority of savage races the differences between the male and the
female pelvis are far less extensive than among civilized nations. The
characteristic peculiarities of the pelvis of the European woman, which
can be distinguished from the male pelvis at a glance--namely, its
greater extent in transverse diameter, the greater depression and the
wider opening of the anterior osseous arch--are far less marked among
women of the South African races and among the South Sea Islanders.

The enlargement of the female pelvis in the course of human evolution is
dependent upon the most important of all the factors of civilization,
the =brain=. Even in the human fœtus the great size of the brain gives
rise to a far greater proportionate development of the skull than we
find in the fœtus of any other mammal. This influences the pelvic inlet
and the sacrum, but also the large pelvis, since, in consequence of the
adoption by man of the upright posture, the pregnant uterus expands more
laterally, and thus opens out the iliac fossæ. In the lower races of
man, it is precisely this plate-like expansion of the iliac fossæ which
is so much less developed than in the case of civilized races.

Another physical difference between the sexes concerns =stature= and
=body-weight=.

The mean stature of woman is somewhat less than that of man. Among
Europeans it is about 1·60 metres (5 feet 3 inches), as compared with
1·72 metres (5 feet 7-3/4 inches) for the average stature of the male.
According to Vierordt, the new-born boy is already on the average from
1/2 to 1 centimetre (1/5 to 2/5 inch) longer than the new-born girl.
Johannes Ranke characterizes the individual factors which give rise to
these differences in the following manner:

  “The typical bodily development of the human male is characterized by
  a trunk relatively shorter in relation to the whole stature; but in
  relation to the length of the trunk, the upper and the lower
  extremities are longer, the thighs and the legs longer, the hand and
  the foot also longer; relatively to the long upper arm and to the long
  thigh respectively, the forearm and the leg are still longer; and
  relatively to the entire upper extremity, the entire lower extremity
  is also longer.

  “On the other hand, the feminine proportions, remaining more
  approximate to those of the youthful state, as compared with those of
  the fully developed male, are distinguished by the following
  characteristics: comparatively greater length of the trunk; relatively
  to the length of the trunk, comparatively shorter arms and lower
  extremities, shorter upper arm and forearm, shorter thigh and leg,
  shorter hands and feet; relatively to the shorter upper arm, still
  shorter forearm, and relatively to the shorter thigh, still shorter
  leg; finally, relatively to the entire upper extremity, shorter lower
  extremities.”

This difference in the stature is found also in primitive peoples. Among
the savage races of Brazil, who are still living in the stone age, Karl
von den Steinen found that the average height of the men was 162
centimetres (5 feet 3·8 inches), whilst that of the women was 10·5
centimetres (4·14 inches) less. This difference corresponds exactly with
that given in Topinard’s figures as corresponding to the average male
height of 162 centimetres (5 feet 3·8 inches).

In relation to the greater length of the body, the other proportions of
the male body also exhibit greater figures. More particularly, the width
of the shoulders is greater in man as compared with woman.

The body-weight of man is likewise notably greater than that of woman.
According to Vierordt, the average weight of a new-born boy in middle
Europe is 3,333 grammes (7·348 pounds), as compared with that of a
new-born girl 3,200 grammes (7·055 pounds). The difference, therefore,
is 133 grammes (0·293 pounds = about 4-1/2 ounces). In the case of
adults, the mean difference amounts to 7 kilogrammes (15 pounds), since
the average weight of man is 65 kilogrammes (143 pounds), that of woman
58 kilogrammes (128 pounds).

Corresponding with the slighter development of the skeleton, the
=muscular system= in woman is also less strongly developed; the muscles
contain a larger percentage of water than those of man, and in this
point also we find a resemblance to the juvenile state.

On the other hand, =the development of fat= in woman is much greater
than in man. Bischoff investigated the relations between muscle and fat
in man and woman, and found that in the entire body in the male there
was 41·8 per cent. muscle and 18·2 per cent. fat; in the female 35·8 per
cent. muscle and 28·2 per cent. fat. In the female two regions of the
body are distinguished by a specially abundant deposit of fat, the
breast and the buttocks, whereby both parts receive the stamp of
extremely prominent secondary sexual characters. Upon this greater
deposit of fat depends the softer, more rounded form of the feminine
body; whilst the muscular system is less developed than in man. Man, on
the other hand, is especially powerful in the head, neck, breast, and
upper extremities. The contrast between the typical beauty of man and
woman, respectively, is mainly explicable by the differences just
enumerated.

Woman’s =skin= is clearer and more delicate than that of man.

More important is the fact that the blood of man contains a notably
larger quantity of =red blood-corpuscles= (erythrocytes) than that of
woman. Woman’s blood is richer in water. Welcker found in a cubic
millimetre of man’s blood 5,000,000, and in the same quantity of woman’s
blood 4,500,000 blood-discs. In correspondence with this, the hæmoglobin
content and the specific weight of woman’s blood are both less than
those of man’s. Since the red blood-corpuscles play a very important
part in the human economy as oxygen-carriers, this sexual difference in
the corpuscular richness of the blood is very important, and influences
to a high degree the bodily organization of both sexes.

=Larynx= and =voice= remain infantile in woman. Woman’s larynx is
notably smaller than man’s. After puberty woman’s voice is, on the
average, in the deep tones an octave, in the high tones two octaves,
higher than man’s.

According to the investigations of Pfitzner, the measurements of the
=head= (length, breadth, height, circumference) are smaller in woman
than in man. Woman’s skull remains, in respect of numerous
peculiarities of structure, strikingly like the skull of the child.[21]
This infantile quality of a woman’s skull, we must again point out,
justifies =no= conclusion regarding the inferiority of woman. Schultze,
when presenting these data for our consideration, rightly reminds us of
the well-known fact that the man of genius is also frequently
distinguished by infantile peculiarities.

Woman’s skull is absolutely smaller than man’s; hence, of course, her
brain is also absolutely smaller. Waldeyer gives as the mean weight of a
man’s brain 1,372 grammes (44·12 ounces), and of a woman’s brain, 1,231
grammes (39·58 ounces); Schwalbe’s figures are respectively 1,375
grammes (44·21 ounces) and 1,245 grammes (40·03 ounces).

In this connexion O. Schultze remarks:

  “The question immediately arises, whether we are justified in speaking
  of the mental ‘inferiority’ of woman, because her brain weighs less
  than that of man.

  “Now, in the first place, it is obvious that the greater body-weight
  of man demands a greater weight of brain. And there is nothing
  remarkable about the fact that the greater size exhibited by many
  organs of the male should be exhibited also by the brain. It seems
  very natural that the unquestionably greater functional activity which
  has distinguished the masculine brain for many thousand years should
  be manifested by the notably greater size of that organ, just as a
  larger muscle generally performs more work than a small one.

  “As a matter of fact, among the numerous investigators occupied with
  this question, many have assumed that differences in the psychical
  power of human brains are dependent upon differences in their size.
  But this is an =assumption= merely, and with Bischoff, who as long as
  forty years ago conducted an exhaustive investigation into the problem
  of the relations between brain-weight and intellectual capacity, we
  must say also to-day that ‘the proof of any such connexion has =not=
  yet been offered us.’”

Whether the study of the finer structure of the brain in man and woman
will enable us to form more trustworthy conclusions regarding their
respective intellectual valuation, is a question whose answer must for
the present be postponed. According to Rüdinger and Passet, in new-born
boys and girls there exist very remarkable differences in the formation
and development of the brain. In the male fœtal brain the frontal lobes
are larger, wider, and higher; the convolutions, especially those of
the parietal lobe, are better formed than in the female fœtal brain.
Waldeyer was able to confirm this observation, and he considers it of
great importance, especially in view of the large share which the
frontal lobes have in the performance of purely intellectual functions.
Broca, however, was unable to detect a lesser development of the frontal
lobes in woman. Eberstaller and Cunningham even believed that they could
establish that this portion of the brain was more powerfully developed
in woman! Finally, the great Swedish cerebral anatomist, G. Retzius,
made an exact investigation of the sexual differences between the brains
of man and woman in the adult state. According to O. Schultze, his
results can be regarded as authoritative. Retzius stated that =hitherto
no specific invariably recurrent peculiarity had been found by which the
female brain could always with certainty be distinguished from the male;
still, he was inclined to attribute to woman’s brain a greater
simplicity of structure; it showed less divergence from the fundamental
type=.

This coincides with the fact to which we have already alluded, that
woman as compared with man possesses less variability, that she is the
simpler, more primitive being. Similarly, experience teaches
ethnologists that the men of a race differ from one another to a much
greater extent than the women.[22]

If we wish to sum up in a word the =nature= of the physical sexual
differences, we must say: =Woman remains more akin to the child than
man.=

This, however, in no way constitutes an inferiority, as Havelock Ellis
and Oskar Schultze have convincingly shown. It is only the expression of
=a primitive difference in nature=, brought about by the adaptation of
the female body to the purposes of reproduction. This is the cause of
the more infantile habitus of women (according to the above-quoted
biological law of Herbert Spencer).

The observation of the physical differences between man and woman also
teaches us the futility of the old dispute as to whether man’s body or
woman’s was the more beautiful.[23] The different tasks which lie
before the male and female bodies respectively give rise to different
development of individual parts. If this development is complete in its
kind, the body is beautiful. Stratz, in the introduction to his book on
“The Beauty of the Female Body,” has rightly =identified perfect beauty
with perfect health=. Man’s body and woman’s will alike be beautiful if
all secondary sexual characters are developed in a harmonious and not
excessive degree, if the idea of “manliness in man” and “womanliness in
woman” have attained full expression, and have not been unduly limited
by isolated peculiarities and variations.

Masculine and feminine beauty are different. There can be no question
regarding the superiority of one or the other.

  [19] Another author--H. Quensel--goes even farther than this in his
  book (in some respects most fantastic), “Do We Advance? An Ideal
  Philosophical Hypothesis of the Evolution of the Human Psyche based
  upon Natural Science,” pp. 152, 153 (Cologne, 1904). He writes: “When
  we compare the position in civilization of man and woman, we find that
  man unquestionably takes the higher position in respect of those
  intellectual impulses which serve as the basis of the higher and the
  highest stages of civilization, especially the impulse of building and
  construction, of the collection and the elaboration of scientific
  facts, in regard to the science of statesmanship and social
  activities, in respect also of the study of the connexion between
  cause and effect, and in respect of art. When, however, we apply to
  the problem before us the data I have obtained concerning the details
  of physical retrogression and of psychical advance, it appears that
  woman in many relations stands unquestionably higher than man; for
  woman, in her development, not alone in bodily relations, as regards
  the retrogression of the skeletal and muscular systems and the
  delicacy of constitution dependent thereon, as regards the cutaneous
  covering of the body, and as regards speech and voice, has advanced
  much farther than man on the path of bodily retrogression necessary
  for the progress of civilization. Positively, also, in all that
  concerns the development of the highest psychical impulses, the
  development of general nervous sensibility, of a finer discrimination
  of moral values and of idealism, of general charity and capacity for
  self-sacrifice in association with diminishing egoism, of
  transcendental piety and religious sentiment, and also of clearness of
  vision, and, finally, in all that concerns the development of an
  adaptability disclosing supreme psychical differentiation--associated,
  indeed, with deficient fixity of purpose--woman has advanced far
  beyond man on the forward path of civilization; that is to say, in
  respect of civilization, woman unquestionably excels man.”

  [20] W. Havelburg, in his essay, “Climate, Race, and Nationality in
  Relation to Marriage,” published in “Health and Disease in Relation to
  Marriage and the Married State,” by Senator and Kaminer, p. 127
  (London, Rebman, Limited, 1904), also alludes to the significance of
  progressive sexual differentiation in the process of civilization, and
  draws attention to the increase in feminine beauty.

  [21] We may refer also to Paul Bartel’s valuable work, “Ueber
  Geschlechtsunterschiede am Schädel”--“Sexual Differences in the Skull”
  (Berlin, 1898). The author concludes: “We are unable to recognize any
  important difference between man’s skull and woman’s--probably,
  indeed, no such difference exists.”

  [22] We must not ignore the fact, that other distinguished
  anthropologists, such as Manouvrier, Pearson, Frassetto, and
  especially Giuffrida-Ruggieri, have recently contested the slighter
  variability and the infantile character of woman. _Cf._
  Giuffrida-Ruggieri, “Anthropological Considerations regarding
  Infantilism, and Conclusions regarding the Origin of the Varieties of
  the Human Species” (_Italian Zoological Review_, 1903, vol. xiv., Nos.
  4, 5). _Cf._ also the interesting remarks of Näcke in the “German
  Archives for Criminal Anthropology,” 1903, vol. xiii., pp. 292, 293.

  [23] Konrad Lange--“Das Wesen der Kunst” (“The Nature of Art”), pp.
  361-364; Berlin, 1901--has ably exposed the subjective grounds of this
  ancient dispute, and has shown their untenability.




