CHAPTER V

PSYCHICAL DIFFERENTIAL SEXUAL CHARACTERS--THE WOMAN’S QUESTION


(Appendix: SEXUAL SENSIBILITY IN WOMAN)

“_Among all the higher activities and movements of our time, the
struggle of our sisters to attain an equality of position with the
strong, the dominant, the oppressive sex, appears to me, from the purely
human point of view, most beautiful and most interesting; indeed, I
regard it as possible that the coming century will obtain its historical
characterization, not from any of the social and economical
controversies of the world of men, but that this century will be known
to subsequent history distinctively as that in which the solution of the
‘woman’s question’ was obtained._”--GEORG HIRTH.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER V

  The fact of psychical sexual differences -- Attempts to deny their
  existence -- Rosa Mayreder’s “Critique of Femininity” -- The sexual
  nuances of the psyche -- Ineradicability of these -- Condemnation of
  psychical bisexuality -- Expression of psychical difference in the
  demeanour of the sperm cell and the germ cell -- Original
  representatives of the differing natures of man and woman -- Recent
  researches regarding psychical sexual differences -- Sensory
  sensations -- Intellectual differences -- Experiments of Jastrow,
  Minot, and others -- Inquiries of Delaunay and Havelock Ellis --
  Readier suggestibility of women -- Tendencies to independent activity
  on the part of women -- Higher spiritual activities in man and woman
  -- Woman’s talent for politics -- Emotivity of woman -- Greater
  susceptibility to fatigue -- Decline of emotivity in the modern woman
  -- Artistic talents of man and woman -- Greater variability of man --
  Influence of menstruation on the feminine physique -- Psychological
  experiments of H. B. Thompson -- Woman and man heterogeneous natures
  -- Comparison by Alfons Bilharz -- The enigmatical in woman -- Poets
  and thinkers on this question -- A saying of Theodor Mundt --
  Antipathy of the sexes -- Love as the solution of the enigma --
  Significance of psychical differences for the woman’s question -- Part
  played by women in civilization -- Retrospect of primeval history --
  Women as the discoverers of handicrafts and arts -- As the teachers of
  man -- Thomas Henry Huxley on the woman’s question -- The value of
  work for woman -- Improvement of domestic service according to
  Schmoller -- The woman of the future.

  _Appendix: Sexual Sensibility in Woman._ -- An old topic of dispute --
  Sexual sensibility in man -- Feminine erotic types -- Theory of
  Lombroso and Ferrero -- Adler’s monograph -- Refutation of the theory
  of the lesser sensual sensibility of woman -- Diffuse character of the
  feminine sexual sphere -- Researches of Havelock Ellis regarding the
  sexual impulse in woman -- Experience of alienists regarding sexuality
  in woman -- A case of temporary sexual anæsthesia -- Causes of sexual
  frigidity.


CHAPTER V

The unquestionably existing physical differences between the sexes
respectively, correspond equally without question to existing
=psychical= differences. Psychically, also, man and woman are completely
=different= beings. We must not employ the word “psychical,” as it is so
often employed, in the sense of pure “intelligence”; we must understand
the term to relate to the entire conception and content of the psyche,
to the whole spiritual being--the spiritual habitus, emotional
character, feelings, and will: we shall then immediately be convinced
that masculine and feminine beings differ through and through, that they
are heterogeneous, incomparable natures.

Under the influence of Weininger’s book, the attempt has recently been
made to deny the existence of sexual differences in the psychical
sphere, and especially to contest the origin of these differences from
the fundamentally different nature of the masculine and feminine types.
(Weininger himself not only went so far as to declare the obliteration
and equalization of sexual differences, but he even asserted that all
feminine nature was a personification of nothingness, of evil; he wished
to annihilate femininity, in order to allow the existence of one sex
only, the male, this being to him the embodiment of the objective and
the good.) I recently read with great interest a most intelligent book,
one full of new ideas, by Rosa Mayreder--“Zur Kritik der Weiblichkeit”
(A Critique of Femininity), Jena, 1905--in which the author maintains
what she calls the “primitively teleological character of sexuality”;
that is, she considers the different sexual functions of man and woman
to be comparatively unimportant for the determination of their spiritual
nature, and regards the individual psychical differentiation as
independent of sexuality and of the different sexual natures. In her
opinion, sexual polarity does not extend to the “higher nature” of
mankind, to the spiritual sphere. She offers as a proof of this, among
other points, the fact that by crossed inheritance spiritual
peculiarities of the father can be transmitted to the daughter. Very
true. Moreover, no objective student of Nature will deny that a woman
can attain the same degree of individual psychical differentiation as a
man, or that she can bring her “higher nature” to an equally great
development. But quite as incontestable is the fact which Rosa Mayreder
keeps too much in the background: =that everything psychical, the
entire emotional and voluntary life, receives from the particular sexual
nature a peculiar characterization, a distinctive colouring, and a
specific nuance=; and that these precisely constitute the heterogeneous
and the incomparable in the masculine and the feminine natures.

The attempts to annihilate sexual differences in theory are very
old,[24] but they have always proved untenable in practice. They have
invariably been shattered by contact with--sexual differences.

_Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret_ (You may drive out Nature
with a pitchfork, but she will inevitably return). And this return of
Nature is, in fact, a =step forward=, in advance of primitive
hermaphroditic states. Sexual differences are ineradicable; civilization
shows an unmistakable tendency to increase them. There is also an
individual differentiation of sexual characters. It is proportional to
the differentiation of the psychical characters of man and woman. And
the problem is this: How is it possible for woman to ensure the
development and perfectibility of her higher nature, without eliminating
and obscuring her peculiar character as a sexual being?

When Rosa Mayreder herself, at the end of her book (p. 278), comes to
the conclusion--

  “In the province of the physical, about which no doubt is possible,
  the development towards ‘homologous monosexuality,’ towards =the
  unconditional sexual differentiation of individuals=, =constitutes the
  most desirable aim=. Every =divergence= from the normal renders the
  individual an imperfect being; =physical hermaphroditism is repulsive=
  because it represents a state of insufficiency, an inadequate and
  malformed structure. It appertains to the qualities of beautiful and
  healthy human beings that the body should be that of an entire man or
  an entire woman, just as it is desirable that the body should be
  intact in all other respects”

--she has at the same time expressed a judgment regarding the value of
psychical bisexuality which =must ever be a rudiment merely= in the
“entire man” or the “entire woman,” and can never attain the
transcendent importance, can never represent the progress towards higher
altitudes, which the author, in her singular misunderstanding of the
true relations, wishes to ascribe to that condition. We may admit that
the bisexual character is more or less strongly developed in the
individual male or female, without thereby abandoning the fundamental
natural difference between man and woman, which involves not merely the
physical, but also the psychical sphere.

I disbelieve, therefore, in Rosa Mayreder’s “synthetic human being,” who
is “subordinate alike to the conditions of the masculine and the
feminine” but I do believe, as I have already stated in earlier
writings, in an individualization of love, in an ennobling and deepening
of the relationship between the sexes, such as is possible only to free
personalities. This is easily attainable in conjunction with the
retention of all bodily and mental peculiarities, as these have
developed during the process of sexual differentiation between man and
woman.

There can be no possible doubt that psychically woman is a different
creature from man. And quite rightly Mantegazza declares the opinion of
Mirabeau, that the soul has no sex, but only the body, to be a great
blunder.

Let us now return to the directly visible elementary phenomenon of love,
to the process of coalescence of the spermatozoon and the ovum. From our
study of other natural processes we feel we are justified by analogy in
drawing the conclusion that the observed kinetic difference between the
spermatozoon and the ovum is the expression also of different psychical
processes. Georg Hirth draws attention to these remarkable =differences
in respect of their modes of energy= between spermatozoa and ova.[25] He
also infers from the greater variability of the spermatozoa in the
different animal species, as compared with the usual spherical form of
the ova, that to the spermatozoon is allotted the most important kinetic
function in the process of reproduction, to which opinion its aggressive
mobility would also lead us, whereas the ovum rather represents
potential energy.

  “We can indeed hardly believe that anywhere in the entire organic
  world is there anything, of the same minute size, endowed with like
  energy and enterprise as these so-called spermatozoa (‘little sperm
  animals’), which are indeed not animals, and which yet prepare for us
  more joy and more sorrow than any animal does. There everything is
  busy. With what turbulence they hurry along until they attain their
  ardently desired goal, and having attained it, thrust themselves head
  first into the interior of the ovum! In this we have a drama for the
  gods. To doubt the energy of these structures would be preposterous.”

Spermatozoa and ova are the original representatives of the respective
spiritual natures of man and woman. Disregarding all further
differentiation and individualization, the =fundamental lineaments= of
the masculine and feminine natures harmonize with the demeanour of the
reproductive cells; and we are able to recognize that for each is
provided a =different= task, and yet that =the task of each is no less
important than that of the other=. Quite rightly Rosa Mayreder points
out, that the male sex stands biologically no higher than the female
from the reproductive and procreative point of view; that in the
continued reproduction of life male and female have equal share.

No less true, on the other hand, is the remark of Havelock Ellis, whose
position in relation to the woman question is throughout objective:

  “As long as women are distinguished from men by primary sexual
  characters--as long, that is to say, as they conceive and bear--so
  long will they remain unequal to man in the highest psychical
  processes” (“Man and Woman,” p. 21).

The nature of man is aggressive, progressive, variable; that of woman is
receptive, more susceptible to stimuli, simpler.

Numerous exact, scientific, ethnological, and psychological
investigations concerning the sexes, among the most important of which
we may mention those of Darwin, Allan, Münsterberg, C. Vogt,
Ploss-Bartels, Jastrow, Lombroso and Ferrero, Shaw, Havelock Ellis, and
Helen Bradford Thompson, have confirmed the existence of these
differences in the nature of the two sexes. Many individual points still
remain obscure, but the above-mentioned sexual difference is everywhere
recognizable, and can never be entirely eradicated, even by a higher
psychical differentiation. Even the author of the “Critique of
Femininity,” who would open an unlimited perspective to the freedom of
individuality, is still compelled to admit that the majority of women
differ from men, no less in character than in intellect.

Havelock Ellis, in his classical work “Man and Woman” (London, 1892),
has given a summary of the psychical differences between the sexes,
based upon the most recent anthropological and psychological
investigations. This work forms the foundation for all later researches.

Of the individual psychical phenomena in man and woman, the sensory
sensations first demand consideration. In these no absolute and general
superiority of one sex over the other can be shown to exist. The
assumption that women have a more delicate power of sensory receptivity
cannot be sustained; indeed, the contrary appears the truer view. It is
true that women can be more readily excited by sensory stimuli, but they
do not possess a more delicate sensory receptivity.

As regards the general =intellectual endowment= of the sexes, the
interesting experimental researches of Jastrow into the psychology of
woman show that she possesses a greater interest in her immediate
environment, in the finished product, in the decorative, the individual,
and the concrete; man, on the other hand, exhibits a preference for the
more remote, for that which is in process of construction or growth, for
the useful, the general, and the abstract.

In agreement with these views is a report in the _Berliner Städtischen
Jahrbuch_ (1870, pp. 59-77), concerning the knowledge possessed by
several thousands of boys and girls at the time of their entry into
school. The report states:

  “The more usual, the more approximate, and the easier an idea is, the
  greater is the probability that the girls will excel the boys, and
  _vice versa_. In boys more frequently than in girls do we find that
  they know nothing of quite common things in their immediate
  environment.”

Professor Minot arranged that persons of both sexes should cover ten
cards with sketches of any subject they chose. It appeared from this
experiment that the sketches of the men embraced a greater variety of
subjects than those of the women.

In respect of quickness of comprehension and intellectual mobility woman
is distinctly superior to man. Women, for example, read faster than men,
and can give a better account of what they have read. From this fact,
however, no conclusion can be drawn regarding their higher intellectual
capacity, for many men of exceptional intelligence read very slowly.

Delaunay inquired of a number of merchants regarding the industrial
capacity of the two sexes, and was informed that women are more diligent
than men, but less intelligent, so that they can be trusted only in
routine work.

In general, the experience of the postal service coincided with what has
already been stated. Havelock Ellis regarded the result of an inquiry
made at several of the large English post-offices as “typical and
trustworthy.” One of the chief postmasters was of the opinion that as
counter and instrumental clerks, doing concurrently money-order and
savings-bank business, taking in telegrams and signalling and receiving,
and in attending to rough and illiterate persons, women clerks were
preferable to men. Women telegraphists work as intelligently and as
exactly as their male colleagues. They do not, however, like the men,
exhibit an interest in the technical working of telegraphy; and, owing
to a lack of staying power, they are unable to compete with the men in
times of pressure. The comparatively slighter strength of the wrist made
it difficult for women telegraphists to write at the desired speed, and
to produce the requisite number of copies.

All the reports agree in this--that

  “Women are more docile and amenable to discipline, they do light work
  as well as men, and are steadier in some respects; on the other hand,
  they more often remain away from work on the ground of trifling
  indisposition, are more likely to fail to meet severe demands, and
  show less intelligence in respect of tasks lying outside the course of
  their current work, and in general show less desire and less capacity
  for self-culture.”

Unquestionable is the =greater suggestibility= of women, doubtless
dependent on organic peculiarities, in consequence of which they so
quickly become subject to the influence of persons and opinions, when
the latter exercise a sufficiently powerful effect upon their emotional
life. The independent, the poietic,[26] are more distant from women, are
more foreign to their nature, than in the case of men. But that these
are quite impossible to them I am compelled to doubt. And when, for
example, Havelock Ellis considers it unthinkable that a woman should
have discovered the Copernican system, I need merely call to mind the
widely known physical discoveries of Madame Curie, whose thoroughly
independent work qualified her to succeed her husband as professor at
the Sorbonne. We cannot therefore exclude the possibility that in the
sphere of the natural sciences notable discoveries and inventions may be
made in the future in consequence of the independent work of women.

Very interesting are the observations of Paul Lafitte on the differences
between the higher intellectual qualities of man and woman. After
drawing attention to the greater receptivity of woman, he says:

  “When children of both sexes are educated together, during the first
  year the girls lead; at this time they have to do chiefly with the
  reception and retention of impressions, and we see every day that
  women put men in the shade by the vividness of their impressions and
  the excellence of their memory. In addition to this we must take into
  account the inborn sense of women for symmetry, from which it is
  readily explicable that they generally receive geometrical instruction
  with very beneficial results. In correspondence with this, we find
  that woman students of medicine excel in the examinations in
  physiology and general pathology, and show a clearness of apprehension
  of series of facts which is really remarkable; on the other hand, they
  are distinctly inferior in clinical investigations, in which other
  intellectual qualities are involved. In general, women are more
  receptive for facts than for laws, more for the concrete than for
  general ideas. If we chance to hear an opinion expressed regarding
  someone with whom we are acquainted, a man’s opinion will probably be
  more accurate in the general outlines, but a woman’s will show a
  clearer perception of the nuances of character.”

Thus it is that among women concrete philosophers are greater favourites
than abstract metaphysicians. According to the experience of a London
bookseller, ladies of the West End of London prefer Schopenhauer, Plato,
Marcus Aurelius, Epictetus, and Renan; that is to say, the most
concrete, the most personal, the most poetical, and the most religious
of thinkers. This last quality especially fascinates the mind of woman.
At the same time, want of relationship between the strong suggestibility
of woman and her slight power of independent production also strikingly
manifests itself in woman’s position with regard to the =religious=
phenomena of the spiritual life. Havelock Ellis shows that ninety-nine
in every hundred of the great religious movements of the world have
received their initial impulse from men. And yet it has always been
women who have been the first to attach themselves to the founders of
religions.

In contrast with this, women appear to possess more independent
significance in the sphere of =politics=, as is shown by the fact that
there has been such a large number of celebrated women rulers.
Diplomatic adroitness, finesse, and self-command, to the extent to which
these qualities favour political activity, are indeed specific feminine
peculiarities.

The above-mentioned greater suggestibility of woman is connected with
her greater =emotivity=; that is, woman reacts to physical and psychical
stimuli more quickly than man. The “vasomotor theory” of the emotions,
originated by Mosso and C. Lange, is true to a greater extent of woman
than of man. Woman’s neuro-muscular system is more irritable, as is
especially shown in the case of the pupil of the eye, and in that of the
urinary bladder. By Mosso and Pellacani the bladder is termed the most
sensitive psychometer in the body. Contraction of the bladder is well
known to occur in many emotional states, such as fear, expectation,
tension, and bashfulness. This is much commoner in women and children
than in men. The fact that in women under the influence of strong
excitement there arises a powerful impulse to urinate, is a fact
extremely well known to medical men and others with special
opportunities for observation.

The greater neuro-muscular irritability of woman may also be explained
as the result of the relatively greater size of her abdominal organs.

To this greater =irritability= of woman there corresponds a =greater
susceptibility to fatigue=. It appears as a result of any long-lasting
task; it is, in fact, a safeguard against over-exertion, which in man so
commonly leads to complete exhaustion, because he works =too= long. The
ease with which a woman becomes exhausted is no doubt partly dependent
upon the physiological anæmia to which we alluded in the last
chapter--to the larger quantity of water and the smaller quantity of red
blood-corpuscles (erythrocytes) in her blood.

Havelock Ellis has detected a decline in the emotivity of modern woman,
under the influence of custom and education, especially as a result of
the great diffusion of bodily sports among girls. But he does not
believe that anything of the kind can lead to a complete abolition of
the emotional differences between the sexes, since these depend upon
firmly established bodily differences, such as the greater extension of
the sexual sphere and of the visceral functions in woman, upon woman’s
physiological anæmia, and upon the more marked periodicity of her vital
processes.

  “So many factors work in combination, in order to give a basis for the
  play of the emotions, whose greater extension can be overcome by no
  alteration of the _milieu_, or of custom. The emotivity of woman may
  be reduced to finer and more delicate shades, but it can never be
  brought down to the level of the emotivity of the male sex.”

In respect of =artistic endowment= the male sex is unquestionably
superior to the female. The long series of male poets, musicians,
painters, sculptors, of the highest genius cannot be matched by any
notable number of striking female personalities in the same sphere of
artistic activity. Even the art of cooking has been further developed by
men. Without doubt the differences in sexuality are the principal causes
of this deficiency. The impetuous, aggressive character of the male
sexual impulse also favours poietic endeavours, the transformation of
sexual energy into higher plastic activity, as it fulfils itself in the
moments of most exalted artistic conception. The greater variability of
the male also serves to explain the greater frequency of male artists
of the first rank.

John Hunter, Burdach, Darwin, Havelock Ellis, and others, have shown
that there exists a greater tendency on the part of man to divergence
from type. In the course of evolution, man represents the more variable
and progressive, woman the more monotonous and conservative, moiety
of mankind. These differences find no less clear expression in
the psychical sphere. Notwithstanding increasing individual
differentiation--in truth, affecting only the minority, the _élite_
among women, as Rosa Mayreder very rightly insists--this great
difference in the variability of the sexes will ever continue. This
biological fact is certainly of great importance in respect of
civilization and of the relation between the sexes.

In a comparison between man and woman, the important fact of
=menstruation= must never be forgotten. Menstruation is only the
expression, only a phase, of a continuous undulatory movement in the
entire feminine organism. The intellectual and emotional state of woman
is, beyond question, a different one in different phases of the monthly
cycle. Icard, and recently Francillon (“Essai sur la Puberté chez la
Femme”--“Essay on Puberty in Woman,” pp. 189-198; Paris, 1906), have
given us exact information on this subject.

  “In all tests of strength and cleverness,” says Havelock Ellis, “the
  woman’s degree of strength and exactitude is related to the level of
  her monthly curve. Moreover, in every criminal procedure, the relation
  between the time of occurrence of the alleged crime and the accused’s
  monthly cycle should invariably be taken into consideration.”

The results obtained by Helen Bradford Thompson by experimental research
in her “Comparative Psychology of the Sexes” (Würzburg, 1905) agree in
general with the details we have already given as the result of earlier
researches. In her experiment also

  “man proved better developed in respect of motor capacity and accuracy
  of judgment. Woman had, indeed, sharper senses and a better memory.
  The opinion, however, that emotional excitement plays a greater part
  in the life of woman has not been confirmed. On the contrary, woman’s
  greater tendency towards religion and towards superstition is a proof
  of her conservative nature, of her function to guard established
  beliefs and modes of action.”

Thus we cannot expel from the world the fact that man and woman are
eminently =different= alike physically and mentally. Whether, as Alfons
Bilharz declares, they are really throughout equivalent opposites, or,
as he expresses the comparison, like +1 and -1, their sum is equivalent
to nil, must remain at present undetermined. But that ineradicable
differences exist is certain. There is no question here of an
inferiority to man. What woman lacks on one side she has more of on
another. She is through and through a creature =constructed on other
lines=, standing nearer to Nature than man, and for this reason, like
Nature, =problematical=, the great guardian of the secrets of Nature
(Bärenbach).

  “Who shall explain the wonderful
   Magic power of woman?”

says Platen, thus touching an aspect of ancient German sentiment, which
has also found expression in the _sanctum aut providum_ of Tacitus.
Ovid, Byron, Börne, and Rousseau, have also described the wonderful and
mysterious influence of woman’s nature, fundamentally different from
that of man. Most beautifully has it been described by Theodor Mundt in
the following magnificent passage of his book on Charlotte Stieglitz:

  “The most secret elements of woman’s nature, in association with the
  magic mystery of her organization, indicate the existence in her of
  peculiar and deep-lying creative ideas, and in this wonderful riddle
  of love we find the sympathetic of the entire universe expressed. The
  sympathetic, which attracts and binds forces, the silent music in the
  innermost being of the world’s soul, by means of which the stars, the
  suns, bodies, spirits, are compelled to move in this eternal,
  changeable rhythm, and in this continuous opposition--is the feminine
  of the universe. This is the eternal feminine, of which Goethe says
  that it draws us heavenward. Therefore there is nothing deeper, more
  gentle, more unsearchable, than a woman’s heart. All-movable, it
  extends into that wonderful distance of existence, and hears with fine
  nerves the most hidden elements of existence. Touched and shaken by
  every sound, like a spiritual harp, the most hidden aspects of nature
  and of life often evoke in its strings prophetic oscillations. The
  feminine is something common to all life, the most gentle psyche of
  existence, and hence the fine connexion of the feminine nature with
  the general organizations, operations, and world forces; hence the
  mysterious force of attraction which exercises itself in such a magic
  manner as the true pole of sex, as though each one only in, and with,
  the true feminine could first find peace.... The ancients made a
  remarkable use of this idea of a common feminine element in human
  nature, inasmuch as by the name they gave to the pupil of the eye they
  expressed the idea that =a young girl was to be found in every man’s
  eye=. Young girls (pupillæ, κοραι)--these formed the centre of the
  human eye, as Winkelmann points out; and is it possible to describe
  the eye more aptly and distinctively, this radiant chiaroscuro of the
  hidden basis of the soul, than by ascribing femininity to
  it--femininity, which rises from that hidden basis of the soul as an
  Anadyomene rises from the deep?”

Nietzsche speaks also of the “veil” of beautiful possibilities with
which woman is covered, and which makes the charm of her life. This
undefinable spiritual emanation, this dark, irrational element in woman,
led von Hippel to coin the clever phrase that woman is a comma, man a
full-stop. “With man, you know where you are--you have come to an end;
but with woman, there is something more to be expected.” From this
inward nature of woman there proceed immense results: the feminine
essence is a civilizing factor of the first rank; were woman wanting,
civilization would be non-existent. Very beautifully has the great
Buckle drawn attention to the indispensability of woman for the
spiritual progress of mankind. He remarks that men, the slaves of
experience and of fact, have only the women to thank for the fact that
their slavery has not become much more complete and more narrowing.
Women’s way of thinking, their spiritual care, their intercourse, their
influence, diffuse themselves unnoticed through the whole of society,
and take their place throughout its entire structure. By means of this
influence, more than by any other cause, we men have been conducted,
says Buckle, to a completely thought-out world.

This obscure, wonderful nature of woman has, however, its shadowy side.
Upon it depends that primitive, deeply-rooted =antipathy of the sexes=,
which is due to their profound heterogeneity, to the impossibility that
they can ever really understand one another. Herein lie the roots of the
brutal enslavement of woman by man in the course of history; of the
belief in witchcraft; of contempt for women, and the continued renewal
of theoretical misogyny. The victory of sexual love over this contrast
is often apparent only. Leopardi, and Theophile Gautier (in
“Mademoiselle de Maupin”), have shown how little woman understands the
inner nature of man; how little man understands woman has been
poetically described by Annette von Droste-Hülshoff.

For this reason, true love is an understanding of the contrasted
natures, a solution of the riddle. “Être aimé, c’est être compris,” says
Delphine de Girardin.

What significance for the so-called “woman’s question” has the
determination of the existence of psychical sexual differences? We
answer: =The nature of woman, completely developed in all her
peculiarities, and enriched throughout her being by all the spiritual
elements of our times adequate to her being, ensures her an equal share
in civilization and in the progress of humanity.=

Complete equality between man and woman is impossible. But are all
sides of woman’s nature as yet adequately worked upon, fully developed?
Is not the civilized woman of the future still to be created? The true
nucleus of the woman’s movement is, I conceive, to be found in the
emancipation of woman from the dominion of pure sensuality, and from the
not less disastrous dominion of masculine spiritual arrogance. Have we
men really any right to pride ourselves to such a degree upon our
knowledge and intelligence? Should we =without= woman have advanced
anything like so far?

A glance at the beginnings of human civilization should teach us a
little modesty, for there we see that woman was equal, if not superior,
to man in productive, poietic activity. Gradually only, in the progress
of civilization, man supplanted woman, and monopolized all spheres of
productive activity, whilst woman was limited more and more to domestic
occupations. According to Karl Bücher, to women were originally allotted
all the labours connected with the obtaining and subsequent utilization
of vegetable materials, also the provision of the apparatus and vessels
necessary for this purpose; to man, on the other hand, were allotted the
chase, fishing, herding, and the provision of weapons and tools. Thus
woman was engaged in threshing and grinding the grain, in baking bread,
in the preparation of food and drink, in the making of pots, and in
spinning. Since these occupations are largely conducted in a rhythmical
manner, and the women worked together in the fields or in their huts,
while the men hunted singly in the forests, it resulted that women were
the first creators of poetry and music.

  “Not,” writes Bücher, “upon the steep summits of society did poetry
  originate; it sprung rather from the depths of the pure strong soul of
  the people. =Women have striven to produce it; and as civilized man
  owes to woman’s work much the best of his possessions, so also are her
  thought and her poetry interwoven in the spiritual treasure handed
  down from generation to generation.= To follow the traces of woman’s
  poetry farther, in the intellectual life of the people, would be a
  valuable exercise. Although these traces have to a large extent
  disappeared, during the subsequent period of man’s poetic activity,
  which appears to have gained predominance in proportion as men
  monopolized the labours of material production, still, in a number of
  races the influence of woman’s poetry can be followed for a long way
  into the literary period.”

=To a large extent men first learned from women the elements of the
various handicrafts.= For instance, as Mason says, primeval woman gave
her “ulu”[27] to the saddler, and taught him the mode of preparing
leather. Women were the first discoverers of numerous industries and
handicrafts. The further development of these in later times was the
work of men; men alone understood how to differentiate their work, while
from the first it was inevitable that motherhood should greatly limit
the working powers of woman.

In the middle ages there still existed in Europe, especially in Germany
and France, certain industries which were exclusively in the hands of
women--for instance, the silk-spinners, silk-weavers, tailoresses, and
girdle-makers. In all these occupations there were mistresses, maids,
and female apprentices. It was not until the sixteenth century that
manufactures became a monopoly of the male sex. In the eighteenth
century women were actually forbidden by law to take part in
manufactures, until in recent times a reaction in their favour took
place.

Therefore we must not from the present conditions judge the capacity of
women for practical activity outside the home. I quite agree with
Gerland, who assumes that during this oppression of the female sex for
thousands of years, a certain deteriorating influence must have been
exercised, and I agree also with Havelock Ellis, who hopes much from the
development in the civilization of the future of an equal freedom for
man and woman, and who demands that we should acquire experience by
unlimited experiment regarding the qualifications of the female sex for
all departments of activity. Golden words as to the necessity for a
comprehensive emancipation of woman were uttered in 1865 by the
celebrated anthropologist Thomas Huxley, in his essay on
“Emancipation--Black and White,” in which he strongly condemns the
present system for the education of girls:

  “Let us have ‘sweet girl graduates’ by all means. They will be none
  the less sweet for a little wisdom; and the ‘golden hair’ will not
  curl less gracefully outside the head by reason of there being brains
  within. Nay, if obvious practical difficulties can be overcome, let
  those women who feel inclined to do so descend into the gladiatorial
  arena of life, not merely in the guise of _retiariæ_, as heretofore,
  but as bold _sicariæ_, breasting the open fray. Let them, if they so
  please, become merchants, barristers, politicians. Let them have a
  fair field, but let them understand, as the necessary correlative,
  that they are to have no favour. Let Nature alone sit high above the
  lists, ‘rain influence and judge the prize.’”

And that men would maintain their old position cannot be doubted. The
only change would be that women, too, would take part in the work of
civilization.[28] They would introduce a new and fresh element into
this work; and inasmuch as every woman would be brought up
systematically with a view to her life’s work, the physically and
psychically disastrous idleness of unmarried young girls, of “old
maids,” and of “misunderstood women,” would come to an end, and these
unattractive types would pass away for ever. The work of mother and
housewife must, in correspondence with these changes, be more highly
esteemed than has hitherto been the case. The technique and the theory
of domestic economy can even now, with sufficient intelligence devoted
to the question, be remodelled and transformed to a satisfying
activity.[29]

Woman is an integral constituent of the processes of civilization,
which, without her, becomes unthinkable. The present moment is a
turning-point in the history of the feminine world. The woman of the
past is disappearing, to give place to the woman of the future; instead
of the bound, there appears the =free personality=.


APPENDIX: SEXUAL SENSIBILITY IN WOMAN

An old and still unsettled subject of dispute is the strength and nature
of sexual sensibility in woman. Whilst the manifestation of sexual
appetite and sexual enjoyment in the male are fairly simple--and in man,
as A. Eulenburg has proved, the copulatory impulse is much more powerful
than the reproductive impulse--the sexual sensibility of woman is still
involved in obscurity. Magendie remarked that no two women are exactly
alike in respect of their sexual sensations and perceptions. There is no
question that among women the varieties of erotic type are far more
numerous than among men. Rosa Mayreder, for instance, distinguishes an
erotic-eccentric, an altruistic-sentimental, and an egoistic-frigid
type. The attempt has been made to prove that the last-named type is the
most widely diffused--that it is, in fact, the characteristic type of
woman. Lombroso and Ferrero were the first to maintain the slight sexual
sensibility of woman; Harry Campbell took the same view; and recently a
Berlin physician--Dr. O. Adler--has published a book on the “Deficient
Sexual Sensibility of Woman,” the conclusions of which are that

  “the sexual impulse (desire, libido) of woman is, alike in its first
  spontaneous origin and in its later manifestation, notably less
  intense than that of man; and further, that libido must first be
  aroused in a suitable manner, and that often it never appears at all.”

Albert Eulenburg, in an article in _Zukunft_ (December 2, 1893), and
later in his “Sexual Neuropathy,” pp. 88, 89 (Leipzig, 1895), first
opposed this doctrine of the physiological sexual anæsthesia of woman,
and quoted in support of his view the following passage from the
writings of the celebrated gynæcologist Kisch:

  “The sexual impulse is so powerful, in certain life periods it is an
  elementary force which so overwhelmingly dominates the entire organism
  of woman, that it leaves no room in her mind for thoughts of
  reproduction; on the contrary, she greatly desires sexual intercourse
  even when she is very much afraid of becoming pregnant or when there
  can be no question of any pregnancy occurring” (see Kisch, “The Sexual
  Life of Woman,” English translation, Rebman, 1908).

I have myself asked a great many cultured women about this matter.
=Without exception=, they declared the theory of the lesser sexual
sensibility of women to be erroneous; many were even of opinion that
sexual sensibility was greater and more enduring in woman than in
man.[30]

When we actually consider the physical bases of feminine sexuality, we
must admit that women’s sexual sphere is a much =more widely extended=
one than that of men. The author of “Splitter” has very well
characterized this fact when he says:

  “Women are in fact pure sex from knees to neck. We men have
  concentrated our apparatus in a single place, we have extracted it,
  separated it from the rest of the body, because _prèt à partir_. They
  (women) are a great sexual =surface= or target; we =have= only a
  sexual =arrow=. Procreation is their proper element, and when they are
  engaged in it they remain at home in their own sphere; we for this
  purpose must go elsewhere out of ourselves. In the matter of time also
  our part in procreation is concentrated. We may devote to the matter
  barely ten minutes; women give as many months. Properly speaking, they
  procreate unceasingly, they stand continually at the witches’
  cauldron, boiling and brewing; while we lend a hand merely in passing,
  and do no more than throw one or two fragments into the vessel.”

It is possible, however, that the greater extension of the sexual sphere
in woman gives rise, if one may use the expression, to a greater
dispersal of sexual sensations, which are not, as they are in man,
closely concentrated to a particular point, and for this reason the
spontaneous resolution of the libido (in the form of the sexual orgasm)
is rendered more difficult.

Recently Havelock Ellis has made a searching investigation into the
nature of the sexual impulse in woman. He found the following
differences by which it was distinguished from the sexual impulse of the
male:

1. The sexual impulse of woman shows greater external passivity.

2. It is more complicated, less readily arises spontaneously, more
frequently needs external stimulus, while the orgasm develops more
slowly than in man.

3. It develops in its full strength only after the commencement of
regular sexual intercourse.

4. The boundary beyond which sexual excess begins is less easily reached
than in man.

5. The sexual sphere has a greater extension, and is more diffusely
distributed than in man.

6. The spontaneous appearances of sexual desire have a marked tendency
to periodicity.[31]

7. The sexual impulse exhibits in woman greater variability, a greater
extent of variation, than in man--alike when we examine separate
feminine individuals, and when we compare the different phases in the
life of the same woman.

This great extension of the feminine sexual sphere is illustrated, for
example, by the case reported by Moraglia, of a woman who was able to
induce sexual excitement by the masturbation of fourteen different areas
of her body.

How much more woman is sexuality than man is can be observed in asylums,
where the conventional inhibitions are withdrawn. Here, according to
Shaw’s observations, the women greatly exceed the men in fluency,
malignity, and =obscenity=; and in this relation there is no difference
between the shameless virago from the most depraved classes of London
and the elegant lady of the upper circles. Noise, uncleanliness, and
sexual depravity in speech and demeanour, are much commoner in the
women’s wards of asylums than on the male side. In all forms of acute
mental disorder, according to Shaw, the sexual element plays a much more
prominent part in woman than in man.

Another experienced alienist, Dr. E. Bleuler, confirms this permeation
of woman with sexuality. In a recently published work he remarks:

  “The whole ‘career’ in the average woman depends on sexuality;
  marriage, or some equivalent of marriage, signifies to her what to man
  a position in business signifies--viz., her ambition in all relations,
  the happily conducted struggle for simple existence, as well as for
  pleasure and for all else that life can bring, and only after these,
  sexuality also, and the joy of having children. Not to marry, and also
  extra-conjugal sexual indulgence, induce in woman inevitable
  consequences, with strongly marked emotional colouring; to the average
  man all this is a trifling affair, or it may even be a matter of
  absolute indifference. And we have further to consider the limits
  imposed by our civilization, which make it impossible for the
  well-brought-up woman to live, and even to think, as she pleases in
  sexual matters, and which demand the actual suppression of sexual
  emotions, not merely of the outward manifestation of these emotions.
  Is it to be wondered at that in these circumstances, in mentally
  disordered women, we encounter once more the suppressed sexual
  feelings, those sexual feelings which really comprise at least half of
  our natural existence?--I say =at least= half, for the analogous
  impulse, the nutritive impulse, seems really to be inferior in
  strength to the sexual impulse, in civilized as well as in savage
  human beings.”

In the majority of cases the sexual frigidity of woman is, in fact,
apparent merely--either because behind the veil prescribed by
conventional morality, behind the apparent coldness, there is concealed
an ardent sexuality, or else because the particular man with whom she
has had intercourse has not succeeded rightly in awakening her erotic
sensibility, so complicated and so difficult to arouse.[32] When he has
succeeded in doing so, the sexual insensibility will in the majority of
cases disappear. A striking example of this is seen in the following
case:

  =Case of Temporary Sexual Anæsthesia.=--Girl twenty years of age.
  Early awakening of the sexual impulses. Already practised onanism at
  the age of five years; often for the sake of sexual stimulation
  introduced hairpins into the vagina, until one day one of these
  remained, and had to be removed by operation. Notwithstanding this,
  she soon resumed masturbation, using for this purpose a finger, a
  candle, etc. Ultimately this became a daily practice, which she
  continued until she was eighteen years of age. She then first had
  sexual intercourse with a man, in which, however, she remained quite
  cold; this was the case also in subsequent attempts with this man and
  with others. Finally she met a man with whom she was in sympathy, who
  succeeded in inducing in her sexual gratification, by exchange of
  rôles, and corresponding alteration in the position in intercourse.
  Later, intercourse in the normal position also induced complete sexual
  gratification; since then onanism has been entirely discontinued, and
  in coitus the orgasm occurs speedily in one or two minutes.

Where sexual frigidity in woman is enduring in character, we have to do
either with inherited influences, with sexual developmental inhibition,
the psycho-sexual infantilism of Eulenburg, or with some disease
(especially hysteria and other nervous disorders), and with the
consequences of habitual masturbation.

Speaking generally, the sexual sensibility of woman is, as we have seen,
of quite a different nature from that of man; but in intensity it is at
least as great as that of man.

  [24] The hermaphroditic idea of antiquity has repeatedly fascinated
  the human spirit. It certainly cannot be denied that something great
  and noble underlay this idea of overcoming sex. As long as eighty
  years before, Weininger and the modern apostles of bisexuality, Johann
  Michael Leupoldt, Professor of Medicine at the University of Erlangen,
  made the following prophecy: “_The reconciliation of the sexual
  contrast in every human individual will some day proceed so far_ that,
  dynamically understood, _with the general attainment of a kind of
  hermaphroditism_, humanity, having reached its earthly goal, will
  become totally extinct” (“Eubiotik oder Grundzüge der Kunst, als
  Mensch richtig, tüchtig, wohl und lang zu leben”--“Eubiotics, or
  Principles of the Art of Living as Man Rightly, Virtuously, Well, and
  Long,” pp. 232, 233; Berlin and Leipzig, 1828). This would amount to a
  kind of natural realization of E. von Hartmann’s ideal of conscious
  self-annihilation at the end of time!

  [25] G. Hirth, “Entropy of the Germinal System and Hereditary
  Enfranchisement,” pp. 89, 90 (Munich, 1900).

  [26] See note (^{36}), p. 94.

  [27] The “ulu” is a kind of knife used by Eskimo women.

  [28] _Cf._ in this connexion, Alice Salomon, “The Choice of a
  Profession for Girls”; Josephine Levy-Rathenau, “A Consideration of
  the Various Professions for Women, Qualifications and Prospects”;
  Elizabeth Altmann-Gottheiner, “A Study of Woman.” These are all
  published in “Das Buch vom Kinde” (“The Book of the Child”), edited by
  Adele Schreiber, Leipzig and Berlin, 1907, vol. ii., Div. 2, pp.
  182-188, 189-209, 210-216 (contains an abstract of the most important
  literature of the subject).

  [29] On this subject one of our most celebrated economists writes as
  follows: “Let us observe what to-day a good housewife of the middle
  class is able to get through in the way of domestic and hygienic
  activity, and of the education of children, and by means of the
  knowledge and employment of domestic machines; let us not overlook in
  what a one-sided way the great advances in natural science and in the
  mechanical arts have hitherto been devoted to the service of the great
  industries, what enormous economies are still possible if the same
  knowledge and intelligence are devoted to the amelioration of domestic
  service. Only the rough, barbarous housewife of the lower classes can
  say, ‘I have no more to-day to do in the house.’ When the mode of life
  is a healthy one, when to every dwelling-house is attached a garden,
  the housewife even to-day is fully occupied, and in the future will be
  still more so, notwithstanding all the schools that come to her
  assistance, all the shops, all the trades; notwithstanding all the
  products, including food-products, which nowadays she buys ready-made.
  And besides her domestic activity, she has to find time for lectures,
  for culture, for music, and for various socially useful
  activities--even women of quite the lower classes. Without this no
  social cure is possible.”--G. SCHMOLLER, “Elements of General Domestic
  Economy,” vol. i., p. 253 (Leipzig, 1901).

  THE SIMPLIFICATION OF HOUSEHOLD DUTIES.--English readers will find the
  questions briefly touched upon in this note--the enslavement of woman
  by an unceasing round of petty domestic toil, the necessity for
  devoting the same amount of finished intelligence to these domestic
  problems that has been devoted to “labour-saving” in most departments
  of masculine activity, and the lines on which future progress may be
  expected to move, bringing about in this way alone a much-needed
  “emancipation” of women--fully discussed by Mr. H. G. Wells in his
  sociological studies. See “Anticipations,” “Mankind in the Making,” “A
  New Utopia,” “In the Days of the Comet.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [30] Noteworthy is the following utterance of a clergyman regarding
  the sensuality of country girls: “Young women are in no way behind
  young men in the strength of their fleshly lusts; they are only too
  willing to be seduced--so =willing= that even older girls frequently
  give themselves to half-grown boys, and =girls give themselves to
  several men in brief succession=. Moreover, it is by no means always
  the young men by whom the seduction is effected. Often enough =it is
  the girls who lure the lads to sexual intercourse=, in which case they
  do not wait till the lads come to their rooms, but they go themselves
  to the young men’s bedrooms, or wait for them in their beds.”--C.
  WAGNER, “The State of Affairs as Regards Sexual Morality among the
  Evangelical Agricultural Population of the German Empire,” vol. i.,
  sec. 2, p. 213 (Leipzig, 1897).

  [31] E. Heinrich Kisch (“The Sexual Life of Woman,” English
  translation, Rebman, 1908) names the =ovaries= “regulators of the
  sexual impulse.” In the ovary, and in the periodical changes that
  occur in that organ, are to be found the fundamental cause, and the
  means of regulation, of the =sexual impulse=; in the clitoris is the
  seat of =voluptuous sensibility=.

  [32] Georg Hirth remarks very aptly (“Ways to Love,” Munich, 1906, p.
  570): “For it is the task of the man to summon his whole power of
  self-command, to employ all his skill, to take all the care in his
  power, that the woman may be, as one says, ‘ready.’ The man who thinks
  only of his own gratification, and who leaves his partner ungratified,
  is a brutal being, or, if not brutal, he is simply ignorant of the
  harm he is doing.... In general, the man has the _tempo_ of
  gratification much better and more securely under control than the
  woman; in many women, indeed, the sexual orgasm is very difficult to
  induce, and in such cases the man must help with skill and
  tenderness.”




