CHAPTER XXIV

OFFENCES AGAINST MORALITY FROM THE FORENSIC STANDPOINT.


  “_In view of the peculiar character of sexually perverse acts, or
  rather in view of the widely diffused interest in sexual questions and
  of the hypocrisy which seems inseparable from their consideration, it
  is easily comprehensible how to these acts there is commonly ascribed
  a forensic importance greater than that which properly attaches to
  them. And it is precisely this hypocrisy with which all questions
  connected with sexuality are treated on the public platform, which
  hinders a natural mode of regarding them, and renders so difficult an
  unprejudiced judgment regarding all the relevant facts._”--J. SALGÓ.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXIV

  Importance of sexual perversions to the State and to society --
  Exaggerated views regarding their injurious influence -- One-sided
  condemnation of them from the forensic-psychiatric standpoint -- Their
  wide diffusion among healthy individuals -- Protection against real
  injury to public and private interests from sexual offences -- Their
  frequency among diseased persons -- The idea of degeneration --
  Congenital taint and the stigmata of degeneration -- Significance of
  these stigmata -- Social causes of degeneration -- Significance of
  tattooing -- § 51 of the Criminal Code -- The idea of “diminished
  responsibility” -- Characterization of sexual emotions -- Other
  factors lessening responsibility (menstruation, etc.) -- Points of
  view in the punishment of acts of fornication with persons under age
  -- Value of the evidence of children in the law-courts -- The age of
  consent -- The condemnation and punishment of sexual offences.


CHAPTER XXIV

It is the evident duty of the State to protect society from certain
manifestations of the sexual impulse, occurring publicly in the form of
“=offences against morality=,” and whenever these manifestations
=interfere= with the persons and the rights of citizens. The sexual
impulse has been compared with a powerful stream, which, when confined
to its natural bed, is a never-ending source of blessing to the
surrounding country; but which, as soon as with elemental force it
overflows its banks and gives rise to widespread floods, is the cause of
unspeakable misery among the entire population.[673] This comparison
would be just if the facts were as stated. But, as I have already
pointed out, =as a whole=, sexual perversions have played a far smaller
part in the decadence of fallen nations than has hitherto been assumed.
The biological and economical history of civilization has taught us to
recognize numerous other influences, which, in such a process of
national decay, play at least as great a part as sexual “degeneration,”
and in many cases a much greater part than this. Frequently, indeed,
sexual perversions and unnatural modes of gratification of the sexual
impulse are =in the first place a consequence of economic and social
abnormalities=, and are intimately connected with the so-called social
problem. The above-named stream, to pursue the image, only trickles over
its banks here and there, without giving rise to any widespread and
devastating flood. And so long as these destructive tendencies are
wanting, the State has no right to take measures against sexual
perversions, or at most can justly do so only by dealing with their
social causes. In view of the extensive diffusion of sexual anomalies
among persons who in other respects are perfectly healthy, we must ask
ourselves whether the importance of these anomalies, in respect of the
offences against morality to which in certain circumstances they may
give rise, has not been overestimated. This idea has recently been put
forward by J. Salgó, in his valuable monograph, “The Forensic Importance
of Sexual Perversities” (Halle, 1907). I am more especially pleased to
find that this author shares the view which I have myself advocated for
years, that sexual perversities in the majority of cases are not
indications of “degeneration,” as has been assumed both by psychiatrists
and neurologists, especially under the influence of the doctrine of
Möbius, who pushed this idea much too far. Moreover, the late Jolly, in
his lectures to practising physicians upon sexual aberrations, expressly
maintained the justice of my view of sexual anomalies as an
anthropological phenomenon. With regard to the nature of sexual
perversions, psychiatric science will have greatly to modify its general
views, in order to attain an objective consideration of their
significance.

  “=Psychiatry=,” says Salgó (_op. cit._, pp. 37, 38), “=must not follow
  the decoy-call of the law (which has wandered into a blind alley), by
  endeavouring to cover with the mantle of specialist science the
  serious legal errors in the matter of perverse sexuality. The
  incontestable domain of psychiatric experience in forensic questions
  is already sufficiently large, and it needs no artificial extension.
  But it is an artificial extension to indicate as morbid all the
  aberrations of sexual activity, or any single one of such aberrations,
  in the absence of indubitable or demonstrable symptoms of physical
  disturbance, and in the absence of a clearly recognizable and abnormal
  course--simply because they contravene the existing criminal law.=”

The blind alley of psychiatry is the prison and the asylum. Because
psychiatry is principally concerned with those sexual perversities which
have criminal or psychiatric importance, with the =abnormalities= and
the =crimes= of the sexually perverse, psychiatric science failed to
recognize the extraordinarily wide diffusion of sexual perversions among
persons who are mentally and physically healthy. Among the healthy,
homosexuality, sadism, masochism, fetichism, etc., may make their
appearance in more or less severe forms; just as other “vicious habits”
may occur in the healthy, just as passionate tobacco-smoking, or
intoxication with any sport, may become =an ineradicable habit=, or at
least a =habit extremely difficult to eradicate=. Neither jurisprudence
nor psychiatry can be spared the accusation of having misled “public
opinion,” this terrible monster so often hostile to civilization, in
respect of sexual perversities, regarding whose nature recent scientific
research, and above all, anthropological research, has diffused a light.
=I am acquainted with a number of persons whose bodily and mental health
is excellent, persons who are, indeed, imposing in respect of their
primeval German racial force, who have assured me that they suffer from
the most severe sexual perversions!= Recall the description given on p.
584 of a masochistic “slave” of the most extreme type. I do not go so
far as Salgó, who demands for sexual anomalies, in so far as they are
not criminal, the same “right of existence” (p. 7) as for the normal
sexual impulse; but I do assert that sexual anomalies exist in
individuals who are in other respects perfectly healthy, and that they
do not always injure the personal health or the bodily and moral
well-being of another, as is the case with sexual perversions arising
upon a morbid foundation and attaining forensic importance. Above all, I
must sharply condemn the fashion of =glorifying= sexual perversities,
which have been regarded as a peculiar privilege of the highest mental
development, and as corresponding to an especial refinement of
sensibility. This assertion may be refuted by reference to the fact,
often mentioned before, that the most incredible and most artificial
sexual malpractices occur among savage races, who in this respect could
give points to our modern decadents and epicurean æsthetes. In any case,
sexual perversions in themselves have neither a moral nor a forensic
importance, and must be regarded as more or less biological variations
of the normal impulse.

Where, on the other hand, the =public= or =individual= interest is
injured by these perversions, the State has unquestionably the right of
intervention and the right of prevention. In every case in which we have
to do with the production of a public nuisance, with the bodily or
mental injury of other human beings, with the employment of force, with
the misuse of the lessened or absent responsibility of children, of
unconscious persons, of those asleep, and of those mentally disordered,
society must intervene in its own interest, and must take suitable
measures to protect itself against such offences. Now, it is
certain--and to have established this is an honour to psychiatric
science--that it is precisely these latter sexual =offences= which in
the great majority of cases are committed by =diseased= persons and by
those who are more or less =irresponsible=. Therefore, we are thoroughly
justified in demanding that in every such criminal case, the bodily and
mental condition of the accused should be subjected to a medical
examination. A typical mental disorder, such as imbecility, epilepsy,
alcoholic insanity, general paralysis of the insane, paranoia, etc.,
will be detected without difficulty, and thereby responsibility will at
once be excluded. More difficult are the =transitional= stages between
health and disease, the so-called “=borderland cases=,” the cases of
“psychopathically deficient responsibility” and of “disequilibrium.” In
forensic medicine two ideas play a very great part in this connexion,
that of “=degeneration=” and that of “=diminished responsibility=.”

Every sexually perverse person must be examined for signs of severe
hereditary taint, as well as for the so-called “stigmata of
degeneration.” If we can prove that in his family there have been
=several= instances of =severe= mental disorder, of alcoholism,
syphilis, diabetes, and other diseases leading to degeneration, the
suspicion that there is a psychopathic foundation for the sexual offence
is justified. But we must insist that congenital taint does not make
itself felt in every case, and cannot, therefore, always be made
responsible as a causal influence in the production of a sexual
perversion.[674]

The so-called “stigmata of degeneration” have importance only when they
are =very markedly= developed, and when =several= of them are
simultaneously present. We distinguish physical and mental _stigmata
degenerationis_. To the former belong disturbances and inhibitions of
development, malformations, such as asymmetry of the skull, narrowness
of the palate, hare-lip, cleft palate, anomalies of the teeth and the
hair, difficulties of speech, tic convulsif, abnormal and morbid states
of the genital organs and genital functions, and more especially
malformations of the ear, such as Morel’s ear (the complete or partial
absence of the helix or antihelix), the Darwinian pointed ear, etc.[675]

The mental degenerative phenomena comprise all that are known as
“bizarre or abnormal” characters; those who possess such characters are
termed “eccentrics” and “originals,” or are known as persons
“psychopathically below par” (J. L. A. Koch), as “disequilibrated”
(Eschle), as “superior degenerates” (Magnan). These phenomena comprise
peculiar disturbances of the harmony of the spiritual life,
characterized by lack of balance between emotion and intellect, as well
as by an abnormal irritability and undue reaction to stimulation. We may
find complete absence of ethical perception, so-called “moral insanity,”
of which E. Kraepelin and his school have proved that it may arise
secondarily as a sequel to certain mental disorders. Striking in these
unbalanced persons is the disharmony of the entire conduct of life, the
internal lack of the _point d’appui_, the unsteadiness, the suddenness
of their actions, which often occur under the influence of coercive
ideas and abnormal impulses, the abnormally early appearance and the
extraordinary intensity of the sexual impulse, the tendency to cruelty
(O. Rosenbach). In judging the personality of the degenerate as a whole,
we must always take into account the =entire course of life=, to which
only too often the remark of Stifter applies: “In his life we saw only
beginnings without continuations, and continuations without beginnings.”

On the other hand, we must not forget that many of the bodily stigmata
of degeneration occur also in healthy persons, and that the existence of
such stigmata in mentally disordered persons and in criminals may also
be referred to social causes, to bad conditions of life and deficient
nutriment, to alcoholism, syphilis, or rickets. For this reason P.
Näcke[676] rightly insists =that many of the so-called stigmata of
degeneration are socially produced=, and will therefore disappear with
the employment of a purposive social hygiene; he gives as an example the
rachitic bandy legs of English factory labourers. Therefore, for the
proof of degeneration, we must lay more stress upon =mental= stigmata,
upon abnormality of the spiritual personality, abnormality of its
intellectual and emotional character, and from this proceed to infer the
irresistible character of a morbid impulsive manifestation.

In addition to the study of the stigmata of degeneration, the study of
=tattooing= is of forensic importance in the consideration of the sexual
offences; the character and the date of the tattooing give sometimes
interesting information regarding the nature of the personality.

  Thus Lombroso[677] reports the case of an offender against morality,
  fifty years of age, with prominent ears and scanty growth of hair.
  This man ravished a girl of fifteen, whose mother was his mistress.
  =At the early age of fifteen= he had had the most obscene pictures
  tattooed upon his body; and upon inquiry he stated that he had begun
  to masturbate at the age of thirteen years, and had begun to have
  intercourse with women at the age of fifteen years. He denied the
  accusation of rape, and maintained that he had enjoyed the girl
  without using force. =His tattooing, however, gave evidence= of his
  capacity to commit sexual crime. The pictures served as a =certain and
  important proof of this=.

  This appeared even more clearly in the case of the ravisher Francesco
  Spiteri, published by Dr. F. Santangelo in 1892, =whose utterly
  immoral and sexually perverse mode of life was most wonderfully
  displayed and recorded by means of the tattooings by which his entire
  body was covered=. It will suffice here to allude to the drawing of a
  fish and of seven points upon his membrum. This indicated that his
  penis (Italian, _pesce_ = fish) since his youth had pædicated seven
  boys (= seven points)!

In the case of sexual offences we have to consider, in addition to the
question of degeneration, that of =diminished= or =entirely absent
responsibility=. In cases of unmistakable mental disorder,
responsibility does not exist, nor in epileptic confusional states, nor
in profound alcoholic intoxication.[678] Between complete
irresponsibility and complete responsibility there are numerous
transitional stages, which are all classified under the idea of
=diminished responsibility=. This fact is not recognized by § 51 of the
Criminal Code, which runs as follows:

  “A punishable offence has not been committed when the accused at the
  time the action was performed was in a state of unconsciousness, or in
  a state or morbid disturbance of mental activity, by means of which
  his freedom of will was excluded.”

In this we find the idea of “morbid disturbance of mental activity,”
which is definitely wider than the idea of mental disease, in so far as
it embraces transient mental disorders in persons who are not suffering
from definite mental disease; but it does not take into consideration
the even more important notion of diminished responsibility, which is
applicable to all the above described borderland states and transitional
conditions lying between mental health and mental disease. Häussler
(_op. cit._, p. 39) as long as eighty years ago demanded the recognition
of the idea of diminished responsibility--that is, of a condition “in
which responsibility for the action was =diminished= by an imperfectly
developed intelligence, without the disturbance of intellectual activity
being sufficiently great completely to abolish free voluntary
determination” (Aschaffenburg). Since that time, by the address given
on September 16, 1887, to the Association of German Alienists at
Frankfort on “diminished responsibility,” Jolly opened a discussion upon
this question. In this discussion the majority of German psychiatrists
recommended the legislative recognition of such an idea, among these
Wollenberg, Hoche, Cramer, Kirn, Aschaffenburg, von Schrenck-Notzing,
etc.[679]

In connexion with diminished responsibility we must distinguish between
=individuals= and =actions=. Among the individuals recognized above as
persons “psychopathically below par,” responsibility may be diminished
permanently and for a number of different actions; but in other cases
healthy normal individuals may exhibit diminished responsibility in
respect of =isolated actions=, when, for example, an =excessively strong
emotion=, or a state of =acute intoxication=, has for a certain time and
in relation to a particular action abrogated responsibility. In this
connexion, in addition to acute alcoholic intoxication, certain =sexual=
processes have especially to be considered. Häussler recognized the
influence of the sexual impulse upon responsibility, and considered that
certain actions performed under the influence of that impulse were
performed without complete responsibility, and he declared that the
voluptuary was a person whose mental health was imperfect.[680]
Forel[681] also regarded the “slaves of the sexual impulse” as mentally
abnormal, as individuals whose responsibility was diminished. I consider
it indisputable that sexual emotions, especially when they arise
suddenly, diminish responsibility, and limit, to some extent at least,
the freedom of voluntary determination. Regarding certain processes of
the _vita sexualis_, such as the epoch of =puberty= in both sexes,
regarding =menstruation=, =pregnancy=, and the =climacteric in women=,
this fact has been already generally recognized. It ought, however, to
be admitted regarding the sexual impulse in general, more especially
when the whole character of the action proves that it has been the
consequence of a suddenly arising powerful emotion. Von Krafft-Ebing
also is of this opinion.[682] It is, moreover, in most cases possible to
determine whether the offence was caused =only by a powerful sexual
emotion=, by means of which the intelligence and the freedom of the will
of a person, in other respects normally responsible, were temporarily
limited or completely arrested; or whether other motives intervened, so
that the action must be regarded as the result of conscious choice.

In conclusion, another point must be considered, which is related to the
question of sexual offences committed with children, and which possesses
forensic importance. This is the circumstance that in many such cases
there is no question of the “seduction” of children, but that, on the
contrary, the incitation =first= proceeded from the children themselves.
In the previous chapter we discussed the early appearance of sexual
activity in children. Moreover, in such cases we could distinguish
between a nobler and a grosser, more sensual love.

  As an example of the former, I may allude to the ardent, affectionate
  love of a girl of twelve for a thoroughly honourable man of forty
  years of age, who certainly had no idea of sexual intimacy with the
  child, and who was unable to free himself from her passionate
  caresses. We often observe such intimate inclinations on the part of
  young girls towards mature men, and we must be careful in such cases
  to avoid immediately thinking of pædophilic unchastity.

  In another case a mother complained that her daughter, seven years of
  age, was in continual pursuit of a boy of fourteen, and could not be
  cured of the affection.

  Maria Lischnewska reports (“Mutterschutz,” 1905, p. 155) the case of a
  boy, not yet six years of age, who drew up the nightgown of his
  foster-mother, and endeavoured to have intercourse with her.

The sexual offences committed by clergymen and tutors upon the girls
taught by them are apt to be seen in a different light when we subject
the youthful accuser to a strict cross-examination, and, in addition, to
a physical examination, whereby in many cases we bring to light the fact
that, long =before= the recent offence, they have been accustomed =of
their own free will= to have sexual relations with =other= men. Casper
long ago drew attention to these circumstances. Very often =from the
pupil herself proceed actual advances= of the worst kind, which have
proved ruinous to many a young teacher whose morals were previously
above reproach.

Finally, there is an important point which must not be forgotten: the
untrustworthy character of childish evidence, a matter which has
recently been discussed by the specialist Adolf Baginsky.[683] This
writer, whose knowledge of childish psychology is so profound, remarks:


  “The evidence given by children in the law-courts appears to those who
  are really familiar with the child mind to be =absolutely worthless=
  and =utterly devoid of importance=, and this is the more the case the
  more frequently the child repeats its statement, and the more firmly
  it sticks to its evidence.”

He alludes to the law of Sweden, according to which the child is not
competent to give evidence in a law-court before the completion of its
fifteenth year.

All these circumstances must be considered in relation to the question
of the so-called “=age of consent=.” M. Hirschfeld justly remarks that
the natural age of consent is equivalent to that at which a child is
competent to make a choice (“The Nature of Love,” p. 284). I consider
that the decision of the Italian Criminal Code is the best; by this Code
the age of consent for =both= sexes is placed at the conclusion of the
sixteenth year.

The majority of crimes committed from purely sexual motives belong to
the crimes of passion, in the sense of Ferris, and indeed to crimes
committed under the coercion of the most powerful of organic impulses. I
doubt whether the existing punishments are the most suitable for the
purpose for which they are designed. In any case, gentleness is here
above all demanded, and we should invoke the saying, “Judge not, that ye
be not judged!” Indeed, an evangelical minister[684] speaks truly when
he says:

  “=The enormous majority of men and women, who constitute themselves
  the judges of offences against morality, whilst they themselves take
  every opportunity of infringing the moral laws they profess to
  uphold--lie day after day, throughout their whole life--their position
  is built upon hypocrisy and lies.=”

It very rarely happens that a judge who condemns a thief or a murderer
has himself been guilty of this crime, but without doubt it frequently
happens that a judge condemns other men on account of sexual offences
which he has himself committed. In the case of =sexual crimes= we almost
always have to do with individuals to whom more good could be done by
=medical influence= than by imprisonment; we must entrust the physician
with the duty of protecting society against such offenders. “=In this
province, physicians will become the judges of the future=,” says M.
Hirschfeld most justly.[685] Until this end is attained, let us remind
German judges of an anecdote which I found in an old French
encyclopædia:[686]

  “A courtesan in Madrid killed her lover, on account of his
  unfaithfulness; she was condemned and brought before the king, from
  whom she hid nothing. The king said to her: ‘Thou hast loved =too
  much= to be a reasonable being.’”

  [673] E. Weisbrod, “Offences against Morality before the Law Courts,”
  p. 5 (Berlin and Leipzig, 1891). _Cf._, regarding offences against
  morality, in addition to the above-mentioned work of Tardieu, the
  interesting “Notes et Observations de Médecine Légale: Attentats aux
  Mœurs,” by H. Legludic (Paris, 1896); also P. Viazzi, “Sur Reati
  Sessuali” (Turin, 1896); L. Thoinot, “Attentats aux Mœurs et
  Perversions du Sens Génital” (Paris, 1898); Toulouse, “Les Délits
  Sexuels,” published in “Les Conflicts Intersexuels et Sociaux,” pp.
  318-326 (Paris, 1904). Regarding offences against morality from the
  forensic standpoint, see also the comprehensive work of Mittermaier,
  “Crimes and Offences against Morality” (Berlin, 1906), which contains
  a comparative account of the legislative enactments of the principal
  countries of Europe. In addition, consult J. Werthauer, “Offences
  against Morality in Large Towns” (Berlin, 1907).

  [674] _Cf._ Th. Ziehen, “Degeneratives Irresein,” in Eulenburg’s
  “Realenzyklopädie,” vol. v., p. 448 (Vienna, 1895); A. Hoche,
  “Handbook of Forensic Psychiatry,” p. 413.

  [675] _Cf._, in this connexion, P. Näcke, “The Value of the So-called
  Stigmata of Degeneration” (_Archives of Criminal Psychology_, May,
  1904), and “The Great Value of Certain Signs of Degeneration”
  (_Archives of Criminal Anthropology_, 1904, vol. xvi., pp. 181, 182).
  The most important, according to him, are stigmata of the head and of
  the genital system, on account of the relationships to the brain and
  to the reproductive organs. Disturbances of development of the auricle
  are not so important as those of the globe of the eye (absence of the
  iris, nystagmus, opacities of the lens, coloboma iridis, ptosis,
  microphthalmus, anophthalmus, colour-blindness, etc.). Penta has
  recently drawn attention to the importance and frequency of anomalies
  of the sexual organs in stuprators and in the sexually perverse (_cf._
  _Archives of Criminal Anthropology_, 1904, vol. xvi., p. 343; _cf._
  also the observations of Matthaes, quoted in note ^{490}, p. 477).

  [676] Paul Näcke, “Criminality and Insanity in Women,” pp. 154-156
  (Vienna and Leipzig, 1894).

  [677] C. Lombroso, “Recent Advances in the Study of Criminality,” pp.
  177, 178.

  [678] _Cf._ G. Aschaffenburg, “Responsibility in Mental Disease,”
  published in Hoche’s “Handbook of Forensic Psychiatry,” pp. 13-47.

  [On the question of “Responsibility in Mental Disease,” English
  readers will naturally refer to Maudsley’s classical work bearing this
  title, published in the International Scientific Series.--TRANSLATOR.]

  [679] _Cf._ A. von Schrenck-Notzing, “The Question of Diminished
  Responsibility, etc.,” published in “Crimino-Psychological and
  Psychopathological Studies,” pp. 76-101 (Leipzig, 1902).

  [680] Häussler, _op. cit._, p. 39.

  [681] A. Forel, “The Responsibility of Normal Human Beings,” p. 21
  (Munich, 1901).

  [682] Von Krafft-Ebing, “Psychopathia Sexualis,” p. 331.

  [683] Adolf Baginsky, “The Impressionability of Children under the
  Influence of their Environment,” published in _Medizinische Reform_,
  edited by Rudolf Lennhoff, 1906, Nos. 43, 44 (especially pp. 533,
  534).

  [684] “Another Conventional Lie: Studies concerning Love, Marriage,
  and Morality,” by an Evangelical Clergyman, p. 7 (Leipzig).

  [685] Kraepelin (“The Question of Diminished Responsibility,”
  published in the _Monatschrijt für Kriminal-Psychiatrie_, 1904, No. 8)
  pleads that the necessity for imprisonment should be determined, not
  by judges, but by medical “crimino-pedagogues,” and he demands “places
  of secure restraint” (“Sicherungsanstalten”), differing in character
  from ordinary prisons, for the detention of criminals whose
  responsibility is diminished. Similarly, P. Näcke (“The So-called
  Moral Insanity,” p. 60; Wiesbaden, 1902), considers that the prison
  should be transformed into a kind of “hospital and educational
  institution.”

  [686] “Encyclopediana ou Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des Ana,” p. 59
  (Paris, 1701).




