CHAPTER II

THE SECONDARY PHENOMENA OF LOVE (BRAIN AND SENSES)


“_From these considerations it follows that man, in the course of his
phylogenetic development extending through lengthy geological periods,
has lost numerous advantages; and the question arises whether, in
exchange for these, he may not also have gained certain other
advantages. Such must, indeed, have been the case if the human species
was to remain capable of survival. There has been a_ process of
exchange, _by means of which man has gained an equivalent for all the
qualities he has lost. And the gain consists in the_ unlimited
plasticity of his brain. _By this he is fully compensated for the loss
of the large and long series of advantages which his remote predecessors
possessed._”--R. WIEDERSHEIM.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER II

  The secondary phenomena of sexuality -- Their connexion with the
  nervous system and the sense organs -- The brain as criterion of human
  sexuality -- Its development proportional to the retrogression of
  other parts -- Example of the organ of smell and of the mammary glands
  -- Relative retrogression of the female clitoris -- Variation of the
  female genital organs -- Reduction of the hairy covering of the skin
  -- Theory regarding the origin of the comparative baldness of the
  human species -- Assumed connexion with climate -- With dentition --
  Influence of artificial clothing -- The hygienic and æsthetic
  significance of the loss of hair -- The reason why the axillary and
  pubic hair have been retained -- Sexual influence of the hair of these
  regions and of the hair of woman’s head -- Gradual retrogression of
  the male beard -- The change of bodily type under the influence of the
  brain -- The way of the spirit in love -- The pure instinctive in the
  sexuality of primitive man -- His lack of the idea, “love” -- Analogy
  of this state among the lower classes of the present day --
  Periodicity of the sexual impulse in the time of primitive man --
  Periodicity amongst savage races of to-day -- The researches of Fliess
  and Swoboda -- The twenty-three day “masculine” and the twenty-eight
  day “feminine” periods -- Menstruation -- A peculiarity of the human
  female -- The origin of enduring love in mankind -- Love rendered more
  enduring by the spirit -- Kant’s views on the subject -- Hypothesis of
  W. Rheinhard and Virey -- The complication of the sexual impulse
  through sensory stimuli -- Buddha’s speech to the monks -- The
  prepotency of the higher senses -- The sense of touch -- The skin as
  an organ of voluptuous sensation -- Erogenic areas of skin -- The kiss
  -- Its erotic significance -- An Arabian poet (Sheik Nefzawi) on this
  subject -- Burdach’s definition of the kiss -- The kiss on the
  boundary-line between erotism and actual sexual enjoyment -- The
  origin of the kiss -- The primitive elements of contact, licking and
  biting -- Its connexion with the nutritive impulse -- European origin
  of the kiss of contact -- The smelling kiss of the Mongols -- The kiss
  and sexuality -- Voltaire’s genito-labial nerve -- The sense of taste
  and sexuality -- The preponderant importance of the higher senses in
  the love of civilized man -- The beautiful explanation of Herder --
  Liberation from the material in the higher senses -- The sense of
  sight as the true æsthetic sense -- Beauty as the product of love --
  Its perception by the sense of sight -- Rôle of the sense of hearing
  in love -- The investigations of Darwin -- The voice as a sexual lure
  -- The rhythmical repetition of alluring sounds -- Origin of song and
  music -- Greater susceptibility of women to impressions received
  through the sense of hearing -- The charm of woman’s voice -- An
  experience of the natural philosopher Moreau.


CHAPTER II

As we have learnt in the first chapter, the primitive phenomenon of
sexual attraction and reproduction, the conjugation of the male and the
female germinal cells, persists unaltered in man as the most important
part of the act of procreation; but this process of “fusion-love”
derived by inheritance from unicellular organisms, is associated in man
with a number of new secondary physical and psychical phenomena of
sexuality. This inevitably results from the nature of the human organism
as a cell society, from the development of man as one of the order of
mammalia, and finally from man’s elevation above the other mammalia as a
being of enormously enhanced brain powers. The complex of these
secondary physical and psychical phenomena of love, dependent upon the
process of evolution, has, as we have already said, been denoted by W.
Bölsche by the apt name of “distance-love,” which he thus distinguishes
from the primary elemental phenomenon of “fusion-love.” These superadded
elements play an extremely important part in human civilization, and,
indeed, actually characterize that civilization which is in no way
dependent on the primitive qualities shared by man with plants and lower
animals.

This secondary sexuality of mankind is, in correspondence with the
differentiation of the various organs of his body, extremely
complicated, and it is by no means solely dependent upon the structure
of the special =reproductive= or =copulatory= organs; it is also
intimately connected with other parts of the body, and more especially
with the sense organs and the nervous system. Thus it has accommodated
itself to all the external influences to which the species has been
subjected in the long course of its development history. We may say that
the =criterion, the characteristic mark of distinction between the human
body and that of the lower animals, is also the distinctive differential
characteristic between human sexuality and that of the lower animals=.
And this criterion is the =brain=.

The present physical and mental constitution of man is the result of an
evolutionary process, of which the most marked characteristic has been a
continually more rapid increase in the size and complexity of the brain.
Phylogeny and ontogeny clearly demonstrate the evolution of the human
body from lower states to higher, the slow but sure improvement in the
direction of a continual enlargement and increasing convolution of the
brain, which has by no means yet attained finality, but which may be
expected to continue into the far-distant future; and associated with
this physical development will undoubtedly proceed an equally extensive
improvement in the quality of human consciousness.

This progressive development of the brain has resulted in a
retrogression and arrest of development of other parts and organs, and
among these some more or less closely associated with the sexual
functions, and originally of considerable importance. Gegenbaur, in his
“Anatomy,” and Wiedersheim, in his interesting work on “The Structure of
Man as Bearing Witness to his Past,” recognize in the unlimited
plasticity of the human brain the sole cause of the arrest of
development and retrogressive metamorphosis of many organs and functions
which persist in other members of the animal kingdom.

In the sexual life, also, in correspondence with this preponderating
development of the brain, purely psychical elements continually play a
larger part, whilst parts and functions at one time intimately related
to sexuality have undergone atrophy. Thus, as we have already pointed
out, the human organ of smell had unquestionably in earlier times much
greater significance in relation to the _vita sexualis_ than it has at
the present day. Wiedersheim shows that in the ancestors of the human
race this organ was much more extensively developed, and that it must
now be regarded as in a state of atrophy. The mammary glands, the
original function of which was perhaps the production of odoriferous
substances, but which later became devoted solely to the secretion of
milk, existed in our ancestors in a larger number than in the present
human race. This is clearly shown by the fact that the human embryo
normally exhibits a “hyperthelia,” an excess of breasts, of which,
however, two only normally undergo development; moreover, the breasts of
the male, which are now in a state of arrested development, were
formerly better developed, and served, like those of the female, the
purpose of nourishing the offspring. These facts are clearly explicable
on the assumption that at one time the number of offspring at a single
birth was considerable, and that in this way the preservation of the
species was favoured (Wiedersheim).

It is a very interesting fact that the principal “organ of
voluptuousness” in women, the clitoris, is notably diminished in size
absolutely and relatively as compared with the clitoris of apes. It
certainly no longer represents an organ so susceptible to voluptuous
stimulation and excitement as it was assumed to be by the older
physicians and physiologists; so that, for example, Van Swieten, the
celebrated body physician of the Empress Maria Theresa, recommended
_titillatio clitoridis_ as the most certain means of curing the sexual
insensibility of his royal patient.

Moreover, the common variations in the external configuration of the
female genital organs, which Rudolf Bergh has very fully and minutely
described in his “Symbolæ ad Cognitionem Genitalium Externorum
Femineorum,” are largely dependent on such arrests of development,
which, indeed, occur also in the male.

A very remarkable phenomenon in the course of human evolution has been
the =diminution in the hairy covering of the body=. As compared with the
other mammalia, especially those most nearly allied to man--the
anthropoid apes--man is relatively bald. This baldness has been
=gradually acquired=, and seems likely to progress further in the
future. Numerous hypotheses have been propounded regarding the purpose
and true cause of this progressive atrophy of the hairy covering which
originally extended over the entire surface of the body. The effect of
tropical climate will not suffice to account for the change, for in the
tropics the hairy covering is useful for a covering against the rays of
the sun--witness the thick hairy coat of the tropical apes. More apt is
the idea of sexual selection, advanced by Darwin in explanation of the
loss of hair. According to this theory, the comparatively balder women
were preferred by the men to those with a thicker covering of hair.
Helbig raises the objection that primitive man in sexual intercourse
would observe only the genital organs and the parts in their immediate
neighbourhood. Yet in this region the sexually mature woman has retained
a portion of the hairy covering of the body. We must therefore, in order
to rescue the idea of sexual selection as an explanation of the
increasing baldness of the human race, assume that primitive man had
cultivated æsthetic tastes, and was not an extremely sensual person, and
that in his choice of a partner he would be guided by the appearance of
the woman’s entire body. This, however, is a very questionable
assumption. Very doubtful also is the suggested connexion between
largely developed dentition and the baldness of the skin (Helbig). More
apposite is W. Bölsche’s view that the atrophy of the human hairy
covering is related to the adoption of an =artificial covering=. Since
that time the thick hairy covering of the skin was felt to be
burdensome, since it hindered perspiration beneath the clothing, and
also favoured the harbouring of parasites, fleas, lice, etc., which play
so large a part in the annoyance of all hair-covered mammals. In these
circumstances bareness of skin became an ideal to primitive man. By
rubbing away the hair beneath the clothes, by cutting it short, and by
pulling it out by the roots, an artificial baldness was produced; this
then became an ideal of beauty. Thus it happened in the choice of a
partner that those individuals less hairy than others were preferred,
and thus gradually by this process of sexual selection the race became
continually less hairy, until ultimately the relative baldness of the
present day was attained.

In certain parts of the body, especially in the armpits and in the
neighbourhood of the external genital organs, the thick hairy covering
has been retained. This may, perhaps, be dependent upon the fact that
from the axillary and pubic hair certain erotic stimuli proceed, more
especially certain odours. In fact, it is possible that the hair of
those regions in which strong-smelling secretions were produced have
played the part of scent-sprinklers, analogous to the “perfume brushes”
of butterflies.

In a similar way, the preservation of an exceptionally rich development
of the hair of a woman’s head may be explained by the fact that
therefrom erotically stimulating odours unquestionably proceed. This
circumstance has influenced sexual selection in the direction of the
preservation and continual increase in the length of the hair of a
woman’s head; while, in the opposite direction, and equally by the
process of sexual selection, the female body has been much more fully
deprived of hair than that of the male.

It seems, however, that this process of loss of hair is not yet
completed. The male beard has already ceased to play the part of a
sexual lure, which it formerly undoubtedly possessed. Schopenhauer’s
opinion, that with the advance of civilization the beard will disappear,
probably represents the truth; he regarded shaving as a sign of the
higher civilization. It is certainly a logical postulate of the natural
course of development.[4]

Havelock Ellis, in “Man and Woman,” comes to the conclusion that the
bodily development of our race is a progress in the direction of a
youthful type. This is merely another way of expressing the fact that
in the case of many organs and systems, and more especially in the case
of the hairy covering of the skin, an arrest of development has
occurred, and it is a recognition of the fact that the retrogressive
metamorphosis of these organs is a compensation for the dominating and
enormous development of the brain.

Parallel with this development of the brain there has occurred a
progressive development of sexuality from the lowest animal instinct to
the highest human “love.” The way of the spirit in love becomes
predominant _pari passu_ with the development of mankind in
civilization. There is a profound meaning in the saying of Schopenhauer
that the transformation of the sexual impulse into passionate love
represents the victory of the intelligence over the will. And when
another writer of genius has described the history of civilization as
the history of the progress of mankind from nearer to =more remote=,
more spiritual stimuli of pleasure, this is above all true of human
love.

In lower states of human love these spiritual elements are undoubtedly
wanting. Amongst primitive men the manifestations of sexuality can have
differed in no wise from those of the animals most nearly related to
them. Their love was still a pure animal instinct. The Asiatic myth
which divided the earliest periods of human history in this way,
asserting that the inhabitants of paradise loved for thousands of years
merely by means of glances, later by a kiss, by simple physical contact,
until ultimately they underwent a “fall” through adopting the debased
methods of common animal sexual indulgence--this infantile mythology
would be accurate enough if one inverted the series of stages in the
evolution of love.

This view is confirmed by the fact that, according to the most recent
investigation into the history of primitive man, it is extremely
probable that to palæolithic man of the earlier diluvial period the idea
of the spiritual was still completely unknown--that palæolithic man was,
in fact, purely a creature of impulse--an opinion already maintained by
Darwin in his work on the “Descent of Man.” In the sexual instinct,
above all, every dualistic division into physical and spiritual was
entirely foreign to primitive man. The more primitive the state of
civilization, the less is the idea “love” known, a fact first
established by Lubbock. Even at the present day, in regard to this
matter, there is a notable difference between the upper and the lower
classes in a European civilized community. For example, Elard Hugo
Meyer, in his excellent “Deutsche Volkskunde” (“German Folk-lore,” p.
152; Strasburg, 1898), states that from Eastern Friesland to the Alps
amongst the common people the word “love,” to us so indispensable and so
exalted, is entirely unknown; in its place words expressing rather the
sensual side of the impulse are employed.

Rousseau suggested that primitive man embraced primitive woman only in
the fugitive moments of domination by his instinctive impulse. It is no
doubt very probable that primæval man shared with other animals the
periodicity of the sexual impulse; this periodicity disappeared only in
the subsequent course of human development, and traces of it yet remain.
It is probable that this periodicity of the sexual impulse was
associated with variations in the supply of nutriment, and was thus, as
Darwin assumes, a kind of natural obstacle to too rapid an increase in
the population. Later, in consequence of an increase in individual
security, and of a more enduring supply of abundant nutriment, such
periodic rutting ceased to occur, or was preserved only in the form of
menstruation (ovulation) in women, in whom at this period there is a
perceptible increase in sexual excitability. =Among savage races this
periodicity of the sexual impulse, its increase at definite seasons of
the year, is still clearly manifested even in the male.= Heape and
Havelock Ellis have carefully studied this primitive phenomenon, and
have adduced numerous proofs of its truth.[5]

Only the human female experiences true “menstruation”; that is to say,
only in women is the maturation of the ovum accompanied by a monthly
discharge of blood from the genital passage. The so-called menstruation
of female apes is limited to a periodic swelling of the external
genital organs, with a mucous discharge therefrom. According to
Metchnikoff, the menstruation of apes constitutes the intermediate stage
between the rutting of the lower animals and the menstruation of the
human female. This latter is a new acquisition, the purpose of which is
perhaps the limitation of fertility and the prevention of the
excessively early marriage of girls.

With the advanced development of the brain, the old periodic rutting, of
which rudiments still persist, became more and more subordinate to the
conscious will, was transformed more and more into enduring love.
Charles Letourneau writes:

  “If we go to the root of the matter, we find that human love is in its
  essence merely the rutting season in a reasoning being; it increases
  all the vital forces of the human being, just as rutting increases
  those of the lower animals. If love apparently differs enormously from
  rutting, this is merely due to the fact that the reproductive impulse,
  the most primitive of all impulses, becomes in developed nerve centres
  more diffuse in its sphere of operations, and thus in man awakens and
  excites a whole province of psychical life which is entirely unknown
  to the lower animals.”

Philosophers and scientific observers have defined the distinction
between human and animal love as consisting in the fact that man can
love at all times, the animal periodically only; but this distinction
certainly does not apply to the beginnings of human development; it
originates beyond question with the =first appearance of the spiritual
element in love=. This alone makes man capable of enduring love, this
alone frees him from dependence upon periodic rutting seasons. The
=prolongation= of love by the introduction of the spiritual element was
already pointed out by Kant, whose writings (especially the lesser ones)
are rich in valuable observations of a similar kind. In his treatise
published in 1786, “The Probable Beginning of Human History,” he says
regarding the sexual instinct:

  “Reason, as soon as it had become active, did not delay to exert its
  influence also in the sexual sphere. Man soon discovered that the
  stimulus of sex, which in animals depended merely on a transient and
  for the most part periodic impulse, was in his own case =capable of
  prolongation, and indeed of increase, by the force of imagination=.
  This influence works more moderately, it is true, but with more
  persistence and more evenness the more the affair is withdrawn from
  the dominion of the senses, so that the satiety produced by the
  gratification of a purely animal passion is avoided.”

This important question regarding the origin of the love of human beings
as contrasted with the periodic instinct of the lower animals and
primitive man has hitherto, strangely enough, hardly received any
attention, notwithstanding the fact that it is one of the most important
evolutionary problems in the history of human civilization, and
represents to a certain extent the only problem in the primitive history
of love.

The =principal= cause of the perennial nature of human love, as
contrasted with the periodic character of the sexual impulse of the
lower animals, must, as Kant says, be sought in the appearance of these
psychical relations between the sexes. Hypotheses such as that put
forward by Dr. W. Rheinhard in his book, “Man considered as an Animal
Species, and his Impulses,” according to which the prolonged
=separation= of the sexes, consequent on the increased difficulty in the
provision of sufficient nutriment (more especially in the Ice Age), led
to an incomplete satisfaction of the sexual impulse during the rutting
season, and thus gave rise to an =enduring= sexual excitement, cannot be
treated seriously. The same author suggests that the excessive
=consumption of meat= of the Ice Age, owing to the absence of vegetable
food, was responsible for the stronger stimulation of the sexual
impulse, and for its prolongation beyond the rutting season.

Unquestionably Kant’s explanation is the only true one; it is the one
which Schiller had in his mind when in his essay on the connexion
between the animal and the spiritual nature of man, he spoke of the
happiness of the animals as of such a kind that

  “it is dependent merely upon the periods of the organism, and these
  are subject to chance, to blind hazard, because this happiness rests
  solely on sensation.”

The sexual love of primitive man was, like this, purely instinctive and
impulsive.

For him, beginning, course, and end, of every love-process was “directly
=linear=, with no to-and-fro oscillations into the indefinite province
of the transcendental.” The need for love and the satisfaction of that
need were in primitive man entirely limited to the physical process of
sexual activity (L. Jacobowski, “The Beginnings of Poetry,” p. 84).

It was the interpenetration of the whole of sexuality with spiritual
elements which first interrupted this single line of sensation, making
in a sense two lines: hence arose the frequently unhappy dualism between
body and mind in our experience of love; and yet at the same time it was
the cause of the elevation of human love to purely =individual=
feelings, which, extending far beyond the purposes of reproduction,
subserved the spiritual demands of the loving individual himself.[6]

Natural science, and especially the doctrine of descent, have shown that
in the higher animal world, to which we have proved primitive man
belongs, a =complication= of the sexual impulse exists as compared to
this condition in lower forms; this complication consists mainly in the
intimate association of =sensory stimuli= with the sexual impulse. In a
speech to monks, reported in the Pali Canon, Buddha has well described
the sexual part played by the various senses:

  “I do not know, young men, any other =form= which fetters the heart of
  man like a woman’s form.

  “A woman’s form, young men, fetters the heart of man.

  “I do not know, young men, any other =voice= which fetters the heart
  of man like the voice of woman.

  “The voice of woman, young men, fetters the heart of man.

  “I do not know, young men, any other =odour= which fetters the heart
  of man like the odour of woman.

  “The odour of woman, young men, fetters the heart of man.

  “I do not know, young men, any other =taste= which fetters the heart
  of man like the taste of woman.

  “The taste of woman, young men, fetters the heart of man.

  “I do not know, young men, any =touch= which fetters the heart of man
  like the touch of woman.

  “The touch of woman, young men, fetters the heart of man.”

Then there follows, in the same rhythmical form, an enumeration of the
sexual stimuli emanating from woman through eye, ear, smell, taste, and
touch.

Associated with the progress towards “love” of this sexual impulse
enriched by sensory stimuli was a =preponderance=, a prevalence, of
certain particular sensory stimuli. Herein are certainly to be found the
beginnings of a spiritualization of purely animal instincts and
impulses.

The most important part in the amatory life of man is played, even at
the present day, by the sense of touch, and by the two higher senses,
sight and hearing, these two latter containing so many spiritual
elements.

The =sense of touch= is more widely extended in space than the other
senses, and for this reason touch is quantitatively the most excitable
of the senses. The stimulation of the sensory nerves of the skin, the
enormous number of which suffices to explain the richness of sensation
through the skin, experienced as touch, tickling, or slight pain,
transmits very similar sensations to the voluptuous sensorium. The
relationship between these various modes of sensation is confirmed by
the fact that the terminals of the sensory nerves of the skin, the
so-called corpuscles of Vater or Pacini, closely resemble in structure
the corpuscles of Krause found on the glans penis and glans clitoridis,
on the prepuce of the clitoris, the labia majora, and on the papillæ of
the red margin of the lip. From this point of view, the entire skin may
be regarded as a huge organ of voluptuous sensation, of which the skin
of the external organs of conjugation is most strongly susceptible to
stimulation.

Mantegazza therefore describes sexual love as a higher form of tactile
sensation. In human beings of a baser disposition love is no more than a
touch. Between the chaste stroking of the hair and the violent storm of
the sexual orgasm there is a quantitative, but not a qualitative
difference. The sense of touch is a profoundly sexual sense, which at
the present day plays much the same part as was in primitive times
played by the sense of smell.

  “The skin,” says Wilhelm Bölsche, “became the great procurer, the
  dominant intermediary of love, for the multicellular animals, in which
  complete conjugation of the cell bodies had become impossible, so that
  their sexual gratification had to be obtained by distance-love, by
  contact-love. Thus the skin was the primitive area of voluptuous
  sensation, the arena of the supreme bodily triumph of this
  distance-love.”

It has been well said that the first intentional touching of a part of
the skin of the loved one is already a half-sexual union; and this view
is confirmed by the fact that such intimate bodily contacts, even when
they occur between parts far distant from sexual organs, very speedily
lead to states of marked excitement of these organs. Quite rightly,
therefore, the pleasurable sensations aroused by means of cutaneous
sensibility are regarded by Magnus Hirschfeld as the stages of
transition along which the power of self-command and the capacity for
resisting the impulses arising out of the transformation of sensory
perceptions into movements and actions most commonly break down. He who
avoids these first contacts, best protects himself against the danger
of being overpowered by his sexual impulse, and of blindly following
where that impulse leads--if, for example, he wishes to avoid
intercourse with a person whom he suspects to be suffering from some
venereal disease.

Areas of skin more especially susceptible to sexual stimulation, the
so-called erogenic areas, are those parts of the body where skin and
mucous membrane meet--above all therefore the lips, but also the region
of the anus, the female genital organs, and the nipples of the female
breast. That in certain circumstances even the eye may be an erogenic
zone is shown by the remarkable observation of Dr. Emil Bock, that in
many female patients a gentle inunction of Pagenstecher’s ointment into
the eye gives rise to changes of countenance showing that a sexual
orgasm is occurring.

The contact of the lips in the =kiss= is one of the most powerful
stimuli of love.[7] An Arabian author of the sixteenth century (Sheikh
Nefzawi) in his work, “The Perfumed Garden,” an Arabian _ars amandi_,
alludes to this fact. He quotes the verses of an Arabian poet:

  “When the heart burns with love,
   It finds, alas, nowhere a cure;
   No witch’s magic art
   Will give the heart that for which it thirsts;
   The working of no charm
   Will perform the desired miracle;
   And the most intimate embrace
   Leaves the heart cold and unsatisfied--
   If the rapture of the kiss is wanting.”

The physiologist Burdach, influenced by the then dominant natural
philosophy of Schelling, defined the kiss as “the symbol of the union of
souls,” analogous to “the galvanic contact between a positively and a
negatively electrified body; it increases sexual polarity, permeates the
entire body, and if impure transfers sin from one individual to the
other.” Goethe has very perspicuously described sexual union in a kiss:

  “Eagerly she sucks the flames of his mouth:
   Each is conscious only of the other.”

And Byron writes:

  “A long, long kiss, a kiss of youth and love,
   And beauty, all concentrating like rays
   Into one focus kindled from above;
   Such kisses as belong to early days,
   Where heart and soul and sense in concert move,
   And the blood’s lava, and the pulse a blaze,
   Each kiss a heart-quake--for a kiss’s strength,
   I think it must be reckoned by its length.”

It is therefore a true saying, that a woman who permits a man to kiss
her will ultimately grant him complete possession.[8] Moreover, by the
majority of finely sensitive women the kiss is valued just as highly as
the last favour.[9]

The problem of the =origin= of the kiss, which Scheffel, in his book
(“Trompeter von Säckingen”), has treated in humorous verse, has recently
been investigated by the methods of natural science. The lip kiss is
peculiar to man and in him the impulse to kiss is not innate, but has
been gradually developed, and the kiss has only acquired by degrees a
relation to the sexual sphere.

Havelock Ellis has recently made an interesting investigation regarding
the origin of the kiss, and has proved that the love kiss has developed
from the primitive maternal kiss and from the sucking of the infant at
the maternal breast,[10] which are customary in regions where the sexual
kiss is unknown. Both the sense of touch and the sense of smell play a
part in this primitive kiss, and to simple contact primitive man
superadded both licking and biting. This primitive physiological sadism
of the biting kiss was probably inherited from the lower animals, which
when copulating often bite one another (Kleist in “Penthesilea” writes
“Küsse”--kissing--rhymes with “Bisse”--biting). Earlier authors--as, for
example, Mohnike, in his admirable essay on the sexual instinct--have
inferred from the existence of these passionate accompaniments of the
kiss that the latter has an intimate connexion with the nutritive
impulse. We have indeed the familiar expression, “I could eat you for
love.” Indeed, according to Mohnike, the frenzy of the wild kisses of
passionate love may actually lead to anthropophagy, as in a case
reported by Metzger, in which a young man on his wedding night actually
bit and began to devour his wife. Although in this case we doubtless
have to do with an insane individual, such sadistic feelings in a lesser
degree are so often observed in association with kissing that they may
be regarded as physiological.[11]

In the novel “Hunger,” by Knut Hamsun, the author describes a peculiar
relationship between hunger and the _libido sexualis_. Georg Lomer also,
in the beginning of his thoughtful work, “Love and Psychosis”
(Wiesbaden, 1907), expresses the opinion that hunger and love are not
opposites, but that one is rather the completion, the larval state, or
the sublimation, of the other. In certain species of spiders the male
runs the danger, when performing his share in sexual congress, of being
actually devoured by the stronger female.

The kiss by contact between the lips or neighbouring parts of the skin
is of European origin, and even here is a comparatively recent practice,
for the ancients very rarely allude to it. Its erotic significance was
early pointed out by Indian, Oriental, and Roman poets. Amongst the
Mongol races the so-called olfactory kiss (“smell-kiss”) is in much more
common use. In this the nose is apposed to the cheek of the beloved
person, and the expired air and the odour arising from the cheek are
inhaled.

With the diffusion of European civilization, the European kiss of
contact has also been diffused. It is no longer possible to determine
whether the peculiar connexion between the lips and the genital organs,
as manifested for example by the growth of hair on the upper lip at
puberty in the male sex, and also by the well-known thick “sensual” lips
often seen in individuals with exceptionally powerful sexual impulses,
is originally primary, or merely a secondary result of the employment of
the lips in a sexual caress.[12]

To our consideration of the kiss we may naturally append a few remarks
on the rôle of the =sense of taste= in human love. Inasmuch as taste is
almost invariably closely connected with smell, we are rarely able to
prove in an individual case whether an impression of taste or an
impression of smell more powerfully affects the _vita sexualis_. In
kissing, an unconscious tasting of the beloved person seems often to
play a part; and as regards the kissing of other parts of the body,
especially the genital organs, at the acme of sexual excitement this
undoubtedly often occurs. In Norwegian folk-tales, and in a South
Hungarian song published by Friedrich S. Krauss, this tasting of the
woman is very realistically described. The taste for sweets has also
been largely associated with sexuality. Children who are fond of sweets,
who have, as it is called, a sweet tooth, are also sensually disposed,
sexually more excitable, and more inclined to the practice of onanism,
than other children. The sensory impulses have therefore been classified
as the hunger impulse and the sexual impulse respectively. A certain
amount of truth appears to lie in these observations.

Much greater influence than these lower senses possess is exerted in the
sexual sphere on modern civilized man by the higher, truly
=intellectual= senses, =sight= and =hearing=. With the adoption of the
upright posture they gained an advantage over the sense of smell and
taste.

In his work “Ideas Concerning the Philosophy of Human History” Herder
writes:

  “In the beginning all the senses of man had but a small area of
  action, and =the lower senses were more active than the higher=. We
  see this among savages of the present day: smell and taste are their
  guides, as they are in the case of the lower animals. But when man is
  raised above the earth and the undergrowth, smell is no longer in
  command, but the eye: it has a wider kingdom, and accustoms itself
  from early childhood to the finest geometry of lines and colours. The
  ear, deeply placed beneath the projecting skull, has closer access to
  the inner chamber for the collection of ideas, whilst in the lower
  animals the ear stands upright, and in many is so formed as to point
  in the direction of the sound.”

Smell, taste, and even touch, have but little æsthetic value as compared
with the two higher senses, because in the former the material
preponderates too greatly, and because they are more closely related
with the pure animal impulses than are sight and hearing. Johannes
Volkelt, in his valuable work “Æsthetics,” has carried on an interesting
investigation of this question, and comes to the conclusion that in
sight and hearing perception proceeds without any trace of the material;
in touch and taste, on the other hand, the material enormously
predominates, whilst smell stands between. Schiller wrote:

  “In the case of the eye and the ear the surrounding matter is rejected
  by the senses; for this reason, these two senses give the freest
  æsthetic enjoyment unalloyed with animal lust.”

The sense of sight is a true æsthetic sense in relation to the _vita
sexualis_; it is the first messenger of love. By means of this sense,
colour and form become sexual stimuli: by the sense of sight the entire
impression of the beloved personality is first conveyed; sympathy and
sexual attraction are almost always at first dependent upon sight. In
regard to love’s choice, sight is unquestionably the sense of the
greatest importance.

According to researches guided by the light of the modern doctrine of
evolution, we can no longer doubt that the beauty of the living world is
intimately connected with the sexual life, and is indeed by this first
called into being. All beauty is, to use the words of Darwin and P. J.
Möbius, “love become capable of perception,” and, let us ourselves add,
love become capable of perception by means of the sense of sight. The
figure, the carriage, the gait, the clothing, the adornment, the
observation of the beauties of the various parts of the body of the
beloved person--all these impressions, received by means of the sense of
sight, have the most powerful erotic influence.

Havelock Ellis also comes to the conclusion that for mankind the ideal
of a suitable love-partner is based far more upon the =data of the sense
of sight= than upon those of touch, smell, and hearing.

However, in addition to the sense of sight, the sense of hearing plays a
part of considerable importance in the amatory life of mankind. A
sufficient indication of this fact is given by the change occurring in a
man’s voice at the time of puberty. Darwin’s classical investigations
prove beyond a possibility of doubt the intimate relationship between
the voice and sexual life. The masculine voice, especially, has a
sexually stimulating effect upon woman; but the converse influence of a
woman’s voice upon man may also be observed. In the other mammalia, it
is especially in the rutting season that the voice is used as a means of
sexual allurement. The repetition of this vocal lure at measured
intervals gives rise to rhythm and song. The rhythmical repetition of
the same tone possesses something highly suggestive, fascinating, and so
gives rise to sexual attraction and charm in the most powerful manner.
Here lies the origin of the profound erotic influence of singing and
music. Darwin assumes that the early progenitors of mankind, before they
had acquired the faculty of expressing their mutual love in articulate
speech, used to charm one another by musical tones and rhythms. Woman
is far more susceptible than man to the sexual influence of singing or
music, but man himself is by no means indifferent to the charms of the
beautiful feminine voice. The soft tones of a woman’s voice are, for
many men, the first enthralling disclosure of woman’s nature. The French
physician and natural philosopher Moreau relates that he was once
compelled to renounce the pleasure of seeing the performance of a
beautiful actress, for only thus could he overcome a violent outburst of
sexual passion which was evoked in him by the mere stimulus of her
voice.

  [4] If at the present day an inquiry were instituted among the
  cultured women of European and Anglo-American descent, whether bearded
  or beardless men more nearly corresponded to their ideal of beauty,
  there can be little doubt that the majority--perhaps a very large
  majority--would declare against a full beard.

  [5] Recently, apart from sexual periodicity, a general periodicity of
  vital manifestations, more especially of the psychical phenomena
  associated with sexuality, has been proved to exist in both sexes. In
  a work that attracted much attention--“The Course of Life: Elements of
  Exact Biology” (Vienna, 1905)--Wilhelm Fliess proved the occurrence in
  the human species of a twenty-three day “masculine,” and a
  twenty-eight day “feminine” period. Not merely do physical phenomena
  recur quite spontaneously at intervals of twenty-three and
  twenty-eight days respectively, but the same is true of perceptions,
  feelings, and voluntary impulses. Hermann Swoboda, a thoughtful
  supporter of Fliess’s theory, has treated this question in two
  works--“The Periods of the Human Organism in their Psychological and
  Biological Significance” (Leipzig and Vienna, 1904), and “Studies in
  the Elements of Psychology” (Leipzig and Vienna, 1905). In these he
  has described also twenty-three-hour and eighteen-hour vital
  undulations in human beings, and has discussed the significance of
  this periodicity to psychology. These researches of Fliess and Swoboda
  need to be confirmed by other investigators before they can be
  regarded as definite additions to our scientific knowledge. In this
  connexion also the older work of Carl Reinl--“Undulatory Movements of
  the Vital Processes in Woman” (Leipzig, 1884)--may be consulted. See
  also Van de Velde’s “Ovarian Functions, Undulatory Movement, and
  Menstrual Hæmorrhage” (Jena, 1905).

  [6] Virey likewise explains the enduring nature of human love as
  dependent upon an excess of potent nutritive material, whereas the
  poor savages of Northern Europe and America, who must often go hungry,
  really experience no more than an instant of sexual pleasure, just
  like the wild animals, who rut only at certain distinct seasons. For
  the same reason, our domestic animals, which have a superfluous supply
  of nutriment, copulate far more frequently. And in our own case, the
  incessant intimate association of the sexes in our domestic life is a
  continued source of ever-renewed sexual needs, even contrary to our
  own will. The assumption of the =upright posture= by man, which is so
  intimately connected with the preponderance of the human brain, is
  also regarded by Virey as “an enduring cause of sexual excitement.”
  _Cf._ J. J. Virey, “Das Weib” (“Woman”), p. 301; Leipzig, 1827.

  [7] Recently Gualino [“Il Riflesso Sessuale nell’ Eccitamento alle
  Labbra” (“The Sexual Reflex resulting from the Stimulation of the
  Lips”), published in the Italian “Archives of Psychiatry,” 1904, p.
  341 _et seq._] by mechanical stimulation of the red parts of the lips,
  has produced erotic ideas and congestion of the genital organs, and
  this proves that the lips are an erogenic zone. Compare also the
  interesting remarks of Professor Petermann and Dr. Näcke on the origin
  of the kiss, in the German “Archives of Criminal Anthropology,” 1904,
  vol. xvi., pp. 356, 357.

  [8] A kiss is on the boundary-line between erotism and sexual
  enjoyment. Bölsche calls it the true transitional form between
  fusion-love and distance-love. At the instant of the kiss the distance
  between the two lovers is certainly reduced to a minimum; the
  distance-love, therefore, is on the point of becoming fusion-love. On
  the other hand, however, the kiss is still simply tactile contact, and
  contact of the heads only, the actual seat in mankind of the sentiment
  of distance-love. The kiss represents a yearning for complete
  fusion-love, and yet is at the same time a symbol of purely spiritual
  distance-love.

  [9] Especially in France is this the case. Madame Adam describes very
  tastefully this feeling of loss of virtue after granting a kiss.

  [10] _Cf._ also J. Librowicz, “The Kiss and Kissing,” p. 22 (Hamburg,
  1877).

  [11] It is interesting to observe that the Chinese regard the European
  kiss as a sign of cannibalism [d’Enjoy, “Le Baiser en Europe et en
  Chine” (“The Kiss in Europe and in China”), _Bulletin de la Société
  d’Anthropologie_, Paris, 1897, No. 2.]

  [12] We can allude only in passing to the celebrated genito-labial
  nerve of Voltaire.




