CHAPTER I

The mystery of sexual love, of this “wonder of life,” from which both
religious belief and artistic inspiration have drawn and continue to
draw the major part of their force, may ultimately be referred to a
single phenomenon in the sexuality of the great group of metazoa to
which the major part of the animal world and the human species belong.
This process is a conjugation of the female germ cell with the male
sperm cell--the “well-spring of love,” to use Haeckel’s expression; in
comparison with this conjugation, all other spiritual and physical
phenomena, however complicated, are of a subordinate and secondary
nature. From this primitive organic process of reciprocal attraction and
conjugation of the two reproductive cells has arisen the entire complex
of the remaining physical and spiritual phenomena of love. We have, in
this process of cell conjugation, a picture in little of love, a greatly
simplified representation of the nature of the relations between man and
woman; moreover, the highest and the finest psychical experiences and
impressions occurring under the influence of love are ultimately no more
than the results of this “erotic chemotropism” of the sperm and germ
cells.

Sexual =differentiation= existed already as a =natural= product in the
early stages of organic evolution, and =civilization= has done no more
than develop, increase, and refine that differentiation, which is
typified in a manner at once simple and convincing--because =directly
visible=--in the male sperm cell and the female germ cell. Herein the
=specific sexual differences= are made visibly manifest.

Procreation results from the approach of the male sperm cell towards the
female germ cell, and from the entrance of the former into the latter.

Thus, the sperm cell represents the =active=, the germ cell the
=passive=, principle in sexuality. Already in this =most important= act
in the process of procreation the natural relations between man and
woman are very clearly manifested. This fact is clearly grasped already
in the mythology and the sepulchral symbolism of antiquity. In these the
man is always represented as the active principle; woman, on the
contrary, as the passive principle.

  “Peace reigns in the ovum, but when driven by the desire of creation
  the masculine god breaks through the shell and begins his work of
  fertilization, everything at once becomes movement, restless haste,
  impulsive force, unending circulation. Thus the male generative
  principle appears as the representative and embodiment of movement in
  the visible act of creation.... The active principle in Nature appears
  to be identical with the principle of motion.... Winged is the
  phallus, quiescent the female; the man is the principle of movement,
  and the woman the principle of repose; force is the cause of eternal
  change, woman the picture of eternal repose; for which reason the
  ‘earth-mother’ is almost always depicted in a sitting posture”
  (Bachofen).

The appearance of =sexual= reproduction in the history of the evolution
of the organic world is an especially instructive example of the great
importance of differentiation and variation as the most effective
principle of evolution in general. The lowliest forms of life reproduce
their kind in an extremely simple manner by a process of asexual cell
division, which has not improperly been regarded as nothing more than a
peculiar form of =growth=; and this simple process of cell division is
retained as a mode of growth also in the higher organisms which
reproduce their kind by sexual union. In some cases of simple cell
division the secondary cell, the “daughter cell,” separates itself from
the old cell, the “mother cell,” and forms a new complete individual; in
other cases the cell division occurs as gemmiparous reproduction
(budding or pululation), the daughter cell remaining united with the
mother cell, so that a new organ is built up. Reproduction by cell
division is found in many plants and lower animals side by side with
sexual reproduction. This latter becomes the exclusive method of
production in higher animals and in the human species, whose capacity
for the procreation of new individuals by cell division, and for the
replacement of lost organs by growth, has been lost. Thus, the progress
and the gain which on the one hand are derived from the process of
sexual reproduction, whose character we are about to investigate more
closely, are balanced on the other hand by a loss. We shall often
encounter this fact again in the history of the evolution of the sexual
impulse, more especially in mankind and in relation to human love.

With the evolution of sexual reproduction is introduced the opportunity
for a great step forward, since an incomparably greater sphere of action
is opened to the differentiation and variability of specific forms than
was possible in the case of species reproduced asexually (Kerner von
Marilaun, R. Martin). By means of the sexual union of two =differing=
independent individuals, each of which, again, has been brought into the
world by the sexual union of two differing individuals, the way is
freely opened for a progressive differentiation of the individuals of
this species. No one of them is exactly similar to any other. Each one
exhibits new peculiarities, new capabilities, and all of these play
their part in the struggle for existence. This gradually results in a
progress towards higher, better, more perfect forms. The persistence of
specific type, due to inheritance, is largely counteracted by sexual
reproduction, inasmuch as the conjugation of reproductive cells derived
from two different individuals induces a tendency to progressive
variation and improvement. Moreover, by this sexual mode of reproduction
the preservation of the species is rendered much more secure than by
asexual reproduction, whilst at the same time the possibility of
differentiation or variation is indubitably increased. We have already
insisted on the fact that in the striking difference between the sperm
cell of the male and the germ cell of the female we must seek for the
ultimate cause of the profound difference between the sexes. Those who
maintain the theory of the absolute identity of man and woman must
continually be reminded of this fact. Unquestionably the greater
motility of the male reproductive cell as compared with the more passive
quality of the female cell implies the existence of deeply founded
psychical differences; and the existence of these may be assumed with
more confidence since we know from experience to what a high degree the
finest psychical peculiarities of father and mother can be transmitted
by inheritance to the child.

=For this reason, all attempts, whether initiated by some natural
process or by some intentional guidance of the process of civilization,
towards the obliteration of the distinction between the specific
masculine and the specific feminine, must be regarded as futile, and as
antagonistic to the process of development.= The production of the
so-called “third sex” is unquestionably a step backwards. For bisexual
differentiation is an =advance= upon the more primitive form of sexual
differentiation in which both the male and the female sexual elements
were produced by a single individual (=hermaphroditism=). In the
phylogeny of the human species unilateral sexual reproduction gave place
to the bilateral type, the reproductive elements being formed within the
bodies of two =distinct= individuals--the sperm cells within the body of
the male, the germ cells within the body of the female. In this manner
originated the contrast between the individuals of the two sexes, or
bisexual differentiation, which, in the course of phylogenetic
development, has become continually more definite, more extensive, and
more characteristic, through the operation of the principle of =sexual
selection=; and thus by inheritance and adaptation the mental and
physical characteristics of sexuality, primitive and superadded, have
gradually become defined and fixed. In the higher ranks of the animal
kingdom and in the human species, this =heterosexuality= has, through
inheritance, become continually more sharply defined; but the traces of
the primitive hermaphroditic state have never been wholly obliterated.
Love in the human species is manifested by pairing. Such is the normal
condition, and the =only= condition in harmony with the progressive
tendency towards perfection. But remnants of hermaphroditism, of
bisexuality in a single individual, of the “third sex,” are to be found
in every human being, and are disclosed by embryology and comparative
anatomy in the form of vestiges of female reproductive organs in the
male and of male reproductive organs in the female. Herein exists an
indisputable proof of the originally hermaphrodite nature of the human
ancestry. But these female organs in the male body, and their converse,
the male organs in the female body, are =stunted=, are rudiments merely;
whereas in the course of evolution the masculine reproductive organs of
the male and the feminine reproductive organs of the female have been
more and more powerfully developed, and more and more sharply
differentiated in type, until they have come to constitute the
expression of the specific differences between man and woman. They alone
represent the more advanced stage. Moreover, these vestiges of an early
hermaphroditic condition are in the human species far less extensive
than in other mammals; and the sexual discrepancy in the human species,
as compared with the lower animals, becomes still more noticeable when
we take into account the fact that certain parts of the reproductive
system are peculiar to mankind, are =new acquisitions=, and, above all,
the hymen, which is non-existent even in the anthropoid apes.

The original purpose of the hymen, which unquestionably must at the time
of its appearance have represented an evolutionary advance, is still
undetermined. Metchnikoff has propounded an interesting hypothesis on
this subject. According to him, it is very probable that human beings,
during the earliest period of human history, began sexual relations at
an extremely youthful age, at a time when the external genital organs of
the boy were not yet fully developed. In such a case the hymen would not
only have been no hindrance to the act of copulation, but rather, by
narrowing the vaginal outlet, and thus accommodating its size to the
relatively too small penis of the male, would have rendered pleasure in
sexual intercourse possible. In such cases, moreover, the hymen would
not have been brutally lacerated, but gradually dilated. Laceration of
the hymen represents a later and secondary phenomenon.

It is a fact that, even at the present day, among many primitive races,
marriages commonly take place in childhood, and it is further true that
even in civilized races in a considerable number of cases (15 per cent.,
according to Budin) the hymen is not always lacerated during sexual
intercourse, but is retained; thus some support is given to
Metchnikoff’s hypothesis.

It is unquestionable that evolution and the progress of civilization
have resulted in an extremely marked differentiation between the two
sexes, and for this reason the formation of a so-called “third sex,” in
which these sexual differences are obscured, can only be regarded as a
markedly retrogressive step. Ernst von Wolzogen, in a well-known
romance, to which he gave the name of “The Third Sex,” described a kind
of barren, stunted woman, capable, however, of holding her own at work
in competition with men; but in our opinion such women represent merely
a =stage of transition= in the great battle of women for the
independent, free development of their =peculiar= personality. Such
types as these are certainly not the final goal of the woman’s movement;
they are caricatures, products of a false and extreme conception of
woman’s development. This “third sex,” which Schurtz very justly
compares to the stunted, barren workers among ants and bees, is
incapable of prolonged existence, and will give place to a new
generation of women, who, while fully retaining their specific feminine
peculiarities, will share with men the rights and duties of the great
work of civilization; and thus this work will unquestionably be enriched
by a number of new and fruitful elements.

It is indeed possible that this “third sex,” that hermaphrodites,
homosexual individuals, sexual “intermediate stages,” also play a
certain part in the great process of civilization. But their
significance is slight and limited, if for this reason alone because
from these individuals the possibility of transmission by inheritance of
valuable peculiarities is cut off, and hence the possibility of a future
perfectibility, of true “progress,” is excluded. There are =two= sexes
only on which every true advance in civilization depends--the genuine
man and the genuine woman. All other varieties are ultimately no more
than phantoms, monstrosities, vestiges of primitive sexual conditions.

Very ably has Mantegazza described the intimate relationship between
these dreams of the “third sex” and the fantastic aberration of the
sexual impulse. He writes:

  “While the pathology of love recognizes in many sexual aberrations the
  obscure traces of a general hermaphroditism, imagination, which works
  faster than science, shows us the possibility that in more
  complicated creations sexual differentiation might be more than
  twofold, so that in such worlds sexual reproduction might be effected
  by a more elaborate division of labour. Thus, in the cynical or
  sceptical distinction between platonic, sexual, and licentious love,
  we see the first traces of new and monstrous possibilities of sexual
  union, on the one hand reflecting the sublimity of the supersensual,
  and on the other more brutal than the most horrible sexual
  aberration.”

In reality, it is only for normal heterosexual love between a normal man
and a normal woman that it is possible to find an unimpeachable
sanction. Only this love, continually more differentiated and more
individualized, will play a part in the future course of civilization.

Heterosexuality arises from the reciprocal attraction and the
coalescence of the reproductive cells of two individuals of distinct
sexes; it forms the foundation and constitutes the most important
element of the sexual relations of the higher animal world and of the
human species; and it obtains through inheritance continually a more
sharply defined expression. Since this fundamental phenomenon of the
sexual impulse has been transmitted from the most ancient and simplest
forms of the organic world and has been modified only in the direction
of heterosexuality, it has come to pass, as Ewald Hering says at the end
of his celebrated lecture on “Memory as a General Function of Organic
Matter,” that organic matter has the strongest memory of the impulse of
conjugation in its most ancient and most primitive form; thus this
impulse at the present day continues to dominate mankind as an intensely
powerful physical imperative, endowed with the strength of an elemental
force, which, notwithstanding the gradually higher development of the
brain, has remained during thousands of years undiminished in its
potency, and indeed by the accumulative influence extending through
thousands of generations has acquired a notable increase in intensity.
We must assume that for untold generations always those animals and men
have had the most numerous descendants in whom the sexual impulse was
the most powerful; this powerful impulse being inherited, was
transmitted once more to the next generation, and tended by natural
selection continually to increase.

This explanation of the indisputable gradual increase in the intensity
of the sexual impulse, first given by the moral philosopher Paul Rée, is
more illuminating than the theory propounded by Havelock Ellis of the
increase of the sexual impulse by civilization, which was long ago
maintained by Lucretius (“De Rerum Naturâ,” V. 1016). In support of this
latter theory, it is asserted that among savage people the genital
organs are less powerfully developed than among civilized races, but
this can by no means be regarded as an established fact. Civilization
has done no more than cause a fuller development of all sides of sexual
love by a multiplication of physical and psychical =stimuli=; but it
appears extremely doubtful if civilization itself is to be regarded as
the immediate causal influence in the increase of the intensity of the
sexual impulse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Having studied the elementary phenomena of human love dependent upon the
phylogenetic history of the human race, namely the union of the male and
female reproductive cells, the question now arises as to the nature of
the =psychical= processes, the character of the =sensations= that
accompany this union of the sperm cells and the germ cells. What is the
most primitive =psychical elementary phenomenon= of love?

It is apparently that sensation in which the actual contact of the
psyche with the material occurs--an immediate sensation of the nature of
matter--namely, the =sense of smell=. The metaphysical significance of
the sense of smell has been aptly indicated by describing that sense as
the “sublimated thing-in-itself,” as a sense which, like no other sense,
allows us to enter immediately into the nature of matter; it is, in
fact, the sense of personality.

  “Smell,” says Heinrich Steffens, “is the principal sense of the higher
  animals; it represents for them their own inner world; it envelops
  their existence. Upon smell, wherein sympathy and antipathy are
  represented, is based the whole security of the higher animal
  instinct; =for carnal desire is comprehended in this sense=....
  Indeed, in sexual union the subjective sensation which is developed by
  means of smell blends completely with the objective, and from the
  monistic union of the two arises the intenser libido, wherein the
  unfathomableness of the procreative force and the whole power of sex
  are absorbed.”

Ernst Haeckel ascribes to the two sexual cells a kind of inferior
psychical activity; he believes that they experience a sensation of one
another’s proximity; and indeed it is probably a form of sensory
activity analogous to the sense of smell that draws them together. The
sensation of the two sexual cells, which Haeckel believes to be situated
especially in the cell nuclei, he denotes by the term “erotic
chemotropism.” He attributes it to an attraction of the nature of smell,
and considers that it represents the psychical quintessence, the
original being of love.

A later investigator, Eugen Kröner, holds the same view. In the
conjugation of two vorticellæ he recognizes the influence of the
chemically operative sensation of smell; to him smell is the most
important element in the sexual impulse of animals.

This theory is strongly supported, and indeed elevated to the rank of a
natural law, by the circumstance that in the higher animals the sense of
smell, in the course of phylogenetic development, has attained a
continually greater significance in relation to sexuality; and by the
fact that, according to the discovery of Zwaardemaker, there exists
widely diffused throughout Nature a =distinct group= of sexual odours,
the so-called =capryl odours=, which have a natural biological connexion
with the _vita sexualis._ These capryl odours, which already in plants
play a sexual part, are in animals and in the human species localized in
or near the genital organs (odoriferous glands of the beaver, the
musk-ox, etc., the secretions of the male foreskin and the female
vagina), or in other cases are found in the general secretions, such as
the sweat. Recently Gustav Klein has succeeded in proving that a
definite group of glands in the female genital organs (glandulæ
vestibulares majores, or glands of Bartholin) must be regarded as a
vestige from the time of periodic sexual excitement (rutting). At that
time in the human species, as now in the lower animals, the sexual
impulse was periodic in its activity, and the secretion of these
odoriferous glands of the human female then served as a means of
alluring members of the male sex. At the present time these glands have
for the most part lost their significance as specific stimuli. Now it is
rather the exhalation from the entire surface of the female body which
exercises the erotic influence. Cases in which such stimuli proceed
exclusively from the female genital organs are regarded by Klein as a
phylogenetic vestige of the primitive relations between the rutting
odours of the female and sexual excitement in the male. Friedrich S.
Krauss, in his “Anthropophyteia” (1904, vol. i., p. 224), reproduces a
Southern Slavonic story in which a man is described who obtained sexual
gratification only by enjoying the =natural= smell of the female genital
organs. The remarkable classification of Indian women according to the
various odours proceeding from their genital organs must not be
forgotten in this connexion.

That this primitive phenomenon of love has even to-day a certain
significance, although, in consequence of the enormous development of
the brain and the predominance of purely psychical elements in man, its
influence has been very notably diminished, is shown by the existing
physiological connexion proved by Fliess to exist between the nose and
the genital organs. On the inferior turbinate bones there exist certain
“genital areas,” which, under the influence of sexual stimulus and
excitement, as in coitus, during menstruation, etc., swell up. From
these areas it is also possible to influence directly certain conditions
of the genital organs.

It is noteworthy that civilization has to a large extent replaced the
natural sexual odours by artificial scents, so-called =perfumes=, whose
origin is partly due to the =imitation= or =accentuation= of the natural
odours, in part, however, and especially in recent times, to an
endeavour to =conceal= these natural odours, especially when the latter
are of a disagreeable character. For this reason, in addition to
penetrating perfumes, such as civet, ambergris, musk, etc., we have also
mild perfumes, for the most part vegetable in origin. The markedly
exciting influence of these artificial scents is employed especially by
women, above all by professional prostitutes, in order to excite men.[3]
Frequently also the simple perfume of flowers suffices for this purpose.
Krauss tells us that in the kolo-dance of the Southern Slavs the girls
fasten strong-scented flowers and sprigs in the front of their dress,
and thereby excite intense sexual desire in the young men. In the East
sexual stimulation by means of the sense of smell plays a far more
extensive rôle than in Europe.

In the human species, however, as a specific elementary phenomenon of
sexual reproduction, smell has long been thrust into the background by
the strong development of other senses, especially that of sight. This
fact is very clearly exhibited by the notable reduction which has
occurred in the size of the organ of smell. In man the frontal lobes of
the brain, the seat of the highest intellectual processes and of speech,
have taken the place of the olfactory lobes in the lower animals.
Besides, by means of clothing, the natural odours of men and women,
which previously had such marked sexual significance, have been rendered
almost imperceptible, and nowadays sexual stimulation may result merely
from the senses of touch and of sight, so that the hands and the lips
and the female breasts have been transformed into erotic organs.
Notwithstanding, however, the notable weakening of the sexual
significance of smell, this most primitive sense (actually associated,
as we have shown, with the activity of the germinal cells) will never
completely cease to influence the sexual life.

  “Still, there always surrounds us a now gently moving and now stormy
  sea of odours, whose waves without cessation arouse in us feelings of
  sympathy or antipathy, and to the minutest movements of which we are
  not wholly indifferent” (Havelock Ellis).

Inasmuch as we have pointed out as the single primæval basis, as the
most important elementary phenomenon, of human love, the conjugation of
the male sperm cell with the female ovum (dependent probably upon a
sensation analogous to that of smell), we denote this particular
phenomenon of sexuality as =primary=, and we separate all the other
phenomena as =secondary=, as more remote. Wilhelm Bölsche has also
expressed this difference by denoting the union of the two reproductive
cells as “=fusion-love=,” whilst all that has occurred later, in the
course of many thousands of years of evolution, and that has transformed
this primary process, by innumerable new influences, stimuli, and
perceptions, into the love of modern civilized man, he denotes by the
apt name of “=distance-love=.”

According to him,

  “the ultimate act of love in a member of the most highly civilized
  community assumes the form of a sudden withdrawal from the entire
  world of surrounding artifacts, of alphabets, posts, telephones,
  submarine cables, etc.... At this instant the principle of union is
  once again victorious, as it were, in an ultimate posthumous vision in
  a vital experience of a portion of primæval Nature, of the primæval
  world, of an instant’s profoundest self-absorption into the great
  mystery of the obscure original basis of Nature, to which neither time
  nor old and new is known, but which is ever renewed in us in its
  elemental force--the procreative principle. At this instant the loving
  individual must return home to the heart of the all-mother--it is
  useless to resist. It must draw from the fountain of youth--must
  descend like Odin to the Norns, like Faust to the Mothers--=and there
  all civilization is swallowed up; there cell body must join cell
  body=, in order in the ardent embrace to reduce to a minimum the
  distance which usually sunders such large bodies. Indeed, in reality
  the sexual act goes further and deeper than this reduction of
  separation to a minimum. Within the body of one of the partners of the
  sexual act the ovum and the spermatozoon undergo an ultimate =perfect
  fusion= of soul and body, in comparison with which even the closest
  approximation of the great halves of the love partnership is no more
  than a mere mechanical apposition. The ultimate aim of the loving
  union is attained only in the coalescence of ovum and spermatozoon.”

To express the matter briefly, fusion-love fulfils the purpose of the
species, while distance-love subserves rather the purpose of the
individual. Thus the natural course of the development of love, which in
the next chapter we propose to follow further, affords already the proof
of the thesis propounded in the introduction regarding the duplicate
nature of human love.

  [3] According to Laurent (“Morbid Love,” pp. 133, 134, Leipzig, 1895),
  common prostitutes generally use musk; young working women, violet or
  rose-water; ladies of the bourgeoisie, penetrating perfumes, such as
  white heliotrope, jasmine, and ylang-ylang; women of the half-world,
  finer perfumes, or such “as are complex, like their own mode of
  life”--for example, lily-of-the-valley, or mignonette.




