CHAPTER XIV

VENEREAL DISEASES


  “_In co-operation with alcoholic intoxication and with tuberculosis,
  syphilis plays in our day the part which in the middle ages was played
  by bubonic plague._”--ALFRED FOURNIER.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XIV

  Prostitution the focus, not the cause, of venereal diseases --
  Philosophy of venereal diseases -- Their age -- Time and place of
  their first appearance -- The origin of syphilis -- Practical
  importance of the proof of the recent character of syphilis -- The
  theologico-animistic theory of venereal diseases -- Refutation of this
  theory -- Blameless infection (_syphilis innocentium_) -- The notion
  of specific infective disease -- Scientific campaign against venereal
  diseases -- Syphilis as a specific disease of modern times --
  Description of its symptoms, its course, and its termination --
  Consequences of syphilis to the family, to the offspring, and to the
  race -- Congenital syphilis of the first and second generations --
  Racial degeneration in consequence of syphilis -- The age at which
  infection with syphilis occurs in man and in woman -- The soft chancre
  (chancroid) -- Gonorrhœa -- Change in our views regarding the dangers
  of gonorrhœa -- Urethral gonorrhœa in the male -- Acute and chronic
  stages -- Complications -- Gonorrhœa in women -- The “diseases of
  women” -- Blindness due to gonorrhœa.

  _Appendix_: Venereal Diseases in the Homosexual.


CHAPTER XIV

The central problem of the sexual question is, as I pointed out at the
commencement of the previous chapter, the suppression of prostitution
and of =venereal diseases=, the former evil being the principal focus of
the latter. I say the principal “=focus=,” not the “cause.” For, if all
prostitutes were =healthy=, we could leave prostitution quietly
alone--leaving out of consideration the moral depravity to which it
gives rise--and venereal diseases would spontaneously disappear.

This opinion I advance at the beginning of the chapter on venereal
diseases because, even at the present day, there is a remarkable species
of =philosophy, or rather theology, of venereal diseases=, which
propounds the most extraordinary hypothesis regarding their =origin=.

For example, the Alsatian writer Alexander Weill, in his confused work
“The Laws and Mysteries of Love,” writes:

  “Why should we bother our heads about the cure of syphilis? If anyone
  wishes to get rid of any evil, he must first of all ascertain its
  causes in order to remove these. If the cause of it is removed, the
  evil disappears spontaneously. If the snake has been killed, its
  poison no longer does any harm. But how can we put an end to the
  causes of syphilis, when this disease is spontaneously renewed and
  increased day by day by means of neglected prostitution, and by our
  social laws which combine to oppose the monogamy of youth and the
  increase of population? If to-day we could cure all patients suffering
  from syphilis, =to-morrow the same disease would return in a new form,
  for it would be recreated by the same irregularities that first led to
  its production= (!) It is absolutely useless to employ iodide of
  potassium and mercury, for every new infringement of natural laws
  would again bring into being new incurable diseases, which can only be
  avoided by those who have firmly resolved to observe these laws
  strictly.”

Weill, indeed, goes so far as to maintain that every man who
=simultaneously, or rather in brief succession, has intercourse with two
healthy women, acquires syphilis=, even although both these women remain
faithful to him, because “=any kind of libertinism in sexual intercourse
suffices by itself to give rise to this disease=!”

According to this view, which is shared by many members of the laity,
venereal diseases, and, above all, the worst of them, syphilis, would be
as old as sexual licentiousness itself--that is, =as old as the human
race, and an inalienable associate of that race=.

In my book on “The Origin of Syphilis” I have disproved this view. I
have answered the question, so important alike on general philosophical
and on social-hygienic grounds, regarding the true nature of syphilis,
and have proved that syphilis (and also the other venereal diseases) had
a definite =local= and =temporal= origin; that syphilis has not existed
since the beginning of time; and that some day, when certain definite
conditions are fulfilled, the disease will disappear.

The history of syphilis is a matter of profound =practical= importance.
From that history we learn with certainty that the most dangerous and
most dreaded of the venereal diseases has, for the European world, and
for the “old world” in general, the character of a =pure chance comer=;
and we learn that =retrospectively=--regarded from the point of view of
our present experience--at the time when the disease first began to
flourish, it might perhaps have been nipped in the bud.

It is hardly possible to overestimate the =practical= importance of the
recognition of this fact--that for the old civilized world syphilis
represents a historical phenomenon, that it has a history, a beginning,
or, as Voltaire half-ironically remarks, a genealogy.

Is there not a deliverance, a redemption, in the idea that for the old
world there was a time in which syphilis did not exist; that this time,
in comparison with the time which has elapsed since syphilis first
appeared, was almost infinitely long; and that for this reason, when we
look out into the future, the history of the lues venerea assumes the
character of a simple episode in the history of European civilized
humanity?

At the same time, the definite acceptance of this view would be an
urgent warning to all those obscurantists of both sexes who imagine that
the problem of the diffusion of venereal diseases can be solved
exclusively by religious and moral considerations, and who thus confuse
the simplest and clearest relationships, place everything upon an
insecure foundation, and exclude every possibility of a successful
campaign against syphilis.

Even to-day it unfortunately happens that many continue, as of old, to
believe that sexual intercourse is a sin for which a punishment has been
provided, and that this punishment is a venereal disease--for example,
syphilis. Tylor, the celebrated English anthropologist, has proved that
this idea has developed out of the =animism= extending back into
prehistoric times, which regarded all illnesses as the work of demons.
We are still influenced by this doctrine, this gloomy, demoniacal
conception in respect of everything sexual. I need hardly remind the
reader of the ideas of Tolstoi, and of his disciple, the unhappy Dr.
Weininger, a disciple exceeding even his master in respect of fanatical
condemnation of sexual intercourse. Until recently the laws regulating
our German system of workmen’s insurance against illness continued to
exhibit definite traces of our legislators’ adhesion to this view. The
majority of physicians and historians who said that syphilis was as old
as sexual intercourse itself, who employed the phrase _ubi Venus ibi
syphilis_, were unconsciously influenced by this idea, that venereal
diseases are to be regarded as a mark of the Divine wrath.

This theological theory, as we may call it, of the origin of syphilis is
opposed by certain incontrovertible facts, which suffice to show its
utter nullity and untenability.

The mere fact that there exists a =blameless= infection with syphilis
(_syphilis innocentium_), that, for example, in certain districts of
Russia as many as 90 % of the cases of this disease are acquired =quite
independently= of sexual intercourse, by simple contact, shows the
absurdity of this superstitious idea.

In the second place, it is a widely known fact that quite frequently
persons who are still entirely uncontaminated, blameless initiates,
become infected with syphilis on the very first occasion in which they
have sexual intercourse, whilst greater experience and more exact
knowledge of the threatening dangers induce notorious debauchees to
adopt effective measures of protection (which, however, would be useless
if syphilis were really a divinely decreed punishment for licentiousness
of this kind!).

In the third place, the occurrence of syphilis =in little
children=--partly owing to inheritance, partly, however, acquired in the
way already mentioned by casual contact--affords a striking refutation
of the above idea, which, unfortunately, still dominates and fascinates
a large circle of people.

We could adduce further arguments against this view, but what we have
said should suffice to show clearly the untenability of such a
superstition. The syphilis of one individual is not the consequence of
sexual intercourse, but the consequence of another case of syphilis in
another individual--that is to say, syphilis is a =specific infective
disease=, transmissible only by means of its peculiar specific virus,
and this transmission can be effected =without any sexual intercourse=,
by means of contacts of other kinds. =Syphilis arises only from
syphilis.=

We have, therefore, to attack =this= disease precisely in the same
manner as the other venereal diseases. As a Portuguese physician has
most aptly remarked, to the tyranny of syphilis we must oppose the
tyranny of human reason. The principal aim of a campaign against
venereal diseases will be the =organization= of the means offered to us
by reason and experience to cope with the disease. The knowledge of
these means must be diffused in ever-wider circles of humanity, and care
must be taken that every individual is fully and clearly informed
regarding the importance and the dangers of syphilis and the other
venereal diseases.

Here also history is our teacher, our lamp of truth, and promises us
complete success as the result of our campaign against venereal
diseases.

The results of my investigations regarding the origin of syphilis all
point to a =single= extremely important fact--namely, that in the case
of syphilis, and as regards the “old world,” we have to do with a
=specific disease of modern times=, which made its first appearance =at
the end of the fifteenth century=, and of the previous existence of
which, even in the most distant prehistoric times, not the minutest
trace remains. This view was held by very eminent physicians, even
before the publication of my own critical work, based upon entirely new
sources of study. Among these authorities I may mention Jean Astruc and
Christoph Girtanner, in the eighteenth century; in the nineteenth
century, the Spanish army surgeon Montejo, and of German physicians,
above all, Rudolf Virchow, A. Geigel, von Liebermeister, C. Binz, and P.
G. Unna. The great philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer held the same
view.[312]

Ricord, the celebrated French syphilologist, spoke once of a romance of
syphilis which still remained to be written. I should rather compare it
with a =drama=, the separate acts of which are =centuries=. Of this
drama, =four= acts have already been played. At the present moment we
find ourselves at the =beginning= of the =fifth= act. Thus, we have an
=entire= century before us, in which, with all the powers placed at our
disposal by scientific medical research, by practical therapeutics, and
by hygiene in association with social measures, we must work to this
end, that this fifth act shall also be the =last=, as it is in the case
of a proper drama.

The history of syphilis has remained so long obscure, because, until the
time of Philipp Ricord--=that is to say, until the beginning of the
second half of the nineteenth century=--the three venereal diseases,
=syphilis=, or =lues=, the so-called =soft chancre= (=venereal ulcer or
chancroid=), and =gonorrhœa=, were regarded as essentially one disease;
whereas we know to-day that syphilis is a specific infective disease of
a =constitutional= character, which permeates the whole body, and must
be absolutely distinguished from the other venereal diseases, these
latter being purely =local= in character. This earlier belief in the
identity of all venereal infections, an error held even by so great an
authority as John Hunter, who was misled by falsely interpreted
experiments, renders it necessary that the historical side of the
question should be considered also from this point of view.

If gonorrhœa and chancroid were of a syphilitic nature, then certainly
syphilis must have existed from very early times. It would not be
difficult to refer to syphilis some descriptions and accounts of
diseases of the genital organs given by the ancient and medieval
writers. It was the progressive enlightenment regarding the essential
differences between the three venereal diseases which first proved the
untenability of such opinions; we were further assisted by the knowledge
of =pseudo-venereal= and =pseudo-syphilitic= diseases which we have
obtained from modern dermatology. Moreover, in the old world syphilitic
bones belonging to ancient or medieval times have =never= been
discovered.[313] The first syphilitic bones date from =after the time of
the discovery of America=. They appear, above all, =after the outbreak
of the great epidemic of syphilis which followed the Italian campaign of
King Charles VIII. of France, in the years 1494 and 1495=; it was then
that syphilis first became diffused in the old world.

In my work on “The Origin of Syphilis” (Jena, 1901),[314] I have adduced
proof, basing my views upon the criticism of older opinions, and
assisted by the utilization of very abundant new sources of material,
that syphilis was first introduced into Spain in the years 1493 and 1494
by the crew of Columbus, who brought it from Central America, and more
especially from the island of =Hayti=; from Spain it was carried by the
army of Charles VIII. to Italy, where it assumed an epidemic form; and
after the army was disbanded the disease was transported by the soldiers
to the other countries of Europe, and also was soon taken by the
Portuguese to the Far East, to India, China, and Japan. At the time of
its first appearance in the old world, syphilis was extraordinarily
=virulent=. All the morbid phenomena produced by the disease had a more
rapid and violent course than at the present day; the mortality was much
higher; the consequences, even when a cure was effected, were much more
severe. This virulence of syphilis at the time of its first introduction
can only be explained, in accordance with our modern views of the nature
and mode of appearances of the disease, by the fact that the nations of
the old world (who, _nota bene_, were =all= attacked with equal
intensity) had, until that time, been =completely free= from syphilis.
=All classes= of the people and =all nations= were visited by syphilis
to an equal extent and with the same violence.

Even to-day we observe everywhere, when syphilis is introduced into
regions which have hitherto been =free= from the disease, that it has
the same acute course, the same violence of morbid manifestations, that
characterized its first appearance in Europe. In the four centuries that
have elapsed since its introduction into Europe there has occurred a
gradual =mitigation= of the syphilitic virus, or rather a certain degree
of immunization of European humanity against the disease. Speaking
generally, syphilis has to-day--in comparison with that earlier time--a
relatively mild course. To this point we shall return later.[315]

The two other venereal diseases, =gonorrhœa= and =chancroid=,
unquestionably existed in Europe in the days of antiquity. But they also
are =specific infective diseases=, and are only produced by the virus
peculiar to each, just as syphilis has its own peculiar virus.

Ricord (1800-1889), in the years 1830 to 1850, proved the complete
=diversity= of syphilis and gonorrhœa, established the doctrine of the
three stages of syphilis--primary, secondary, and tertiary--and,
finally, taught us to distinguish the =soft, non-syphilitic chancre=
(=chancroid=) from the =hard, syphilitic chancre=. Virchow, in his
celebrated essay on “The Nature of Constitutional Syphilitic Affections”
(_Virchow’s Archiv_, 1858, vol. xv., p. 217 _et seq._), then threw a
clear light on the peculiar course of constitutional syphilis and on the
causes of the occasional disappearance and sudden reappearance of the
morbid phenomena. Hitherto, however, our knowledge of venereal diseases
had rested on an extremely insecure foundation; and =the truly
scientific study of the subject= may be said to have begun in the year
1879, with Albert Neisser’s epoch-making discovery of the =gonococcus=
as the specific exciting cause of gonorrhœa. In the years 1889 to 1892
there followed the discovery of the =bacillus of chancroid= by Ducrey
and Unna, by means of which discovery the complete distinction between
the soft and the hard chancre was definitely proved; and, finally, the
three years 1903 to 1906 were characterized by =remarkable discoveries=,
the full importance of which is not as yet fully realized, =regarding
the nature of the syphilitic virus=. In the year 1903 Eli Metchnikoff
succeeded in transmitting syphilis from human beings to =apes=, and thus
laid the foundation for progressive research regarding syphilis by means
of experiments on animals; this was carried further by Lassar, by the
inoculation of the syphilitic virus from one ape to another, and also by
A. Neisser in his experimental researches in Java;[316] and in March,
1905, the Berlin protozoologist Fritz Schaudinn, since prematurely lost
to the world of science, published his first studies on the probable
exciting cause of syphilis, the so-called “=spirochæte pallida=.”
Numerous subsequent investigations have established the connexion
between this spirilla-form, belonging to the order of protozoa, and
syphilitic disease. In this way we have been brought notably nearer to
the discovery of the certain cure of syphilis and to the discovery of
means of immunization against the disease. In this direction quite new
views are opening before our eyes.[317] Numerous ideas suggested by
recent discoveries in the province of syphilitic research are described
in the admirable essay by J. Jadassohn, “Contributions to Syphilology,”
published in the German “Archives for Dermatology and Syphilis,” 1907.
_Cf._ also the account of the recent doctrines regarding syphilis by P.
G. Unna and Iwan Bloch, “Die Praxis der Hautkrankheiten,” pp. 548-592
(Vienna and Berlin, 1908).

When some day humanity has been freed from the “=sexual plague=,” from
the hydra of venereal diseases, and when a monument is erected to the
liberators, four names will there be commemorated: Ricord, Neisser,
Metchnikoff, and Schaudinn!

After these preliminary remarks on the nature of venereal diseases, I
proceed to a short description of them, and I begin with the most
dangerous of all the venereal diseases, =syphilis=.[318]

The first manifestations of syphilis make their appearance about three
or four weeks =after= infection, at the place at which infection has
occurred, and this is not in every case the genital organs. It is true
that syphilis is most commonly transmitted by means of sexual
intercourse, but frequently also by contacts of other kinds--for
example, by =kissing=; by gynecological or surgical examinations and
operations; by =drinking from a glass= which has previously been used by
some one suffering from syphilis; by the use of uncleansed
pocket-handkerchiefs, towels, and bedding, which have been used by a
syphilitic patient; by the use of tobacco-pipes, wind-instruments,
tooth-brushes, tooth-picks, a glass-blower’s mouthpiece, etc., belonging
to strangers; =by an uncleansed razor=; by the nasty habit of licking
the point of a pencil; by moistening postage-stamps with the tongue; by
sucking the wound in circumcision; =by the suckling of the infant at the
breast of a syphilitic wet-nurse=, etc.[319] In England the custom, when
taking a judicial oath, of kissing the Bible has repeatedly sufficed to
transmit syphilitic infection.

In certain districts in which the level of civilization is a low
one--as, for example, in some parts of Russia and of Turkey--as many as
50 to 60 % of all infections occur independently of sexual intercourse.

All the =discharges= from syphilitic lesions in all three stages of the
disease are infective. The infective character of the tertiary stage of
syphilis was formerly doubted, but has recently been proved beyond
dispute. =Blood= also, although more rarely, can prove infective. On the
other hand, the =pure= secretions--that is, the physiological
secretions, not contaminated by morbid products--such as the saliva,
tears, and milk, are not infective. Syphilis is, however, very
frequently transmitted by means of the =semen=.

Infection occurs in places in which there is a solution of continuity of
the skin or mucous membrane, such as a scratch or a superficial wound,
through which the virus can enter. In this way an apparently healthy
syphilitic patient--when, for example, he gets a small abrasion on the
penis (or, in the case of a woman, in the vagina)--can transmit syphilis
if the other individual also has a similar abrasion through which
infection can occur.

As we have said, it is not till the lapse of two to four weeks after
infection has occurred that the first manifestations of syphilis appear,
in the form of a small vesicle or nodule in the infected area; less
often merely an abraded area of a peculiar red colour. Gradually this
nodule or area enlarges, and becomes continually =harder= at the base,
whilst the surface often undergoes ulceration, and secretes extremely
infective pus (the so-called “=hard chancre=” or “=primary
lesion=”[320]).

This induration is in most cases a certain sign that the syphilitic
virus has already entered the body; at least, it has only been possible
in a few very rare cases, by excision or cauterization of the hard
chancre, to prevent syphilis from entering the blood. Almost always,
notwithstanding such endeavours, the manifestations of general infection
of the body soon appear.

From the place of infection--that is, from the place at which the hard
chancre forms--the syphilitic virus next passes by way of the
lymph-stream into the inguinal glands, so that these, in the third or
fourth week after the appearance of the hard chancre, begin to swell and
to become hard. This swelling of the inguinal glands is painless (the
so-called “=indolent bubo=”), in contrast to the painful swelling which
accompanies the soft chancre. From this region the poison now proceeds
by way of the bloodvessels and lymph paths on its wanderings all over
the body, the individual stages of which can be detected by swellings of
the lymph-glands of the axilla, the elbow, the neck, etc. Sometimes
other symptoms of general infection are noticeable; above all, the
appearance of =fever= (never earlier than forty days after infection),
=pains= in the muscles, joints, nerves, also severe headaches, a general
feeling of =lassitude=, =pallor=, and a falling-off in the nutritive
condition.

These are the forerunners of the so-called =secondary= stage of
syphilis, which now manifests itself by the appearance of a multiform
=skin eruption=, rendering the diagnosis of syphilis absolutely
certain. For this reason, in doubtful cases of ulceration of the genital
organs the patient should inspect his skin very carefully every day for
several weeks or months, and keep watch for the appearance of red spots
or nodules. This syphilitic eruption on the skin is also in the later
periods one of the most certain and most characteristic insignia of the
disease.

The eruption commonly appears first on the trunk, in the form of
rose-coloured spots (the so-called “=roseola syphilitica=”), spreads
thence over the whole body, and in many cases, simultaneously with or
shortly after the spotted eruption, =nodules= appear on the skin, and
marked thickenings form on the mucous membranes, especially at the anus,
in the mouth, and on the tongue (the so-called “=plaques muqueuses=,” or
“=condylomata=”). The patient’s attention is spontaneously directed to
these lesions by painful sensations in the mouth or by itching of the
anus. Often it is these painful sensations, associated with a violent
inflammation of the tonsils and pharynx (the so-called “=angina
syphilitica=”), which first lead the patient to consult a doctor, after
all the earlier symptoms have passed by unnoticed! As characteristic
forms of the secondary syphilitic changes in the skin must, therefore,
be mentioned the so-called “=corona Veneris=,” by which distinguished
name is denoted an eruption on the forehead, especially along the margin
of the hair, which by members of the laity is easily confused with other
affections of the skin common in this locality; the so-called “=collier
de Venus=,” or =leukoderma syphiliticum=, a peculiar pigmentation of the
skin on the throat and the back of the neck in the form of =brown=
patches with =white= intervening areas. This symptom, =which occurs
almost exclusively= in women, is an absolutely certain sign of syphilis.
Equally characteristic is the so-called “=syphilitic psoriasis=,” the
appearance of peculiar patches and thickenings on the palms of the hands
and the soles of the feet; characteristic also is the syphilitic =loss
of hair=, by its sudden onset and by the patchy way in which it occurs.
Not rarely do we see =purulent= eruptions on the skin in this secondary
stage of syphilis.

The syphilitic eruption of the skin is only an external manifestation of
a disease affecting the entire body, for the internal organs also
suffer. The affection of the liver manifests itself by jaundice; that of
the brain and the meninges by headaches and by =weakness of memory=,
which is often well marked at this stage; that of the spleen by
swelling; that of the kidneys by the appearance of albumin in the urine;
that of the bones by very painful inflammatory swellings; that of the
eyes specially by the well-known =syphilitic iritis= (60 % of all
inflammations of the iris are syphilitic in nature!).

If the disease remains untreated, the appearances just described become
more general and continually more severe; and after some time, quite new
morbid symptoms are superadded (often as early as the third year, on the
average five to ten years after infection, but also later), resulting
from the transformation of the syphilitic morbid process into the
=tertiary= stage. To these new manifestations belong the appearance of
large =nodules= in the skin and other organs, which sooner or later
undergo ulceration, the so-called “=syphilitic gummata=”; their
ulcerative destruction may entail the greatest disfigurement or danger
to life--for example, perforation of the hard palate; sinking of the
bridge of the nose (the syphilitic “=saddle-nose=”); ulcerative
destruction of large portions of the bones of the skull, of the
intestine, of the liver, the lungs, the testicles, the bloodvessels
(especially dangerous are gummous diseases of the bloodvessels of the
brain), the brain, and the spinal cord. =Apoplectic strokes= occurring
in comparatively young persons and =nervous paralysis= of the most
various kinds, as well as sudden =deafness= and =blindness=, are in most
cases referable to syphilitic disease. Many chronic diseases of the
liver, kidneys, and nervous system, are consequences of previous
syphilis; also =calcification of the arteries=, the very dangerous
dilatation of the great bloodvessels, especially of the aorta (aneurism
of the aorta), are very often of syphilitic origin.

By the researches of Alfred Fournier and Wilhelm Erb, we know to-day
that two severe diseases of the central nervous system--=tabes dorsalis=
or =locomotor ataxy=, and =general paralysis of the insane= (=paralytic
dementia=)--are almost always (in about 95 % of the cases) referable to
earlier syphilis. Among 5,749 cases of syphilis encountered in his own
private practice, Fournier observed no less than 758 cases of brain
syphilis, 631 cases of tabes, and 83 cases of softening of the brain.
Tabes and general paralysis of the insane are all the more dangerous
because they are no longer, properly speaking, “syphilitic” diseases,
and therefore they cannot be cured by antisyphilitic treatment; they are
severe degenerative changes of the central nervous system, which has
been, as it were, prepared for their occurrence by the previous
syphilis. These belong to the class of the so-called “=parasyphilitic=”
diseases in which antisyphilitic treatment has little or no good effect.

Even more tragic are the consequences of syphilis to the =family=, the
=offspring=, and the =race=. =Syphilis in married life=, =congenital
syphilis=, and the =degeneration of the race by syphilis=--these are the
tragic manifestations which come under consideration in this connexion.

In his admirable work on “Syphilis and Marriage,” Alfred Fournier, the
greatest living authority on syphilis in all its manifestations and
relationships, has described the momentous influence exercised by
syphilis in conjugal life; and in his recently published work, “Syphilis
a Social Danger,” he has dealt also with congenital syphilis and racial
degeneration. He found that, on the average, among 100 women suffering
from syphilis, 20 had been infected by their husbands, either at the
very commencement of married life, or in its later course, or finally
through the offspring after conception. Divorce on the ground of
syphilitic infection by the husband is at the present day of frequent
occurrence.

The transmission of syphilis to the child by =inheritance= may be
effected either by the father or the mother; when both the father and
the mother are syphilitic, it occurs with absolute certainty. The
various possibilities of transmission, and the contingent immunity of
mother or child, as they are expressed in Colles’s law (Baumès’s law),
and in Profeta’s law, cannot here be further dealt with. If the mother
has herself been infected with syphilis, or if she was previously
syphilitic, either the child is not carried until term, abortion or
miscarriage ensuing, or, finally, it is born with symptoms of congenital
syphilis.[321]

The frequent occurrence of premature births and still-births in any
family suggests strong suspicions that they are due to syphilis. The
=general mortality= of the children in a family is regarded by Fournier
as an important sign to the physician of congenital syphilis. Syphilitic
infection of the father gives rise to a mortality in the children of
28 %; syphilis in the mother causes a mortality in the children of 60 %;
when the disease affects both parents, the mortality among the children
amounts to 68 %. Absolutely astounding is the mortality of the children
of syphilitic prostitutes; it amounts to from 84 to 86 %.

Children born =alive=, suffering from congenital syphilis, are generally
weakly,[322] of deficient body-weight; have often a flaccid, wrinkled
skin, covered with typical syphilitic eruptions, and frequently with
great purulent vesicles, especially on the palms of the hands and the
soles of the feet (“pemphigus syphiliticus”); the internal organs also,
the spleen, the liver, and the bones, exhibit morbid changes.
Characteristic is the syphilitic affection of the upper air-passages,
especially the syphilitic “cold in the head” (=syphilitic
rhinitis=--“snuffles”), of new-born congenitally syphilitic children.
Congenital syphilis further gives rise to severe =disturbances of
development= and to phenomena to which Fournier has given the name of
“=late syphilis=” (“syphilis hereditaria tarda”), because they first
make their appearance in the later years of life.[323] Permanent
=debility=, =arrest of development=, =stigmata of degeneration=, in the
form of various =malformations=--as, for example, notching of the edge
of the upper central incisor permanent teeth (a symptom first described
by Jonathan Hutchinson), malformations of the nose, the ears, and the
palate, dwarfing, deaf-mutism, malformations of the external and
internal reproductive organs, rickets,[324] epilepsy, and mental
weakness--are the consequences of congenital syphilis. Tarnowsky,
Fournier, and Barthélémy have traced the consequences of congenital
syphilis into the second and third generation, and so have discovered an
important cause of racial degeneration. Syphilis in the grandfather can
still exercise its disastrous influence in the grandson, and give rise
to the above-mentioned stigmata of degeneration.[325] Indeed, congenital
syphilis of the second generation often appears with the same severity
as that of the first generation; and, like acquired syphilis, congenital
syphilis in women can cause a predisposition to miscarriages and
still-births.

According to statistics obtained by Edmond Fournier, relating to 11,000
cases of syphilis (10,000 men, 1,000 women) from the private practice
of his father, Alfred Fournier, regarding the age at which infection
occurs, it appears that in =men= it most commonly occurs between the
ages of twenty and twenty-six years (the maximum number of infections
during the twenty-third year); in =women=, between the ages of eighteen
and twenty-one; 8 % of syphilitic males and 20 % of syphilitic females
were infected before the age of twenty years. Syphilis is to a
considerable extent at the present day a disease of =inexperienced
youth=. This fact is important in relation to the problem of prevention
and the problem of enlightenment.[326]

Of much less importance than syphilis is the purely local =soft
chancre=, or chancroid, which never results in general infection.
Chancroid is produced by a specific exciting cause, a chain-forming
bacillus (streptobacillus), _Bacillus ulceris cancrosi_, which is found
in the pus secreted by the ulcer. =One or two days= after infection, a
small pustule forms at the site of inoculation, generally on the
external genital organs. This pustule soon bursts, and a deeply hollowed
ulcer makes its appearance, which usually undergoes rapid increase, and
frequently, owing to the infective character of the pus, gives rise to
new chancres in the neighbourhood of the original one, so that the soft
chancre is commonly multiple. When suitably treated with antiseptic
powders and cauterization, chancroid usually heals quickly; there are,
however, very dangerous varieties of chancroid--for instance, the
=serpiginous= chancre, which continues to creep irresistibly forward;
and the =phagedænic= or =gangrenous= chancre, which puts the skill of
the physician to the utmost test. A less dangerous but extremely
disagreeable complication of chancroid is inflammation of the inguinal
glands, most commonly only on one side; this painful “bubo” (painful in
contrast with the painless syphilitic bubo) has a well-marked tendency
to suppuration. If this occurs, and the pus finds its way to the
surface, fistulas and new chancrous ulcers are liable to occur at the
place where it opens. By rest in bed, the inunction of iodide ointment,
the application of cold compresses, the injection into the bubo of a
solution of nitrate of silver, and the internal use of iodide of
potassium, this unfortunate course may be prevented.

A remarkable =change of views= has, in the course of the last thirty
years, taken place in respect of the nature and importance of
=gonorrhœa=.[327] Whereas formerly this was regarded as a comparatively
harmless disease, we know to-day that gonorrhœa in the male, and still
more in the female, gives rise to tedious dangers and painful morbid
phenomena, and is the source of unspeakable sorrows, and of the
miserable ill-health of numerous women, and that it is the chief cause
of =sterility= in both sexes.

Gonorrhœa is principally a =disease of the mucous membrane=, and is, in
this way, distinguished from syphilis, which is a general disorder,
diffusing itself by way of the bloodvessels. In rare cases, indeed,
gonorrhœa can exhibit general morbid manifestations, the so-called
=gonorrhœal rheumatism=, gonorrhœal affections of the spinal cord and of
the heart, and gonorrhœal nervous troubles, all of which are so rare,
that for practical purposes they can be left out of consideration.

The typical seat of gonorrhœa is the =mucous membrane of the urinary and
the genital organs= of the male and the female; in the male affecting
=chiefly= the urinary organs, and in the female affecting chiefly the
genital organs. The cause of =genuine= gonorrhœa is always infection,
the transmission from one human being to another of the purulent
inflammation produced by the =gonococcus= discovered by Neisser in 1879.
=Simple urethral inflammations= with a purulent discharge also occur in
which no gonococci are found. These arise also from infection, but their
actual exciting cause has not yet been discovered. Not less obscure is
the relationship of many of the irritants giving rise to simple urethral
catarrh--for example, that which is active during menstruation--to the
supposed exciting cause. In any case, these simple catarrhs have a very
mild course, and undergo a cure after a few days or weeks, spontaneously
or as a result of treatment with mild injections.

Quite otherwise is it with genuine gonorrhœa. In the male it begins from
two to six days after the infective intercourse, with a burning
sensation on passing water, itching at the urethral orifice, which very
easily becomes reddened, and this is soon followed by the discharge,
either spontaneously or as a result of pressure on the urethra, of a
thick fluid, at first mucous, later purulent, and then of a yellow or a
greenish colour. Inflammation, discharge, and pain, the latter
especially in association with urination, increase during the subsequent
weeks; in addition, in a good many cases there are slight fever,
lassitude, and mental depression, and the patient is tormented,
especially during the night, by violent, painful erections. In
exceptional cases there are hæmorrhages from the urethra (the so-called
“=Russian clap=”). In some cases the disease terminates favourably; this
is especially observed after the first attack of gonorrhœa. As early as
the third week the above symptoms become less severe, and in the fourth
or sixth week after infection the whole morbid process may come to an
end, the discharge ceases, the urine becomes clear once more, and, in
fact, definite cure of the gonorrhœa ensues.

But the number of those who are so fortunate is comparatively small. In
the majority of cases, there are other morbid phenomena and
complications; the gonorrhœa becomes “=subacute=,” and later
“=chronic=.” Ricord wrote many years ago: “When anyone has once acquired
gonorrhœa, God only knows when he will get well again!” Happily, this
pessimism is no longer fully justified at the present day; but it is a
fact that in the majority of cases =even to-day= gonorrhœa is a very
obstinate, wearisome illness, a long-continued burden, not only for the
patient, but also for the doctor. The gonococci proliferate in the
deeper layers of the mucous membrane, and pass upwards into the
=posterior= part of the urethra, this latter migration being manifested
especially by frequent and painful =strangury=; further, the =bladder=,
the =prostate gland=, and the =epididymis= may be attacked. Bilateral
epididymitis has often serious consequences as regards the procreative
capacity. In about 50 % of the cases incapacity for fertilization
(impotentia generandi) has resulted.

If the gonorrhœa becomes chronic, thickenings occur in isolated portions
of the urethral mucous membrane; the urine remains turbid for a long
time; the discharge, it is true, becomes scantier, but shows itself with
the most annoying persistency every morning as soon as the patient
leaves his bed, in the form of the so-called =“bon jour” drops= in the
meatus; there are also troubles connected with the prostate (painful
sensations, especially during defæcation), and symptoms of stricture of
the urethra may occur. Very often, also, relative impotence and severe
sexual neurasthenia are observed, as consequences of chronic gonorrhœa.
Worst of all is the =long duration of the infectivity=. There is always
the danger that somewhere or other some gonococci may remain hidden,
and, given an opportunity, may start the process all over again, or may
transmit the infection to another person. Zweifel reports a case in
which a man actually infected a woman thirteen years after he had first
acquired gonorrhœa!

The infection of a woman with gonorrhœa, as we know to-day, is a
disaster. It is the immortal service of the German-American physician
Noeggerath that, in the year 1872, he proved that the majority of the
stubborn “=diseases of women=” were nothing more than the consequences
of gonorrhœal infection. Gonorrhœa selects by preference the internal
reproductive organs of woman; upon the extensive mucous membranes of
these organs the gonococci find the most favourable conditions for their
persistent life; they find a thousand out-of-the-way comers and
hiding-places, where they can elude the therapeutic activity of the
physician.

  “They grow luxuriantly, like a weed which it has not been possible to
  uproot, over the entire surface of the genital mucous membrane,
  attacking with the same vigour the mucous membrane of the uterus and
  that of the Fallopian tubes. In women, as in men, they induce
  ulceration, they cause adhesions, and they give rise to sterility. But
  in the case of women, something further must be added--that, namely,
  this disease has upon them a miserably depressing effect, and that, in
  contradistinction from men, they are likely to suffer for many years
  from intense pains. Whenever they execute certain bodily movements, it
  may be during ten years in succession, they experience pains, often
  horribly severe, and in most cases they are condemned to a life of
  deprivation and misery--not usually for any fault of their own, since
  most women are infected by their husbands” (Zweifel).

Gonorrhœa in women, attacking successively the vagina, the uterus, the
Fallopian tubes, the ovaries, and the peritoneum, is a true martyrdom, a
hell upon earth. Sick in body and in mind, these unhappy women drag out
a miserable existence; and to them so often the last consolation, that
of motherhood, is denied, for gonorrhœa is the most frequent cause of
sterility in woman.

Patients infected with gonorrhœa further run the danger of =blindness=,
by transference of the gonorrhœal virus to the =eye=. This is one of the
most distressing of the possible results of the disease. New-born
children whose mothers are infected with gonorrhœa are during birth
exposed to the same danger of eye infection, as they pass down the
genital passage. In earlier days a very large proportion of the blind
were persons who had lost their sight in this way very shortly after
birth. Since Crédé advocated the admirable method of introducing nitrate
of silver solution into the conjunctival sacs of new-born children,
gonorrhœal inflammation of the eye has become one of the greatest
rarities.


APPENDIX

VENEREAL DISEASES IN THE HOMOSEXUAL

It is an old belief, shared by the homosexual themselves, that venereal
infections are extremely rare among them. If male homosexual persons had
sexual intercourse =only with one another=, this assumption would be in
some degree plausible. For the principal focus of venereal infection is
feminine prostitution, by which venereal diseases are transmitted to
heterosexual men. But since these homosexual men often undertake sexual
acts with heterosexual men--apart from occasional sexual intercourse
with women--a priori there is a possibility of infection in their case,
and such infection is, in fact, observed. Above all, many male
prostitutes also indulge in intercourse with women, and thus diffuse
venereal troubles among homosexual men.

It is obvious that =syphilis= can be diffused among the homosexual as
easily as among the heterosexual, for syphilis is transmitted by many
varieties of contact--by kisses, other caresses, etc. But how is it as
regards =gonorrhœa=?

In the case of heterosexual men and women gonorrhœa is almost
exclusively transmitted by the sexual act, by the introduction of the
male penis into the female vagina. The analogous act between men--that
is to say, pæderasty, _immissio penis in anum_--is unquestionably far
=rarer= than the ordinary sexual act between men and women; it is
commonly replaced by mutual onanism, by kisses and other caresses, and
quite frequently by _coitus in os_. This last is much commoner than
genuine pædication. Of gonorrhœa of the rectum produced by pædication
when the active man is suffering from gonorrhœa, we very rarely hear.
But is there, in the case of homosexual men, any possibility of
gonorrhœal infection due to _coitus in os_?

There can be no doubt that typical =gonorrhœa of the mouth= occurs. The
observations of Kuttler, Atkinson, Rosinski, Dohrn, and Kast, have
proved it.[328] Horand and Cazenave have even observed gonorrhœal
infection of the urethra as a result of oral coitus![329] A homosexual
patient told me that some years before, after _coitus in os_ with a man,
he had for several weeks had a discharge from the urethra, which
spontaneously ceased, and therefore cannot have been genuine gonorrhœa,
but only urethritis resulting from infection by contagious angina. In
the case in question, the urethral catarrh was certainly due to the
_coitus in os_, since any other sources of infection could be excluded.

On the other hand, in a second case an apparently =gonorrhœal infection
of the oral cavity= was transmitted from the urethra.

  A homosexual man, forty-five years of age, one day allowed a
  =heterosexual= man to perform _coitus in os_ on him. Some days
  afterwards he experienced difficulty in swallowing, was feverish, and
  saw in the looking-glass that the uvula was swollen. A specialist for
  throat troubles diagnosed merely a catarrhal infection. The illness
  became worse, and a second throat specialist detected the presence of
  a purulent angina of both tonsils, ordered painting with argentamin,
  also vapour baths, and an astringent gargle, whereupon the affection
  gradually subsided. Six weeks later the patient had swelling and pain
  in the joints of the right knee and foot; under cold compresses these
  swellings subsided after a fortnight. Of the whole trouble nothing now
  remains.

This description, on the part of a patient who is thoroughly
trustworthy, aroused strong suspicion of a =gonorrhœal angina=, with a
consecutive gonorrhœal arthritis. Unfortunately, the purulent discharge
from the tonsils was not examined for gonococci by either of the
physicians in attendance. The case remains, anyhow, very remarkable.

In the case of homosexual women, it is obvious that syphilis, and also
gonorrhœa, can be transmitted, the latter by mutual friction of the
genital organs. I do not know what actually occurs in practice.

  [312] _Cf._ Iwan Bloch, “Schopenhauer’s Illness in the Year 1823. A
  Contribution to Pathography based upon an Unpublished Document.”
  Published in _Medizinische Klinik_, 1906, Nos. 25 and 26. (This gives
  an account of all Schopenhauer’s utterances regarding syphilis.)

  [313] At a meeting of the Société d’Anthropologie de Paris, held on
  April 19, 1906, I read a paper on “La Syphilis Prétendue
  Préhistorique,” in which I discussed this question. The important
  question of ancient bones is further considered in the second volume
  of my work on “The Origin of Syphilis,” pp. 317-364 (now in the
  press).

  [314] The results of this study I have briefly epitomized in an
  address given before the Social Science Congress in Berlin, entitled
  “The First Appearance of Syphilis in Europe” (Jena, 1904).

  [315] Regarding the gradual acquirement (by means of natural
  selection) of immunity to epidemic diseases, the works of Archdall
  Reid may be most profitably consulted (“The Present Evolution of Man,”
  London, 1896; “The Principles of Heredity,” London, 1905). Dr. Reid’s
  views on the part played in human history by the transference of
  diseases from immunized to non-immunized races are of especial
  interest. Unfortunately, as regards syphilis, he accepts Hirsch’s
  erroneous statements relative to the antiquity of that disease, and
  its origin in the eastern hemisphere (see also p. 384, note
  ^{346}).--TRANSLATOR.

  [316] _Cf._ A. Neisser, “The Experimental Investigation of Syphilis as
  it Stands at the Present Day” (Berlin, 1906).

  [317] _Cf._ Erich Hoffmann, “The Etiology of Syphilis” (Berlin, 1906);
  Hans Hübner, “Recent Researches into the Nature of Syphilis,”
  published in the _Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_,
  1906, vol. v., pp. 468-481.

  [318] I must not omit allusion to some recent admirable works on
  venereal diseases: A. Blaschko, “Venereal Diseases”--a popular
  exposition--(Berlin, 1904); Paul Zweifel, “Venereal Diseases and their
  Importance to Health” (Leipzig, 1902); Alfred Fournier, “Syphilis a
  Social Danger”; Karl Ries, “Blameless Sexual Infection” (Stuttgart,
  1904); O. Burwinkel, “Venereal Diseases” (Leipzig, 1905); Waldvogel,
  “The Dangers of Venereal Diseases and their Prevention” (Stuttgart,
  1905). In view of the large number of popular works on venereal
  diseases, those without professional knowledge should confine
  themselves to the best names, because in this province trashy
  literature is extraordinarily abundant, and by the false and erroneous
  views it diffuses, it does much more harm than good. The writings
  mentioned in this note I am able to recommend as thoroughly scientific
  and =trustworthy=.

  [319] Galewsky, “The Transmission of Venereal Diseases in the Suckling
  of Children,” published in the _Journal for the Suppression of
  Venereal Diseases_, 1906, vol. v., pp. 365-371.

  [320] It is true that such a hardening may also occur in other
  non-syphilitic affections of the genital organs--for example, when
  they are peculiarly situated or as a result of cauterization. Only the
  physician can determine whether in such a case syphilitic infection
  has actually occurred.

  [321, 322] According to English experience, the congenitally
  syphilitic child rarely exhibits any sign of syphilis when born. Thus,
  Hutchinson writes (“Syphilis,” p. 73): “At the time of birth, the
  congenitally syphilitic infant almost invariably has a clear skin, and
  appears to be in perfect health.” According to Osler also (“Medicine,”
  sixth edition, p. 269): “The child may be born healthy-looking or with
  well-marked evidence of the disease. In the majority of instances the
  former is the case, and within the first month or two the signs of the
  disease appear.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [323] _Cf._ the recently published admirable work of Edmond Fournier,
  “Recherches et Diagnostic de l’Hérédo-Syphilis Tardive” (Paris, 1907).

  [324] Parrot regarded rickets as a manifestation of congenital
  syphilis, but this view has never found acceptance in England.
  Hutchinson remarks (“Syphilis,” p. 408): “The typical forms of rickets
  are constantly met with in conditions which do not lend the slightest
  support to the suggestion of syphilis.” As Cheadle remarks: “Syphilis
  modifies rickets; it does not create it.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [325] This view must be accepted with reserve. See, for instance,
  Osler’s “Medicine,” sixth edition, p. 271: “Is syphilis transmitted to
  the third generation? The general opinion is opposed to this view.
  Occasionally, however, cases of pronounced congenital syphilis are met
  with in the children of parents who are perfectly healthy, and who
  have not, so far as is known, had syphilis, and yet, as remarked by
  Coutts, who reported such a group of cases, they do not bear careful
  scrutiny. The existing difference of opinion is well illustrated in
  the account by G. Boeck (_Berl. Klin. Wochenschrift_, September 12,
  1904) of four instances of hereditary lues in the second generation,
  while in the same journal Jonathan Hutchinson expresses his belief
  that syphilis is not transmitted to the third
  generation.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [326] As more important scientific works on syphilis I must mention
  that of Isidor Neumann (Vienna, 1899, second edition), containing the
  entire bibliography of the subject; that of Joseph Lang (Wiesbaden,
  1896, second edition); but, above all, the epoch-making work of Alfred
  Fournier, “Traité de Syphilis” (Paris, 1898)--English translation,
  Fournier, “The Treatment and Prophylaxis of Syphilis” (Rebman Ltd.,
  London, 1906).

  [327] The most important scientific work on gonorrhœa is that of
  Ernest Finger, “Blennorrhœa of the Sexual Organs,” fifth edition
  (Leipzig and Vienna, 1901).

  [328] _Cf._ M. von Zeissl, “Diagnosis and Treatment of Venereal
  Diseases,” third edition, pp. 171, 172 (Berlin and Vienna, 1905).

  [329] _Op cit._, p. 172.




