CHAPTER XXVI

SEXUAL EDUCATION


  “_Better a year too early than an hour too late._”--OKER BLOM.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXVI

  Science and practice have hitherto, for the most part, ignored the
  sexual -- The danger of blind chance in the sexual province --
  Necessity for the enlightenment of the coming generation -- Sexual
  education as a part of general pedagogy -- The right to the knowledge
  of one’s own body -- Sexual enlightenment of young people -- The
  dispute regarding the when and the how -- Distinction between the
  youth of the country and the youth of the town -- Points of
  association -- A passage from Gutzkow’s autobiography -- Disastrous
  sources of early sexual enlightenment -- Character of the pedagogic
  enlightenment -- Importance of this -- Suggestions regarding the
  methods of sexual enlightenment (Sigmund, Lischnewska, F. W. Förster)
  -- My own views -- Education of the character and of the will --
  Principal rules of sexual pedagogy -- Education to manhood.


CHAPTER XXVI

The manner in which up to the present day humanity has, properly
speaking, completely ignored the fact of sexuality is at once remarkable
and difficult to understand. Until recently people went so far as to
regard scientific research into sexual matters by =adult persons= as
improper! The mystical idea of the sinfulness, of the radically evil
character, of the sexual, was a dogma which even natural science
appeared to admit. Our attitude towards the sexual was as if it were at
once Sphinx and Gorgon’s head, as if it were the veiled statue of Sais.
We stood helpless, in the face of this mysterious and malignant power,
against the =blind hazard of chance which plays= so momentous a part,
more especially in sexual affairs. As everywhere in life, so here also,
the dominion of chance could be overcome only by means of knowledge. The
solution of the sexual problem demands, in the first place, =openness=,
=clearness=, =learning= in the department of the sexual, knowledge of
cause and effect, and the =transmission= of this knowledge to the =next
generation=, so that this latter may without harm become wise. =Sexual
education= is an important chapter in general pedagogy.[696]

Regarding animals, plants, and stones the youthful human being of to-day
acquires the most exact information, but we have hitherto =refused= him
the right to understand his own body, and to acquire a knowledge of
certain important vital functions of that body. There can be no doubt
about the fact that the modern human being, who has learned to so large
an extent to regard himself as a =social= being, has a sacred natural
right to this knowledge.

Celebrated pedagogues of a hundred years ago, such as Rousseau,
Salzmann, Basedow, Jean Paul, etc., expressed themselves in favour of
the early sexual enlightenment of youth, and gave the most valuable
advice regarding the methods to be employed;[697] but their views
remained for the most part devoid of practical effect, and it is only in
recent years, in connexion with the question of the protection of
motherhood, with the campaign against prostitution, and with the attempt
to suppress venereal diseases, that interest in this matter has been
reawakened; and there now exists in this department an extensive
literature, belonging chiefly to the last few years, proceeding from the
pens of physicians, pedagogues, hygienists, and advocates of woman’s
rights.[698] It is, in truth, the burning question of our time, the
solution of which is here attempted. Correct sexual education forms the
foundation for the ennoblement and resanation of our entire sexual life.
Only =knowledge= and =will= can here effect a cure. Thus, sexual
pedagogy naturally falls into two parts--=sexual enlightenment= and the
=education of the will=.

The need for sexual enlightenment is now recognized by all far-seeing
social hygienists and pedagogues. The only difference of opinion
concerns the =when= and the =how=. Some plead for enlightenment as early
as possible, in the first years of school life; others wish to defer
enlightenment until puberty, or even later. I am of opinion that the
circumstances in this respect are entirely different, according as we
have to do with small towns and the open country, where more careful
watching of children is possible, and where the dangers of premature
sexual development and of seduction are not so great, or as we have to
do with large towns, where, in my view, the children =cannot be
enlightened too early=, since town life brings the children of all
classes, and social misery brings more especially the children of the
lowest classes of the population, so early into contact with sexual
matters that a purposive enlightenment becomes absolutely indispensable.
Children living in large towns should, from ten years onwards, be
gradually and carefully made acquainted with the principal facts of the
sexual life. We find here =more points of association= than is usually
imagined. Gutzkow, in his admirable autobiography, “From the Days of My
Boyhood” (Frankfort-a.-M., 1852, pp. 263, 264), has beautifully
described this:

  “The first appearances of love in the heart of the child occur as
  secretly as the fall of the dew upon flowers. Playing and jesting,
  innocence gropes its way through the darkness. Words, perceptions,
  ideas, which to the adult appear to be full of dangerous barbs, the
  child grasps with careless security, and takes the duplex sexual life
  of humanity to be a primeval fact which came into the world with man
  as a matter of course, and one which requires no explanation. Born
  from the mother’s womb, to the child the mother is the secure bridge
  by which it is conducted past all the riddles of womanhood. The child
  imitates the love of the father for the mother, plays the game of the
  family, plays father and mother, plays at being himself, a child. From
  the rustling autumn leaves, from abandoned bundles of straw, huts and
  nests are built, and for half an hour at a time a completely blameless
  boy can lie down besides his girl playmate, quietly, and as if
  magnetized by the intimation of love. Danger is in truth not far
  distant from such a practice of childish naïveté; it lurks in the
  background, and seeks only an opportunity to lead astray. But a child
  never understands the significance of the severe punishment which it
  so often receives for its imitative imaginary family life. The amatory
  life of the adult first breaks upon the imagination of the child and
  upon his quiet play like the opening of a door into a house. People
  take so little care of what they do before the innocent; they exhibit
  passionate affection for one another; they caress when the children
  are by. The child sees, ponders, and listens. Certain hieroglyphics
  alarm it; tales are laughed at--tales which suddenly throw a strange
  and wonderful light upon quite familiar human beings. The boy will
  notice that his elder sister has a joy or a sorrow, the nature of
  which he cannot completely grasp. He sees an elder brother filled with
  the joy of life, with the lust of youth, with the love of adventure,
  and no attempt is made to conceal these passions from the child....
  Such and similar experiences succeed one another without cessation,
  and tales which the child hears are listened to with eagerness. The
  red threads of love and of the charm of beautiful women are not to be
  grasped by the hand of a child, and yet they have upon the child a
  certain secret influence.”

The child hears and sees much that is erotic, even immoral, but does not
stop to think about it, does not understand it. After a while its
ignorance becomes a puzzle; soon lascivious thoughts arise. Maria
Lischnewska describes very vividly this psychological process in the
soul of the child, in part according to her observations as a teacher.
She justly criticizes the “stork stories,” to which the child listens
without believing them, in order subsequently to be enlightened in an
extremely disagreeable manner by older ill-conditioned comrades.[699]

These children, ten or twelve years of age, often learn about sexual
matters from the lowest side, =without= obtaining a =true knowledge=.
They frequently acquire the most astounding verbal treasury of lewd
expressions, and even sing obscene songs, of which Maria Lischnewska
gives a remarkable example on the part of a girl twelve years of age.

No, there can be no question that the child at school, from the tenth
year onwards, should, without fear of disastrous consequences, be
enlightened regarding sexual matters by parents and teachers, in order
to avoid the dangers which we have just described. But this instruction
must be divested of any individual relationship, of any personal
character, and must be communicated in thoroughly general terms, as
=natural scientific knowledge=, as a medical doctrine, belonging to the
province of philosophical and pathological science. In this way will be
avoided any undesirable accessory effect related to subjective
perceptions. When Matthisson esteems youth as happy on this account,
because the =book of possibilities= is not yet open to its gaze, this
certainly does =not= hold as regards sexual enlightenment. Here, to a
certain degree, this book of possibilities must be disclosed, if we do
not wish all the poetry and all the ideal view of life to be utterly
destroyed by contact with rude reality. Precisely in this case do we
understand the wonderful remark of Goethe, that we receive the veil of
poetry from the hand of =truth=. This first renders possible a truly
earnest and profound conception of sexual relationships; this creates a
consciousness of responsibility which cannot be awakened sufficiently
early. The true danger is, as Freud[700] also points out, the
intermixture of “lasciviousness and prudery” with which humanity is
accustomed to regard the sexual problem, just because people have not
learned sufficiently to understand the connexion between cause and
effect in this department of human activity.

Various methods have been recommended for sexual enlightenment. I shall
discuss more particularly the suggestions of the Austrian _Realschul_
professor, Sigmund, of the _Volkschul_ teacher, Maria Lischnewska, and
of the University professor, F. W. Förster.

Sigmund (quoted by Ullmann, _op. cit._, p. 7) considers that in the
_Volkschüler_ (primary schools), in the case of children up to the age
of eleven years, there should be no systematic explanation of sexual
matters, and that this should be begun first in the Gymnasium (higher
school). His scheme of instruction is as follows:

  1. The enlightenment of the pupils at the Gymnasium is to be effected
  in five stages (Classes I., II., V., VI., VII.)

  2. The enlightenment in the lower classes is limited to the processes
  of sexual reproduction. In the first class, the origin and birth of
  the mammalian young and the origin of insects’ eggs are explained. In
  the second class, the origin and birth of reptiles’ and birds’ eggs,
  the fertilization of the eggs of fishes and batrachians, the ova of
  the sea-urchin, and those of the jellyfish, are described. =The act of
  sexual intercourse will not be alluded to in the first two
  classes--that is, it will not be mentioned to children before the age
  of thirteen years.=

  3. The completion of the idea of “sexual life” is effected by means of
  botanical and zoological instruction in the upper school in a
  synthetic manner, wherein no important detail is omitted, but the
  copulatory act is kept in the background.

  4. All sexual matters expressly concerning human beings, and all the
  pathological relations of the sexual life, should be left to the
  hygienic instruction, which is given during one hour weekly to the
  seventh class as a part of general instruction in somatology.

  5. The natural history taught to the sixth class will embrace zoology
  only; the natural system will be considered in an ascending series
  (excluding human somatology, which in a logical manner is deferred
  until the study of zoology is completed, and it will thus be dealt
  with in the seventh class, as a preparation to the instruction in
  hygiene).

  6. In conferences with parents, the parents can be kept informed
  regarding the nature of the instruction which is being given to their
  children, and can at the same time be led to work in unison with the
  school in this matter.

Maria Lischnewska advises beginning already in the third class of
primary schools--that is, when the child is only eight years old--to
give instruction in the elements of natural science, more especially
utilizing, as the first means of sexual enlightenment, the examples of
vegetable fertilization, as well as the reproduction of fishes and
birds. Even to the question “Whence do little children come?” an answer
should be given, more or less in the following terms:

  “The child lies in the body of the mother: when she breathes, then the
  child breathes; when she eats and drinks, the child also obtains his
  food. It lies there warm and safe. Gradually it becomes larger and
  begins to move. It has to lie somewhat curled up, because there is so
  little room for it. But the mother feels that it is alive; she is full
  of joy, and makes ready the child’s clothing and its bed. Finally it
  is fully grown. The mother’s body opens, and the child comes to the
  light. Then the mother takes it into her arms with joy and nourishes
  it with her milk.” Then the teacher would pause, and continue after a
  while: “Now, would you like to see the child?” Then there would
  naturally be a many-voiced “Yes, yes!” and the teacher would show to
  the class a picture such as our anatomical atlases exhibit now in
  beautiful form. The abdominal walls of the mother are turned back, and
  the child is seen slumbering. Then the teacher would say: “Thus you
  also slept within the body of your mother. You belong to her as to no
  other human being in the whole world. For this reason you should
  always love and honour her.”

  Thus is the child’s urgent demand for knowledge satisfied. He is freed
  from all prying into nooks and corners. He experiences a feeling of
  honourable respect towards the primary source of life.

In the fourth school year further examples of the reproduction of
plants, fishes, and birds should be given; in the fifth and sixth years
the first demonstration of the process of sexual union among the
mammals, with some account of embryology; and the process of birth
should also be described. Then there should follow (at about the age of
thirteen or fourteen) enlightenment regarding the development of the
sexual life and regarding venereal diseases--information, that is to
say, concerning hygiene and concerning the protection of one’s own body.
Physicians such as Oker Blom and Dr. Agnes Hacker definitely demand that
elucidation regarding this latter point should =not= be deferred until
the time of puberty.

F. W. Förster proposes to postpone the whole process of enlightenment
=until the twelfth or thirteenth year=; and if at an earlier age a child
expresses any natural doubt regarding the stork fables, the following
answer should be given (_op. cit._, p. 606):

  “Where small children come from is a matter which you cannot yet
  understand. We grown-up persons even understand very little about it.
  I promise you that I will explain to you what we know of the matter on
  your twelfth birthday, but only if you promise me something in return.
  Do you know that there are boys and girls so bumptious that they
  behave as if they already knew all about it, because they have
  somewhere picked up a word or two without really understanding it?
  Promise me that you will never listen when such as these begin to talk
  about the matter; for you may be certain that the true secrets are
  matters of which they are ignorant, for this reason--they would not
  speak about it. He who really knows holds it as a sacred matter; he is
  silent about it, and does not call it out at the street comers.”

Förster strongly advises =against= associating sexual enlightenment with
a knowledge of the reproductive process in plants and animals, for this
reason: that if this is done “the human being is brought too near to the
vegetable and animal life,” and the “sacred thought” of the elevation of
humanity above the animal is obscured. He then gives very beautiful
examples and modes of instruction for such sexual enlightenment of
children twelve years of age.

I myself am of opinion that, without in any way making light of the
difference between man and animal, the earlier elucidation at about the
age of ten years should be associated with the general instruction in
natural history regarding the reproductive process of animals and
plants; and then very gradually, up to the age of fourteen, all
important points in this department can be explained, including,
finally, an account of the venereal diseases. It is obvious that after
this time, more especially in the dangerous years of puberty, systematic
enlightenment must be continued. That which is good and useful in this
department of knowledge cannot be too often repeated.

But all enlightenment will be useless unless hand in hand with it there
proceeds =a process of education of the character and the will=. Our
school youth thinks and dreams too much, and does too little. Up to the
present time it has been believed that it is sufficient to teach
children, and to continue to teach them, to care for their health, to
see that they have good food and sound sleep, without also taking into
consideration the necessity for awakening the =individuality= and the
=energy= slumbering in each one of them. The “gymnasium” must concern
itself with the =gymnastics=, not only of the body, but also of the
mind, and must thus restore that harmony between body and mind which
appears to have been quite lost at the present day. Bodily education by
games and sports is only one of the means for this purpose. The
principal aim is to strengthen the character, to induce the habit of
self-command and self-denial by a profound and intimate grasp of sexual
problems. Nowhere does fantastic dreaming take revenge more thoroughly
than in sexual relationships, for which reason also the so-called “only
children” are especially endangered;[701] nowhere do clear knowledge,
objective acquirements, and a firm will celebrate finer triumphs over
blind impulses than they do here. The principal rule of sexual pedagogy
runs as follows: Avoid the =first opportunity= and the =first contact=;
keep the child and the young man and the young woman at a distance from
all the stimulating pleasures and enjoyments of the adult. The
production of manliness, as it has recently been described by
Mosso,[702] Güssfeldt,[703] Georg Sticker,[704] and Ludwig Gurlitt,[705]
has the greatest importance, more especially as regards the sexual life.
This has been insisted on, above all, by Hans Wegener[706] and F. W.
Förster (_op. cit._). Moral statistics have incontrovertibly proved that
progress in civilization and morals does not depend upon punishment or
upon prophylactic measures against errors and excesses of passion, but
only upon the =subjective= improvement and strengthening of the single
individual. Guizot declared: “C’est de l’état _intérieur_ de l’homme que
dépend l’état visible de la société.” Drobisch,[707] in his “Moral
Statistics,” has established this fact yet more firmly. Energy is the
magic word for all vital activities of the present day, both spiritual
and physical. Discipline, work, abstinence, bodily hygiene, are the
means for educating the character, and these also play the principal
part in sexual pedagogy.[708]

  [696] For this reason, Fr. W. Förster, in his admirable “Jugendlehre”
  (Berlin, 1906), devotes a special section to the subject of “sexual
  pedagogy” (pp. 602-652).

  [697] Maria Lischnewska, in her admirable work upon “The Sexual
  Instruction of Children,” published in _Mutterschutz_, 1905, vol. i.,
  pp. 137-150, quotes the principal passages relating to this subject
  from the works of the writers just mentioned.

  [698] In addition to the two admirable works already mentioned, by F.
  W. Förster and M. Lischnewska, I may allude also to the following:
  Richard Flachs, “Sexual Enlightenment as a Part of the Education of
  our Young People,” with a full bibliography (Dresden and Leipzig,
  1906); Carl Kopp, “Sexual Affairs in the Education of Youth” (Leipzig,
  1904); Max Marcuse, “Sexual Enlightenment in Youth” (Leipzig, 1905);
  “Sexual Hygiene and Sexual Enlightenment in the School” (a Discussion
  at the First International Congress for School Hygiene, held at
  Nürnberg, 1904), published in the “Reports of the German Society for
  the Suppression of Venereal Diseases,” 1904, vol. ii., pp. 63-71; Karl
  Ullmann, “The Sexual Enlightenment of School-Children,” published in
  the _Monatsschrift für Gesundheitspflege_, 1906, No. 1; M. Flesch,
  “Enlightenment in the School,” published in _Blätter für
  Volksgesundheitspflege_, vol. iv., p. 164; Emma Eckstein, “The Sexual
  Question in the Education of the Child” (Leipzig, 1904); Adelheid von
  Bennigsen, “Sexual Pedagogy in the House and the School” (Berlin,
  1903); Alfred Fournier, “Pour nos Fils quand ils auront Dix-huit Ans”
  (Paris, 1905); M. Oker Blom, “Beim Onkel Doktor auf dem Lande”: a Book
  for Parents, second edition (Vienna, 1906); Friedrich Siebert, “A Book
  for Parents” (Munich, 1905); same author, “What shall I say to my
  Child?” (Munich, 1904); Mary Wood-Allen, “When the Boy becomes Man”
  (Zurich, 1904); same author, “Tell me the Truth, dear Mother”; W.
  Busch, “No more Stork Stories: a Practical Introduction, showing how
  Children should be taught the Truth, and how the Family should be
  Safeguarded from Moral Contamination” (Leipzig, 1904); E. von den
  Steinen, “The Human Sexual Life: a Lecture to those leaving School”
  (Düsseldorf, 1906); _cf._ also, by the same author, “An Address to
  those leaving School concerning Sexual Love,” published in the
  _Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_, 1900, vol. v., pp.
  259, 260; F. Siebert, “Our Sons: their Enlightenment regarding the
  Dangers of the Sexual Life” (Straubing, 1907); F. Siebert, “The Sexual
  Problem in Childhood,” published in “The Book of the Child,” edited by
  Adele Schreiber (Leipzig and Berlin, 1907), vol. i., pp. 106-117; L.
  Bergfeld, “Take the Bandage from your Eyes, dear Sister: an Open
  Letter to Adolescent Girls” (Munich, 1907).

  [699] In some cases the child will criticize the grown-up’s fables
  with a sharp-sighted logic, as the following story proves: Pepito, a
  child seven years of age, asks his mother, “Tell me, mamma, how do
  children come?” “People buy them.” “I don’t believe that people buy
  them!” “Why not?” “Because poor people have the most!”

  [700] S. Freud, “Collection of Minor Writings upon the Doctrine of
  Neurosis,” p. 216 (Leipzig and Vienna, 1906).

  [701] _Cf._ Eugen Neter, “The Only Child and its Education” (Munich,
  1906).

  [702] Angelo Mosso, “Physical Culture in Youth” (Hamburg and Leipzig,
  1894).

  [703] Paul Güssfeldt, “The Education of German Youth” (Berlin, 1890).

  [704] Georg Sticker, “Health and Education,” second edition (Giessen,
  1903).

  [705] Ludwig Gurlitt, “Education in Manliness” (Berlin, 1907).

  [706] Hans Wegener, “We Young Men: the Sexual Problem of the Cultured
  Young Man before Marriage: Purity, Strength, and the Love of Woman”
  (Düsseldorf and Leipzig, 1906).

  [707] M. W. Drobisch, “Moral Statistics and the Freedom of the Human
  Will,” pp. 96-101 (Leipzig, 1867). Valuable works regarding the
  education of the character and the social education of the child are
  found in the first volume (second edition) of the monumental work
  edited by Adele Schreiber, “The Book of the Child” (Leipzig and
  Berlin, 1907), from the pens of Laura Frost (pp. 42-63), F. A. Schmidt
  (pp. 168-179), Lüngen (pp. 192-201), G. Kerschensteiner (pp. 202-207),
  R. Penzig (pp. 215-222), and Adele Schreiber (pp. 223-231). Important
  in relation to sexual enlightenment is also the question (one actively
  discussed at the present moment) of the =education of the sexes in
  common=--the so-called =co-education=. It has been proved by
  experience that co-education has a good effect in sexual relationships
  (_cf._ Gertrud Bäumer, “Co-education,” _op. cit._, vol. ii., pp.
  44-48).

  [708] The question of sexual education and enlightenment occupies at
  the moment a place in the foreground of public interest, and rightly
  so; for upon this depends principally the further reform and the
  resanation of all the sexual relationships of civilized peoples. For
  this reason the Discussions, now in the press, of the Third Congress
  of the Society for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases
  (“Sexualpädagogik”), Leipzig, 1907, were occupied exclusively with
  this subject, which was considered in elaborate debates from four
  points of view:

  1. Sexual instruction in the house and the school.
  2. Sexual enlightenment of young persons at puberty.
  3. Sexual instruction of teachers and parents.
  4. Sexual dietetics and education.

  The present position of sexual pedagogy in all these respects is
  exactly defined in this comprehensive volume; and, in addition, at the
  conclusion of the book we find a compend of the recent literature of
  the subject. Much of value regarding sexual regimen is to be found in
  the work of H. Mann, “Art and the Sexual Conduct of Life”
  (Oranienburg, 1907), and in that of A. Eulenburg, “Sexual Regimen,”
  published in _Mutterschutz_, July and August, 1907. As an opponent of
  early sexual enlightenment, we must mention G. Leubuscher (“School
  Medicine and School Hygiene,” pp. 65-70; Leipzig, 1907). He considers
  that such enlightenment should only be given at the time of leaving
  school. His reasons, however, are not convincing, and, above all, do
  not apply to large towns.




