CHAPTER XXXI

LOVE IN POLITE (BELLETRISTIC) LITERATURE


  “_The question arises whether it is not absolutely_ =necessary= _that
  art should represent this erotic element forbidden by the culture of
  our time, because it corresponds to a profound subjective human need,
  to a yearning for the completion of man’s imperfect
  existence_.”--KONRAD LANGE.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXXI

  Love the nucleus of belletristic literature -- Necessity for the
  erotic element in polite literature -- Remarks of the æsthetic Konrad
  Lange on this subject -- Sexual topics in belles-lettres are
  principally problem-literature -- As a mirror of the times --
  Description of puberty in our poems -- The _demi-vierge_ type -- The
  “Vera” books -- Misogyny and ascetic romances, and rejoinders -- The
  “intimacy” and free love in literature -- Irregular sexual intercourse
  in literature -- Marriage in literature -- Novels of divorce -- The
  emancipated woman in belletristic literature -- Novels dealing with
  “fallen woman” -- Precursors and imitations of the “Diary of a Lost
  Woman” -- Belletristic descriptions of brothel life, and of the life
  of prostitution -- Alcoholism and syphilis in literature -- Sexual
  perversities in belletristic literature -- Larocque’s “Voluptueuses,”
  etc. -- Homosexuality and bisexuality in belles-lettres -- Masochism
  and sadism -- Psychological love romances -- More earnest and more
  profound grasp of sexual questions displayed in modern belletristic
  literature.


CHAPTER XXXI

It is a familiar fact that from the very earliest uprising of
belletristic literature its nucleus has always been the passion of love.
There are, indeed, very few recent romances or dramas in which love does
not play a part. It is a fable to say that sexual matters have =to-day
for the first time= been freely discussed in belletristic literature, to
assert that the predominance of erotic literature (which is to be
distinguished from pornographic literature by its artistic intention and
form) is especially characteristic of modern civilization. A glance at
the catalogue of the library of the poet and bibliophile Eduard
Grisebach,[794] which contains the erotic literature of the world,
teaches us that such literature has existed at all times and among all
civilized nations. The erotic in belles-lettres has not merely a
permissive existence, but by necessity forms a part of it--a fact very
justly recognized by the æsthetic Konrad Lange.[795] Who that knows
human nature can doubt the fact? Lange remarks:

  “Art which represents the nude, because an opportunity exists for it
  to delight in the representation of the flesh, because it regards
  humanity as the crown of creation, and because it admires the
  purposive anatomical structure of the human body--such an art is
  =within its own rights=, and does what it =may= and =must=.

  “If we regard the representation of the nude in painting and sculpture
  as not repulsive, although it does not suit us in ordinary life to go
  naked, =so also in the poesy of the erotic we must sometimes allow a
  form to which in ordinary life a justification is refused=. Indeed,
  the question arises whether it is not absolutely =essential= that art
  should represent the erotic, although this is forbidden by the
  civilization of our time; for this corresponds to a profound
  subjective human need, a yearning for the completion of man’s
  imperfect existence.

  “Next to hunger and thirst, love is the strongest human emotion; next
  to death, its enjoyment is the most important human experience. It is
  not to be wondered at that art is especially fond of depicting it. Art
  which wishes to represent life in general cannot leave unconsidered an
  instinct which plays so important a part in the life of the majority
  of human beings, and from which such a number of conflicts proceed.
  With regard to the degree and the kind of representation, =the
  decision depends not upon moral, but exclusively upon æsthetic,
  considerations=. The task of the poet is no more than this: to
  describe transgressions of the moral code in such a manner that they
  appear to arise by an inner necessity out of the whole course of
  activity, out of the characters, out of the objective relationships.
  Then the immoral content comes to the help of the illusion.”

It is naturally impossible, within the narrow compass of this work, to
give an exhaustive account of the sexual element in modern belletristic
literature. I shall only refer to a few well-known phenomena which all
exhibit a common feature. Love and sexual topics in belles-lettres are
principally =problem= literature. The earnest and profound social
perception with which sexual problems are to-day considered and
explained is reflected also in the literature of our time. The adult
will long ago in these matters have risen above the level of shallow
story-telling and schoolgirl morality, and demands an earnest and honest
representation of sexual problems. Frey[796] justly observes that it is
a general and a healthy tendency of the time, not a tendency to perverse
lust, which impels the choice of erotic material. In the economically
determined forced labour of persons of average ability, in the monotony
and the poverty of adventure of our civilized life, it is only by
eroticism that into many a life any individual colouring is brought.

In the following brief sketch of the sexual problems treated in recent
belletristic literature, I hope to give some idea of the =very numerous=
and interesting topics which the various phenomena of the sexual life
now offer to the poet.

The very =first= sexual activities of the child have been subjected to
poetic treatment, as in Frank Wedekind’s drama, “Frühlingserwachen”
(“The Awakening of Spring”); and the sexual note of the time of puberty
is treated in Bonnetain’s celebrated onanistic novel, “Charlot s’Amuse,”
in Walter Bloem’s novel, “Der krasse Fuchs,” in Max von Münchhausen’s
“Eckhart von Jeperen,” and very strikingly in the novel “Lothar oder
Untergang einer Kindheit” (“Lothar, or the Ruin of Childhood”), by Oscar
A. H. Schmitz. In connexion with the consideration of the time of
puberty in belletristic literature, the following works may also be
mentioned: “Unterm Rad,” by Hermann Hesse; “Freund Hein,” by Emil
Strauss; “Die Verwirrungen des Zöglings Törless,” by Robert Musil; “Was
zur Sonne Will,” by Hans Hart; “Eine Gymnasiastentragödie,” a drama in
four acts, by Robert Sandeks. Consult also Gustav Zieler’s review of
“Frühlingserwachen,” published in _Das Literarische Echo_ of August 15,
1907.

The type of girl who ripens to a premature sexuality, and who, though
physically still intact, is spiritually corrupt, has been made widely
known by Marcel Prévost’s “Demivierge.” A companion novel to this is
“Nixchen,” by Hans von Kahlenberg. Nobler types of girls playing with
this vice are described by Clara Eysell-Kilburger in “Dilettanten des
Lasters.”

Diametrically opposed to these are the “Vera” characters, so called
after the book by Vera, “Eine für Viele. Aus dem Tagebuche eines
Mädchens” (“One for Many. From the Diary of a Girl”), which demands from
the man before marriage the same purity and chastity that man himself
demands from his future wife. Svava, in Björnsen’s drama “Der
Handschuh,” is a similar type. Regarding this problem an entire
literature has sprung into being, which associated itself with Vera’s
above-mentioned book, such as “Eine für sich Selbst” (“One for
Herself”), by “Auch Jemand” (“Somebody Else”); “Einer für Viele” (“One
Man for Many”); “Eine für Vera. Aus dem Tagebuche einer jungen Frau”
(“One for Vera. From the Diary of a Young Wife”)--these in favour of
Vera’s demand--and Christine Thaler’s “Eine Mutter für Viele” (“One
Mother for Many”); by Verus, “Einer für Viele” (“One Man for Many”), and
“Kranke Seelen. Von einem Arzte” (“Morbid Souls. By a Physician”)--these
in opposition to Vera’s demand--for masculine abstinence from sexual
intercourse before marriage.[797]

Next we may mention certain novels glorifying =misogyny=, such as
Strindberg’s “Beichte eines Toren” (“Confessions of a Fool”) and
“Vergangenheit eines Toren” (“The Past of a Fool”); and Tolstoi’s “The
Kreutzer Sonata,” in which absolute asceticism is demanded. These ideas,
which in Weininger found a pseudo-scientific apologist, have been
contested in an interesting autobiography in the form of a romance, “Das
Weib vom Manne erschaffen: Bekenntnisse einer Frau” (“Woman created from
Man: Confessions of a Woman”), translated from the Norwegian by Tyra
Bentsen. Zola’s magnificent hymn in favour of fruitfulness in
“Fécondité” is also a refutation of this extreme ascetic-malthusian
standpoint.

The “intimacy” and “free love” are to-day the subject of innumerable
romances and novels. Tovote discusses the problem in “Im Liebesrausch”
(“In the Intoxication of Love”), and in other novels, more superficially
from the grossly sensual side; the ideal free love, ending indeed in
marriage, is described in Peter Nansen’s “Maria.”[798] Similarly,
Frenssen, in “Hilligenlei,” deals with the preconjugal sexual
intercourse so common in country districts, and he reproves in powerful
words the repression of natural impulses by conventional morality.[799]

In “Martin Birks Jugend,” Hjalmar Söderberg has described the great
difficulties of ideal-minded young men who are not in a position to
marry, and who are repelled by the idea of intercourse with common
prostitutes.

In contrast to this, Camille Lemonnier, in “Die Liebe im Menschen,”
describes the great danger of an =overgrowth= of the sexual; and Arthur
Schnitzler, in his admirable “Reigen,” describes the utter misery of
=irregular sexual intercourse=, of true “wild love,” and displays
vividly before our eyes the results of sexual promiscuity.

The social contempt and the other disastrous consequences which to-day
follow free love, in the form of =illegitimate motherhood=, have been
described in dramas, such as Sudermann’s “Heimat” and Gerhart
Hauptmann’s “Rose Bernd,” and in romances such as Gabriele Reuter’s “Aus
guter Familie,” Johann Bojer’s “Eine Pilgerfahrt,” and Ernst
Eberhardt’s “Das Kind.” The manifold conflicts resulting from free love
and illegitimate motherhood are also described by Marcelle Tinayre in
“La Rebelle.”

In belles-lettres we also find numerous accounts of the burning question
of our day--that of =coercive marriage=. Above all, Ibsen, in “Ghosts,”
“A Doll’s House,” “The Lady from the Sea,” “Hedda Gabler,” and “Little
Eyolf,” has exposed the manifold injuries resulting from modern
conventional marriage, and has propounded the ideal of a new marriage,
based upon a deeply subjective conception of love and upon life’s work
in common. The influence of Ibsen is further shown in numerous dramas
and romances dealing with the marriage problem. Of these, it will
suffice to mention a few of the most successful, such as “Die Sklavin,”
by Ludwig Fulda; “Fanny Roth: eine Jungfrauengeschichte,” by Grete
Meisel-Hess; and “Was siehst du aber den Splitter,” by Karl Larsen.

The important question of differences in class and social position in
married life is considered by Ernst von Wildenbruch in his drama, “Die
Haubenlerche.”

The classical novels of adultery are, and will remain, Erneste Feydeau’s
delightful “Fanny,” and Gustave Flaubert’s “Madame Bovary.” In French
literature in general, in dramas as well as romances, adultery is a
favourite motive.[800]

Isolated but especially characteristic phenomena of the sexual life have
also found expression in poetry. Thus Ernst von Wolzogen, in “Das Dritte
Geschlect,” describes the various types of =emancipated women=; the same
question forms the theme of “Die Neue Eva,” by Maria Janitschek. Anna
Mahr, also, in Gerhart Hauptmann’s “Einsame Menschen,” is such a type.
In all of these the conflict between woman and personality is described;
and this is done with exceptional force and clearness in “Das Neue
Weib,” by M. Janitschek.[801]

The contrast to the woman who wishes to become a personality is to be
found in the woman who has never possessed a personality, or who has
lost it, the woman who has become only a chattel, an object of enjoyment
for man--=the prostitute=. I alluded before (p. 315) to the fact that
Margarete Böhme, in her sensational “Diary of a Lost Woman,” was not the
first to describe the life of a prostitute. Already from the sixteenth
century there date such romances as, for example, the celebrated “Lozana
Andaluza” of Francisco Delgado; also Defoe’s “History of Moll Flanders,”
and Abbé Prévost’s “Manon Lescaut” (both belonging to the eighteenth
century). Besides the “Memoirs of a Hamburg Prostitute” (_vide supra_,
p. 315), there exist still other precursors, belonging to the nineteenth
century, of the “Diary of a Lost Woman,” such as E. de Goncourt’s “Fille
Elisa,” Leon Leipsiger’s “Ballhaus-Anna,” etc. The “Diary of a Lost
Woman” naturally soon found imitations, such as Hedwig Hard’s
“Confessions of a Fallen Woman,” the “Diary of Another Lost Woman”; and
the purely pornographic “History of Josephine Mutzenbecher, a Viennese
Prostitute,” Daudet’s “Sapho,” Zola’s “Nana,” Cristian Krogh’s
“Albertine,” and George Moore’s “Esther Waters,” belong to the same
class.[802]

=Brothel life= and the =life of prostitution=, in all their
relationships to modern civilization, and in their influence upon human
character, are described by Frank Wedekind in “Die Büchse der Pandora”
(“Pandora’s Box”) and in his “Hidalla”; and with exceptional vividness
by Oscar Metenier, in his romance cycle, extending to seven volumes,
“Tartufes et Satyres.”

The rôle of =alcohol= and of =syphilis= in the sexual life have also
been discussed in belletristic literature. In Gerhart Hauptmann’s “Vor
Sonnenaufgang” (“Before Sunrise”), Loth abandons his beloved Helne as
soon as he learns that she springs from a degenerate family of
drunkards. The disastrous consequences of syphilis are described by
Ibsen in “Ghosts,” and recently most vividly by Brieux in “Les
Avariés.”[803]

Extraordinarily comprehensive, especially in France, is the belletristic
literature of =sexual perversities=. After the manner of the
“Rougon-Macquart” series by Zola, Jean Larocque has written a romance
cycle of eleven volumes, under the general title of “Les Voluptueuses”
(the separate titles are: “Isey,” “Viviane,” “Odile,” “Fausta,”
“Daphne,” “Phœbe,” “Fusette,” “La Naïade,” “Louvette,” “Lucine,” and
“Hémine”; in the last volume we find even a discussion of copralagnistic
details!). Some volumes of this series--for example, “Phœbe”--have even
been translated into English. The works also of Baudelaire, Verlaine,
and Guy de Maupassant, offer a rich material for the study of
psychopathia sexualis. In this connexion I may also mention the poetic
collections “La Légende des Sexes,” by Edmond Haraucourt; “Rimes de
Joie,” by Théodore Hannon; and also the “Chants de Maldoror.” Octave
Mirbeau also, in his “Journal d’une Femme de Chambre,” provides us with
a review of the entire register of sexual perversities.[804] He, and
also the talented Rachilde (who in her romances “Monsieur Venus,” “Les
Hors Nature,” and “Madame Adonis,” considers the question of
homosexuality), never fail to exhibit the artistic spirit in their
descriptions of these delicate topics--and, indeed, _l’art pour l’art_
doctrine seems to have been created especially in relation to this
department of thought.

=Homosexuality= and =bisexuality= have been considered in such a large
number of works that it is quite impossible to mention them all here. A
fairly complete bibliography of these will be found in the volumes of
the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_.[805] I can allude here only
to a few especially well-known and artistically important homosexual
romances and poems. Jouy, in his admirable “Galerie des Femmes” (Paris,
1799), devotes to the “Lesbiennes” a special chapter; Théophile Gautier,
in “Mademoiselle de Maupin,” discusses the interesting problem of
bisexuality; Zola, in “Nana,” represents the Lesbian relationship; Paul
Verlaine in 1867 published tribadistic poetry under the title of “Les
Amis.”[806] Since that time Englishmen, Germans, Belgians, and Italians
have published belletristic descriptions of homosexual relationships. I
may allude to Oscar Wilde’s “Dorian Grey,” Georges Eekhoud’s
“Escal-Vigor,” Walt Whitman’s “Leaves of Grass,” Prime-Stevenson’s
“Irenæus,” Louis d’Herdy’s “L’Homme-Sirene,” F. G. Pernauhm’s “Ercole
Tomei,” “Die Infamen,” and “Der junge Kurt”; also the sensational
“Idylle Sapphique” of the demi-mondaine Liane de Pougy, the epic
“Ganymedes” of C. W. Geissler, and the drama “Jasminblüte” of Dilsner.

Masochism found its introduction to belles-lettres by the writer from
whom the very name is derived, L. von Sacher-Masoch, more especially in
“Vermächtnis Kains.” Of his novels, the best known is “Venus im Pelz”;
others are “Galizischen Geschichten,” “Messalinen Wiens,” “Die schwarze
Zarin,” and “Wiener Hofgeschichten.” He still remains the only writer
who has treated this peculiar perversity in an artistic manner. The more
recent masochistic and sadistic novels belong to the worst kind of
hawker’s literature. Lou Andreas-Salomé only, in “Eine Ausschweifung,”
has artistically described the spiritual masochism of a woman with the
fine psychological characterization peculiar to her work.

Quite recently there has actually appeared a masochistic monthly
magazine, entitled _Geissel und Rute: Archiv für Erziehung_ [_sic!_]
_Erwachsener_ (_Whip and Rod: Archives for the Education_ [_sic!_] _of
Adults_), edited by C. vom Stein, Buda-Pesth. The first number appeared
on February 1, 1907. It contains masochistic stories, correspondence,
historical sketches, and advertisements.

Sadistic love is the theme of Oscar Wilde’s “Salome,” and of the
“Diaboliques” of Barbey d’Aurevilly. The satanic element is dealt with
in Huysmans’ “La Bas,” and in various novels by St. Przybyszewski.
Herbert Eulenburg’s drama “Ritter Blaubart” also represents a sadistic
type.

In conclusion, I may allude to some authors who represent to us the
whole psychology of modern love, and, above all, the depths of the love
of reflection, its spiritual refinement, all the manifold moods,
illusions, and dreams of the modern eros. J. P. Jakobsen’s “Niels
Lyhne,” Hans Jäger’s “Christiania-Bohême,” Oskar Mysing’s “Grosse
Leidenschaft,” Heinrich Mann’s “Jagd nach Liebe,” Gabriele d’Annunzio’s
“Il Piacere,” “Trionfo della Morte,” and “Fuoco,” represent aspects of
love. With the profoundest art, Lou Andreas-Salomé, in her
stories--which in this respect I regard as among the most valuable
products of modern literature--“Ruth,” “Fenitschka,” “Ma,” and
“Menschenkinder,” represents the finer spiritual relationships between
man and woman. This writer appears to possess the most intimate
knowledge of the soul of the modern woman. Elisabeth Dauthendey, also
(“Vom neuen Weibe und seiner Liebe”), Gabriele Reuter (“Liselotte von
Reckling,” “Ellen von der Weiden”), and Rosa Mayreder (“Idole”), give
most powerful descriptions of complicated feminine characters.[807] An
important and interesting topic is discussed by Yvette Guilbert in “Les
Demivieilles”--the psychology of the woman beginning to grow old, who
cannot yet renounce love and yet is forced to do so by rude reality.

The writings to which I have referred in this chapter--the number of
which could easily be increased tenfold without exhausting the abundance
of recent belletristic literature occupied in the discussion of the
sexual problem--should suffice to give some idea of how great is the
interest in the important problems of the sexual life, how detailed and
complicated the problems of that life have become under the influence of
modern civilization, and with what earnestness they are treated in the
belles-lettres of the day. The light and frivolous mood of Wieland and
Clauren is no longer found to-day. In its place we have grandiose moral
description, a more =dramatic= treatment of sexual problems, an
unsparing exposure of the gloomier aspects of amatory life, and a
psychological penetration into all the activities of the loving soul.
Regarded =as a whole=, love in modern belletristic literature is treated
from far worthier and higher standpoints than formerly. =There is no
ground whatever for regarding the widespread discussion of sexual
problems in modern literature as a stigma of degeneration.= In this
respect our literature is merely a mirror of our time; and its
tendencies indicate very clearly the emergence of a new, earnest, and
more profound conception of the sexual relations between man and
woman.

  [794] Eduard Grisebach, “Catalogue of World Literature, with Literary
  and Bibliographical Annotations” (second edition, Berlin, 1905).

  [795] K. Lange, “The Nature of Art,” vol. ii., pp. 161-177 (Berlin,
  1901).

  [796] Philipp Frey, “The Battle of the Sexes,” pp. 33, 34 (Vienna,
  1904).

  [797] Reference has previously been made (p. 673) to an English novel
  similar in character to Vera’s book--viz., “The Heavenly Twins,” by
  Sarah Grand. But the classical English example of a novel devoted to
  the consideration of the differing standards by which preconjugal
  sexual intercourse is judged in man and in woman respectively is “Tess
  of the D’Urbervilles,” by Thomas Hardy.

  [798] In “The Woman who Did,” by Grant Allen, we have an English novel
  advocating free love; like “Eine für Viele,” this evoked a number of
  novels with allied titles, such as “The Woman who Didn’t,” “The Woman
  who Wouldn’t,” and the like. A far profounder study of a free union
  between a man whose wife refused to divorce him (on “moral” grounds)
  and another woman is George Meredith’s “One of Our Conquerors.” In
  “Jude the Obscure,” by Thomas Hardy, we have another detailed
  consideration of the difficulties attendant on a free union in a
  society under the dominion of Philistine morality. A recent novel in
  which freer sexual relationships are discussed from a somewhat ideal
  standpoint is “In the Days of the Comet,” by H. G. Wells. (In the
  character of Sue Bridehead, in “Jude the Obscure,” we have a
  remarkable study of the “frigid” type of woman. I have before alluded,
  in a note to p. 435, to a recent novel by Hubert Wales, “Mr. and Mrs.
  Villiers,” devoted to the question of sexual frigidity in
  woman.)--TRANSLATOR.

  [799] “Bourgeois morality is the arch-murderer, which murders your
  youth and the youth of many of your sisters. If we lived in natural
  conditions, you would always, from the days of your childhood, be
  surrounded by young persons of the other sex. One of these would have
  contracted a friendship for you; another would have honoured you from
  a distance; with a third you would have played joyfully. But from your
  twentieth year onwards, three or four or more of them would have
  ardently wooed you, because you are strong and beautiful and chaste.
  And so with tears, and passion, and suffering, with games and kisses,
  you would have gladly become a woman; thus it is even yet among the
  children of manual labourers. A beautiful, chaste, diligent workman’s
  child has wooers enough. But among the so-called cultured people,
  morality has distorted and destroyed all the beauty of nature....
  Where the middle-class youth goes to and fro, there goes also, like an
  old youth-hating aunt, morality, and destroys for each poor girl the
  best time of her life; and many never come to marriage, and many come
  too late.”

  [800] In “Divorçons,” a comedy by V. Sardou and E. de Najac, we have
  an exceedingly witty, though trivial, treatment of the idea of a
  terminable marriage contract.--TRANSLATOR.

  [801] An early example of the “emancipated woman” in English
  literature is to be found in Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s “Aurora
  Leigh.” This conception of feminine character aroused the usual
  hostility in minds working along the older grooves, so that Edward
  Fitzgerald, when Mrs. Browning died, is said to have exclaimed: “Thank
  God! No more ‘Aurora Leighs’!”--TRANSLATOR.

  [802] George Gissing’s “The Unclassed” is a powerful study of the life
  of a London prostitute.--TRANSLATOR.

  [803] Bayet, “À propos des ‘Avariés’” (Brussels, 1902).

  [804] We may include in this category Willy’s “La Môme Picrate,” and
  also the “Claudine” novels by the same author (“Claudine à l’École,”
  “Claudine à Paris,” etc.).

  [805] Consult also the work “Lieblingsminne und Freundesliebe in der
  Weltliteratur,” by Elisar von Kupffer.

  [806] And at a later date Verlaine wrote other homosexual poems, “Les
  Hommes,” which for the most part are still unpublished.

  [807] A work of similar character to these is the notable novel
  recently published (February, 1907) “Die Stimme,” by Grete Meisel-Hess
  (Berlin, 1907).




