CHAPTER XX

PSEUDO-HOMOSEXUALITY (GREEK AND ORIENTAL PÆDERASTY, HERMAPHRODITISM,
BISEXUAL VARIETIES)


   “_Nous sommes les enfants des anciennes Sodomes;_
    _Puisque l’on nous voit beaux, laissons-nous nous aimer._
    _Notre sort est le plus désirable: charmer,_
    _Nous sommes adorés des femmes et des hommes!_”

  RACHILDE.

  [“_We are children of the ancient Sodom;_
    _Since people regard us as beautiful, let us continue to love one
    another;_
    _Our lot is the most desirable: to charm,_
    _We are adored both by women and by men._”]


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XX

  Connexion between pseudo-homosexuality and bisexuality -- Great
  antiquity of the idea of bisexuality -- Magnus Hirschfeld’s
  treatise on bisexuality -- Bisexuality of the time of puberty --
  Pseudo-homosexual tendencies at this period of life -- Examples
  (Gutzkow, Grillparzer) -- On the large scale -- Analogy to the
  pseudo-heterosexuality of youthful homosexuals -- Persistence of
  bisexuality -- The “Junores” -- Delusion of sexual metamorphosis --
  Cultivation of pæderasts -- Women-men and men-women -- Brouardel’s
  type of effeminate Parisian street-arab -- Homosexuality in the state
  of trance -- Pseudo-homosexuality owing to the lack of heterosexual
  intercourse -- Anal masturbators -- Pseudo-homosexuality of
  prostitutes -- Temporary pseudo-tribadism in Paris -- Pseudo-uranism
  as a popular custom -- Explanation of the Greek love of boys -- Its
  fundamental difference from modern true homosexuality -- Value of the
  noble asexual friendship of men for men -- A letter of Gutzkow’s --
  The Platonic Eros and Græco-Oriental pæderasty -- Bisexuality in
  German romanticism -- Explanation of this -- Hermaphroditism --
  Previous under-estimation of the importance of hermaphroditism --
  Recent researches -- True hermaphroditism -- Pseudo-hermaphroditism --
  Male and female apparent hermaphrodites.


CHAPTER XX

The dispute whether homosexuality is a congenital or an acquired
phenomenon was one hitherto impossible to settle, because the whole
province of those homosexual manifestations for which I suggest the name
of “=pseudo-homosexuality=” had not been separated with sufficient
clearness from true homosexuality for the essential difference between
the two classes to receive accurate expression. True homosexuality is
congenital. It is an original, =permanent, essential outflow= of the
personality: pseudo-homosexuality, on the contrary, is either a
homosexual sensibility suggested from without, transient, and not
associated with the essence of the personality; or else it is merely
=apparent= homosexuality, the illusion being dependent upon
hermaphroditism or upon some other physical or mental abnormality.

The pseudo-homosexuality of the former category is explicable only by
means of the fact of “=bisexuality=,” the existence of which has been
scientifically proved only within recent years. By bisexuality we
understand the possibility of two distinct modes of sexual perception
occurring in one and the same person; and this, again, finds its
explanation in the bisexual germinal vestiges which exist in every
individual. There remains in every man a vestige of woman, in every
woman a vestige of man, in a sense in a state of potential energy,
which, however, is capable, by the action of various external
influences, of being transformed into kinetic energy; but this vestige
=always= plays a small part in comparison with the true specific sexual
nature. This bisexuality was discussed in an earlier chapter of this
book (pp. 39, 40 and 70, 71), and was there characterized as a
phenomenon secondary in every respect, to which no great importance
could be attached. The idea of bisexuality is not new; neither Fliess
nor Weininger was its discoverer. It was already known to the
ancients.[567] Heinse, in “Ardinghello,” gives expression to the idea in
almost the same words as Weininger (see p. 40). Recently Magnus
Hirschfeld[568] has collected the historical and literary details of the
subject of bisexuality.

Bisexuality manifests itself more especially at the period of puberty,
during the time of obscure yearnings and impulses--the so-called
indifferent period which precedes the awakening of the sexual impulse.
Physical bisexuality, therefore, often enough corresponds to psychical
bisexuality. In the boy there is a trace of girlishness, in the girl a
trace of boyishness; we have the two types of the dreamy youth and of
the tomboy. Then there readily arise delicate inclinations between
individuals of like sexes, especially as the result of continuous
companionship, so that an obscure impulse of transient homosexual
perception manifests itself between two boys, or between two girls, of
the same age; or, again, this transient homosexuality may take the form
of a worshipful admiration of an older person of the same sex. Gutzkow
distinguished these two forms of pseudo-homosexuality, of which he had
had experience in his own person. In his “Secular Pictures,” vol. i.,
pp. 50, 51 (Frankfort, 1856), he remarks:

  “The feeling of love originates in most feminine natures, not from the
  quiet consideration of the secrets of love, but from a magnetic
  attraction towards other individuals, whom they regard as being better
  and more beautiful than themselves. Commonly the love for a man is
  preceded by an often illimitable love for a woman. Young girls fall in
  love with older girls--a phenomenon which often occurs also in boys,
  as I myself experienced when a boy, feeling the most ardent passion
  for one of my comrades, who now is extremely disagreeable to me.”

A similar explanation suffices for the transient tender love exhibited
by Grillparzer towards Altmüller (_cf._ Grillparzer’s “Diary,” edition
of Glossy and Sauer, pp. 24-26; Stuttgart). In boarding-schools,
barracks, and training-schools we often find these pseudo-homosexual
liaisons. The prison is said by Parent-Duchatelet to be a high-school of
tribadism. He and other French authors report the epidemic diffusion of
homosexual practices in prisons for women. Whenever homosexuality
appears =suddenly= in an epidemic manner, =affecting large numbers of
individuals=, we have to do, not with genuine original uranism, but with
pseudo-homosexuality. As regards boarding-schools, which exhibit a
lascivious environment extremely open to manifestations of this kind,
Hans von Kahlenberg, in his “Nixchen,” p. 41 (Vienna, 1904), has vividly
described the matter.

Youthful bisexuality is to be found in slighter forms in almost every
human being, but it is a typical phenomenon of puberty, and disappears
with the passing of this epoch, to make room for the completely
developed heterosexuality of the adult. There occurs also in
homosexuals, in whom homosexual sensibility first makes itself
definitely manifest after puberty, a quite analogous inclination to the
other sex before and during puberty. Thus, a typical homosexual
twenty-three years of age, who now exhibits _horror feminæ_, related to
me that at the age of sixteen or seventeen years he was very fond of
girls, and pursued them a great deal, but without definite sexual
desire. This transient obscure attraction of homosexuals towards the
other sex is a kind of “pseudo-heterosexuality.”

Sometimes bisexuality will continue after the period of puberty, and in
exceptional cases will persist throughout life. According to Hirschfeld,
this occurs especially in men of genius, and in those inclined to become
priests or schoolmasters. But in most cases even then one or other
impulsive tendency--the heterosexual or the homosexual--is predominant.
These individuals have been called “psychical hermaphrodites” (von
Krafft-Ebing). These bisexual varieties may manifest themselves in very
various ways, in most cases gynandry or androgyny is purely spiritual,
and finds expression only in association with particular tendencies,
especially =fetichistic= tendencies. The two following very remarkable
cases throw a clear light on this peculiar form of bisexuality. We may
as well accept for the more or less specific form of bisexuality
described in these cases the suggested name of “junores.”

  1.The case of a psychical hermaphrodite:

  N. N., an American journalist, thirty-three years of age, writes:
  “From earliest youth I had an impulse to appear dressed in women’s
  clothing, and whenever I had an opportunity I had elegant body linen
  made for me, silken chemises, and whatever was the fashion. Even as a
  boy I used to borrow my sister’s clothing and wear it secretly. Only
  later, after my mother’s death, was I able to give free rein to my
  wishes, and I came into the possession of a wardrobe resembling that
  of the most elegant lady of fashion. Although compelled in the daytime
  to appear as a man, still I wear, under these clothes, a complete
  outfit of women’s underclothing--stays, open-work stockings, and
  everything proper to a woman, a bracelet also, and patent-leather
  women’s boots, with elegant high heels. When the evening comes, I
  breathe more freely. Then I can throw off the burdensome mask, and
  feel wholly woman. Wrapped in a tea-gown of an elegant cut, and
  wearing the finest underclothing, I am able to occupy myself in my
  favourite employments, among which may be mentioned the study of the
  primitive history of mankind, or I give myself up to some routine
  duties. A feeling of repose takes possession of me, such as is
  impossible during the day, when I have to wear men’s clothing.
  Although fully woman, I do not feel any need to give myself to a man.
  I feel flattered, certainly, if, when appearing in women’s dress, I
  please others, but I have no definite sexual desire towards my own
  sex. It may be that I have not yet discovered my _alter ego_.
  Notwithstanding all my well-developed feminine customs, I married, and
  am the father of a powerful, beautiful girl, who exhibits no
  tendencies whatever resembling mine. My wife, an energetic, cultured
  lady, was fully aware of my passion, but hoped in the course of time
  to wean me from it. In this, however, she was not successful. I
  performed my marital duties, but I gave myself up all the more to my
  customs. My wife obtained a separation, and at the time at which I now
  write she is intimate with another man, and is pregnant. My physique
  is thoroughly masculine, with the exception of the pelvis and of the
  calves of the legs, which are feminine in form. Summary: Outward
  appearance masculine. When wearing women’s dress I have completely the
  corresponding figure--waist, 20 inches; chest measurement, 34 inches;
  height, 176 centimetres (5 feet 9 inches); weight 125 pounds. Hands
  long and narrow, sensibility feminine. When wearing men’s clothing I
  feel a certain uneasiness. When I see an elegant lady or actress, I
  think how well I should appear in her dress. I have an abundance of
  earrings, pearls, lace scarves, and similar articles of adornment, and
  at a dance I give myself up to the idea of how delightful it would be
  to appear in women’s dress. If it were possible, I should completely
  abandon men’s clothing.”

  2. “At about the age of fifteen and a half years I began to take an
  interest in women’s dress. I felt an inward impulse, which drove me to
  the windows of the shops displaying articles of women’s
  dress--corsets, etc. In shoemakers’ windows it was the women’s boots
  and shoes which attracted my attention rather than the men’s. The same
  was the case with dress fabrics, among which self-coloured materials
  for women’s dress pleased me best. Beautiful blue stuffs (satin)
  especially attracted me; also, I had an ardent love for blue velvet.
  As time passed, I felt a desire to possess such things, and to wear
  them. But since at home I had no means to spend in this way, whilst
  the desire sometimes was so violent as to give me no rest, I
  endeavoured to resist it with all the religious and rational grounds I
  could call to mind; yet this was of little help to me, for whenever I
  met a woman clothed to my taste, the longing was immediately
  reawakened. If I met a woman whose appearance aroused this desire
  (which henceforth I will call my ‘costume-stimulus’), I looked round,
  in order to overcome this costume-stimulus, to try to find a woman who
  displeased me. Within me there raged a conflict (which at that time
  was obscure even to myself) between the masculine nature and the
  feminine. One day the feminine in me gained the victory, as it
  impelled me (when my parents were absent from the house) to try on
  some of my sisters’ clothes; but as soon as I had put on the corset I
  had an erection, immediately followed by an ejaculation of semen. This
  gave me no gratification; on the contrary, I was very angry that
  putting on the corset should have given rise to an ejaculation of
  semen. At varying intervals I repeated this attempt to dress myself as
  a woman, and in doing so always endeavoured to avoid anything that
  could give rise to an erection. Gradually I succeeded in this matter
  of dressing; but I was now consumed also with the desire for caressing
  a feminine being, and therefore the dressing alone failed to satisfy
  me. Moreover, this dressing-up also failed to give me real pleasure,
  because I did not possess any costume which really suited me; but
  still, apart from sexual excitement, it produced a feeling of
  well-being. After I had dressed up as a woman, my imagination always
  busied itself with the idea of how beautiful it would be if I had a
  beloved before whom I might display myself unrestrainedly, just as I
  then was. In these fancies I always pictured to myself a girl of my
  own age, with long hair and well-developed breasts and hips. This
  imagination generally resulted in a pollution, which I sometimes
  endeavoured to prevent by taking off the articles of clothing as
  rapidly as possible.

  “By a colleague I was initiated into the practice of masturbation. He
  explained to me that if I had no woman who would give herself to me, I
  was in a position to satisfy myself. The first time I resisted the
  impulse; but the costume-stimulus tormented me, and I had discovered
  that after a seminal emission I was at peace for a time; moreover,
  when dressing up, I was always exposed to the danger of being
  discovered, and so I began the practice of self-abuse. Masturbation
  did not give me proper gratification, and therefore, after practising
  it, I always experienced a great feeling of regret and also a feeling
  of exhaustion; moreover, it did not produce the feeling of well-being
  which resulted from dressing up as a woman.

  “I was shy, and was very readily embarrassed in the presence of the
  female sex; I therefore avoided seeing much of women; I avoided it,
  also, on account of my costume-stimulus. It would have been preferable
  to me if, physically, Nature had made me a woman, so that I could have
  gone about freely among girls of my own age. For the reasons already
  given I did not learn to dance; moreover, the turning round made me
  very giddy, and from the age of seventeen and a half to nineteen years
  I suffered from attacks of syncope. At about the age of twenty-two
  years I fell in love with my present wife, who attracted me on account
  of her grace, her figure, and her character. My wife was even more
  bashful than myself. My inclination drew me towards her, but on
  account of my costume-stimulus, I avoided being alone with her. From
  now onwards I began to consider what I could possibly do in order to
  explain to my betrothed my true nature, but all the attempts which I
  made were failures. After six months’ engagement, I left the place
  where my betrothed was living. The engagement lasted seven years
  before we were married. The principal reason for the delay was that we
  were both impecunious. When I was alone with my betrothed, I was
  always thinking of my costume-stimulus. Shortly before we were married
  I told my betrothed in a letter of my peculiar tendency, for I felt it
  was my duty to do so. She could not understand how I could find
  pleasure in dressing myself up as a woman. At first she was
  indifferent regarding my costume-stimulus; later she thought it was
  morbid, an impulse bordering on the insane. I often had to call my
  imagination to my help in order to produce an erection. My marriage
  became more unhappy year by year. My wife, on account of my morbid
  tendency, suspected me of all possible perversities, and was of
  opinion that an individual predisposed as I was could not be capable
  of true, upright love for a woman. How I was to get woman’s clothing
  to my taste I did not know. In my marriage I was no better off as
  regards the costume-stimulus, but rather worse. I had more sleepless
  nights on account of this costume-stimulus than I had had before I
  married. As time passed, I became continually more ill-humoured, and
  was occasionally cross to my wife, which afterwards made me very
  sorry. In the sleepless nights I puzzled how I could possibly manage
  that my wife should not concern herself any more about the
  costume-stimulus, and how I could possibly fulfil my wishes in this
  respect. Gradually I succeeded in winning my wife to my side to this
  extent, that she agreed to make a costume for me, but I must not have
  many such.

  “My wife was always looking for a reason. She believed that dressing
  up must have some cause, or must produce in me some effect, which I
  was unwilling to tell her. She was continually tormenting me about
  this; she would not believe that I spoke the truth, and she no longer
  felt any confidence in me. She believed that every one must perceive
  that I had this morbid impulse. She endeavoured to learn something
  about the matter from other women. Those whom she asked could only
  tell her evil and common things about men with tendencies like mine;
  some said I must be unconditionally an urning; others that I must have
  intercourse with other women behind my wife’s back; others that I
  wanted to lay aside men’s clothing in order to please girls under age,
  and so on. I suffered horribly from these false accusations.

  “I endeavoured once again, in an essay I composed, which I entitled
  ‘The Junores,’ to make the matter clear to my wife. By junores I
  indicated men who wished to assume, or who did assume, the outward
  appearance of women in the matter of clothing, demeanour, and figure,
  but who sexually were masculine. All this was of no help to me. Our
  life together became continually more unbearable with the lapse of
  time; often there were scenes which had the most depressing effect on
  my mind. After violent scenes there occurred in me nocturnal
  pollutions, accompanied by no sensation of pleasure; also after these
  scenes erections were for a long time incomplete, so that a kind of
  impotence ensued.

  “After every new accusation which my wife made against me I avoided
  going home in the evening. I wandered for hours in by-streets,
  overwhelmed by a feeling of futility and vacuity; my nerves all
  vibrated; sometimes I could not keep my limbs still. If I had had no
  children, or if I had known that they would be properly cared for, I
  should have known what to do in such a mood. One thing still torments
  me. Will my children be hereditarily tainted?”

I have myself seen both of these cases. The men concerned appear
somewhat nervous, but they are otherwise quite healthy and manly, and
both deny that they feel any sexual inclination towards men. The desire
to wear women’s clothing, and to feel as a woman, may also make its
appearance as a =morbid= phenomenon later in life, in the form of the
“delusion of sexual metamorphosis” (_metamorphosis sexualis paranoica_);
or it may be =artificially induced=, as among the ancient Scythians and
among the Mexican “mujerados.” These latter are selected as men
originally =most powerful=, and entirely free from any feminine
appearance, and by incessant riding on horseback and by excessive
masturbation they are made impotent (through atrophy of the genital
organs) and effeminate, so that there may even occur a secondary
development of the breasts (Hammond). All this belongs to the category
of pseudo-homosexuality.

With regard to numerous historical women-men and men-women--such as, for
example, the celebrated Chevalier d’Eon, Mademoiselle de Maupin
(immortalized by Gautier in the romance of this name), and many other
women going about in men’s clothing, or men going about in women’s
clothing--it is, as a rule, no longer possible to determine whether they
were genuinely homosexual, pseudo-homosexual, or bisexual.

I regard, however, the interesting type of =effeminate Parisian
street-arab=, described by Brouardel at the Second Congress of Criminal
Anthropologists at Berlin in the year 1889, as characteristically and
originally homosexual.

  “At the age from twelve to sixteen years the lad is still small,
  grasps ideas very slowly, and has little will-power. At the time of
  puberty he has experienced an inhibition of development, and his
  bodily growth has remained stationary. The penis is thin and flaccid,
  the testicles are small, the pubic hair is scanty, the skin is smooth,
  and the beard is very thin; the skeleton does not develop fully, like
  that of the normal male; the pelvis becomes wide, and the general
  outlines of the body become rounded (_potelées_) because there is an
  undoubted deposit of fat in the subcutaneous tissues, so that the
  breasts also become enlarged.”

This state persists. Brouardel found it still present in individuals of
twenty-five to thirty years of age. These children of great towns are
characterized by intellectual sterility and by incapacity for
procreation. This type is found also among the well-to-do middle
classes, and from such, according to Brouardel, the _décadents_ are
recruited, while the effeminate gamins either become professional
pæderasts, or undertake the preparation of _articles de Paris_.[569]

It is not difficult, in this description, to recognize true
homosexuality.

Magnus Hirschfeld gives an account of a peculiar form of
pseudo-homosexuality occurring in an individual who in ordinary life was
asexual.[570]

The person concerned was an extremely effeminate and neurasthenic member
of a spiritualistic club, who in his normal condition felt sensual
attraction neither to woman nor to man, but who in the trance state
felt himself to be an Indian woman, and then became inspired with an
ardent passion for one of his fellow-members.

Also in chronic intoxications, especially in alcoholism,
pseudo-homosexuality may make its appearance, in some cases as an
enduring and in others as a transient condition.

An important category of pseudo-homosexuality is constituted by persons
in whom it arises owing to =insufficient opportunity for sexual
intercourse with members of the opposite sex=--as, for example, in the
absence of women on board ship, in monasteries, in prisons for men, in
the French foreign legion; and as regards lack of men in nunneries, and
in the case of unmarried or unhappily married women, who supply a large
contingent to pseudo-tribadism.[571] An account of pæderasty in prisons
is given by Charles Perrier, “La Pédérastie en Prison” (Lyons, 1900).

In this category we must also mention the “debauchee pæderasts” for
which =truly existent= kind of pseudo-homosexuals I propose the name of
“=anal masturbators=.” These are heterosexual individuals in whom either
primarily the anus plays the part of an erogenic zone, or in whom this
region becomes erogenic in consequence of the exhaustion of all other
varieties of sexual stimulus. Hammond, von Schrenck-Notzing, and Taxil
have proved the existence of these anal masturbators and the frequent
occurrence in them of pseudo-homosexual tendencies.[572]

An interesting phenomenon is the =pseudo-homosexuality of female
prostitutes=. We certainly encounter among prostitutes a number of
genuine tribades, who owe their adoption of professional prostitution to
the existence of this original tendency to homosexual love, because in
their relations with men the heart plays, and can play, no part (see
above, p. 434). Prostitutes who are heterosexual by nature may become
homosexual for two reasons: first, by intercourse with, and owing to the
influence of, truly Lesbian associates, in whom the inward sense of
solidarity possessed by all prostitutes is especially strong; in the
second place, in consequence of the antipathy to intercourse with men,
created by their experience of life, and striking always deeper roots,
for they learn to know man only in his brutal sexual coarseness. The
continuous compulsion to which they are subjected to satisfy the animal
sensuality of worn-out roués by the most disgusting procedures
ultimately produces in them the most unconquerable antipathy to the male
sex, so that all the delicate sensibility of which they are capable is
directed towards their own sex. The homosexual union appears to them, as
Eulenburg rightly points out (“Sexual Neuropathy,” pp. 143, 144), to be
something “higher, purer, and comparatively blameless.” They regard it
in a more ideal light than sexual intercourse with men. Women owners of
brothels also favour tribadistic love, because thereby they safeguard
the prostitutes in their houses from the influence of _souteneurs_.[573]

As J. de Vaudère describes in his “Demi-Sexes,” pseudo-tribadism is
especially diffused in Paris as a fashionable practice, and manifests
itself here in the form described by Martineau,[574] of a =temporary=
homosexuality, which is subserved by an extensive prostitution, and
which clearly exhibits its pseudo-homosexual characteristics by its
intermittent appearance in the form of spiritual epidemics.

Unquestionably we have to do with pseudo-homosexuality also in all those
cases in which homosexual love makes its appearance as a =national
custom= among a percentage widely exceeding the usual percentage of
ordinary homosexuality. The typical example of this kind is =the love of
boys of ancient Greece=--“pæderasty,” in the better sense of the word.
Since in this work I am discussing the sexual life of the present day, I
do not propose here to deal at length with this interesting topic, and
must refer the reader to the second volume (in course of preparation) of
my work on “The Origin of Syphilis,” in which I have discussed the
subject at considerable length.

Since the Hellenic love of boys was a widely diffused custom, the origin
of which may be directly referred to Crete, indirectly to the Orient, it
is evident that only a fraction of the pæderasts can have been true
homosexuals. The majority were pseudo-homosexuals. It is possible that
the custom was first introduced by original homosexuals, and also that
it was subsequently maintained by these. But soon it became a general
practice for a man to regard his wife simply as a “procreative machine,”
and to seek for true =spiritual= love from a youth. Since to the men of
antiquity woman had no soul and no individuality, =the love of boys
appeared to them something natural and morally justifiable=. It would,
however, be completely unnatural if for the heterosexual community of
our own time we wished to reintroduce the antique love of boys, since we
modern men have learned that woman also has a =soul=; that she also has
the same justification as man for the development of her human nature;
that she can be, and ought to be, the object of individual, spiritual,
profound love. I rejoice, that those who are fighting for the rights of
the genuine congenital homosexuals, that men like Magnus Hirschfeld,
Numa Prætorius, and other investigators, have recently expressed
themselves in energetic terms as opposed to those whose aim is a
sort of propaganda for the diffusion of the love of men among
heterosexuals--whose endeavour it is, in fact, to introduce a formal
cult of uranism. This movement can do nothing but harm to the just cause
of homosexuals.

No one can prize more highly than I do myself a =noble friendship=
between men, which at the present day is far too little practised;[575]
no one can wish more heartily than I do that men could speak to one
another of love, without being exposed to the suspicion of
homosexuality.[576] In a certain sense I am in thorough agreement with
the beautiful demonstrations of Heinrich Schurtz and Benedict
Friedländer on masculine friendship as a normal fundamental impulse of
humanity and as the foundation of social intercourse.[577] But this
friendship between heterosexual men, based upon natural sympathy and
community of occupation, has =not the least sexual admixture=, whereas
only in the beautiful dialogues of Plato can the Greek love of boys,
which some advocate at the present day, be ascribed to the spiritual
Eros.[578] In reality, however, the Greek love of boys degenerated into
the grossest sensuality, since the youth stimulated sexual desire like a
woman, and was used as such,[579] so that the originally ideal character
of the relationship disappeared.

In the =Oriental= love of boys[580] this ideal element was probably
never present, and sensual relationships played the principal part from
the very first. The boys’ brothels of the Mohammedan East were visited
by heterosexual men just as much as by homosexuals. The same men derived
pleasure from intercourse both with women and with boys. Bisexuality was
in this case put into practice as a matter of course.

German civilization also passed through an epoch in which bisexual
activities of feeling were clearly manifest in both sexes, without,
however, leading at any time to the physical practice of
pseudo-homosexuality. This remarkable period was the time of transition
between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

The “Sturm und Drang” had quieted down; its fiercely active forces had
been controlled; its vigorous will had been pacified, and guided in
concrete directions; its kinetic energy had in a sense become potential
in two new formative and emotional tendencies of the time, which
progressed side by side, and, notwithstanding all the differences
between them, influenced one another mutually to a considerable
extent--classicism and romanticism. Classicism, under the stimulating
influence of Winckelmann, looked back to the “noble simplicity and quiet
greatness” of the antique, to the beauty exhibited simply in =form=,
whose wonder Goethe more than any other has made manifest to us.
Romanticism, on the other hand, was the term employed to indicate the
boundless enlargement and increasing profundity of the emotional life,
of which the =formless= is especially characteristic. This appears most
clearly in the work of Novalis, Tieck, and Wackenroder; but both
tendencies meet in the sphere of the sexual. I need only mention the
name of Winckelmann to indicate how markedly the purely æsthetic
contemplation,[581] and the purely æsthetic enjoyment, of the beautiful
human form must have favoured the development of homosexual modes of
perception. We may in this connexion speak of the “Greek Renascence.” On
the other hand, the romantic mood, the deepening of the individual life
of feeling, the eternal searching for new, peculiar sensations, was very
apt to awaken those activities of feeling slumbering so deeply beneath
the threshold of consciousness, which we to-day denote by the term
“bisexuality.” In Friedrich Schlegel’s “Lucinde,” for example, we find
frequent allusions to this bisexual mode of perception, as in the place
in which he speaks of a confusion of the masculine and feminine rôles in
the love contest. When, in so much of the published “Correspondence” of
this period, kisses, embraces, caresses, and tendernesses between two
men or two women appear to fly to and fro, it may be that this is
neither to be regarded as purely homosexual perception, nor as a simply
conventional contemporary custom, but rather as the very characteristic
expression of a tendency to bisexual imaginations and dreams induced by
the hypertension, overdriving, and artificial increase, of the emotional
life. Thus only, for example, can we explain the passionate profusion of
tenderness which appears in many of the letters of Jean Paul, written by
him to men; for Jean Paul was unquestionably heterosexual.[582]

The same is true of the women of this time. According to Welcker, the
friendships of the women of the romantic period exhibited this character
of a Platonic love. Since the dominion of romanticism “influenced
emotional young men in very various ways, in more than one morally
strict circle, two women friends were so inseparable and so
indispensable to one another that those round them used sometimes to
laugh at this amativeness, of which, however, a serious suspicion was
impossible.”[583]

An interesting proof of the existence of pseudo-homosexuality among the
women of that time is afforded by a passage[584] from a romance by Ernst
Wagner (1760-1812), one of the scholars of Jean Paul. The book is
entitled “Isidora,” and in it the Lesbian love-scene between the
Princess Isidora and her friend Olympia is very plainly described,
although both of them at the same time are passionately in love with
men.

The last and not unimportant phenomenal form of pseudo-homosexuality is
=hermaphroditism=. It is a remarkable fact that only in recent years has
science attempted a serious study of hermaphroditic states, which
previously, as Blumreich[585] points out, were to a large extent
ignored, both as regards their social importance and their frequency. It
was the great service of Neugebauer[586] and Magnus Hirschfeld[587] that
they drew general attention to these remarkable sexual intermediate
stages, and proved their eminent practical importance, which had
previously been suspected by no one. How completely the matter had been
ignored is proved by the remarkable fact that the new Civil Code for the
German Empire completely ignores the juridical determinations of the
former Prussian Civil Code regarding hermaphrodites, alleging that there
existed no persons whose sex was indeterminate or indeterminable!

The so-called “=true hermaphroditism=”--the condition in which male and
female reproductive glands (testicles and ovaries) are met with =in a
single individual=--is one of the greatest rarities. By the
investigations of Salen (1899), Garré-Simon (1903), and Ludwig Pick
(1905), the existence of such individuals with mixed reproductive
glands (“ovotestes”) has been proved as an actual fact. Walter Simon, in
the one hundred and seventy-second volume of _Virchow’s Archives_, has
described the rare case of true hermaphroditism observed by Garré. In a
person twenty-one years of age, brought up as a man, and having
thoroughly masculine feelings, there suddenly occurred, associated with
swelling of the breasts (gynecomasty), monthly recurring hæmorrhages,
proceeding from the supposed intertesticular fissure; also from time to
time, associated with voluptuous erection of the penis, there was
discharged whitish mucus, and the libidinous ideas connected with this
discharge referred always to women. The physical structure and facial
expression of this individual were feminine; the build of the thorax,
the shoulders, and the shape of the arms exhibited male characteristics.
In a right-sided swelling, resembling an inguinal hernia, were found a
testicle-ovary (Ger. _Hodeneierstock_), an epididymis, a parovarium, a
spermatic cord, and a Fallopian tube.

More frequent than these cases, in which naturally the determination of
sex is practically impossible, are cases of =pseudo-hermaphroditism=,
which also possess the greatest importance in connexion with the problem
of pseudo-homosexuality. In these cases of pseudo-hermaphroditism the
reproductive glands are, in fact, distinctively male or female, but the
characteristics of the =excretory organs= and of the =external genital
organs= do not enable us to determine the sex, for they are in part
male, in part female, and in part completely undifferentiated,
which is to be explained as dependent upon an incomplete or entirely
wanting differentiation of the primitively identical rudiment of
the external genital organs of the two sexes (inhibition of the
processes of growth at some stage of development). Thus there arises
_pseudo-hermaphroditismus masculinus_, in cases in which the genital
fissure is not completely closed, so that the urethra possesses a
fissure below (hypospadias); also the two halves of the scrotum may fail
to join, so that a fissure is left between them, simulating a vaginal
inlet. Since in these cases the testicles are commonly retained within
the abdominal cavity, or else appear in the inguinal region, simulating
an inguinal hernia, the penis is believed to be a kind of enlarged
clitoris, and the individual is mistaken for a woman (_erreur de sexe_).
If it further happens that, on account of the supposed inguinal hernia,
the individual is ordered to wear, and continues to wear, a truss, the
testicular tissue disappears completely as a result of pressure atrophy,
and the correct diagnosis becomes more difficult than ever. I recently
saw a case of this kind in a male hermaphrodite, twenty-two years of
age, who had been brought up as a woman. He had, however, always felt
attraction towards women, and, having a large membrum, he was able,
notwithstanding the existence of hypospadias, to complete regular
coitus. In the ejaculated semen the examining physician had =not found
any spermatozoa=; but in this case the testicles had doubtless atrophied
in consequence of the wearing of a truss. This pseudo-hermaphrodite has
recently published the history of his upbringing as a “woman.” The work
is of great interest from the psychological point of view, and is
entitled “A Man’s Years as a Girl,” by “Nobody” (Berlin, 1907).

Where the reproductive glands are female there results a
_pseudo-hermaphroditismus femininus_ in cases in which the external
genital organs of this female pseudo-hermaphrodite exhibit a certain
similarity with the genital organs of the male--for example, when the
clitoris is exceptionally large, and the labia majora have grown
together, so that the vaginal inlet appears to be wanting. In this case
also there may be a mistake in diagnosis, and, consequently, the
individual having been educated as a man, apparent homosexuality may
result when the natural sexual inclination towards the male manifests
itself in due course.

In both varieties of pseudo-hermaphroditism there exist very various
anatomical and physiological possibilities in respect of the
relationship of the secondary sexual characters to the anatomical
character of the reproductive glands, in respect of the menstrual
equivalents in male pseudo-hermaphrodites, in respect of the
relationship of the sexual impulse to the reproductive glands, in
respect of the greater or less strength of the impulse, in respect of
periodic genital hæmorrhages in male pseudo-hermaphrodites, in respect
of possible sexual aberrations, etc. For more exact details I must refer
the reader to the works of Neugebauer and Hirschfeld. Here I will only
refer to a case described by the last-named author, of a male
pseudo-hermaphrodite, forty years of age, Friderike S., who had been
brought up as a “woman,” who at a very early age had exhibited an
inclination towards women =only=, and an antipathy to sexual intercourse
with men. In this individual a reproductive gland resembling a testicle
could be detected, out of which there issued a structure resembling the
spermatic cord. In the left inguinal canal was an atrophied reproductive
gland of indeterminate character. The membrum was something between
penis and clitoris. The labia majora and minora bounded a short cæcal
vagina. Internal female reproductive organs could not be detected. On
the other hand, there appeared to be a prostate gland. In the sexual
secretion, which was discharged by a different opening from the urine,
H. Friedenthal =was able to detect very numerous completely normal
spermatozoa=, whereby the male character of this pseudo-woman was
completely proved, and whereby also the alleged “homosexual” tendencies
were now shown to be heterosexual.

  [567] _Cf._ L. S. A. M. von Römer, “Regarding the Androgynous Idea of
  Life,” _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1903, vol. v., pp.
  707-940.

  [568] M. Hirschfeld, “The Theory and History of Bisexuality,”
  published in “The Nature of Love,” pp. 93-133 (Leipzig, 1895). _Cf._
  also P. Näcke, “Some Psychiatric Experiences in Support of the
  Doctrine of Bisexual Vestiges in Mankind,” published in _The Annual
  for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1906, vol. viii., pp. 583-603.

  [569] _Cf._ C. Lombroso, “Recent Advances in the Study of
  Criminality,” pp. 109-111 (Gera, 1899).

  [570] M. Hirschfeld, “Berlin’s Third Sex,” p. 13.

  [571] These pseudo-tribades, belonging mainly to the aristocracy and
  to the upper middle classes, are known in Parisian slang as “Sapphos,”
  in contrast to the genuine “Lesbian lovers.”

  [572] _Cf._ my “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia
  Sexualis,” vol. i., pp. 224-227.

  [573] _Cf._ L. Martineau, “Leçons sur les Déformations Vulvaires et
  Anales,” p. 21 (Paris, 1885).

  [574] _Op. cit._, pp. 29-31.

  [575] Karl Gutzkow writes in a beautiful letter to Max Ring: “Our time
  is so separative, our hearts beat in so solitary a manner, and yet the
  need of intimate bonds is there, but who dares to tie them? Any
  intimate friendship formed between men in early youth disappears like
  dust before the wind. Then comes the love of woman, which fills the
  whole of our heart; then follows the care for material existence,
  which increases our egoism; and the danger that our heart will shrink
  makes its appearance all too soon. Who draws near to another human
  being? Who admits that he has need of others, and that his life is a
  life without love? We all suffer in this way; we should form warm
  friendships between man and man” (“Berlin in the Time of Reaction,”
  reminiscences by Max Ring, published in _Deutsche Dichtung_, 1898,
  vol. xxiii., pp. 51, 52).

  [576] Such a noble love between men shines, for example, from the
  letters of Count Arthur Gobineau to Prince Philipp zu
  Eulenburg-Hertefeld. _Cf._ Prince zu Eulenburg-Hertefeld’s “Eine
  Erinnerung an Graf Arthur Gobineau,” especially pp. 22, 23 (Stuttgart,
  1906).

  [577] _Cf._ H. Schurtz, “Age Classes and Associations of Men” (Berlin,
  1904); B. Friedländer, “Physiological Friendship as a Normal
  Fundamental Impulse of Humanity and as the Foundation of Social
  Intercourse,” in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1900,
  vol. vi., pp. 179, 214; and the same author’s “Renascence of Eros
  Uranios,” pp. 163-211 (Berlin, 1904).

  [578] O. Kiefer, “Plato’s Attitude towards Homosexuality,” _Annual for
  Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1905, vol. vii., pp. 107-126. _Cf._ also
  “Lyrical and Bucolic Poetry,” _op. cit._, 1906, viii., pp. 619-684.

  [579] This connexion was recognized, although in the inverse
  direction, by Heinrich Laube. In a passage of “Junge Europa” (vol. i.,
  p. 72 of the new edition; Vienna, 1876) we read: “Constantia is the
  most beautiful woman I have ever seen. Outline, muscles, figure, eyes,
  speech, mind, feeling--everything in her is beautiful; she is the
  ideal of a man found in the feminine form. I love this power in woman
  above everything; the soft, the non-resisting, does not offer me
  enough opposition. _Perhaps such women as these form the transition to
  the Hellenic love of boys._”

  [580] _Cf._, in this connexion, also P. Näcke, “Homosexuality in the
  Orient,” published in the _Archives for Criminal Anthropology_, 1904,
  vol. xvi., pp. 333 _et seq._

  [581] Goethe confirms this in a conversation with Chancellor von
  Müller, in which he deduces the “aberration” of Greek love from this,
  “that, according to his own æsthetic judgment, man has always been
  more beautiful, more perfect, more complete, than woman. Such a
  feeling, when it has once originated, easily passes over into the
  animal and the grossly material.” _Cf._ _Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, 1905, vol. vii., p. 127.

  [582] Especially instructive is his correspondence with Christian Otto
  (_cf._ “Jean Paul’s Correspondence with his Wife and with Christian
  Otto,” edited by Paul Nerrlich; Berlin, 1902). For example, he writes
  once to this friend: “Ah, my friend, if I could only once more clasp
  your form to my breast.” _Cf._ also the interesting remarks on the
  peculiarly intimate masculine friendship of this period given in the
  last (eighth) volume of the “German History” of Karl Lamprecht
  (Freiburg, 1906).

  [583] F. G. Welcker, “The Odes of Sappho,” published in the
  _Rheinisches Museum für Philologie_, 1856, vol. xi., p. 237.

  [584] I reproduce this passage in the eighth volume of _The Annual for
  Sexual Intermediate Stages_, pp. 609, 610.

  [585] L. Blumreich, “Diseases of Women, including Sterility,” being
  chapter xx. of Senator and Kaminer’s “Health and Disease in Relation
  to Marriage and the Married State,” published by Rebman Limited
  (London, 1906).

  [586] Franz Neugebauer, “Seventeen Cases of the Coincidence of Mental
  Anomalies with Pseudo-Hermaphroditism, selected from a Collection of
  Seven Hundred and Thirteen Observations of Pseudo-Hermaphroditism,”
  published in _The Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1902, vol.
  ii., pp. 224-253; same author, “Interesting Observations in the
  Department of Pseudo-Hermaphroditism,” _op. cit._, 1902, vol. iv., pp.
  1-176; same author, “Surgical Surprises in the Domain of
  Pseudo-Hermaphroditism, containing One Hundred and Thirty-four
  Observations of Cases, with Fifty-four Instances of Erroneous
  Determination of Sex, in most Cases proved by the Scalpel,” _op.
  cit._, 1903, vol. v., pp. 205-424; same author, “One Hundred and Three
  Observations of more or less marked Development of a Uterus in the
  Male (_pseudohermaphroditismus masculinus internus_), in addition to a
  Compilation of Observations of Regular Periodic Bleeding from the
  Genital Organs, Menstruation, Vicarious Menstruation,
  Pseudo-Menstruation, Molimina Menstrualia, etc., in
  Pseudo-Hermaphrodites,” _op. cit._, 1904, vol. vi., pp. 215-326; same
  author, “Compend of the Literature of Hermaphroditism in Human
  Beings,” _op. cit._, 1905, vol. vii., pp. 471-670, and 1906, vol.
  viii., pp. 685-700.

  [587] Magnus Hirschfeld, “Sexual Links: Intermixture of Masculine and
  Feminine Sexual Characters (Sexual Intermediate Stages),” Leipzig,
  1905.




