CHAPTER XXXII

THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE OF THE SEXUAL LIFE


  “_Stress has been laid upon the harm which can be done by the
  publication of works dealing with sexual problems. Undoubtedly the
  pornographic interest of the laity, and also of men of science, does
  play a part here!_ =But the benefits which the unreserved scientific
  elucidation of the sexual problem is able to diffuse throughout the
  widest circles of the population are so extensive that this
  consideration of any possible harm that may ensue becomes
  infinitesimal in comparison.=”--A. VON SCHRENCK-NOTZING.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXXII

  Indispensable need for the scientific investigation of sexual problems
  -- Insignificance and ludicrous character of the objections made to
  such investigation -- The diffusion of sexual perversities was just as
  extensive before their scientific study was first undertaken -- de
  Sade’s system of psychopathia sexualis -- Recent additions to the
  scientific literature of the subject -- Works upon homosexuality --
  Upon erotic symbolism -- General investigations regarding the sexual
  impulse -- General works upon the sexual problem -- Periodical
  literature relating to the sexual life.


CHAPTER XXXII

Truth is always a good thing, even truth regarding the sexual life.
Neither prudery nor moral hypocrisy can controvert this proposition. He
who recognizes the immense importance of sexuality in relationship to
civilization at large--he who, like the author of the present work, has
been occupied for many years in the study of the subject from the points
of view of medicine, anthropology, ethnology, literature, and the
history of civilization--is not only entitled, but will also consider it
his duty, to publish his investigations, to make publicly known his
views and his opinions, and to take a definite and clear position in
relation to the burning questions of the day in this province of
thought.

Such men as Ploss-Bartels, who, in their celebrated and purely
scientific work, “Woman in Natural History and Folklore,” could not
avoid collecting numerous piquant and even obscene details, and who, for
example, have described in a special chapter the various postures
assumed during sexual intercourse; such a man as von Krafft-Ebing, whose
“Psychopathia Sexualis”[808] contains a number of detailed
autobiographies and clinical histories of sexually perverse
individuals--such men as these have been blamed because their books have
been diffused in numerous editions, extending to many thousands of
copies, and because these books have been read more by laymen than by
medical men. Apart from the fact that in earlier times much more
dangerous books--such, for example, as the works of Virey, Flittner, G.
F. Most, and Rozier, characterized by a lascivious style, or such a book
as the dictionary “Eros”--obtained the widest possible circulation;
apart, also from the fact that even in works conceived and executed in a
strictly scientific spirit--such as the numerous monographs of Martin
Schurig, or the work of Frenzel (belonging to the nineteenth century)
concerning impotence (see, for example, Frenzel, _op. cit._, pp. 155,
156, 161)--obscene passages and incredibly depraved stories occur; and
apart, finally, from the incredible mass of pornographic writings, in
comparison with which the scientific literature of the sexual life is
almost infinitesimally small--putting on one side all these
considerations, it is merely necessary to refer to the =established
fact= that all possible sexual perversities were known to exist before
the publication of von Krafft-Ebing’s “Psychopathia Sexualis,” and that
they made their appearance spontaneously at all times and in all places.
In the eighteenth century the Marquis de Sade, in his romance “The One
Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom,” was able to found a system of
psychopathia sexualis which not only contained =all= the perverse types
described by von Krafft-Ebing, but was even more varied in its contents,
and exhibited yet more numerous categories of sexual anomalies than the
book of the Viennese alienist.[809] This work is a document of enormous
importance to civilization,[810] because it provides a complete
refutation to the fable of modern degeneration, and because it gives us
a proof that =quite shortly= before the powerful upheaval of the French
nation and the heroic campaigns of the Napoleonic epoch, in this nation
there were diffused the most frightful perversities, regarding the
reality of which there can, according to recent experience, be no doubt
whatever.

Scientific authorship--even popular scientific works[811]--dealing with
the province of the sexual life cannot therefore be made responsible, in
any respect, for the diffusion of sexual perversities. The founder of
modern sexual science, A. von Schrenck-Notzing,[812] insisted on this
fact; and recently it has been once more emphasized by S. Freud, who has
probably gone further than any other writer in biologico-physiological
derivation of sexual perversions.

Havelock Ellis’s “Analysis of the Sexual Impulse” (vol. iii. of this
writer’s “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,” published by the F. A.
Davis Co., Philadelphia)--a book in which we find an admirable analysis
of the development and variations of the sexual impulse, including an
account of sadism and masochism, enriched by numerous examples--has
recently appeared in a German translation (Würzburg, 1903). The
translator, Dr. H. Kurella, in his preface to this work, says (pp. ix,
x), in my opinion with perfect justice:

  “Daily experience among my patients suffering from nervous
  diseases--patients who were for the most part women and girls--has
  shown me how extremely important is enlightenment regarding the sexual
  life for women suffering from nervous disorders. =For this reason, I
  hope the book will have the widest possible circulation among the
  mothers of daughters about to grow up.= If they will employ in a
  proper manner the knowledge which they will be able to obtain from its
  contents, in this way an immeasurable quantity of sorrow and misery
  can be prevented. This use of its teaching will, by itself, suffice to
  compensate the author and the translator for the scruples they must
  always feel in giving to the world a book which is likely to be valued
  by some simply as providing prurient reading matter, and which by such
  persons will perhaps be circulated for this purpose--a fate to which
  every book dealing with erotic subjects is exposed, however earnest
  its style and tendency may be.”

The lively scientific activity which now animates the department of
sexual problems is a matter for rejoicing, since it indicates the
advance of knowledge in one of the most important of all vital problems.
Whereas earlier none but alienists and neurologists concerned themselves
with sexual questions, an interest in these questions is now very
generally displayed by the circles of other medical men, of
anthropologists, folk-lorists, psychologists, æsthetics, and historians
of civilization. One good result of this wide diffusion of interest is,
as I have already remarked (pp. 455 _et seq._), that a one-sided
consideration of the problems under investigation will thereby be
prevented. Every earnest investigator, to whatever discipline he may
personally belong, can here contribute something =new=, something which
will advance knowledge; but most helpful, unquestionably, can the
=physician= be who, as von Schrenck-Notzing[813] declared, is competent
to consider the question in relation to various other departments--those
of biology, anthropology, history, belles-lettres, psychology, and
forensic medicine.

It would subserve no useful purpose to enumerate once more in this place
the works of all the recent authors who have dealt with the subject of
the sexual life. In the text of the present book they have for the most
part received sufficient mention.[814]

Of larger monographs upon homosexuality, there still remain to be
mentioned those of Havelock Ellis and J. A. Symonds,[815] A. Moll,[816]
J. Chevalier,[817] and Laupts.[818] In these works we find extensive
reports of cases; and more especially in the two first mentioned do we
find a record of all the historical and critical data of homosexuality
up to the time of the first publication of the “Annual for Sexual
Intermediate Stages” (1899 _et seq._).

A new work by Havelock Ellis[819] recently reached me, the fifth volume
of the American edition of his “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,”[820]
giving an account of “Erotic Symbolism” (fetichism, exhibitionism,
etc.), the “Mechanism of Detumescence,” and the “Psychical Condition
during Pregnancy,” with an appendix giving an analysis of the sexual
development of various individuals. This book, full of interesting
details, will doubtless, like the earlier volumes of his “Studies,” soon
appear in a German translation.

The fundamental work of A. Marro on “Puberty in Man and Woman” also
deserves especial mention. It can most usefully be consulted in the
French edition, “La Puberté chez l’Homme et chez la Femme. Etudiée dans
ses Rapports avec l’Anthropologie, la Psychiatrie, la Pedagogie, et la
Sociologie” (Paris, 1902; 536 pp.).

Special studies on the subject of the sexual impulse have been published
by Moll[821] and Féré.[822] In Moll’s work, of which hitherto the first
part only has appeared, the sexual impulse is divided into two
components, the “detumescence impulse”--that is, the impulse towards the
evacuation of the reproductive products--and the “contrectation
impulse”--that is, the impulse towards the other individual; and from
these two components the various manifestations of sexuality are
explained. Féré, more especially, has made an exhaustive study of the
instinctive element of the sexual impulse; and, apart from this, he
appears to be the most extreme advocate of the atavistic theory of
sexual perversions.

An interesting study of sexual psychology, based upon the doctrine of
Freud, has been published by Otto Rank.[823] The tendency of this work
also is in opposition to the degeneration-phobia.

The work of the Italian psychiatrist Pasquale Penta, “I pervertimenti
sessuali nell’ uomo e Vincenzo Verzeni strangolatore di donne” (“The
Sexual Perversions observed in Vincenzo Verzeni, the Strangler of
Women”), Naples, 1893, contains numerous interesting details. In the
first chapter the author gives contributions to a history of
psychopathia sexualis; the second chapter contains a detailed report of
Verzeni and an account of his lust-murders; in the third chapter Penta
discusses the similarities and differences between the sexual impulse in
man and in the lower animals; in the fourth chapter he deals with the
biological foundations of lust-murder; in the fifth chapter he reviews
the different sexual perversions; in the sixth chapter he considers
rape; and in the seventh and last chapter he discusses the forensic
importance of rape and of sexual perversions.

The recently published work on “Sexual Biology,” by Robert Müller
(Berlin, 1907), is written from the standpoint of veterinary medicine,
and the sub-title of the book, “Comparative and Evolutionary Studies in
the Sexual Life of Man and the Higher Mammals,” indicates the author’s
intention to elucidate the general biological roots of sexual phenomena.
This =comparative= consideration of the sexual life of man and of the
higher mammals throws a new light on many matters, and enables us to
understand a number of phenomena of the sexual life which have hitherto
seemed obscure.

A comprehensive, general, popular work upon the sexual life is now in
course of publication--“Man and Woman.” It is issued by R. Kossmann and
J. Weiss, with the collaboration of a number of leading specialists
(Stuttgart, 1907). A number of illustrated sections have already been
issued.

Finally, two other works must be mentioned which consider the sexual
life as a whole, a larger work and a smaller one. Forel’s[824]
comprehensive book is distinguished from beginning to end by an
=original, subjective= grasp of the question, and by an =optimistic view
of the future=, as I have pointed out in my review of this book in the
_Deutsche Aerztezeitung_. As such a subjective programme of a future
solution of sexual problems, it will ever retain a value; and we can
always follow with pleasure the demonstrations of the talented and
sympathetic author, although the book is perhaps somewhat monotonous in
character. Its merits, moreover, are counterbalanced by the almost
complete neglect of the numerous recent researches in almost every
department of the sexual life. More particularly the chapter upon
syphilis and venereal diseases, the chapter upon homosexuality and
sexual perversions, and the chapter upon marriage betray this fault. The
chapter on marriage is a mere extract from Westermarck. The author is
fully conscious of these defects, and freely admits them; and in spite
of them the book must not be ignored, because its value really lies in
its subjectivity, and because we find in it so profound a conviction of
the great importance of =social= activity for the higher development of
love. A shorter consideration of sexual problems, but one abounding in
paradoxes, is to be found in a book by Leo Berg.[825]

In conclusion, I may give a brief survey of the reviews and other
periodical publications which are occupied with sexual questions. A
great periodical devoted to the =entire province= of sexual research
does not exist. Such periodicals as we have deal with separate
departments of the sexual life. A rather insignificant periodical, _Vita
Sexualis_, which appeared for the first time in 1899, seems to have
become extinct a few years later. An exceedingly valuable publication,
especially occupied with the problems of homosexuality, bisexuality, and
sexual intermediate stages, is the one edited by Magnus Hirschfeld, and
entitled _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_ (of this eight volumes
have hitherto appeared). Purely popular and belletristic aims are
subserved by the homosexual monthly magazine _Der Eigene_ (edited by
Adolf Brand). Another annual, not less valuable than the one previously
mentioned, is that edited by Friedrich S. Krauss, entitled
_Anthropophyteia_. This treats more especially of folk-lorist research
in sexual matters, and is a true treasure-house of new facts and
observations.[826] The periodicals for the study of venereal diseases,
such as the _Archives of Dermatology and Syphilis_, edited by F. J. Pick
(hitherto eighty-two volumes), the _Monthly Magazine of Practical
Dermatology_, edited by Unna and Tanzer (hitherto forty-four volumes),
the _Monthly Magazine for Diseases of the Urinary Organs and Sexual
Hygiene_, edited by W. Hammer, in succession to K. Ries (hitherto four
volumes), and the other German and foreign dermato-urological
periodicals, also contain much material regarding venereal diseases and
sexual perversions. Interesting contributions to all sexual problems, as
well as an extensive case-literature and bibliography, are to be found
in the _Archives for Criminal Anthropology and Criminology_, edited by
Hans Gross (hitherto twenty-seven volumes), proceeding largely from the
pen of the learned and most original alienist Paul Näcke; also in the
_Monthly Magazine for Criminal Psychology and Criminal Law Reform_,
edited by Gustav Aschaffenburg; in the monthly magazine _The Protection
of Motherhood; a Magazine for the Reform of Sexual Ethics_, edited by
Helene Stöcker (_vide supra_, pp. 270 and 273); in the monthly magazine
_Sex and Society_, edited by Karl Vanselow (hitherto two volumes); and
in the illustrated magazine, under the same editorship, _Beauty_
(hitherto four volumes). Finally, we have to mention certain periodicals
concerned chiefly with the aims of racial hygiene, and containing
valuable material--the _Politico-Anthropological Review_, edited by
Ludwig Woltmann (hitherto five years of issue), and the _Archives for
Racial and Social Biology_, edited by Alfred Ploetz (hitherto three
years of issue).

  [808] R. von Krafft-Ebing, “Psychopathia Sexualis.” Only Authorized
  Translation from the Twelfth revised German Edition (Rebman Limited,
  London, 1906).

  [809] _Cf._ my “New Researches concerning the Marquis de Sade,” pp.
  437-450 (Berlin, 1904).

  [810] Recently A. Moll (_Enzyklopädische Jahrbücher der gesamten
  Heilkunde_, 1906, vol. xiii., pp. 238, 239) has expressed the
  “opinion,” =without offering the slightest proof in support of his
  views=, that “The One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom” is a forgery.
  But I myself, in my French edition of this work, have given all the
  historical and critical details regarding its origin; moreover, the
  original manuscript, as has been shown by the examination of all the
  experts, (1) =dates from the eighteenth century=; (2) =is throughout
  in de Sade’s original handwriting=; (3) =is written in his
  characteristic style=; and, finally, the forgery of this manuscript, a
  roll 12 metres 12 centimetres in length, written on both sides in
  letters of microscopic smallness, would be an absolute impossibility.
  If anything is genuine and authentic, this work is such. Dr. Albert
  Eulenburg, without doubt one of the most experienced, if not the most
  experienced, student of de Sade, assured me that this work
  unquestionably came from de Sade’s pen. I must, therefore, reject
  Moll’s opinion, which was formed independently of any proof, and
  without any examination of the original manuscript, as =unscientific
  and utterly futile=.

  [811] In popular writings dealing with the sexual life, I have myself
  found many interesting remarks, and even many new ideas. Naturally,
  when I say “popular,” I mean truly popular writings, not hawkers’
  literature or garbage literature.

  [812] A. von Schrenck-Notzing, “Suggestive Therapeutics in Cases of
  Morbid Manifestations of Sexual Sensibility,” preface, p. ix
  (Stuttgart, 1892).

  [813] Von Schrenck-Notzing, “Bibliography of the Psychology and
  Psychopathology of the Vita Sexualis,” published in the _Zeitschrift
  für Hypnotismus_, vol. vii., Nos. 1 and 2, p. 121.

  [814] In order to give an idea of the great interest in sexual science
  exhibited by the most diverse circles of cultured men of the present
  day, I shall merely mention in this note a few names, without
  pretending to give an exhaustive list: R. von Krafft-Ebing,
  Mantegazza, Ploss-Bartels, A. Eulenburg, von Schrenck-Notzing, Fr. S.
  Krauss, Tarnowsky, L. Löwenfeld, Havelock Ellis, Magnus Hirschfeld, S.
  Freud, Georg Hirth, H. Kurella, H. Swoboda, Laurent, A. Hoche, C.
  Lombroso, P. Fürbringer, E. Carpenter, Rohleder, Alfred Fournier, A.
  Binet, Marro, J. J. Bachofen, J. Kohler, E. Westermarck, Max Dessoir,
  Alfred Blaschko, Albert Neisser, Eli Metchnikoff, Fritz Schaudinn,
  Ducrey, Unna, Oskar Schultze, Wilhelm Waldeyer, V. von Gyurkovechky,
  Louis Fiaux, Léon Taxil, Wilhelm Fliess, Willy Hellpach, P. J. Möbius,
  Heinrich Schurtz, B. Friedländer, Eduard von Meyer, Hans Ostwald, R.
  Kossmann, Otto Adler, W. Hammond, Beard, Wilhelm Erb, Paul Näcke, J.
  Salgó, H. T. Finck, F. Neugebauer, C. Wagner, H. Ferdy, Rosa Mayreder,
  Ellen Key, Helene Stöcker, Anna Pappritz, Maria Lischnewska, Lily
  Braun, and many others.

  [815] Havelock Ellis and J. A. Symonds, “Contrary Sexual Sensibility.”

  [816] Albert Moll, “Contrary Sexual Sensibility,” third edition
  (Berlin, 1899).

  [817] J. Chevalier, “L’Inversion Sexuelle,” with a preface by A.
  Lacassagne (Lyons and Paris, 1893).

  [818] Laupts, “Perversion et Perversité Sexuelles,” preface by Émile
  Zola (Paris, 1896). (Containing interesting critical, literary, and
  medical studies upon the subject of homosexuality.)

  [819] Havelock Ellis, “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,” vol. v.:
  “Erotic Symbolism, etc.” (Philadelphia, 1906).

  [820] Apart from “Man and Woman” (fourth edition, 1904, revised and
  enlarged), all Havelock Ellis’s writings on sexual questions are
  included in the “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,” 5 vols. (sixth
  concluding volume not yet completed), published by the F. A. Davis
  Company, of Philadelphia, U.S.A.--TRANSLATOR.

  [821] A. Moll, “Investigations regarding the Libido Sexualis,” Part I.
  (Berlin, 1897).

  [822] Charles Féré, “L’Instinct Sexuel, Évolution et Dissolution”
  (Paris, 1899).

  [823] Otto Rank, “The Artist: Contributions to Sexual Psychology”
  (Vienna and Leipzig, 1907).

  [824] August Forel, “The Sexual Question” (Rebman, 1908).

  [825] Leo Berg, “Geschlechter” (Berlin, 1906).

  [826] Prior to the issue of the first edition of the present work,
  three volumes of _Anthropophyteia_ had appeared, and references to
  many of the most important papers in these volumes have already been
  given in the appropriate chapters. While the sixth edition of “The
  Sexual Life of Our Time” was in the press, in October, 1907, the
  fourth volume of _Anthropophyteia_ was issued, and constitutes an
  especially weighty section of this work. Among the contributions are
  the following: A. Mitrović, “Temporary Marriages in Northern
  Dalmatia”; Fr. S. Krauss, “Selective Marriages in Bosnia”; H. E.
  Luedecke, “Erotic Tattooing”; W. von Bülow, “The Sexual Life of the
  Samoans”; F. Wernert, “Tales of the German Peasantry” (of an erotic
  character); A. Mitrović, “A Visit to a Sorceress in Northern
  Dalmatia”; Krauss, Mitrović, and Wernert, “The Sense of Smell in the
  Sexual Life”; B. Laufer, “A Japanese Spring Picture”; O. Knapp, “The
  ‘ολισβος’ of the Hellenes”; A. Kind, “Coitus and the Sexual Instinct”;
  K. Amrain, “The Increase of Virile Potency”; H. E. Luedecke,
  “Eroticism and Numismatics”; V. S. Karadžić, “Erotic and Skatological
  Proverbs and Locutions of the Servians”; Luedecke, “Elements of
  Skatology”; Fr. S. Krauss, “Slavonic Popular Traditions regarding
  Sexual Intercourse.”




