CHAPTER IX

THE ARTISTIC ELEMENT IN MODERN LOVE


“_I am of opinion that love bears within itself, more than any other
moral relationship, the_ sense of the beautiful, _and when anywhere a
heavy heart begins to move its wings and to strive towards the ideal, it
is in the time when it loves. Without doubt an æsthetic perception
always accompanies the eye of the lover, and in a greater degree than it
ever accompanies the dispassionate eye._”--KUNO FISCHER.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER IX

  Ennoblement and reform of the amatory life as a demand of our time --
  The battle with the elemental forces of the sexual impulse and of
  asceticism -- The artistic element in modern love -- Erotic
  rhythmotropism -- Sexuality and æsthetics -- The awakening of æsthetic
  sensibility at the time of puberty -- Importance of sensuality to
  life and to the poietic impulse -- The example of Annette von
  Droste-Hülshoff -- Sensuality of great poets and artists -- Views of
  recent æsthetics regarding the relations between sexual love and
  artistic perception -- Rôle of the erotic need for illusion in social
  life -- Emerson, Konrad Lange, and William Scherer, on the æsthetic
  eroticism of social life -- The liberating and vitalizing elements
  therein -- Significance of modern individual beauty -- Misnamed
  “nervous” beauty -- The English “Pre-Raphaelites” and the ideal of
  beauty -- Masculine beauty -- Why women love ugly men -- Caroline
  Schlegel, Goethe, Eduard von Hartmann, and Swedenborg, on this subject
  -- The attractive force of the poietic and the spiritual in man.


CHAPTER IX

At the present day, notwithstanding all the adverse opinions and
jeremiads of infatuated apostles of morality, the epoch of our amatory
life through which we are passing is by no means one of decadence. On
the contrary, we are now actually engaged in its re-constitution,
reform, and ennoblement. All the tendencies of the time proceed towards
such a radical perfectionment of love, towards its free, individual
configuration, not by the unchaining of sensuality, but by its
idealization; and when we have once attained a natural view of
sensuality, it loses all its terrors. We fight at first against the
elemental force of the wild impulse, and against the elemental force of
life-denying asceticism. In this struggle the artistic element in modern
love plays a notable part. By this we do not signify “sugary”
æstheticism, nor yet the completely non-sensual Platonic Eros, but that
æsthetic tendency in human love, bringing about an intimate association
of the bodily and spiritual, which W. Bölsche denotes by the term
“rhythmotropism.” It is “an impulsive, forced reaction of the higher
animal brain to rhythmical beauty,” to which art also owes its origin.
This æsthetic natural impulse is of great importance to love, as Darwin
recognized many years ago. It was he who expressed the great thought
that beauty is love become perceptible.

The sexual is in no way hostile to æsthetic contemplation, as the
unhappy Weininger quite erroneously maintained in the confused chapter
“Erotism and Æsthetics” of his book. He curtly denies that sexuality has
any æsthetic value whatever, yet Plato himself deduced from the physical
Eros the highest æsthetic contemplation of a spiritual nature. In the
world of the senses he discovered the reflection of the Divine.

The well-known fact that with the awakening of the sexual life,
spiritual creative activity also awakens, and an artistic tendency
becomes kinetic, that at the time of puberty every youth is a poet,
confirms the suggested existence of this intimate relationship between
sexual and æsthetic perception.

  “There appears to me to be no doubt,” says J. Volkelt in his
  “Æsthetics” (vol. i., p. 523; Munich, 1905), “that in the youth or the
  maiden the awakening of sexuality induces an individualization and
  invigoration of artistic perception. Hand in hand with the first love
  of youth, somewhere about the sixteenth or seventeenth year, the
  sense of grace and beauty in the landscape, the appreciation of the
  charm of poetry, painting, and music, are strengthened and refined to
  such a degree, that in comparison with what is now felt, all earlier
  experiences and enjoyments seem to be as nothing.”

Sensuality first gives life colour, brings out the nuances and the finer
tones of feeling, without which life would be tinted a uniform grey,
would be a monotonous waste, and lacking which the joy of existence and
creative activity would be annihilated, or, at least, would be reduced
to a minimum. Even the most ideal love must be nourished upon
sensuality, if it is to remain poietic and full of vitality. Of this
Annette von Droste-Hülshoff is an interesting example--a woman and poet
in whom in other respects sexual influences can have played only a very
modest part. But she lost on the instant all poetic capacity, all
artistic creative power, when her lover, Lewin Schücking, became engaged
to Louise von Gall. The mere idea of the =possibility= of physical
possession was to her a spur to poetic activity without its being
necessary for this possibility to be translated into reality. But when
the possibility was for ever removed, her muse at once became dumb.

An absolutely convincing proof of the intimate connexion between
sexuality and æsthetics is the fact that great artists and poets have,
in the majority of cases, possessed thoroughly sensual natures. The
previously described relationship between the sexual impulse and the
poietic impulse, comprised in the “function impulse” of Santlus, is
especially manifest in the case of artists. In these artistic natures
the perceptive æsthetic power is associated with an ardent sensuality,
which derives its most powerful impulse directly from the beautiful. We
agree with von Krafft-Ebing when he denies the possibility of genius,
art, and poetry except upon a sexual foundation. We do not believe in a
so-called purely æsthetic contemplation and perception without any
sexual admixture. Even Volkelt, who is inclined to sever art and the
sexual impulse each from the other, is unable to deny the genetic
connexion between the two. Oskar Bie makes the interesting observation
that “in æsthetic relationships the cord of the will does not become
thinner to the breaking point, but stronger, until it becomes blind
passion” (_Neue Deutsche Rundschau_, 1894, p. 479). Nietzsche and Guyau
have also declared themselves opposed to Schopenhauer’s theory regarding
the absence of a will-element in æsthetic perception. Nietzsche speaks
even of an “æsthetic of the sexual impulse.” Guyau bases his æsthetic
upon the love of life and upon sexual love (“Les Problèmes de
l’Esthétique Contemporaine,” Paris, 1897). Magnus Hirschfeld alludes in
his “Wesen der Liebe” (“The Nature of Love”), p. 48, to a work by G.
Santayana entitled “The Sense of Beauty,” in which the theory is
propounded that “for human beings the whole of nature is an object of
sexual perception, and it is chiefly in this way that the beauty of
nature is to be explained.” Finally, Gustav Naumann (“Sex and Art:
Prolegomena to Physiological Æsthetics,” Leipzig, 1899) says most
convincingly that the sexual is the =root= of all art, of all æsthetics.

But whatever view may be held regarding the relationship between
sexuality and art, it is a quite incontestable fact that our latter-day
life is characterized by a need “for erotic illusion” (to use the
expression of Konrad Lange), that the slighter degree of eroticism, as
it exhibits itself in social intercourse between the two sexes, is
principally of an artistic nature. I do not speak here merely of the
dance as the artistic transfiguration of the erotic phenomena of
courtship, or of dress and fashion and the whole _milieu_ as æsthetic
means of expression of the personality (as they were described in
earlier pages of this work), but I refer above all to =social
intercourse= as a whole, which to-day represents a free and facile
æsthetic element, in which modern love receives its most manifold
suggestions.

Emerson, in his essay on Love, has very beautifully described the
importance to our civilized life of these slight, imponderable
influences of an erotic-æsthetic nature; and Konrad Lange, in his “Wesen
der Kunst” (vol. ii., p. 23; Berlin, 1901), refers the pleasure of
social intercourse ultimately to the sexual impulse, even though therein
sensuality is mitigated by illusion and is elevated to a purer sphere.
Erotic enjoyment is modified into a “love-play,” sensuality is refined,
spiritualized, dematerialized. It is precisely this æsthetic eroticism
which at the present day becomes of increasing importance in the
emotional life of civilized humanity, in the life of those engaged in
the hard struggle for existence, to whom time and leisure are lacking
for the “great” love-passion. For such as these, these gentler
suggestions constitute the true charm of life, into the dreary monotony
of which they bring light and colour.

In his excellent “Remarks on Goethe’s Stella,” Wilhelm Scherer has
assigned its true value to this erotic æstheticism and æsthetic
eroticism of society and social intercourse. He speaks of a charm of
personal presence, which brings out all that is best in two human
beings. He speaks of an enthusiastic and complete surrender of the
spirit and the emotions, in which the souls seem to enter into
inseparable union--and yet only seem. For in reality this surrender
occurs for weeks, for days, for minutes, for moments, and to various
persons. These frequent, individual, purely spiritual contacts between
the two sexes have completely the character of æsthetic joy; they give
rise to a perception of =freedom=, of liberation from the power of the
senses. Who does not know the happy freedom of spirit which is aroused
by the glance of a beautiful girl, by the smile of a sympathetic face?

This æsthetic incitation by means of eroticism has, moreover, in it
something =vitalizing=, something which spurs on the will, because its
cause--eroticism itself--contains within it such an element of action
and vital energy. The modern love ideals of the sexes have a peculiar
impulsive force. Classical beauty taken by itself, and without the
individual, personal characteristic element, is valueless. And woman
herself also is no longer the patient Gretchen of yore. She must have
temperament, character, passion--she must be a personality.

More than by the beautiful are we allured by the characteristic, by the
developed personality, by the passionate, the subjective in woman--by
that which, in pursuance of a false connotation, is often now termed
“nervous” beauty. The pale Josepha of the days of Heine’s boyhood is an
example of this type.

In her “Buch der Frauen” (“Book of Women”) (Paris and Leipzig, 1895),
Laura Marholm has described in the figures of Marie Bashkirtzeff, Anna
Charlotte Loeffler, Eleonore Duse, George Egerton, Amalie Skram, and
Sonja Kowalewska, well-marked and characteristic types of modern woman
as a personality.

This attraction to the characteristic, to the personal, in the aspect of
woman conflicts to some extent with the preference arising under the
influence of the English “Pre-Raphaelites,” of Burne-Jones and Rossetti,
for straight lines, for slender, ethereal, unduly spiritual,
supersensual forms, which no longer express the free personality of the
mature, complete woman, but approximate rather to the infantile, asexual
habitus. In this case, however, we have to do with a mere transient
fashion, which cannot countervail the above characterized general
tendency towards the personal.

This personal, individual has in man even greater importance than actual
beauty. It is a distinctive fact that, throughout the history of
civilization, men have always had a clearer understanding of “masculine
beauty” than women. Women have preferred power, intelligence, energy of
will, and marked individuality. Caroline Schlegel, in a letter to Luise
Gotter, writes of Mirabeau: “Hideous he may have been--he says so
himself frequently in his letters--but Sophie loved him, =for what women
love in men is certainly not beauty=” (“Letters of Caroline Schlegel,”
vol. i., p. 93; edited by G. Waitz, Leipzig, 1871). This conception also
elucidates the words in the second part of Goethe’s “Faust”:

  “Women, accustomed to man’s love,
   Fastidious are they not,
   But cognoscenti;
   And equally with golden-haired swains
   Shall we see black-bristly fauns,
   As opportunity may serve,
   Over their rounded limbs
   Attain rights of possession.”

It explains, too, the opinion of Eduard von Hartmann (“Philosophie des
Unbewussten”--“Philosophy of the Unconscious,” p. 205; Berlin, 1874),
that the most powerful passions are not aroused by the most beautiful,
but, on the contrary, by the ugliest, individuals. The influence of
powerfully developed individuality is, in fact, notably greater than
that of physical beauty. The mystic Swedenborg long ago declared that in
man woman desired truth, spiritual significance, not beauty alone.[154]

Herein we see a suggestion of the fact that true beauty is ultimately
spiritual beauty, the expression of the force of will, of poietic
activity, and of free personality.

  [154] “It is by no means rare,” says Lermontoff in “Ein Held unserer
  Zeit” (“A Hero of our own Time”), “for women to love such men to
  distraction, and to be unwilling to exchange their hideousness for the
  beauty of an Endymion.”




