CHAPTER XVII

THE ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASPECT OF PSYCHOPATHIA SEXUALIS


  “_I hope that in the not distant future, for the advancement of
  science, physicians will be glad to ally themselves with folk-lorists
  and ethnologists._”--FREDERICK S. KRAUSS.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XVII

  Anthropological and clinical views of sexual anomalies -- Ubiquity and
  enduring nature of psychopathia sexualis -- Secondary rôle of
  civilization and degeneration -- The fable of “the good old times” --
  The ungrounded fear of degeneration -- “Nervous degeneration” in
  earlier times -- Recent arguments against the degeneration theory --
  Metchnikoff’s book, “The Nature of Man” -- Georg Hirth’s idea of
  “Hereditary Enfranchisement.”

  Elements of the anthropological theory of psychopathia sexualis -- The
  need for variety in sexual relationships -- Sexual perversions in
  healthy persons -- The effect of external influences -- Morbid
  impressions -- Artificial production of perversions (repetition,
  suggestion, imitation, seduction) -- Importance of sexual
  differentiation -- Congenital character of perversions -- The
  diffusion of perversions among savage races -- Examples -- Immorality
  in the country -- Influence of race and nationality -- Of age and sex
  -- Social differences -- Influence of civilization -- Influence of
  conventionality -- The unrest of the present day -- Spiritual
  configuration of modern perversity.

  _Appendix: Sexual Perversions due to Diseases._ -- General survey --
  Epilepsy and sexual perversions -- Other mental diseases-Syphilis and
  sexual perversions -- Abnormalities of the genital organs.


CHAPTER XVII

In my “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,”
published in the years 1902 and 1903, I for the first time attempted to
deal systematically, from the standpoint of the =anthropologist= and
=ethnologist=, with the great province of the so-called “psychopathia
sexualis,” the field of sexual aberrations, degenerations, anomalies,
perversities, and perversions. I started from the point of view that, in
order to obtain new ideas regarding the nature of psychopathia sexualis,
and in order to revise the old ideas in the light of recent knowledge,
we must keep before our eyes, not one-sidedly “=the sick man=,” but
comprehensively “=man as man=,” both as =civilized man= and as =savage
man=.

Previously the doctrine of psychopathia sexualis had been dominated
exclusively by =clinical, purely medical conceptions=. Observations had
been limited to morbid phenomena, occurring in individuals with an
abnormal _vita sexualis_. Thus there had arisen a general view of the
=nature= of sexual anomalies, by which these anomalies were allotted
almost entirely to the province of the physician, and were described as
=stigmata of degeneration=. H. J. Löwenstein,[456] Häussler,[457] and
Kaan,[458] in the third and fifth decades of the nineteenth century,
were the first to adopt this medical point of view of sexual
aberrations; and finally, in the last quarter of the same century,
Richard von Krafft-Ebing[459] converted modern sexual pathology into a
comprehensive scientific system,[460] which stands and falls with the
idea of =degeneration=.

Von Krafft-Ebing is, and remains, the true founder of modern sexual
pathology. Without wishing in the slightest degree to underestimate the
value of the clinical researches he carried out in this province of
research, characterized by precision and profound scientific
zeal--without undervaluing for a moment these extraordinary services--I
am compelled to point out that his purely medical view of sexual
aberrations is one-sided, and to insist that it must be amplified and
rectified by anthropological and ethnological researches.

Let us leave the hospital and the medical consulting-room; let us make a
journey round the world; let us observe the sexual activity of the
_genus homo_ in its manifold phenomena, not as physicians, but as
ordinary observers; let us compare the sexuality of the civilized human
being with that of the savage: then we shall recognize the vast
extension of our visual field for the comprehension of psychopathia
sexualis; we shall see how the civilized and temporary phenomenon
becomes absorbed into the general human phenomenon, presenting amid all
local variations =the same fundamental lineaments=. Psychopathia
sexualis exists =everywhere= and =at all times=. Culture, civilization,
and diseases play only the parts of favouring, modifying, intensifying
factors.

I do not go so far as Freud, who, on account of the now generally
recognized wide diffusion of perverse sexual tendencies, is compelled to
adopt the view “that the rudiments of perversions are the =primeval=
general rudiments of the human sexual impulse, out of which the normal
sexual mode of behaviour is developed in the course of evolution, in
consequence of organic changes and psychical inhibitions”;[461] but I do
maintain that sexual perversities and perversions appertain to the human
race as such, and independently of civilization. I am convinced that
they are =supplementary= to normal sexual manifestations, and that their
diffusion among civilized and savage peoples =extends far more widely
than the circle of true degenerative phenomena=.

The sexual impulse, as a purely physical function, is neither an object
of comparison nor a distinctive characteristic between primitive and
civilized humanity. The “elementary ideas” of humanity return everywhere
again in the elementary manifestations of sexual aberrations.

From the investigations collected and published in the above-mentioned
work I have been led to the firm conviction, which I must now put
forward as a =scientific truth= based upon the teaching of anthropology,
folk-lore, and the history of civilization, that at the present day, in
our time so widely decried as “nervous,” “degenerate,” and
“overcivilized,” not only are there no more sexually “perverse” persons
than there were in former days--let us think only of the middle ages,
with their frightful excesses, appearing in epidemic diffusion--but,
further, that the greater part of the perversions of the present day are
not to be regarded as “degenerations” at all; and, finally, that the
factors which are to weaken and undermine the vital forces of a nation
must be something other than purely sexual factors. For sexual
aberrations alone have, taken as a whole, but a trifling influence in
effecting the decadence of a nation. They first gain such an influence
in combination with causes, which we cannot now discuss, of an economic
and political nature.

As old as humanity is the fable of the good old times, of the golden
youth of the human race, of the glorious past, to which an always
corrupt, physically and morally rotten =present= is supposed to have
succeeded.[462] The ancients held this view; it recurred at the time of
the renascence; and since the time of Rousseau’s unfortunate
condemnation of all civilization, it has been, in the hands of all
zealots, moral fanatics, backsliders, and guardians of conventional
morality, a greatly prized weapon, and one, also, of great power when
used to influence the ignorant and easily misled. Anthropology, the
history of primitive man, and the history of civilization in general,
have utterly destroyed this beautiful dream of the good old times and of
the =better= days of the past. Nothing has been left but the ever =more
beautiful= present!

The critical and far-sighted Lessing opposed Rousseau’s hypothesis of
corruption by means of “civilization.” It was true, he said, that
Athens, standing so high in civilization, and at the same time so
corrupt, passed away; but the =virtuous= Sparta, did not this also pass
away? Rousseau himself had to admit that the destruction of civilization
would be of no use, that the world would then relapse into barbarism,
and that the corruption would =none the less= persist. The philologist
Muff,[463] discussing this question, added that if civilization had not
come, vice would still have been dominant, and that civilization,
involving as it does =intellectual= progress, provides also the means
for counteracting vice.

Physicians and natural philosophers have long protested against the
theory of the corrupt and degenerate “present.” For instance, a
countryman of Rousseau’s, Dr. Delvincourt,[464] exclaimed:

  “How false is the assumption of the fanatics and the pious who
  attribute to the moral corruption of our century the majority of
  diseases, and, above all, venereal diseases; who maintain that the
  race is degenerating; and who thunder an anathema against modern young
  men, whom they would gladly muzzle as we muzzle an animal.”

Must we, then, he asks, at a moment when civilization is marching
forward with giant strides, have our ears wearied with sophisms which
can no longer deceive even the ignorant masses? And he shows how =since
primeval times, everywhere=, all over the earth, vice has been diffused.
He rightly points to the innumerable _monuments de turpitude_ of all
ages.

About the same time (be it noted, more than sixty years ago) in Germany
the celebrated natural philosopher Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg, in an
academic speech with the distinctive title “=The Fear that Progressive
Intellectual Development will Lead to Physical National Degeneration: A
Demonstration that this Fear is entirely devoid of Scientific and
Medical Foundation=” (Berlin, 1842), opposed the belief in the
unwholesome influence of civilization upon the popular strength and
popular morals. Of special interest to us are his remarks upon the
alleged deleterious influence of civilization upon sexuality. He says
(p. 8):

  “The occurrence of puberty in warm climates at a comparatively early
  age (from ten to fifteen years), in cold climates somewhat later (from
  fourteen to eighteen years), is a natural measure of human
  intelligence and power; and if our sexually mature youths at school,
  at the time at which their development has naturally progressed to
  this point, experience also sexual stimulation, this is entirely
  according to the nature of things, and only imposes upon those in
  charge of schools, and upon parents, the special duty of watchfulness
  in these respects. Even if secret vice becomes general anywhere among
  young fellows in a manner open to regret, still, this does not mean
  that our schools are the cause of physical weakness, of
  overstimulation, and of deterioration of the people and of the epoch;
  it merely indicates a local deficiency in energetic purposive
  education, and a lack of the necessary watchfulness over the youths in
  the particular institution in which the trouble has occurred, or that
  the family life of the children thus affected is less strictly moral
  than we could wish; and the evil is only to be overcome by
  counteracting its especial causes. In many cases we may compare
  outbreaks of premature sexuality with epidemics of disease, which also
  find entrance through lack of sufficient care. Just the same is it in
  respect of the great mass of adults who, by exhortation and example on
  the part of those whose business it is to give them counsel, are in
  most cases so easily led in the right direction, but who, in the
  absence of such judicious treatment, often give way to the most
  unbridled licentiousness. The student of popular history will easily
  find numerous instances of cause and effect, now of the former and now
  of the latter kind.”

Ehrenberg comes to the conclusion, most encouraging to ourselves and to
our time, and one which may be unhesitatingly accepted, that the entire
history of humanity, in so far as that history is open to us, leads us
to believe, not that the progress of civilization[465] has given rise to
infirmity or to nervous overstimulation of the people, but, on the
contrary, that as the centuries pass, =our bodies are as powerfully
developed as formerly=, and that there is an ever-happier development of
all the nobler human activities, such as can only result from an
improvement in our mental faculties.

At the fifty-ninth Congress of German Natural Philosophers and
Physicians, held at Berlin in the year 1886, the celebrated physicist
Werner von Siemens, discussing the same problem in a formal speech,
proved the nullity of the hypothesis of the evil influence of
civilization upon the physical and moral nature of humanity, and
expressed himself as fully convinced that

  “our activity in research and discovery conducts humanity to higher
  stages of civilization, ennobles humanity, and makes ideal aims more
  easily accessible; that the coming scientific age will diminish
  poverty and illness, will increase the enjoyment of life, and will
  make humanity better, happier, and more contented with its lot.”

“Has humanity degenerated?” asks a celebrated specialist,[466] who,
owing to the nature of his speciality, has been able to obtain
exhaustive information regarding what is often believed to be a symptom
of degeneration--namely, falling out of the hair and baldness--and he
answers:

  “=Certainly not!= In the process of civilization, which has lasted for
  many thousands of years, our organization has not experienced any
  serious convulsion of its fundamental nature. Superficially only have
  the battles we have had to fight made any mark upon us.”

To a frightful extent in earlier times the great infective epidemic
diseases decimated civilized humanity, to an extent which is hardly
realized at the present day, and those of more powerful constitution
were undoubtedly carried off quite as much as those endowed with weaker
powers of resistance. Bubonic plague, small-pox, leprosy, the sweating
sickness, scarlatina, cholera, and syphilis (which at its commencement
was a far more severe disease than it is at the present day), have often
annihilated the blossoms of youth; and yet mankind as a whole has not
suffered therefrom. Formerly there were much more violent and obstinate
nervous troubles than our modern “nervousness,” which, to a large
extent, represents merely a =phenomenon of adaptation=, not a disease in
the proper sense of the term. St. Vitus’s dance, the dancing mania, and
similar psycho-nervous epidemics, disturbed medieval humanity, without,
however, giving rise to any permanent injury, and without causing
progressive degeneration. And the most frightful sexual excesses can do
no harm to the strength of the nation.

With regard to this point, the reputed connexion between sexual excesses
and the political downfall of a nation, Carl Bleibtreu[467] rightly
remarks:

  “Ancient Rome produced its greatest men during a period of moral
  degeneration. The finest blossoms of Hellenic civilization coincided
  with a period of fundamental immorality. We might easily urge that
  after Pericles, Phidias, Aristophanes, Euripides, Alcibiades, and
  Socrates, the decay of the Greek race began, notwithstanding the fact
  that much later in Greek history the vital force of the nation was
  proved by the appearance of men of the first rank, such as Alexander,
  Aristotle, and Demosthenes. But this rejoinder does not help us much,
  for in the earliest days of Greek history, in the legal codes of Solon
  and Lycurgus, we find the most notable and clear indications that
  precisely in respect of sexual relationship, and more especially in
  regard to marriage and the procreation of children, the morals of this
  fresh and youthful race were disordered to the greatest possible
  extent.

  “Just the same do we find it at the time of the Italian renascence and
  at the time of the Hohenstaufen dynasty--a complete confusion of
  sexual relationships. The eighteenth century, also, notwithstanding
  all the justified jeremiads of Rousseau regarding the widespread
  unnaturalness of the time, and notwithstanding all the sorrows of the
  young Werther, was distinguished by the production of an incredible
  abundance of men of genius; and in contemporary France, the country
  which was most severely affected by this moral decay, there flourished
  the generation to which such men as Mirabeau and Napoleon
  belonged--men whose unparalleled vitality influences us to this
  moment.”

Finally, I must refer to two leading authors of recent years, Eli
Metchnikoff and Georg Hirth, whose writings exhibit a remarkable
similarity in respect of general philosophical foundation. Both have
energetically opposed the unfounded fantasies of degeneration (there
exists also a =justified= campaign against the continuously effective
causes of degeneration in the form of alcohol, syphilis, etc.), and both
have advocated a belief in life and in the life-force.

In his work “The Nature of Man” (English translation by Chalmers
Mitchell; Heinemann, 1903), Metchnikoff advances an “optimistic
philosophy,” in opposition to the pessimistic degenerative theory of our
time, of which latter P. J. Möbius may be regarded as the chief
advocate, and he proves how the imperfections and “disharmonies” of the
human organism may give place to a further development and
perfectibility of human nature, and this =precisely in connexion with
culture and civilization. It is now that humanity first begins really to
live.=[468] Mankind has not degenerated in consequence of civilization,
but has, on the contrary, by means of civilization, first attained the
possibility of establishing “physiological old age” and “physiological
death.” Our device is not =backwards=, but =forwards=! The pessimists
cry out: “Existence has no meaning! For what purpose do we live, and for
what purpose do we die?” This dreadful “=for what purpose=” with which
Friedrich von Hellwald concludes his history of civilization, disturbs
day by day emotional minds. Metchnikoff proves that this problem is
connected with the existence of the disharmonies of human nature. But
evolution continues to transform these disharmonies into harmonies
(“orthobiosis”). Thus the aim of human existence lies in “the completion
of the entire physiological cycle of life with a normal old age, so
that, with the cessation of the instinct to live, and with the
appearance of the instinct for natural death, the cycle comes to an
end.” This is, to a certain extent, the =scientific= formulation of the
“superman” of Nietzsche, who based upon quite similar considerations his
opposition to the hypothesis of degeneration, and who, out of the
disharmonies, imperfections, and pains of life, also created the
conviction of a progressive evolution, and thus, like Metchnikoff,
thoroughly =affirmed= life. Metchnikoff’s ideal human being of the
future is realizable, but only by means of the principles of science and
intelligent culture.

Similar views to those of Metchnikoff are advanced by Georg Hirth. He,
above all, has introduced into science the most felicitous conception
of “=hereditary enfranchisement=.”[469] Thus to the pessimistic
degeneration theories and the psychical paralysis evoked by the idea of
“hereditary taint” (we now hear the expression from every mouth), Hirth
opposes a =word of power=, a word expressing “an energetic opposing
stream of tendency.” Thus the incontestable fact finds simple
expression, that

  “The requirements of all individuals through millions of generations
  =constitute an inalienable, progressively influential common
  possession of the whole of humanity=, an =impulsive force= based upon
  natural law, which marches victoriously forward over the sins and
  failures of individuals.... That is to say, that in our entire
  organism, so long as it continues to =live=, in addition to the
  disturbing influences which we have inherited or have acquired by our
  own faults, there exists also a mass of =old= and =new= constructive
  influences, which work towards the =restitution of the former
  condition=.... =Enfranchisement= by means of primevally old, healthy,
  and strong reproductive cells is stronger than the quite recent
  =tainting= by means of weakly and diseased germs. If it were not so,
  the entire human race would long since have passed away, for there can
  hardly exist a single family tree at the foot of which there are not
  somewhere worms gnawing.”

I cannot here examine more closely the extremely interesting foundation
of this view, which rightly places in the foreground the capacity for
=self-regeneration=, for the removal of morbid vital stimuli, and their
replacement by new and healthy vital stimuli, and which notably limits
the extension of hereditary “tainting.” The conclusion which Hirth draws
from this view is identical with that of Metchnikoff--namely, =that our
life remains capable of upward progress=, a view which Hirth everywhere
happily employs in his battle “with the forces of obscurity and
degeneration.”

The theory of degeneration finds a thorough scientific refutation also
in the admirable work by Dr. William Hirsch, “Genius and Degeneration: a
Psychological Study” (Berlin and Leipzig, 1904). At the end of the book
(p. 340) the writer says:

  “In view of the investigations I have made, we are necessarily led to
  the conclusion that the authors mentioned have =by no means= adduced
  proof of a general degeneration of the civilized nations. Humanity
  need not be alarmed with regard to the alleged ‘black plague of
  degeneration,’ and the world need be as little concerned by these
  fables of the ‘twilight of the nations’ as by Herr Falb’s prophecies
  of the approaching destruction of our planet.”

It cannot be denied that the wide diffusion of the deleterious means of
sensual gratification (alcohol, tobacco, etc.), the increase in the
number of large towns, and the rapid growth in their population, by
means of which prostitution and the spread of venereal diseases are
especially favoured, constitute important etiological factors for the
degeneration of the race. Still, the wide diffusion of public hygiene,
which is more and more brought under the notice of the individual,
affords here an effective counterpoise. “Enfranchisement” in Hirth’s
sense is here clearly manifested.

After we have seen that the “degeneration” of our time, to the medical
idea of which we shall return to speak more exactly in the next chapter,
is not greater now than it was in earlier epochs, and that sexual
anomalies have always existed, let us return to consider this point, to
the anthropological view of psychopathia sexualis.

In my “Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis” I have collected the general
human phenomena of the sexual impulse in primitive and civilized
states--that is, the everywhere recurring fundamental lineaments and
phenomena of the _vita sexualis_ peculiar to the _genus homo_ as such.

As the principal result of this inquiry, the following propositions
appear to me to be established:

=Degeneration cannot be employed, as von Krafft-Ebing has employed it in
his “Psychopathia Sexualis,” as a heuristic principle in the
investigation, recognition, and judgment of sexual aberrations and
perversions.=

At the most, degeneration is no more than a =favouring= factor of the
diffusion of sexual abnormalities, an influence which =increases the
frequency= of their appearance.

=On the contrary, the ultimate cause of all sexual perversions,
aberrations, abnormalities, and irrationalities, is the need for variety
in sexual relationships peculiar to the genus homo, which is to be
regarded as a physiological phenomenon, and the increase of which to the
degree of a sexual irritable hunger is competent to produce the most
severe sexual perversions.=

In contrast with this, “degeneration” or diseases play only a
subordinate part, and can be invoked for the explanation of only a small
number of sexual aberrations--at most for those which come to the notice
of physicians on account of pathological conditions or _in foro_. In
fact, the =majority= of cases of sexual perversions which come the way
of the physicians in clinical or forensic relationships =are=
pathological, but these constitute only a =minority of all cases=. The
large majority of cases do =not= come within the scope of
degeneration.[470]

Freud, in his “Three Essays on the Sexual Theory,” recognizes the
justice of my view, and on p. 80 he writes:

  “Physicians who have first studied perversions in well-marked examples
  and peculiar conditions are naturally inclined to regard them as signs
  of disease or as stigmata of degeneration, just as in the case of
  sexual inversion. Daily experience has shown that the majority of
  these transgressions--at any rate, the less marked of them--constitute
  a seldom lacking constituent of the sexual life of healthy persons. In
  favourable conditions =the normal individual may exhibit such a
  perversion for a considerable length of time in the place of his
  normal sexual activity; or the perversion may take its place beside
  the normal sexual activity. Probably there is no healthy person in
  whom there does not exist, at some time or other, some kind of
  supplement to his normal sexual activity, to which we should be
  justified in giving the name of ‘perversity.’=”[471]

A =second= important factor in the genesis of sexual anomalies is the
=ease with which the sexual impulse is affected by external influences,
the associative inclusion of manifold external stimuli in sexual
perception itself=, the “=synæsthetic stimuli=,” as I myself have called
them, in the amatory life of mankind. In this way gradually all the
relations of art, religion, fashion, etc., to sexuality have developed,
and they offer, in conjunction with the sensory impressions and the
psychical and physical imaginative associations which accompany the
sexual act, an incredibly rich material for the manifold realizations of
the sexual need for variation.

The need for variety in sexual relationships, in conjunction with the
sexual “demand for stimulation” (Hoche),[472] plays a great part,
especially in the occurrence of sexual perversions in =adult= persons
and at a more advanced age of life. The effect of =external influences=
is most clearly noticeable in =childhood=, when it is experienced most
deeply and in a most enduring manner, and when it can become permanently
associated with sexual perception (Binet and von Schrenck-Notzing).

Alexander von Humboldt, in his “Cosmos” (vol. ii., Introduction), drew
attention to the well-known experience that “=sensual impressions and
apparently chance occurrences are, in the case of youthful emotional
individuals, often capable of determining the entire course of a human
life=.” Freud draws attention to the psychological fact that impressions
of childhood, which have apparently been forgotten, may,
notwithstanding, have left the most profound marks upon our psychical
life, and may have determined our entire subsequent development. The
impressions of childhood are often incorporated fate. For this reason,
for example, the children of criminals become criminals themselves, not
because they are “born” criminals, but because, as =children=, they grow
up in the atmosphere of crime, and the impressions they here receive
become firmly and deeply rooted in their natures. Hence the campaign
against crime must in the first place take into consideration the
=education of the children of criminals=!

From the need for variety in sexual relationships, and from the effect
of external influences, we deduce the possibility and the actual
frequency of the =acquirement= and the =artificial production= of sexual
perversions and perversities; and these, in proportion to the
=intensity= of the sexual impulse (=very variable= in strength in
different individuals, according to the ease with which it is excited),
will appear now earlier, now later, will be now transient and now
enduring.

The =third= important etiological factor in the origination of sexual
perversions is the =frequent repetition= of the =same= sexual
aberration. There can be no doubt whatever that the normal human being
can become =accustomed= to the most diverse sexual aberrations, so that
these become perversions, which appear in =healthy= human beings just as
they do in the diseased.

=Fourthly=, =suggestion= and =imitation= play an extremely important
rôle in the _vita sexualis_ alike of primitive and of civilized nations,
in accordance with which certain aberrations in the sexual sphere become
diffused with great rapidity, and make their appearance as customs,
fashions, and psychical epidemics. Those who everywhere trace
perversities from morbid rudiments underestimate the powerful influence
which =example= and =seduction= exercise in the human sexual life. This
is especially noticeable to-day in those sexual perversions which have
become =national customs=. The most celebrated example is that of
=Hellenic pæderasty=, reputedly introduced from Crete, but probably in
the first place originated by a few =genuinely= homosexual individuals,
who in their own interest transmitted artificially by suggestion their
peculiar tendencies to a few heterosexual individuals, until at last the
love of boys became a national custom which every heterosexual man
adopted. The momentous part which modern =prostitution=, and more
especially =brothels=, plays in the suggestion of perversions has
already been mentioned. It is a matter to which we shall frequently have
occasion to return. Schrank alludes (“Prostitution in Vienna,” vol. i.,
p. 285) to a prostitute who enjoyed a “European reputation” as an artist
in sexual perversities of every kind, and who enjoyed the nickname of
“the Ever-Virgin,” because she allowed men every possible kind of
enjoyment except that of regular normal intercourse (which she avoided
for fear of becoming impregnated).

=Fifthly=, the =difference= between man and woman in the essence, the
kind, and the intensity, of sexual perception (sexual activity in man,
sexual passivity in woman) constitutes a rich source of sexual
aberrations, most of which belong to the provinces of masochism and
sadism.

=Sixthly=, and lastly, in otherwise =healthy individuals there occur at
a very early age=, and probably in consequence of =congenital=
conditions, changes in the direction and the aim of sexual perception,
variations from the type of differentiated heterosexual love. =Genuine
homosexuality= is the principal phenomenon to be considered under this
head. It occurs in perfectly =healthy= individuals quite independently
of degeneration and of civilization; and it is diffused throughout the
whole world.

From all these facts may be deduced the =untenability= of a purely
=clinical and pathological= conception of sexual aberrations and
perversions. We must now accept the point of view that, although
numerous morbid degenerate and psychopathic individuals exhibit sexual
anomalies, yet these =identical= anomalies and aberrations are
extraordinarily common in =healthy= persons.

Ethnological research, for more exact details of which I may refer
to my own work already mentioned, and to the pioneer works of
Ploss-Bartels,[473] Mantegazza,[474] Friedrich S. Krauss,[475] and
Havelock Ellis,[476] has adduced stringent proof that sexual
aberrations and perversions are =ubiquitous=, diffused throughout the
entire world, just as much among primitive races as among civilized
nations, that on the psycho-physical side they are “elementary ideas” in
Bastian’s sense, that they recur everywhere in a qualitatively identical
manner as a result of similar conditions. As it is with prostitution, so
it is also with sexual perversions--a tendency to sexual aberration is
deeply rooted in human nature. It is a primitive, purely anthropological
phenomenon, which is not strengthened by civilization, but, on the
contrary, is mitigated thereby. Charles Darwin rightly points out that
the =hatred= of sexual immorality and of sexual aberrations is a “modern
virtue,” appertaining exclusively to “civilized life,” and entirely
foreign to the nature of primitive man. Primitive man revelled in wild
indecency (as Wilhelm Roscher also proves), in sexual perversions, and
libertinism.[477] The sexual aberrations of civilized mankind are for
the most part =imitations= of the examples given by primitive peoples.

Thus, the well-known “stimulating rings” of European rubber
manufacturers (_cf._ Weissenberg, in the “Transactions of the
Anthropological Society of Berlin,” 1893, p. 135) correspond to the
“stimulating stones” of the Battaks (Staudinger, _op. cit._, 1891, p.
351), to the “penis stones” of the savage Orang Sinnoi in Malacca
(Vaughan Stevens in the _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie_, 1896, pp. 181,
182), the “ampallang” of the Sunda Islands (see Miklucho-Maclay in the
“Transactions of the Anthropological Society of Berlin,” 1876, pp.
22-28). The “renifleurs” and “gamahucheurs” of the Parisian brothels and
houses of accommodation find their typical analogues in the urine
fetichists and cunnilingi of the Island of Ponape, in the Carolines
(_cf._ Ploss-Bartels), who are, in truth, far removed from the
_fin-de-siècle_ life. And what a perverse imagination have the women of
this same island! According to Otto Finsch (_Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie_, 1880, p. 316), the men of this island have all only =one=
testicle, because in boys at the age of seven or eight years the left
testicle is removed by a piece of sharpened bamboo. This is said to make
the men more desirable =to the women=! Among the Masai, for similar
reasons, circumcision is effected in such a manner that a portion of the
prepuce is left behind to form a kind of firm button of skin. “This mode
of circumcision is greatly prized by the women. Among the black races,
indeed, everything turns round the question of sensual enjoyment”
(“Medical Notes from Central Africa,” by M. C., published in the
_Deutsche Medizinische Presse_, 1902, No. 14, p. 116). And how can our
roués compete with the Tauni islanders of the South Seas? These select
certain women, who are not allowed to marry, but are reserved as simple
“objects of sensual pleasure,” and with these every kind of sexual
artifice is practised (Dempwolf, “Medical Notes on the Tauni Islanders,”
published in the _Zeitschrift für Ethnologie_, 1902, p. 335).

Thus between primitive and civilized races in these respects there are
no important differences; and according to recent researches we find the
same may be said with regard to civilized nations, that there is no
difference between =town= and =country=.[478] I quote here the account
given by an experienced author sixty years ago:

  “People usually believe that in the country morals are much better
  than in the towns, but this belief is quite erroneous. Brothels and
  professional prostitutes naturally cannot exist in the country, but
  nearly every peasant-girl in the country is equivalent to a secret
  prostitute. It is incredible what sexual excesses go on between the
  masculine and feminine inhabitants of the villages. Every barn, every
  shed, every haystack, every copse, bears witness to this. Especially
  disadvantageous to morals is it when in the heat of summer persons of
  different sexes work side by side, half undressed, in remote fields
  for the whole day, and lie down to rest side by side.”[479]

We may here allude to a fact that we shall have to discuss later--that
young men, after the conclusion of their term of military service, carry
back with them to the country the knowledge of sexual excesses and
perversities which they have acquired in the town, and thus diffuse
these tendencies more and more widely.

Since sexual anomalies constitute a phenomenon generally characteristic
of humanity, =race= and =nationality=, as such, have less to do with the
matter than is commonly imagined. The Mongol and the Malay are not less
voluptuous than the Semites, or than many Aryan races. Among the
Semites, the Arabs and the Turks are pre-eminently sexually perverse
nations. They seek sexual gratification indifferently in the female
harem and in the boys’ brothel (see numerous descriptions of travellers
on the moral customs of Turkey, the Levant, Cairo, Morocco, the Arabian
Soudan, the Arabs in Africa, etc.). Among the Aryan races the Aryans of
India must be considered pre-eminent as refined practitioners of
psychopathia sexualis, which they have reduced to a =system=. In
addition to recognizing forty-eight _figuræ Veneris_ (different postures
in sexual intercourse), they practise every possible variety of sexual
perversion; and they have in various textbooks[480] a systematic
introduction to sexual immorality. Here there is manifestly no trace of
morbid conditions, of degeneration, or of psychopathia; it is simply a
matter of popular manners and customs. Sexual perversion among the
Greeks and the Romans, two other Aryan nations, is too well known to
need detailed description. In modern Europe the French were at one time
believed to lead the way in sexual artifices. For a long time this has
ceased to be true, and, in fact, never was true. They do, indeed, excel,
if one may use the expression, all other nations in the outward
technique and in the elegance of their sexual excesses. To them from
very early times there has been ascribed a certain preference for the
skatological element in the sexual life; but according to the recent
researches of Friedrich S. Krauss regarding the Slavs, published in his
“Anthropophyteia,” this alleged pre-eminence is extremely doubtful. That
among the Slavs sexual perversions of every kind have an extraordinarily
wide diffusion has been shown by this investigator by the collection of
an enormous mass of material. It is also very generally known that the
English from early days have exhibited a marked tendency to sadistic
practices, and especially to flagellation. I will return later to this
remarkable phenomenon. The French accuse the Germans of an especial
tendency to homosexuality (_le vice Allemand_), but there are no
sufficient grounds for this accusation. In psychopathia sexualis, the
Germans are as cosmopolitan as they are in other respects.

With regard to the =age= of the individual in relation to sexual
perversions, the frequency of these is greater after puberty than
before,[481] and the frequency increases with advancing years. The time
at which the imagination unfolds its greatest activity, the commencement
of manhood, is extremely favourable to the origination of sexual
aberrations, and to their becoming habitual practices; and, again, the
age at which the sexual powers begin to decline, and when for their
incitation new stimuli are needed, is one at which abnormal varieties
of sexual gratification frequently originate.[482]

Which =sex= is more inclined to abnormalities of the sexual impulse, the
male or the female?

The primitively more powerful sexual impulsive life of man in
association with his greater use of alcohol makes him distinctly more
inclined to follow sexual bypaths than woman, whose sexuality at first
develops very gradually, and experiences, in consequence of motherhood,
powerful inhibitions to the development of any sexual anomalies. On the
other hand, the much =more difficult development= of voluptuous
sensations in women, by means of normal coitus, is not rarely the cause
of a tendency to perverse varieties of sexual intercourse. They often
seduce man in this direction, and excel him in the discovery of sexual
artifices. Among primitive races, where the relationships are clearest,
this is still easily recognizable, whereas by civilization the matter is
often obscured. All the artificial deformities of the male genital
organs amongst savages, which give the man much more trouble than
pleasure, but which, on the other hand, increase the voluptuous
enjoyment of the woman during the sexual act, cannot otherwise be
explained except on the ground of an original demand on the part of
women. To this category belong incisions in the glans penis, and the
implanting of small stones in the wounds until the skin has a warty
appearance (Java); perforation of the penis to enable rods beset with
bristles, feathers, rods with balls (the well-known “ampallang” of the
Dyaks of Borneo), bodkins, rings, bell-shaped apparatus, to be inserted
through these perforations; the wrapping up of the penis in strips of
fur with the hair outwards, or enveloping it in a leaden cylinder, etc.
The feminine imagination has proved inexhaustible in this direction.
Miklucho-Maclay, the great authority on the sexual psychology of the
savage races of the Malay Archipelago and the South Sea Islands,
declares it to be extremely probable =that all these customs and all
these apparatus were invented by or for women=. The women reject all men
who do not possess these stimulating apparatus on the penis. Finsch and
Kubary confirm this, and state that in most cases it is the frigidity of
the women which makes them desire such means of artificial stimulation.
Among civilized races, also, abundant material can be collected with
regard to sexual perversities among women, as has recently been done by
Paul de Régla in “Les Perversités de la Femme” (Paris, 1904), and by
René Schwaeblé in “Les Détraquées de Paris” (Paris, 1904).

The following case shows that European women sometimes demand artificial
changes in the male genital organs, in order to increase their
voluptuous sensations. Some years ago a man, fifty years of age, was
admitted into the syphilis wards of the Laibacher Hospital. The
discharge from the penis was, however, found to be due merely to
balanitis. On examination the greatly enlarged penis was found to be
perforated by rod-shaped objects, and an incision through the skin
showed that these were pins and hairpins. The pins were about two inches
long, with brass heads the size of a peppercorn, and they were at least
ten in number. One of the pins was run partly into the testicle. After
the foreign objects had been removed, the man informed us that his
mistress had stuck these in, in order that she might experience more
ardent sensations. The pins were all subcutaneous; several of them ran
right round the penis.

=Social differences= in respect of the frequency of sexual perversions
do not exist. Sexual perversions are just as widely diffused among the
lower classes as among the upper. A. Ferguson, Havelock Ellis,
Tarnowsky, and J. A. Symonds are all in agreement regarding this fact,
which, indeed, in view of the anthropological conception of psychopathia
sexualis, does not require additional explanation.

Finally, we come to the last and most important point--to the question
of the relation of =culture= and =civilization= to psychopathia
sexualis. Even though psychopathia sexualis is in its =essence=
independent of culture, is a general human phenomenon, still we cannot
fail to recognize that civilization has exercised a certain influence
upon the external mode of manifestation, and also upon the inner
psychical configuration of sexual aberrations. Especially as regards the
latter--the psychical relationships--the perversity of the civilized man
is more complicated than that of primitive man, although in =essence=
the two are identical.

The modern civilized man is in respect of his sexuality a peculiar =dual
being=. The sexuality within him leads a kind of independent existence,
notwithstanding its intimate relationship to the whole of the rest of
his spiritual life. There are moments in which, even in men of lofty
spiritual nature, pure sexuality becomes separated from love, and
manifests itself in its utterly elementary nature beyond good and evil.
I expressed earlier the idea that this frequent phenomenon reminded me
of the “monomania” of the older alienists. “Il y a en nous deux êtres,
l’être moral et la bête: l’être moral sait ce que mérite l’amour
véritable, la bête aspire à la fange où on la pousse,” we find in a
French erotic work (“Impressions d’une Fille” par Léna de Mauregard,
vol. i., pp. 57, 68; Paris, 1900).

No other human impulsive manifestation is so ill adapted as sexuality to
the =coercion= and =conventionality= which civilization necessarily
entails. Carl Hauptmann, in an interesting socio-psychological study,
“Unsere Wirklichkeit” (“Our Reality”; Munich, 1902), has described very
impressively this frightful conventionality, especially characteristic
of our own time, which so painfully represses the “reality” of love,
suppresses everything primitive in it, banishes it into the darkness of
its own interior, and only allows the conventionally sanctioned forms of
sexual love to subsist. This coercion, this outward pressure, develops a
volcano of elementary sexuality, which usually slumbers, but may
suddenly break out in eruption, and give free vent to excesses of the
wildest nature. Dingelstedt in his poem “Ein Roman,” has excellently
described this condition:

   “Wenn du die =Leidenschaft= willst kennen lernen,
    Musst du dich nur nicht aus der Welt entfernen.
    Such’ sie nicht auf in friedlicher Idylle,
    In strohgedeckter und begnügter Stille...
    Da suche sie in festlich vollem Saale
    Bei Spiel und Tanz, an feierlichem Mahle,
    Dort, eingeschnürt =in Form und Zwang und Sitte=,
    Thront sie wie Banquos Geist in ihrer Mitte.”

  [“If you wish to learn to know passion,
    You must, above all, not remove yourself from the world.
    Do not look for it in a peaceful idyll,
    In padded and satisfied quietude....
    Look for it in the full festal hall,
    At the game and the dance, at the brilliant banquet;
    There, entrapped amid form, and coercion, and custom,
    Enthroned, like Banquo’s ghost, it sits amid the throng.”]

Similarly, Charles Albert[483] remarks:

  “If love nowadays so often manifests itself in the form of aberration
  or passion, this is almost always to be explained by the hindrances of
  every kind which have been opposed to it. No other feeling is so
  hindered, opposed, detested, and loaded with material and moral
  fetters. We know how education makes a beginning in this way,
  declaring that love is something forbidden, and how the hardness of
  economic life continues the process. Hardly has a young man or a young
  girl gone out into life, hardly have they begun to feel their way
  into society, but they encounter a thousand difficulties which are
  opposed to their living out their life from a sexual point of view.
  How would it be possible that, in the limits of such a society, love
  could become anything else but a fixed idea of the individual, and how
  could it fail to give rise to continuous restlessness? Nature does not
  allow herself to be inhibited by our artificial social arrangements.
  The need for love within us remains active; it cries out in
  unsatisfied desire; and when no answer is forthcoming, beyond the echo
  of its own pain, it takes a perverse form. The love which is prevented
  from obtaining complete satisfaction and repose is to many an
  intensely painful torment.... The over-rich imagination and the
  unsatisfied longing give rise to the most horrible and abnormal forms
  of love. Above all, in a society which will make no room for love, the
  love-passion must give rise to the greatest devastation. The impulse
  to love which is repressed by the organization of society does not
  only fight violently for air--the inevitable consequence of any
  pressure--but it discovers also all those artifices and corruptions
  which are supposed to make the enjoyment of love more intense.
  Conscious of being despised by society, it endeavours to regain by
  violence what is wanting to it in sensuality.”

The struggle for reality in love, for the elementary and the primitive,
manifests itself in the search for the greatest possible =contrast= to
the conventional, to the commonly sanctioned mode of sexual activity.
Love cries out for “nature,” and comes thereby to the “unnatural,” to
the =coarsest, commonest= dissipation. This connexion has been already
explained (pp. 322-325). Certain temporary phenomena exhibit also this
fact--for example, the remarkable preference for the most brutal, the
coarsest, the commonest dances, mere limb dislocations, such as the
cancan, the croquette (machicha), the cake-walk, and other wild negro
dances, which rejoice the modern public more than the most beautiful and
gracious spiritual ballet. It was only when the above-described
connexion became clear to me that I was able to understand the
remarkable alluring power of these dances, which had hitherto been
incomprehensible to me.

An additional factor which favours the origination of sexual perversions
is the =unrest= always connected with the advance of civilization, the
haste and hurry, the more severe struggle for existence, the rapid and
frequent change of new impressions. Fifty years ago the celebrated
alienist Guislain exclaimed:

  “What is it with which our thoughts are filled? Plans, novelties,
  reforms. What is it that we Europeans are striving for? Movement,
  excitement. What do we obtain? Stimulation, illusion, deception.”[484]


There is no longer any time for quiet, enduring love, for an inward
profundity of feeling, for the culture of the =heart=. The struggle for
life and the intellectual contest of our time leaves the possibility
only for transient sensations; the shorter they are, the more =violent=,
the more intense must they be, in order to replace the failing _grande
passion_ of former times. Love becomes a mere =sensation=, which in a
brief moment must contain within itself an entire world. Modern youth
eagerly desires such =experience= of a whole world by means of love. The
everlasting feeling of our classic period had been transformed, more
especially among our leading spirits, into a passionate yearning to
reflect within themselves truly the spirit of the time, to live through
in themselves all the unrest, all the joy, all the sorrow, of modern
civilization.

From this there results a peculiar, more spiritual configuration of
modern perversity, a distinctive spiritualization of psychopathia
sexualis, a true wandering journey, an “Odyssey” of the spirit,
throughout the wide province of sexual excesses. Without doubt the
French have gone furthest in this direction, and the names of
Baudelaire, Barbey d’Aurevilly, Verlaine, Hannon, Haraucourt, Jean
Larocque, and Guy de Maupassant, indicate nearly as many peculiar
spiritual refinements and enrichments of the purely sensual life.

We have no longer to deal with the pure love of reflection, as in the
case of Kierkegaard and Grillparzer, and in the writings of young
Germany, where, indeed, reflection predominates, but which still more
extends to the direction of =higher love=. Contrasted with this is the
=simple lust of the senses=, by means of which new psychical influences
are to be obtained. Voluptuousness becomes a cerebral phenomenon,
ethereal. In this way the most remarkable, unheard-of, sensory
associations appear in the province of sexuality--true _fin-de-siècle_
products which are, above all, specifically =modern=, and could not
possibly exist in former times. For it is always the same play of
emotion, the same effects, the same terminal results: ordinary
voluptuousness. The dream of Hermann Bahr, of “non-sexual
voluptuousness,” and the replacement of the animal impulse by means of
finer organs, is only a dream. The elemental sexual impulse resists
every attempt at dismemberment and sublimation. It returns always
unaltered, always the same. It is vain to expect new manifestations of
this impulse. Such efforts end either in bodily and mental impotence, or
else in sexual perversities. In these relationships the imagination of
civilized man is unable to create novelties in the =essence=; it can do
so only as regards the objective =manifestations=. This is confirmed by
the increase of purely ideal sexual perversities in connexion with
certain spiritual tendencies of our time. Martial d’Estoc, in his book,
“Paris Eros” (Paris, 1903), has given a clear description of these
peculiar spiritual modifications of sexual aberrations. (It is
interesting to note that Schopenhauer remarks, in his “Neue
Paralipomena,” pp. 234 and 235: “The caprices arising from the sexual
impulse resemble a will-o’-the-wisp. They deceive us most effectively;
but if we follow them, they lead us into the marsh and disappear.”)


APPENDIX

SEXUAL PERVERSIONS DUE TO DISEASE

It is the immortal service of Casper and von Krafft-Ebing to have
insisted energetically upon the fact that =numerous= individuals whose
_vita sexualis_ is abnormal are persons suffering from =disease=. This
is their _monumentum ære perennius_ in the history of medicine and of
civilization. Purely medical, anatomical, physical, and psychiatric
investigations show beyond question that there are many persons whose
abnormal sexual life is pathologically based.

I shall not here discuss the peculiar =borderland state between health
and disease=, the existence of which can be established in many sexually
perverse individuals; I shall not refer to the “abnormalities,” the
“psychopathic deficiencies,” the “unbalanced,” etc.; nor shall I discuss
the question of the significance of the stigmata of degeneration,
because these will be adequately dealt with in connexion with the
forensic consideration of punishable sexual perversions.

Here we shall speak only of actual and easily determined diseases which
possess a causal importance in the origination and activity of sexual
perversions. The great majority of these are, naturally, =mental
disorders=.

Von Krafft-Ebing, to whom we owe the most important observations
regarding the pathological etiology of sexual perversions, enumerates
the following conditions: Psychical developmental inhibitions (idiocy
and imbecility), acquired weak-mindedness (after mental disorders,
apoplexy, injuries to the head, syphilis, in consequence of general
paralysis), epilepsy, periodical insanity, mania, melancholia, hysteria,
paranoia.

Among these, =epilepsy= possesses the greatest importance.[485] It comes
into play =much more frequently= as a causal morbid influence in the
case of sexually perverse actions and offences than has hitherto been
believed. The psychiatrist Arndt maintains that wherever an abnormal
sexual life exists, we must always consider the possibility of epileptic
influence. Lombroso assumes that all premature and peculiar instances of
satyriasis are instances of larval epilepsy. He gives several examples
in support of this view, and also a case of Macdonald’s which
illustrates the connexion between epilepsy and sexual perversity.[486]
Especially in the so-called epileptic “confusional states” do we meet
with sexually perverse actions; exhibitionism and other manifestations
of sexual activity _coram publico_ are frequently referable to epileptic
disease. Similar impulsive sexual activities and similar confusional
states are seen after =injuries to the head= and in =alcoholic
intoxication=, also after =severe exhaustion=. Many cases of “=periodic
psychopathia sexualis=” are due to epilepsy.

=Senile dementia= and =paralytic dementia= (general paralysis of the
insane), also severe forms of =neurasthenia= and =hysteria=, often
change the sexual life in a morbid direction, and favour the origin of
sexual perversions.

It is a fact of great interest that Tarnowsky and Freud attribute to
=syphilis= an important rôle in the pathogenesis of sexual anomalies. In
50 % of his sexual pathological cases Freud found that the abnormal
sexual constitution was to be regarded as the last manifestation of a
syphilitic inheritance (Freud, _op. cit._, p. 74). Tarnowsky observed
that congenital syphilitics, and also persons whose parents had been
syphilitic, but who themselves had never exhibited any definite symptoms
of the disease, were apt later to show manifestations of a perverse
sexual sensibility (Tarnowsky, _op. cit._, pp. 34 and 35). =Obviously
this is to be explained by the deleterious influence upon the nervous
system (perhaps by means of toxins?) which syphilis is also supposed to
exert in the causation of tabes dorsalis and general paralysis of the
insane.= When investigating the clinical history of cases of sexual
perversion, it appears that previous syphilis is a fact to which some
importance should be attached.[487]

From syphilis we pass to consider direct =physical= abnormalities and
=morbid changes in the genital organs= as causes of sexual anomalies. In
women prolapsus uteri sometimes leads to perverse gratification of the
sexual impulse--for example, by pædication;[488] in men, shortness of
the frænum preputii plays a similar part,[489] also phimosis. Wollenmann
reports the case of a young man suffering from phimosis, who, at the
first attempt at coitus, experienced severe pain, and since that time
had an antipathy to normal sexual intercourse. He passed under the
influence of a seducer to the practice of mutual masturbation. Only
after operative treatment of the phimosis did his inclination towards
the male sex pass away, and the sexual perversion then completely
disappeared.[490]

  [456] Hermann Joseph Löwenstein, “De Mentis Aberrationibus ex Partium
  Sexualium Conditione Abnormi Oriundis” (Bonn, 1823).

  [457] Joseph Häussler, “The Relations of the Sexual System to the
  Psyche” (Würzburg, 1826).

  [458] Heinrich Kaan, “Psychopathia Sexualis” (Leipzig, 1844).

  [459] R. von Krafft-Ebing, “Psychopathia Sexualis” (Stuttgart, 1882).

  [460] We must not omit to mention the fact that a little earlier the
  French physician Moreau de Tours published a comprehensive work upon
  psychopathia sexualis, entitled “Des Aberrations du Sens Génésique”
  (Paris, 1880).

  [461] S. Freud, “Three Essays in Contribution to the Sexual Theory,”
  p. 70.

  [462] _Cf._ the interesting remarks of G. H. C. Lippert, “Mankind in a
  State of Nature,” p. 1 _et seq._ (Elberfeld, 1818).

  [463] Christian Muff, “What is Civilization?” pp. 30, 31 (Halle,
  1880).

  [464] G. L. N. Delvincourt, “De la Mucite Génito-Sexuelle,” p. 64
  (Paris, 1834). Apt remarks on the alleged degeneration of the French
  are to be found also in the work of P. Näcko, “The Alleged
  Degeneration of the Latin Races, more Especially of the French,”
  published in _Archives for Racial and Social Biology_, 1906, vol. iii.

  [465] As, for example, Immermann, in his work “Epigonen,” published at
  the same period (1836), assumes. In the mouth of the physician he puts
  the following words: “The physician has a great task to perform in the
  present day. _Diseases, especially nervous troubles, to which for a
  number of years the human race has been especially disposed, are a
  modern product._” _Cf._ Leopold Hirschberg, “Medical Matters as dealt
  with in General Literature: the Judgment of a Member of the Laity
  regarding Nervousness in the Year 1876,” published in _Medizinische
  Wochenschrift_, 1906, No. 41, p 428. Seventy years ago the German
  people was “nervous”; thirty-four years before _Sedan_, thirty years
  after _Jena_! Therefore neither Jena nor Sedan can be connected with
  the nervous “degeneration.” The authors of the eighteenth century (!)
  made similar complaints of the nervousness of their time, upon which
  Cullen and Brown founded their medical theories.

  [466] J. Pohl-Pincus, “The Diseases of the Human Hair, and the Care of
  the Hair,” third edition, p. 57 (Leipzig, 1885).

  [467] Carl Bleibtreu, “Paradoxes the Conventional Lies,” sixth
  edition, pp. 1, 2 (Berlin, 1888).

  [468] See “Nature and Man,” E. Ray Lankester’s Romanes Lecture,
  1905.--TRANSLATOR.

  [469] G. Hirth, “Hereditary Enfranchisement,” published in “Ways to
  Freedom,” pp. 106-127 (Munich, 1903).

  [470] Näcke’s thesis is in agreement with this, that “all sexual
  abnormal practices in an asylum are =for the most part much more rare=
  than the laity, =or even many physicians, imagine=.” _Cf._ P. Näcke,
  “Some Psychologically Obscure Cases of Sexual Aberrations in the
  Asylum,” published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_,
  vol. v., p. 196 (Leipzig, 1903). See also, by the same author,
  “Problemi nel Campo delle Psicopatie Sessuali,” in _Archivio delle
  Psicopatie Sessuali_, 1896; “Sexual Perversities in the Asylum,” in
  the _Wiener klinische Rundschau_, 1899, Nos. 27-30.

  [471] S. Freud, _op. cit._, pp. 19, 20.

  [472] A. Hoche, “The Problem of the Forensic Condemnation of Sexual
  Transgressions,” published in the _Neurologisches Centralblatt_, 1896,
  p. 58.

  [473] Ploss-Bartels, “Das Weib in der Natur- und Volkerkunde,” eighth
  edition, 2 vols. (Leipzig, 1906).

  [474] Mantegazza, “Anthropological and Historical Studies on the
  Sexual Relationship of Mankind.”

  [475] F. S. Krauss, “Morals and Customs relating to Sexual
  Reproduction among the Southern Slavs,” published in “Kryptadia,”
  vols. vi.-viii. (Paris, 1899-1902); and in the larger work,
  “Anthropophyteia” (Leipzig, 1904-1906).

  [476] In all his works.

  [477] _Cf._ Charles Darwin, “The Descent of Man, and Selection in
  Relation to Sex,” vol. i., p. 182 (2 vols., London, 1898).

  [478] _Cf._ the inquiry of C. Wagner, containing extremely valuable
  material, “The Sexual and Moral Relationships of the Protestant
  Agricultural Population of the German Empire” (3 vols., Leipzig, 1897,
  1898).

  [479] “Prostitution in Berlin and its Victims,” p. 27 (Berlin, 1846).

  [480] _Cf._ the detailed bibliography of these works in my
  “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. i., pp.
  29, 30.

  [481] Typical sexual perversions have, however, been observed even in
  children, and it is this fact which has chiefly given rise to the
  doctrine of the “congenital” character of sexual perversions.

  [482] _Cf._ the remarks of the Marquis de Sade regarding the abnormal
  sexuality of elderly men, in my “New Research Concerning the Marquis
  de Sade,” pp. 421, 422 (Berlin, 1904).

  [483] C. Albert, “Free Love,” p. 148.

  [484] Joseph Guislain, “Clinical Lectures on Mental Diseases,” p. 229
  (Berlin, 1854).

  [485] Kowalewski, “Perversions of Sexual Sensibility in Epileptics,”
  published in the _Jahrbücher für Psychiatrie_, 1887, vol. vii., No. 3.

  [486] C. Lombroso, “Recent Advances in the Study of Criminology,” pp.
  197-200 (Gera, 1899).--Tarnowsky has even described a form of
  “epileptic pæderasty” (_cf._ B. Tarnowsky, “Morbid Phenomena of Sexual
  Sensibility,” pp. 8, 51; Berlin, 1886).

  [487] E. Laurent (“Morbid Love,” pp. 43-45; Leipzig, 1895) regards
  tubercular inheritance as an important etiological factor of sexual
  anomalies, for these occur more frequently in blonde, weakly
  individuals, than in brunettes (?).

  [488] Bacon, “The Effect of Developmental Anomalies and Disorders of
  the Female Reproductive Organs upon the Sexual Impulse,” published in
  the _American Journal of Dermatology_, 1899, vol. iii., No. 2.

  [489] M. Féré, “Sexual Hyperæsthesia in Association with Shortness of
  the Frænum Preputii,” published in the _Monatshefte für praktische
  Dermatologie_, 1896, vol. xxiii., p. 45.

  [490] A. G. Wollenmann, “Phimosis as a Cause of Perversion of Sexual
  Sensibility,” published in _Der ärztliche Praktiker_, 1895, No. 23.
  Matthaes has shown that morbid changes of the genital sphere or its
  vicinity are apt to give rise to offences against morality (“The
  Statistics of Offences against Morality,” published in the _Archiv für
  Kriminalanthropologie_, 1903, vol. xii., p. 319).




