CHAPTER X

THE SOCIAL FORMS OF THE SEXUAL RELATIONSHIP--MARRIAGE


“_The individualistic tendency, in the most decisive and characteristic
form peculiar to our system of civilization, is most happily represented
in the monogamic form of marriage; for here, on the woman’s side also,
the development of individuality is gently and imperceptibly
accomplished._”--LUDWIG STEIN.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER X

  The disputed question of sexual promiscuity -- The fact of its
  existence -- Westermarck’s defective criticism of the doctrine of
  promiscuity -- Persistence of promiscuity until the present day --
  Ethnological proofs of this fact -- The researches of Friedrich S.
  Krauss -- Marriage an artificial product -- Group-marriage -- A form
  of limited promiscuity -- Diffusion of group-marriage -- Connexion of
  polygamy and group-marriage -- The loan and the exchange of wives --
  Matriarchy and patriarchy -- Progress from lower to higher social
  forms of sexual relationship -- Transition from matriarchy to
  patriarchy -- Formation of the patriarchal family -- Marriage by
  capture and marriage by purchase -- The bright side of patriarchy --
  Patriarchal forms of marriage -- Polygamy and the patriarchal family
  -- Levitical marriage -- Monogamic marriage -- Coexistence with
  monogamic marriage of a facultative polygamy -- The conventional lie
  of marriage -- Hegel’s definition of marriage -- Criticism of this
  definition -- Combination of the matriarchal and the patriarchal forms
  of the sexual relationship -- Revival of the idea of matriarchy --
  Transformation of the ancient patriarchal form of marriage to freer
  forms -- Introduction of civil marriage and divorce -- Chief grounds
  for marriage reform -- Duplex sexual morality -- Its origin --
  Criticism thereof -- Relationship between prostitution and the
  conventional coercive marriage -- Necessity of, and justification for,
  freer forms of marriage -- Lecky’s views on this subject -- Roman
  concubinage, and the morganatic marriage -- Significance of the
  sacramental character of marriage -- Sanction by the State of a freer
  form of marriage (civil marriage, mixed marriage, divorce) --
  Psychology of love in the marriage problem -- Inconstancy of human
  love -- The eternity lie -- Transient character of youthful love --
  Gutzkow, Kierkegaard, and Rétif de la Bretonne on this subject -- The
  poetical character of the first stages of every love -- The sexual
  need for variety as an anthropologico-biological phenomenon -- This
  simply an explanatory principle, not an ideal -- Rarity of the “only”
  love -- The psychologist Stiedenroth on this subject -- The
  possibility of love felt simultaneously for several persons --
  Explanation of this fact -- Examples -- Difficulty of complete harmony
  between man and wife -- The ideal of the “one” love -- Schleiermacher
  on the necessity for experiments in love -- The examples of Wilhelmine
  Schröder-Devrient and Caroline Schelling -- The need for love
  unaffected by disillusion -- Dangers of habituation -- The double rôle
  of habituation in marriage -- Danger of intimate life in common -- The
  common bedroom -- Unfavourable conditions with regard to the relative
  ages of husband and wife -- Increase in premature marriages --
  Connexion of this phenomenon with the premature awakening of sexuality
  -- Too great a difference in age between husband and wife --
  Consequent physiological disharmony -- Postponement of marriage in
  consequence of civilization -- Diminution of marriages in various
  European countries -- Economical factors -- Mercenary marriage a
  vestige of earlier times -- Disappearance of the economic background
  to marriage with the further advance of civilization -- Marriage and
  the price of corn -- Part played by mercenary marriage in various
  classes -- Importance of economic factors in marriage -- Summary of
  the causes of the diminution of the “marriage impulse” -- “Conjugal
  rights” -- Justification and misuse of these -- Boredom in married
  life -- Marriage and disease -- Opinion of an alienist on the
  calamities of marriage -- Statements of a wife -- Schiller and
  Byron upon love and marriage -- A dictum of Socrates -- Growing
  disinclination to the coercive character of the marriage bond -- Great
  increase in the number of divorces in recent years -- § 1568 of the
  Civil Code -- Legal possibility of several successive divorces on the
  part of the same individual -- A kind of civil sanction of free love
  -- Dependence of the consciousness of duty upon freedom -- Grounds for
  divorce -- Marriage reform in France -- Composition and programme of
  the French committee for marriage reform -- The idea of sexual
  responsibility.

  Appendix: Report of one hundred typical marriages, and twelve
  characteristic more detailed pictures of married life, after
  Gross-Hoffinger.


CHAPTER X

Since the subject first engaged my close attention, it has always seemed
to me incomprehensible that a dispute should ever have arisen among
anthropologists, ethnologists, and historians of civilization as to
whether, among the primitive forms of the sexual relationship, marriage
was the first, or whether it was preceded by a state of sexual
promiscuity.

Whoever knows the nature of the sexual impulse, whoever has arrived at a
clear understanding regarding the course of human evolution, and,
finally, whoever has studied the conditions that even now prevail, alike
among primitive peoples and among modern civilized races, in the matter
of sexual relations, can have no doubt whatever that =in the beginnings
of human development a state of sexual promiscuity did actually
prevail=.[155]

  “The ideal goal,” says Heinrich Schurtz, “towards which, more or less
  consciously, civilized humanity is undoubtedly advancing,
  involuntarily also becomes the standard by which the past is judged,
  and sentiment and mood take the place of a single-minded endeavour to
  arrive at truth.”

Thus it has happened that the ideal of permanent marriage between a
single man and a single woman, which, in fact, as we shall proceed to
explain, must persist as =an ideal of civilization never to be lost=,
has been employed as a standard for the judgment of bygone conditions.
This error is one into which Westermarck more especially has fallen in
his “History of Human Marriage” (Jena, 1893)--a work of considerable
value from its richness in ethnological detail. Hence Westermarck’s
criticism of the doctrine of promiscuity, based as it is upon false
premises, “has ultimately remained barren,” as Heinrich Schurtz has
proved.[156] Westermarck, for example, simply ignores the fact that
within the group-marriage of sexual associates, within the totem,
promiscuity undoubtedly existed.

Since, as we shall see, among the tribes and races living in social
unions, sexual promiscuity can be proved to have existed side by side
with, and commonly in advance of, the development of marriage, it is
indubitable that primitive man, in whom the sexual impulse was still
purely instinctive, had simply no knowledge of “marriage” in the modern
sense of the term. Otherwise, indeed, the “mother-right” would not have
been necessary, for matriarchy was the typical expression of the
uncertainty of paternity which resulted from sexual promiscuity.

The great freedom of sexual intercourse in primitive times is denoted by
various investigators by many different terms; sometimes it is called
“promiscuity,” sometimes “free-love,” sometimes “group-marriage,”
“polyandry,” “polygamy,” “religious and sexual prostitution,” etc. The
classical works of Bachofen, Bastian, Giraud-Teulon, von Hellwald,
Kohler, Friedrich S. Krauss, Lubbock, MacLennan, Morgan, Friedrich
Müller, Post, H. Schurtz, Wilcken, and others, have proved beyond
question the existence of this primordial hetairism.

When modern critics at length find it convenient to admit the
overwhelming force of the enormous mass of evidence that has been
collected concerning this subject, they still exhibit a great dislike to
the conception and the term sexual “promiscuity,” whereby is understood
the boundless and indiscriminate intermingling of the sexes. They admit
the possibility of group-marriage, although this is merely a socially
limited form of promiscuity; they admit even the existence of polyandry
and polygamy, and of indiscriminate religious prostitution; but they
refuse to believe in the existence of genuine promiscuity.

And yet, if they only chose to make use of their eyes, they could
observe sexual promiscuity at the present day among the modern civilized
nations. In certain strata and classes of the population, such an
indiscriminate and unregulated sexual intercourse, in no way leading to
the formation of enduring relationships, can be observed to-day. Ask a
young man, even of the better classes, with how many women he has had
connexion during a single year--not one of these need have been a
prostitute--and, if he speaks the truth, you will be astounded at the
number of the “objects of lust”! This last expression is suitable
enough, because in most cases there is no individual relationship
between such casual partners. Ask certain girls also--maidservants, for
example, or girls engaged in the manufacture of ready-made clothing--and
you will obtain analogous information regarding the number of their
annual lovers. Phillip Frey (“Der Kampf der Geschlechter”--“The Battle
of the Sexes,” p. 51; Vienna, 1904) bases on similar grounds the
assumption of a primitive sexual promiscuity; he refers especially to
the condition of the seaports:

  “Ports in which ocean-going vessels come to harbour are familiar with
  the sexual impulse in its most completely animal form, and devoid of
  every refinement and concealment. We find ourselves transported into
  the depths of an urgent primitiveness and savagery, which gives the
  lie to the advance in civilization, and this will enable us to form a
  clearer idea of the bestial indifference in sexual matters that must
  have obtained amongst the herds of primitive man. Intercourse between
  man and woman promoted by the lust of the moment, dependent solely
  upon reciprocal animal desire, the various male and female individuals
  of the human herd differing too little each from the other to make it
  worth while to strive for permanent rights of possession, the absence
  of any ownership of land amongst those wandering to and fro through
  the primeval forest, the common ownership of children by the herd or
  tribe--that such was the primitive, ape-like condition of the human
  race, one actually inferior to that of many other mammals, is a belief
  amply justified by the polygamous and polyandrous instincts of _homo
  sapiens_, recurring again and again in all the stages of
  civilization.”

Fortunately, ethnology furnishes us with incontrovertible proofs of
genuine promiscuity.

Of the Nasomoni in Africa, Herodotus (iv. 172) reports:

  “When a Nasomonian man takes his first wife, it is the custom that on
  the =first= night the bride should be visited by each of the guests in
  turn, and each one, as he leaves, gives her a present which he had
  brought with him to the house.”

Diodorus Siculus makes a similar report regarding the inhabitants of the
Balearic Islands (v. 18). Have we not here an echo of primeval custom,
of sexual promiscuity prior to marriage?

Very interesting are the accounts recently given by Melnikow regarding
the free sexual relationships customary among the Siberian Buryats.
There before marriage unregulated sexual intercourse between men and
girls prevails. This is especially to be observed at festival seasons.
Such festivals occur usually late in the evening, and can rightly be
called “nights of love.” Near the villages bonfires are lighted, round
which the men and women dance monotonous dances termed “nadan.” From
time to time pairs separate from the thousands of dancers, and disappear
into the darkness; soon they return and resume their place in the dance,
to disappear again by and by into the obscurity; but they are not the
same couples that disappear each time, =for they continually change
partners=.[157]

Is this not promiscuity? In a mitigated form we can see the same among
ourselves. A case recently came under my notice in which two friends
made an exchange of their “intimates”; moreover, the “intimacy” in each
case had been of very brief duration. This, indeed, happened in the full
light of day; while among the Buryats the darkness concealed a
completely indiscriminate promiscuity.

Marco Polo reports as a remarkable custom of the inhabitants of Thibet,
that there a man would in no circumstances marry a girl who was a
virgin, for they say a wife is worth nothing if she has not had
intercourse with men. Girls were offered to the traveller, and he was
expected to reward the courtesy with a ring or some other trifle, which
the girl, when she wished to marry, would show as one of her
“love-tokens.” =The more such tokens she possessed, the more she was in
request as a wife.=[158]

From New Holland we receive similar reports.

Of especial importance, as proving the existence of sexual promiscuity,
are the investigations of the student of folk-lore, Friedrich S. Krauss,
regarding the sexual life of the Southern Slavs. Krauss has, indeed,
rendered most valuable aids to the scientific study and anthropological
foundation of the human sexual life; a place of honour among the
founders of “anthropologia sexualis” must be given to Krauss, and also
to Bastian, Post, Kohler, Mantegazza, and Ploss-Bartels.

Dr. Krauss first published his pioneer investigations in “Kryptadia,”
vols. vi. and vii. (Paris, 1899 and 1901); but later he founded an
annual for the record of researches into the folk-lore and ethnology of
the sexual life, entitled “Anthropophyteia: Jahrbuch für folkloristische
Erhebungen und Forschungen zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der
geschlechtlichen Moral”--“Anthropophyteia: Annual for Folk-lorist
Investigations and Researches in the History of the Evolution of Sexual
Morality.” This has been published now for four years, 1904-1907, Krauss
having the co-operation of anthropologists, ethnologists, folk-lorists,
and medical men, such as Thomas Achelis, Iwan Bloch, Franz Boas, Albert
Eulenburg, Anton Herrmann, Bernhard Obst, Giuseppe Pitré, Isak
Robinsohn, and Karl von dem Steinen. It constitutes a most important
addition to the hitherto very scanty works for the scientific study of
sexual problems. Later, I shall have occasion to refer again to this
important undertaking. Krauss, who, as he himself says, is insensitive
to the romantic appeal of folk-lore, but has an open mind for the
realities and possibilities of human history, has proved in this
publication the unquestionable existence of sexual promiscuity among the
Southern Slavs. As he himself declares, such an abundance of trustworthy
proofs, obtained by a professional folk-lorist, regarding the existence
of a form of sexual promiscuity within the narrow sphere of a single
geographical province of research, has not hitherto been available.

It is, moreover, perfectly clear that the human need for sexual variety,
which is an established anthropological phenomenon,[159] must in
primitive times have been much stronger and more unbridled, in
proportion as the whole of life had not hitherto risen above the needs
of purely physical requirements. Since even in our own time, in a state
of the most advanced civilization, after the development of a sexual
morality penetrating and influencing our entire social life, this
natural need for variety continues to manifest itself in almost
undiminished strength, we can hardly regard it as necessary to prove
that in primitive conditions sexual promiscuity was a more original,
and, indeed, a more =natural=, state than marriage.

For from the purely =anthropological= standpoint--only from this
standpoint, since with questions of morality, society, and civilization
we are not now concerned--permanent marriage appears a thoroughly
=artificial= institution, which even to-day fails to do justice to the
human need for sexual variety, since, indeed, vast numbers of men live
_de jure_ monogamously, but _de facto_ polygamously--a fact pointed out
by Schopenhauer. This criticism is, of course, based upon purely
physical sensual considerations; it does not touch marriage as an ideal
of civilization possessing a =spiritual and moral= content.

The other social forms of sexual intercourse, forms whose existence is
admitted even by the critics of promiscuity, are characterized by
frequent =changes= in sexual relationships. This is especially true of
the oldest form of marriage, the so-called “=group-marriage=.”[160]

Group-marriage is not a union in marriage of isolated individuals, but
such a union between two =tribal groups=, composed respectively of male
and female individuals, a union between the so-called =totems=.

The social instinct, the impulse towards companionship, upon which even
to-day the State and the family depend, united mankind at one time into
tribes of a peculiar kind, which felt themselves to constitute single
individuals, and believed themselves to be inspired by an animal spirit,
their protective spirit. Their union was known as the totem.

Group-marriage is =the marriage of one totem with another=--that is, the
men of one totem-group marry the women of another, and _vice versa_. But
=no individual man has any particular wife=. On the contrary, if, for
example, twenty men of the first totem espoused twenty women of the
second totem, then each one of the twenty men had an equivalent share of
each one of the twenty women, and _vice versa_. This was indeed an
advance over unrestricted sexual promiscuity, limited by no social
forms; but it afforded no possibility of any individual relationships of
love, it remained promiscuity within narrow bounds. Group-marriages
exist at the present day in Australia in a well-developed form among
certain tribes; whilst, as an occasional custom, in the form of an
exchange of wives among friends, guests, and relatives, it appears to be
almost universally diffused throughout Australia. Schurtz regards
Australian group-marriage as a kind of partial taming of the wild sexual
impulse.

Well known is the description of group-marriage in ancient Britain given
by Julius Cæsar: “The husbands possess their wives to the number of ten
or twelve in common, and more especially brothers with brothers, or
parents with children.” Here we have a special variety of
group-marriage.

According to Bernhöft, =polyandry= is also to be regarded as the
vestige of a primitive form of group-marriage, arising from a deficiency
of women in a totem, so that one woman was left as the representative of
the totem married to several husbands. Marshall has, in fact, amongst
the polyandrous Toda in Southern India, actually observed group-marriage
side by side with polyandry.

Among certain Indian tribes we find even at the present day indications
of group-marriage. For example, the husband will have a claim on the
sisters of his wife, or even on her cousins or her aunts, and gradually
he may marry them. In this case we see that =polygyny= has developed out
of the group-marriage.

The widely diffused practice of =wife-lending= and =wife-exchange= is
also connected with the conditions of group marriage. In Hawaii, in
Australia, among the Massai and the Herero in South Africa, we encounter
this custom, but more especially in Angola and at the mouth of the
Congo, also in North-Eastern Asia, and among many tribes of North
American Indians.

Schurtz points out that similar conditions may arise among European
proletariat in consequence of inadequate housing accommodation.

In this state of a somewhat limited promiscuity the only natural tie was
that between mother and child. The child belonged exclusively to the
mother, and therefore, in the wider sense, belonged to his mother’s
totem. As Bachofen proved in his celebrated work,[161] in primeval
times, and among many primitive tribes even at the present day, the
“=mother-right=” (matriarchy), founded upon purely sensual,
non-individual relations, was predominant; and only with the appearance
of freer, more spiritual, more individual relations between the sexes
(though this did not necessarily involve the development of monogamy)
was “mother-right” first superseded by “father-right” (patriarchy).

These recent ethnological researches have proved the untenability of
Westermarck’s criticism of the doctrine of promiscuity; it is no longer
possible to doubt the fact of a primitive sex-companionship, taking the
form of a more or less limited promiscuity of sexual intercourse. Ludwig
Stein also lays stress on this view.[162] The sexual relationships of
the primeval hordes were either quite unregulated, or regulated only to
a very small extent.

In this view of the matter there is nothing in any sense degrading to
the human race; on the contrary, in the development of individual,
enduring relationships between man and woman out of a condition of
primitive promiscuity, we see manifested a continuous progression from
lower to higher social forms of the sexual relationships, a gradual
improvement and ennoblement of these relationships, until the
development of monogamic marriage (which even to-day is merely an ideal
state, since the reality does not correspond to it, or the original pure
idea has been falsified and obscured).

The transition from matriarchy, resting on a purely natural basis, in
which women assumed a leading social position, and often also a leading
political position, to patriarchy, in which the spiritual and the
individual relationships were brought into the foreground, signified a
great step forward in the developmental history of marriage. Bachofen
was the first to recognize the profound importance in the history of
civilization and for the spiritual and social life of humanity of this
transition of the mother-right to the father-right, from matriarchy to
patriarchy. Schurtz found the following formula to express the change:

  “Woman is the central point of the natural groups arising from sexual
  intercourse and reproduction; man, on the other hand, is the creator
  of free forms of society based upon the sympathy of like kinds.”

The development of the individual personal marriage is most intimately
dependent upon patriarchy. In this sense, but only in this sense, Eduard
von Mayer is right when he points to man as the true creator of the
family. For under the matriarchal system the “family” was incomplete: it
consisted only of mother and child. Only with the development of
patriarchy could the family become a complete whole. This patriarchal
family, which is also our modern family, is thus “the masculine form of
the human tendency to social aggregation.”[163]

The father-right consisted in the right of the father over the wife and
her children; it was a right of domination acquired by a severe
struggle. The =rape of women= and =marriage by capture= belong to the
beginnings of patriarchy; later, when woman, completely enslaved, had
fallen to the position of a mere chattel, =marriage by purchase= was
introduced. The debased position of women under the domination of the
primitive father-right can be best studied among the Greeks, where free
sexual relationships were possible only in connexion with hetairæ and
the love of boys. To the Greeks of classical antiquity the love of boys
was precisely that which to the modern civilized man hetero-sexual love
is, resting upon the most personal, most individual, most spiritual
contact and understanding.

Kohler has beautifully described the bright side of the complete and
unrestricted father-right:

  “Now for the first time the man founds his home; he is the master of
  the domestic herd, he is the priest of sacrifice at the domestic
  altar; his ancestors are present in the spirit; he honours them; the
  house is permeated by them. In his house nothing unclean shall exist;
  he teaches the children propriety and dependence on the family; and
  the wife, at the moment when, as a bride, she crosses the threshold of
  her husband’s house, or is carried across it, gives up her household
  gods; his home is now her home. Now, at the domestic hearth, the
  virtues flourish--those virtues which become the preliminaries of
  national greatness. In the bosom of his family the man gains power,
  which fits him for the most important functions, whether in the life
  of the State or in the life of science; and a township or an
  agricultural community based upon such conditions constitutes the
  necessary foundation upon which to erect the structure of ethical,
  scientific, and political life. The wife passes into the background,
  but in the house she develops new virtues; self-sacrifice to the
  family, a domestic sense, joy in the home, amiability in narrower
  circles, are the bright sides of her influence, for the wife knows how
  to develop everywhere beautiful traits of character, so long as her
  lot is not cast amidst rude or degenerating conditions.”

The most ancient form of marriage under the father-right was polygamy,
as, for example, we find it described in the Old Testament. Here we have
a typical picture of the patriarchal order of family. The head of the
house and of the family has a principal wife for the procreation of
legitimate issue, but, in addition, numerous concubines. Among the Jews,
the great stress laid upon father-right gave rise to the so-called
“=Leviratsehe=”--that is to say, a widowed wife was compelled to marry
the brother of her deceased husband, in order that the race of the dead
man should be continued. Out of this patriarchal polygamy there
gradually arose =monogamic= marriage, which down to the present
time--let us insist on the matter once for all--has remained an ideal,
never in reality attained, either by the Greeks or Romans or in the
modern civilized world. For the modern civilized marriage is mainly a
production of the father-right, and stands under the dominion of
“man-made” morality, which, beside monogamy, legally established and
assumed to be binding, tolerates “facultative polygamy”; hence =there is
here concealed an element of lying and hypocrisy which has rightly
brought into discredit the modern patriarchal marriage as a conventional
form among those who regard as the true ideal of marriage in the future
the enduring life in common of two free personalities endowed with equal
rights=.

Hegel, in his celebrated definition of marriage,[164] which he regards
as the embodiment of the reality of the species and as the spiritual
unity of the natural sexes brought about by self-conscious love, as
legal-moral love, has not done justice to the recognition and
development of the individuality of =both= parties. The “unity,” the
“one body and one soul,” corresponds indeed to the patriarchal
conception, according to which the woman is completely absorbed into the
man; it does not correspond, however, to the modern idea of individual
marriage, in which both man and woman are united as free personalities.
This, as we shall see later, is the meaning of the struggle for
“free-love,” which must not be confused, as, for example, it is confused
by Ludwig Stein (“Beginnings of Civilization,” p. 110), with the
free-love, the hetairism, of ancient times, or with the simple
extra-conjugal intercourse of the present day.

=Neither the mother-right alone, nor the father-right alone, is
competent to satisfy the ideals of modern civilized human beings, in
respect of the configuration of the social forms of the amatory life.=
This is only possible when both forms of right are united in a new form,
by equal rights given to both sexes.[165]

Hence, in association with the endeavour for the free individual
development of the feminine nature, we find also the tendency to
reintroduce into public life, into true valuation and honour, the
ancient conception of the mother-right.

  “Slowly and gradually,” says Kohler, “has the reawakened idea of the
  mother-right been gnawing with a sharp tooth, now in one way, now in
  another, at the rigid fetters of this system, and has loosened
  them.... =That in this manner woman will attain a worthier position is
  certain.= But the unitary family-sense has long ceased among us to be
  the powerful incentive to action that it is among the purely agnate
  (patriarchal) peoples.... Our own conditions render it possible that
  the institutions of civilization will continue to thrive, even though
  the family tie is no longer tense and exclusive.”

The modern civilized man can quietly accustom himself to the idea that
the old patriarchal family under the dominion of the father-right will
gradually disappear; and that at the same time the patriarchal
conventional marriage of ancient times, still to all appearance so
firmly established, will be replaced by other, freer forms. The idea of
marriage, and its value as a form of social life, remains meanwhile
unaffected. It is possible to be a critic of the old, outlived form of
marriage, without therefore being exposed to the suspicion of wishing to
dispense with the idea of “marriage” altogether. The one-sided,
juristic, political, sacramental, and ecclesiastical conception of the
past does justice neither to the social nor to the individual
significance of marriage. He who, like Westermarck, regards monogamic
marriage as something primitively ordained, as if it were a biological
fact, and denies completely the =development= of that institution out of
lower forms, denies also the possibility of any extensive transformation
of the existing forms of marriage. The common mistake is, to place on
the one hand monogamy in its most ideal form, that of life-long
marriage, and on the other hand, the so-called “free love,”
understanding by free love completely unregulated extra-conjugal sexual
intercourse. It is not a matter for surprise that, in respect of both of
these extreme forms of sexual relationship, a pessimistic view should
easily gain ground. According to the point of view, one party will
insist on the intolerable character, in relation to the need for
individual freedom and as regards the development of personality, of a
lifelong marriage of duty; whilst the other party will lay stress upon
the equally great, if not greater, dangers of the unrestrained practice
of extra-conjugal sexual intercourse.

With regard to recent views on the marriage problem, the reader will do
well to consult the thoughtful pamphlet of Gabriele Reuter, “The Problem
of Marriage” (Berlin, 1907). The author points out that there is a
“deep-lying dissatisfaction with the existing marriage conditions, a
yearning and restless need for improvement.” In marriage, she holds, the
bodily and spiritual process of human development is completed in the
most concentrated manner. As a cause of the numerous unhappy marriages
of our time, she points to the divergencies, so widely manifest at the
present day, between modes of thought and views of life among members of
the same strata of society and among those of the same degree of
education, more especially in religious matters, and she refers also to
experiments made in respect of new modes of life, such as the woman’s
movement. According to Gabriele Reuter, the child will become the
regulator of all the changes in the married state which we have to
expect in the future. As “marriage,” she defines that earnest union
between man and woman which is formed for the purpose of a life in
common, and with the intention of procreating and bringing up children,
and she regards it as altogether beside the question whether that union
has been affected with or without civil or ecclesiastical sanction. In
contrast with this idea of “marriage,” there would be other fugitive or
more enduring unions, serving only for excitement and sensual enjoyment.
It is interesting to note that the author recommends to the modern woman
“good-humoured and motherly forbearance” in respect of marital
infidelity. For a woman’s own good and for that of her children, it is
more important that her husband should show her love, respect, and
friendship, than that he should preserve unconditional physical
faithfulness. But the author here ignores the possibility of venereal
infection as a result of occasional unfaithfulness, which very seriously
threatens the well-being of the wife and the children! Very wisely she
advises a facilitation of divorce. This would not make husband and wife
careless in their relations one to the other; on the contrary, it would
make both more careful and thoughtful in the avoidance of anything
causing pain to one another. The children should always remain with the
mother up to the age of fourteen years. A detailed and valuable account
of the problems of modern marriage will be found also in the work
“Regarding Married Happiness: the Experiences, Reflections, and Advice
of a Physician” (Wiesbaden, 1906).

Fortunately, by the legal introduction of =civil marriage= and of
=divorce= the necessity has now been recognized by the State of leaving
open for many persons a middle course--one which lies =between= lifelong
marriage (whose sacramental character is thus abandoned) and free
extra-conjugal sexual intercourse, =and yet maintains the tendency
towards the ideal of monogamic marriage=.

The principle of divorce forms the most important foundation at once for
a future reformation of marriage, and for a rational view, one doing
equal justice to the interests of society and those of the individual,
of the relations between man and wife. By the introduction of divorce,
the State itself has recognized the purely personal character of
conjugal relations, and has admitted that circumstances arise in which
the marriage ceases to fulfil its aims and becomes injurious to both
parties. =Thus the State has proclaimed the rights of the individual
personality in the married state.=

In the marriage problem, the so-called “=duplex sexual morality=” also
plays an important part--that is to say, the idea that man is by nature
inclined to polygamy, but woman to monogamy. Herein, indeed, the
thoroughly correct idea was dominant that the cohabitation of one woman
with several men--be it understood we refer to simultaneous
cohabitation--is harmful to the offspring. From this, however, the only
permissible inference is that for the purposes of the procreation of
children and of racial hygiene “monogamy” can be demanded of woman on
rationalistic grounds--that is to say, the intercourse of woman should
be restricted to a single man during such a time and for such a purpose.
But it is not legitimate from these considerations to deduce the
necessity of permanent “monandry” for woman.

I will consider this question somewhat more exactly, and in doing so
will refer to the interesting essay of Rudolph Eberstadt on “The
Economic Importance of Sanitary Conditions” in relation to marriage,
being the concluding chapter of “Health and Disease in Relation to
Marriage and the Married State,” by Senator and Kaminer (Rebman, 1906),
because here we find a very clear recognition of the confusion between
monogamy and monandry.

According to Eberstadt, there are above all two things characteristic of
modern civilized marriage--in the first place, the higher rank allotted
to the husband in the married state, and, in the second place, the
increased demand for prenuptial purity and for conjugal fidelity on the
part of the wife. The husband demands from his wife, in addition to his
own mastership in the married state, also sexual continence before
marriage and unconditional fidelity during marriage. But the husband
does not recognize that corresponding duties are imposed on himself.

This difference of judgment regarding extra-conjugal sexual intercourse
on the part of husband and wife respectively, depends entirely upon the
perfectly sound experience that =simultaneous= cohabitation on the part
of a woman with several men obscures paternity, and therewith the
foundations of the family, quite apart from a not uncommon physical
injury to the child. This =natural= difference between man and woman, in
respect of sexual intercourse and its consequences, will always endure.
A man can simultaneously cohabit with two women without thereby
interfering with the formation of a family; but a woman cannot with
similar impunity cohabit with two men. It is possible that the demand
for the virgin intactness of the wife at the time of marriage is based
upon the old experience that by sexual intercourse, and still more by
the first conception, certain far-reaching specific changes are induced
in the feminine organism, so that the first man impregnates the feminine
being for ever in his own sense, and even transmits his influence to
children of a second male progenitor. (_Cf._ in this connexion G.
Lomer, “Love and Psychosis,” p. 37.)

  “It is not the brutality of man,” says Eberstadt, “which has imposed a
  higher responsibility upon woman; Nature herself has done this. Nature
  has endowed man and woman differently in respect of the consequences
  of sexual intercourse. The fruit of intercourse is entrusted to the
  woman alone. Now, one who has special responsibilities has also
  special duties. Certain breaches of conjugal responsibility are more
  sternly condemned when committed by the man; certain
  others--especially such as concern care for the offspring--are more
  severely judged in the wife. The relative positions in respect of
  sexual intercourse are different in man and in woman, for reasons
  which are physical and inalterable. Seduction, ill-treatment,
  abandonment of a wife, and adultery, are punished in the husband by
  law and custom. The wife, on the other hand, loses her honour =simply=
  on account of promiscuous and unregulated intercourse, because Nature
  herself forbids this intercourse if the material and spiritual tie
  between mother, father, and child is to persist.”

In accordance with these considerations, Eberstadt holds fast to the
demand for “=monandry=” on the part of the wife; he rejects on principle
the idea of =sexual= equality between man and wife, and relegates the
progressive development of marriage exclusively to the =spiritual= and
=moral= provinces.

Although we recognize the general accuracy of this view, and admit that
it is based upon conditions imposed once for all by Nature herself,
still we are compelled to regard it as too narrow and one-sided, for it
completely overlooks the fact that this demand for monandric love on the
part of woman can be fulfilled in association with a freer moulding of
woman’s amatory life. We need merely think of the often happy marriages
of one woman to =several= men--_nota bene_ in temporal succession--in
which marriages perfectly healthy children have been born to different
fathers, in order to see that for the woman of the future a freer
moulding of the amatory life is also possible, though admittedly within
=narrower= limits than in the case of man. Just as the mastership of the
husband must give place to an equality of authority on the part of
husband and wife, considered as two free personalities, so also must the
“duplex morality” undergo a revision in the sense above indicated.

In passing, let us remark that all those who proscribe any kind of
extra-conjugal intercourse on the part of woman, and who love to brand
as an “outcast” any woman who indulges in it, should have their
attention directed for a moment to the tremendous fact of politically
tolerated, and even legalized, =prostitution=, which, like a haunting
shadow, accompanies the so-called conventional marriage--a shadow
growing ever =larger= the more strictly, exclusively, and narrowly the
idea of this “marriage” is conceived.[166]

The civilized ideal of marriage is the lifelong duration of the marriage
between two free, independent, mature personalities, who share fully
love and life, and by a common life-work further their own advantage and
the well-being of their children. =But this rarely attained ideal of
civilization in no way excludes other forms of marriage=, which have a
more transient and temporary character, without thereby doing any harm
either to the individual or to society.

More than forty years ago Lecky, the English historian of civilization,
an investigator whom no one can blame, in respect of the tendency of his
writings, for advancing lax ideas regarding sexual morality or for
advising libertinage, expressed himself admirably on this subject. In
his “History of European Morals” he wrote:

  “In these considerations, we have ample grounds for maintaining that
  the lifelong union of one man and of one woman should be the normal or
  dominant type of intercourse between the sexes. We can prove that it
  is on the whole most conducive to the happiness, and also to the moral
  elevation, of all parties. But beyond this point it would, I conceive,
  be impossible to advance, except by the assistance of a special
  =revelation=! =It by no means follows that because this should be the
  dominant type, it should be the only one, or that the interests of
  society demand that all connexions should be forced into the same
  die.= Connexions, which were confessedly only for a few years, have
  always subsisted side by side with permanent marriages; and in periods
  when public opinion, acquiescing in their propriety, inflicts no
  excommunication on one or both of the parties, when these partners are
  not living the demoralizing and degrading life which accompanies the
  consciousness of guilt, and when proper provision is made for the
  children who are born, it would be, I believe, impossible to prove, by
  the light of simple and unassisted reason, that such connexions should
  be invariably condemned. It is extremely important, both for the
  happiness and for the moral well-being of men, that lifelong unions
  should not be effected simply under the imperious prompting of a blind
  appetite. There are always multitudes who, in the period of their
  lives when their passions are most strong, are incapable of supporting
  children in their own social rank, and who would therefore injure
  society by marrying in it, but are nevertheless perfectly capable of
  securing an honourable career for their illegitimate children in the
  lower social sphere to which these would naturally belong (!). Under
  the conditions I have mentioned these connexions are not injurious,
  but beneficial, to the weaker partner; they soften the differences of
  rank, they stimulate social habits, and they do not produce upon
  character the degrading effect of promiscuous intercourse, or upon
  society the injurious effects of imprudent marriages, one or other of
  which will multiply in their absence. In the immense variety of
  circumstances and characters, cases will always appear in which, on
  utilitarian grounds, they might seem advisable.”

In ancient Rome these laxer unions were recognized by law as a form of
marriage, and this legal recognition protected them, notwithstanding the
unlimited freedom of divorce, from social contempt and stigmatization.
“Concubinage” was such a second kind of marriage, which was thoroughly
recognized and thoroughly honourable. The _amica convictrix_ or _uxor
gratuita_ was neither a legitimate wife nor simply a mistress; she had
rather the position of women in our own day who have contracted a
“morganatic” marriage, a “left-handed marriage.” The only difference was
that these ancient unions were more readily dissoluble.

It was the Christian dogma and the sacramental and lifelong character of
marriage which first caused the stamp of infamy to be impressed upon all
other varieties of sexual intercourse. The religious marriage was in its
very nature indissoluble; indeed, by forbidding mixed marriages
(marriages between Christian and pagan) individual freedom was entirely
prohibited.

In contrast with this ancient religious view, the State, by the
introduction of civil marriage, of mixed marriage (_vide supra_), and of
divorce, has been compelled to make continually greater concessions to
modern ideas, and =has already recognized in principle= that marriages
limited in duration harmonize exceedingly well with the demands of
civilization; that in general, as Lecky maintained, the recent changes
in economic conditions have a much greater influence upon marriage and
the forms of marriage than the ecclesiastical and mystical conception of
the institution.

Anyone who wishes to gain an insight into this very difficult problem of
modern marriage must first obtain clear views in respect of certain
peculiarities of individual human love, regarding the intimate connexion
of which with the whole process of mental evolution we have already
dealt in earlier chapters.

Max Nordau has written a celebrated chapter on “The Lie of
Marriage,”[167] and in the light of reality marriage is, in fact, often
such a lie as he describes, especially in view of the fact that not less
than 75 per cent. of modern marriages are so-called “marriages of
convenience,” and in no sense are properly love-marriages.[168]

But it is a well-known fact that these marriages of reason are often
more enduring than love-marriages. This depends upon the nature of human
love, which is by no means inalterable, =but changes in accordance with
the various developmental phases of the individual, needs new
incitements and new individual relationships=.

In No. 14,919 of the _Neue Freie Presse_ of Vienna, March 6, 1906, there
appeared among the advertisements a remarkable question, which was
probably directed by a betrayed or deceived lover to his beloved:

  “Ewige Liebe--ewige Lüge?”

  “Eternal Love--Eternal Lie?”

Love also, personal love, is transitory, like man himself, like the
isolated individual. It differs in the different ages of life; it
differs, too, according to its object for the time being. Eduard von
Hartmann calls love a thunderstorm, which does not discharge in a single
flash of lightning, but gradually discharges the electrical energy in
several successive flashes, and after the discharge “there comes the
cool wind, the heaven of consciousness clears once more, and we look
round astonished at the fertilizing rain falling on the ground, and at
the clouds fleeing towards the distant horizon.”

All those who are well acquainted with humanity, all poets and
psychologists, are in agreement respecting the fugitive character of
youthful love. For this reason, they advise against marriage concluded
during the passion of early youth. This poetry of love at first sight
is, according to Gutzkow, the eternal =game of chance= of our young
people, in which their health, their life, and their future go to wreck.

Another keen observer, Kierkegaard, in his “Diary of a Seducer,” says:

  “Love has many mysteries, and this first love is also a mystery, if
  not the greatest. Most men in their ardent passion are as if insane;
  they become engaged or commit some other stupidity, and in a moment it
  is all over, and they know once more what it has cost them, what they
  have lost.”

And, finally, a third eminent writer on eroticism, Rétif de la Bretonne,
says:

  “It is a folly of the same kind to trust the constancy of a young man
  of twenty years of age. At this age it is less a woman that one loves
  than women; one is intoxicated rather by sensual phenomena than by the
  individual, however lovable that individual may be.”

But to youth love is almost always no more than a beautiful memory, a
vanishing paradise. There clings to it something imperishable, which
has, however, no binding force.

And just as to every man the love of youth appears ideal in character,
precisely because it is not subjected to the rude considerations of
reality, so also in every subsequent love it is almost always the =first
beginnings= only in which true beauty and deep perception are
experienced.

  “A thousand years of tears and pains,” Goethe makes his Stella say,
  “could not counterpoise the happiness of the first glance, the
  trembling, the stammering, the approach and the withdrawal, the
  self-forgetfulness, the first fugitive ardent kiss, and the first
  gently breathing embrace.”

The eternal duration of such feelings is contradicted by an
anthropologico-biological phenomenon of human sexuality, which I have
described as “=the need for sexual variety=.”[169] Human love, as a
whole and in its individual manifestations, is dominated and influenced
by the need for change and variety. Schopenhauer drew attention to this
primordial and fundamental phenomenon of human love; he was wrong,
however, in limiting it to the male sex.[170] As I have already
insisted, this general human need for variety in sexual relationships is
to be regarded rather as a general =principle of explanation of admitted
facts=, than as a desirable ideal. On the contrary, in my opinion,
faithfulness, constancy, and durability in love, bring under control and
diminish this need for sexual variety, through the recognition of the
eminent =advances in civilization= by means of which the human amatory
life will be further developed and perfected in a higher sense. But the
facts of daily observation are not to be shuffled out of existence by
any kind of hypocrisy or prudery. They must be faced and dealt with.

First, it is an incontestable fact that the so-called “only” love is one
of the greatest rarities; that, on the contrary, in the life of the
majority of men and women a frequent repetition and renewal of
love-sentiments and love-relationships occurs. For the most part these
loves occur at successive intervals. Stiedenroth, in his admirable
“Psychology,” makes the following remarks regarding these successive
outbursts of passion and the transitory character of the feeling of
love:

  “Since no two human beings are precisely alike, one will at one time
  love passionately one only; in succession, however, several can be
  loved, and the opinion that one person only can be loved in a lifetime
  originates in rare dreams regarding the ideal, of which a quite false
  representation is made. An object can indeed appear which transcends
  the ideal hitherto conceived; but passion does not need a fully
  developed ideal for its first foundation; it needs merely that which
  in the theory of the feelings has been found to be a necessary
  condition of love. That every love gladly thinks itself immortal, lies
  in the nature of the case, for on account of the overwhelming
  character of the sensations of love, it is impossible to understand
  how they can ever come to an end. Experience, however, teaches us the
  contrary, and insight enables us to recognize the reason.”[171]

Regarding the frequent occurrence of several love-passions on the part
of the same person, there can be two opinions; but is it possible that
anyone can =simultaneously= be in love with several individuals? I
answer this question with an unconditional “Yes,” and I agree fully with
Max Nordau when he explains that it is possible to love at the same time
several individuals with almost identical tenderness, and that it is not
necessarily lying when ardent passion for each of them is
expressed.[172]

It is precisely the extraordinarily manifold spiritual differentiation
of modern civilized humanity that gives rise to the possibility of such
a simultaneous love for two individuals. Our spiritual nature exhibits
the most varied colouring. It is difficult always to find the
corresponding complements in one single individual.

I ask those who are well acquainted with modern society if they have not
met men, and women also, who had advanced so far in the adaptation of
their love-needs to the anatomical analysis of their psychical life,
that for the romantic, realistical, æsthetic traits of their nature, for
the lyrical or dramatic moods of their heart, they demanded
correspondingly =different= lovers; and if these several lovers should
encounter each other, and be angry with one another, the one who loved
them both (or all) would be inclined to cry out in naive astonishment,
like the heroine in Gutzkow’s “Seraphine,” “Love one another! love one
another! You are all one, one--=in me=!”

In the romance “Leonide,” by Emerentius Scävola, the heroine is at the
same time the wife of two husbands. Reality also is familiar with double
love of this kind--for example, in the relationship of the Princess
Melanie Metternich to her husband, the celebrated statesman, and to her
previous bridegroom, Baron Hügel.[173] Especially frequent is the
gratification of higher ideal needs and of the simple natural impulse,
by means of two different persons. A man can love at the same time a
woman of genius and a simple child of Nature. In the novel “Double Love”
(1901), Elisar von Kupffer describes the simultaneous love of a learned
man for his extremely intelligent wife and for a buxom servant-girl. A
well-known example is also the double love of Wieland--the ideal love
for Sophie Laroche, the frankly sensual love for Christine Hagel. But
not only do differences of culture, of position, of character, play a
part in such multiple love; the simple difference also of bodily
appearance may lead to such simultaneous attractions; for example, a man
may love at the same time a brunette and a blonde, an elegant little
sylph and a distinguished presence. This is, however, on the whole, much
rarer than simultaneous attraction to two different spiritual varieties.

Such facts as these are not to be employed so much in advocacy of the
multiplication of love-relationships as for the illustration of the
enormous difficulty in obtaining complete harmony between human beings,
between one man and one woman. There remains always a balance of
yearning, which the other does not fulfil; always a balance of striving,
which the other is unable to understand. This cannot, however, affect in
the slightest degree the ideal of the =single love=; on the contrary, it
makes it stand out all the more brilliantly before our spiritual vision.
It is rare, like every ideal, and attainable only by few. This rarity of
=complete= love between a man and a woman is dwelt on also by Henry
Laube in his novel “Die Maske,” in which he describes love in all its
manifoldness and modern distraction.

Schleiermacher described very strikingly the necessity that exists for
the repetition and manifoldness of love-perceptions:

  “Why,” says he, “should it be different with love from what it is in
  every other matter? Is it possible that that which is the highest in
  mankind should be brought at the first time, by the most elementary
  activity, to a perfect conclusion in a single deed? Should we expect
  it to be easier than the simple art of eating and drinking, which the
  child first attempts, and attempts again and again, with unsuitable
  objects and rude experimentation, and with results which, contrary to
  his deserts, are not always unfortunate? In love, also, there is need
  for =preliminary experiments=, leading to no permanent result, from
  which, however, every one carries away something, =in order to make
  the feeling more definite and the prospect of love greater and
  grander=.”[174]

Georg Hirth also shows that true mastery of love only becomes possible
by means of repetition. There are ideal masculine and feminine Don Juan
natures, which are always searching for the genuine, eternal, only love;
as, for example, Wilhelmine Schröder-Devrient, wandering perpetually
from man to man; or a similar figure, the titular heroine of the romance
“Faustine,” by the Countess Ida Hahn-Hahn. Many, most indeed, of such
never learn to know true love, because they never find the proper object
of love; and they die, as Rousseau, in his “Confessions,” says so
strikingly, without ever having loved, eternally torn by the need for
love, without ever having been able perfectly to satisfy that need.
Happy indeed are those like Karoline, who in Schelling found at length
the man whose powerful personality fully corresponded to her idea of
love.

The need for such a great and true love remains fixed, notwithstanding
all deceptions, bitternesses, and the sorrows of unsatisfied longing.
Love is, in fact, the human being himself; like the human being, love
has its development, its impulse towards higher things, towards that
which is better. No painful experience can completely annihilate love,
and the need for love. In a beautiful stanza a French poet of the
eighteenth century, the Chevalier de Bonnard, has described this
essential permanency of love:

  “Hélas! pourquoi le souvenir
   De ces erreurs de mon aurore
   Me fait-il pousser un soupir!
   Je dois peut-être aimer encore,
   Ah! si j’aime encore, je sens bien
   Que je serai toujours le même;
   Le temps au cœur ne change rien:
   Eh! n’est-ce pas ainsi qu’on aime?”

True love is the product of the ripest development; it is therefore
rare, and comes late. For this reason, as Nietzsche points out, the time
for marriage comes much earlier than the time for love. It is by means
of spiritual relationships that love first becomes enduring. Its
prolongation is almost always effected only by an enlargement and
variation of psychical relationships. Physical relationships alone soon
lose through habituation the stimulus of novelty; whence we explain the
fact that so many husbands, notwithstanding the physical beauty of their
wives, become unfaithful to them, often in favour of much uglier women,
of girls of the lower classes, or even of prostitutes. The de Goncourts
remark in their “Diary” that the beauty which in a _cocotte_ a man will
reward with 100,000 francs, will not in his own wife seem worth 10,000
francs--in the wife whom he has married, and who, with her dowry, has
brought him this magnificent beauty into the bargain. For this reason, a
priest, when a wife complained to him that her husband had begun to get
somewhat cold in his manner to her, gave the following by no means bad
advice: “My dear child, the most honourable wife must have in her just a
suspicion of the demi-mondaine.”

The greatest danger for love, a danger which therefore makes its
appearance above all in married life, is the danger of =habituation=.
This has a double effect. On the one hand, by the mere monotony of
eternal repetition, love may become blunted.

  “It is worth remarking,” says Goethe, “that custom is capable of
  completely replacing passionate love; it demands not so much a
  charming, as a comfortable object; given that, it is invincible.”

In the second place, however, custom contradicts the already mentioned
need for variety, the eternal uniformity of daily companionship puts
love to sleep, damps its ardour, and even gives rise to a sense of
latent or open hatred between a married pair. This hatred is observed
most frequently in love-matches,[175] precisely because here the ideal
is all the more cruelly disturbed by the rude grasp of realities;
especially if the intimate life in common enfolds a human,
all-too-human, element, and tears away the last ideal veil. With justice
the common bedroom of a married couple has been called “the slaughter of
love.”

A further cause of unhappy marriages is to be found in unfavourable
age-relations of the married couple. The most serious is the premature
entrance upon marriage.

Before the introduction of the Civil Code, the age of nubility in the
German Empire was attained, in the male sex, with the completion of the
twentieth, in the female sex with the completion of the sixteenth year
of life. In Prussia a Minister of Justice could give permission to marry
at an even earlier age. According to the Civil Code, men could not marry
until they were of full age (twenty-one), and women, as before, not
until they were sixteen years of age. Women are able to obtain remission
from this restriction, but not men. In special cases, however, a man is
enabled to marry before the age of twenty-one years if the Court of
Wardship (_cf._ the English Court of Chancery) declares him to be of
full age, which the Court has power to do at any time after he is
eighteen years of age.

Whilst, before the year 1900, on the average, there were not as many as
300 men under twenty years who annually contracted marriage with the
permission of the Minister of Justice--already a matter for serious
consideration--since the introduction of the new Code, by which the
ordinary age of nubility for man is raised by one year, =the number of
persons prematurely contracting marriage has exhibited a notable
increase=. In the year 1900 there were 1,546, and in the year 1901
actually 1,848 young men married before the age of twenty-one years.
These very early marriages were distributed among all professions, and
almost all classes of the population.

This increase in premature marriages is, speaking generally, a symptom
indicative of the premature awakening of sexuality in our own time, a
phenomenon which we shall discuss more fully later. Such an occurrence
as the elopement of a girl aged fourteen with a boy aged fifteen, the
pair having already for some time been engaged in an intimate
love-relationship, and having finally come to the conclusion that they
could no longer live apart, is by no means a great rarity.[176] No
detailed argument is needed to show that persons completely wanting
mental and moral maturity are not suited for marriage, which can only be
regarded as offering some security for endurance and life happiness,
when it is the union of two fully-developed personalities. In this
respect it seems to me that the regulations of the Civil Code are not at
present sufficiently strict.

A second notable factor in the causation of unhappy marriages is an
excessive =difference between the ages= of husband and wife, and in this
respect it is quite an old experience, that a marked excess of age on
the part of the husband has a less unfavourable influence than a similar
excess on the part of the wife. This observation harmonizes with the
fact that men can preserve sexual potency up to the most advanced
age--even in a centenarian active spermatozoa have been found[177]--that
such old men can have complete sexual intercourse, and can procreate
children; whereas in women, at the age of forty-five to fifty years,
with the cessation of menstruation the procreative capacity is
extinguished, though not, indeed, the capacity for sexual intercourse
and for voluptuous sensation. Naturally, in this connexion we are not
alluding to quite abnormal cases, such as a premature impotence in the
husband, or other morbid conditions in either husband or wife. We are
considering merely the normal physical difference in age. Metchnikoff
lays great stress upon this physical disharmony between husband and
wife. He insists upon the fact that in the man sexual excitability
generally begins much earlier than in woman, and that at a time when the
woman stands at the acme of her needs the sexual activity in the man has
already begun to decline; but this is only the case when the husband was
notably older than the wife when the marriage was contracted. A
difference of five or ten years in this respect is a small matter; but a
difference of ten or twenty years may be of serious significance.
Generally speaking, in the case of marriages which are intended to be of
lifelong duration, the difference of age should never exceed ten years.

With increasing civilization, the average age at marriage has
continually advanced (in Western Europe the average age at marriage is
for men twenty-eight to thirty-one years, and for women twenty-three to
twenty-eight years), whilst the number of persons who do not marry until
late in life, and of those who do not marry at all, is continually
increasing. This is partly the result of spiritual differentiation and
of the ever-increasing difficulty in finding a suitable life-partner,
and partly it is the result of the increasing economic difficulty in
providing for the support of a household.

Schmoller has calculated that under normal conditions about 50 per
cent.--one-half, that is to say--of the population of the country must
be either married or widowed. In Europe, however, a much smaller
proportion is in this condition. Thus, taking only persons over fifty
years of age, in Hungary 3 per cent., in Germany 9 per cent., in
England 10 per cent., in Austria 13 per cent., in Switzerland 17 per
cent., were unmarried.

The number of married and widowed persons among those over fifty years
of age varies in the different countries between 56 per cent. (in
Belgium) and 76 per cent. (in Hungary). In England, in the years 1886 to
1890, the number was 60 per cent., in Germany 61 per cent., in the
United States 62 per cent., in France 64 per cent. If we enumerate the
married only, excluding the widowed, we find 8 or 10 per cent. fewer.
When we compare the number of married with the entire population, we
find, instead of the above-mentioned 50 per cent., no more than 37 to 39
per cent. And this percentage appears likely to undergo a continual
further decline. We must, at any rate, in the future reckon with this
fact, although, of course, isolated oscillations in the marriage
frequency may continue to occur. In these oscillations =economic= and
=domestic= factors play a great part.

It is, however, quite erroneous to regard our own time as one especially
characterized by “=mercenary marriages=,” one in which the union between
man and wife has become a simple affair of commerce. There are not
wanting reformers who attribute to mammonism all the blame for the
disordered love-life of the present day, and who describe very vividly
and dramatically Amor’s dance round the golden calf.

The facts of the history of civilization and folk-lore completely
contradict the view that this mammonistic character of marriage is a
product of our modern civilization. It is, on the contrary, a =vestige=
of early primitive civilization, in which economic factors always had a
far greater importance for marriage than spiritual sympathies. Thus,
Heinrich Schurtz proves that among the majority of savage races marriage
is rather an affair of business than of inclination. And where are money
marriages more frequent than they are among our sturdy German peasants,
with whom everything conventional has the freest possible play?[178]

It is first the higher, refined spiritual civilization which brings with
it a higher conception of marriage as the realization of the ideal,
individual only-love. As Ludwig Stein justly remarks:

  “It was not in our own time that marriage first began to degenerate to
  the level of an economic idea. The converse, indeed, is true; the
  economic background of marriage, as it so clearly manifests itself
  among savage races, =first began to disappear in the course of the
  development of our own system of civilization, and therewith began
  also the liberation of mankind from the burden of metallic
  shackles=.”[179]

At the same time, it cannot be denied that even at the present day the
economic factor plays a very extensive part in the determination of
marriage, although certainly not to the degree maintained by Buckle, who
held that there was a fixed and definite relationship between the number
of marriages and the price of corn.[180] Beyond question, economic
considerations have a great influence upon the frequency of marriage.
Many marriages, even to-day, are purely mercenary marriages; but still
at the present time the qualities of intellect and emotion, quite apart
from physical characteristics, have at least an equal share in the
production of marriage. Only among the classes who feel it their duty to
keep up a particular kind of appearance, among the upper-middle classes,
the aristocracy, and among officers in the army, is the economic
question the main determining influence in marriage. Well known, also,
is the predominance of mercenary marriages among the Jews.

One may be an enemy of mammonism, and still see the necessity for an
economic regulation of conjugal relations in view of the expected
offspring, of the altered conditions of life, of the increase in the
household, and of the necessity for safeguarding personal independence
and free development. Such economic considerations can harmonize
perfectly with the demand for personal sympathy, and with the most
intimate physical and spiritual harmony between husband and wife.

Schmoller rightly places the most important advance of the modern family
in this, that it becomes more and more transformed from a productive and
business institute into an institute of moral life in common; that by
the =limitation= of its economic purposes the nobler ideal must become
more predominant, and the family become a richer soil for the
cultivation of sympathetic sentiments.[181]

More especially among the upper classes of modern European and American
society is there apparent an increasing disinclination to marriage, or,
to employ a phrase of the moral statistician Drobisch, there is a
decline in the intensity of the marriage impulse. Although the often
burning money question no doubt plays its part, that part is, on the
whole, much smaller than the part played by the ever-increasing
difficulties of individual spiritual harmony, difficulties dependent on
differences in age, character, education, views of life, and individual
development during marriage. This disinclination to marry is nourished
by certain tendencies of the time to be subsequently described, and by
certain changes in the relations between the sexes.

To many also the idea of “=conjugal rights=,” as established by law,
appears a horrible compulsion, an assignment to physical and spiritual
prostitution. The modern consciousness of free personality, in fact, no
longer harmonizes with that stoical conception of duty in marriage such
as, for example, is described by B. Chateaubriand in his memoirs,
although, of course, every one who enters on marriage ought to be aware
that by doing so he assigns to the other party certain rights, the
non-fulfilment of which actually destroys the character and the idea of
marriage. Thus, the conduct of a schoolmistress of Berlin, who
persistently refused physical surrender to her husband, on the ground
that she had wished merely to contract an “ideal” marriage (of the same
kind as the mystical “reformed marriage” of the American woman Alice
Stockham), demands emphatic condemnation. But an abominable =misuse= of
“conjugal rights” is unquestionably made by inconsiderate husbands, who
demand from their wives unlimited, excessively frequent, gratification
of their sexual desire, without any regard to the wife’s physical and
spiritual condition at the time. That in this respect the idea of
“conjugal rights” is greatly in need of revision has been convincingly
proved by Dorothee Goebeler in an essay entitled “Conjugal Rights,”
published in the _Welt am Montag_ of August 6, 1906.

Too frequently, also, it happens that the husband simply transfers into
his married life previous customs of extra-conjugal sexual intercourse,
and makes use in marriage of the experience he has gained in intercourse
with prostitutes or with priestesses of the love of the moment; he
treats his wife as an object of sensual lust, without paying any regard
to her individuality and to her more delicate erotic needs.

This physical dissonance is not even the worst. Too often it is simply
boredom which kills love in married life. Like Nora in “A Dolls’ House,”
one waits for the “wonderful,” and the wonderful does not happen.
Instead of this the years pass by; sexual passion, greatly influenced as
it is by the spiritual environment, gradually disappears, and with it
disappears also the last possibility of spiritual sympathy. Thus, the
character of most marriages is =solitude=. They represent the tragedy
of desolation, of the eternal self-seeking of husband and wife.

What disastrous consequences, finally, may result from the part played
in marriage by =disease=, what tragic conflicts may here rise, can be
studied in the great book “Health and Disease in Relation to Marriage
and the Married State” (Rebman, 1906), an encyclopædic work edited by H.
Senator and S. Kaminer, discussing in detail the relation between
disorders of health and the married state.

The calamities of modern marriage are strikingly illuminated in the
following psychologically interesting account given by the alienist
Heinrich Laehr (“Concerning Insanity and Lunatic Asylums,” p. 44 _et
seq._; Halle, 1852):

  “How, as a matter of fact, do marriages come about? In heaven
  certainly a very small number indeed, if by that phrase we understand
  marriages undertaken with the full understanding of the nature of the
  sacrifice involved, under the impulsion of an inner necessity, and
  based upon deep mutual inclination founded upon self-respect and
  respect for each other; in social circles, and not in heaven, on the
  other hand, the majority of marriages are made. The question upon
  which ultimately so many marriages depend is, what each will gain by
  it, whilst inner sensations and mutual liking are regarded as
  subordinate matters.... A man is fully informed about such matters in
  early years; a woman is full of dark perceptions, uncertain as to what
  she is to receive and what she is to give. She is naturally impelled
  by her sense of inward weakness to yield to anyone more powerful than
  herself, and, in the intoxication of sensual excitement, under
  conditions in which both, in order to please, tend to show the best
  side only to each other, she is far less able than man to weigh
  beforehand the significance of such a step. Later, indeed, when, in
  the trodden path of marriage, the current of love runs more slowly,
  her eyes are opened, naked reality takes the place of the pictures of
  imagination, which formerly caused self-deception, and what appeared
  to be love, but was not love, takes flight for ever. What has not been
  hidden under the name of love! It conceals the pretence of egoistic
  impulses, vanity it may be, the life of pleasure, avarice, indolence;
  and what a number of marriages are entered into on the part of the
  woman in order to escape from the oppression of repugnant domestic
  conditions, because the imagined future appears to them more pleasant
  in contrast with the actual present.

  “There are in the course of marriage so many periods of misunderstood
  depression, sadness, trouble; and mankind so readily forgets the
  golden rule, that these periods have to be got through by means of
  mutual aid, and that in married life husband and wife should do all
  that is possible to help one another onwards, and not to thrust one
  another back--so easily is this forgotten, that only too readily the
  mirth and gladness with which married life was begun vanish away. The
  intense pain which attacks us with violence, but only at long
  intervals, has a far less depressing influence on our organism than
  much less severe, but frequently repeated, emotional disturbances,
  especially such as arise out of the wretchedness of life. They give
  rise in us to irritability of the nervous system, by which
  sensitiveness is increased; and repeated misunderstandings in married
  life soon make both husband and wife feel that marriage is rather a
  burden than a joy.”

That women as well as men recognize the danger to love entailed by
marriage is shown by Frieda von Bülow in “Einsame Frauen,” pp. 93, 94
(1897):

  “During this period I have often considered the question of such
  continued life in common. Is it not inevitable that this unceasing,
  intimate association must always give rise to mutual hatred? Husband
  and wife learn to know one another through and through. The veil of
  white lies which plays so important a part in ordinary social
  intercourse is here impossible. The characters are seen naked in all
  their weakness, all their incapacity for love, all their vanity, all
  their egoism. In such circumstances, phrases intended to conceal
  appear simply untruths, and instead of producing illusion they repel.
  Just as in the first awakening of love, all the powers of the soul are
  directed towards the discovery of the excellences of the beloved one,
  so here the soul is for ever upon a voyage of discovery seeking for
  faults. In both cases alike, a sufficiency of that which one seeks is
  found.”

The poets also give us an insight into the depths of the eternal
contradiction between love and marriage. Who does not know the saying of
the idealistic and optimistic Schiller: “Mit dem Gürtel, mit dem
Schleier reisst der schöne Wahn entzwei”--“With the girdle, with the
veil (of marriage), the beautiful illusion is torn to pieces”? Consider,
also, the horribly clear characterization of the pessimistic Byron (in
“Don Juan,” canto iii., stanzas 5-8):

  V.

  “’Tis melancholy, and a fearful sign
   Of human frailty, folly, also crime,
   That love and marriage rarely can combine,
     Although they both are born in the same clime.
   Marriage from love, like vinegar from wine--
     A sad, sour, sober beverage--by time
   Is sharpen’d from its high, celestial flavour,
   Down to a very homely household savour.

  VI.

  “There’s something of antipathy, as ’twere,
     Between their present and their future state;
   A kind of flattery that’s hardly fair
     Is used until the truth arrives too late--
   Yet what can people do, except despair?
     The same things change their names at such a rate;
   For instance--passion in a lover’s glorious,
   But in a husband is pronounced uxorious.

  VII.

  “Men grow ashamed of being so very fond;
     They sometimes also get a little tired
   (But that, of course, is rare), and then despond;
     The same things cannot always be admired,
   Yet ’tis “so nominated in the bond,”
     That both are tied till one shall have expired.
   Sad thought! to lose the spouse that was adorning
   Our days, and put one’s servants into mourning.

  VIII.

  “There’s doubtless something in domestic doings,
     Which forms, in fact, true love’s antithesis;
   Romances paint at full length people’s wooings,
     But only give a bust of marriages;
   For no one cares for matrimonial cooings,
     There’s nothing wrong in a connubial kiss.
   Think you, if Laura had been Petrarch’s wife,
   He would have written sonnets all his life?”

It is significant that those who most praise marriage are young people
who do not know marriage from experience, but have failed to find true
happiness in celibacy. We think of the words of Socrates, that it is a
matter of indifference whether a man marries or does not marry, for in
either case he will regret it.

Our own time is certainly characterized by hostility to marriage. It is
the =form= of modern marriage which frightens most people; the
compulsion which has actually been rendered more stringent by the new
Civil Code of 1900. Modern individualism draws back from the undeniable
=loss of freedom= which legal marriage entails. The shadow which,
according to a saying of E. Dühring, indissoluble marriage has thrown
upon love and upon the nobler aspects of the sexual life, is darker
to-day than ever before.

Hence the growing disinclination to marry, which, significantly enough,
is increasingly manifest upon the part of women; hence, above all, the
=extraordinary increase in divorce=.

According to a statement in the _Vossische Zeitung_ (No. 137, March 22,
1906), the number of divorces in Germany underwent a =marked= increase
in the year 1904. In that year there were 10,882 divorces; in 1903,
9,932; in 1902, 9,074; thus in the year 1904 there was an increase of
590, or 9·6 per cent.

In the closing years of the nineteenth century, a marked increase in the
number of divorces was already discernible. For instance, in the years
1894-1899 the number rose from 7,502 to 9,433. It was at that time
believed that the increase depended upon the fact that in most of the
countries of the German Confederation the new Civil Code made divorce
more difficult, and that for this reason as many people as possible were
seeking divorce before the new Code came into action. It is true that
the number of divorces diminished after the Civil Code passed into
operation. In the year 1900 the divorces numbered 7,922, and in the year
1901, 7,892. =Since then, however, there has once more been a marked
increase=, so that =the figure for the year 1904 is 2,990 in excess of
that for the year 1901, an increase of 38 per cent=. This increase is
principally to be referred to the fact that the so-called =relative
grounds for divorce=, enumerated in § 1568 of the Civil Code,[182]
appear to have justified a great number of demands for divorce. The
marked extensibility of the sections of this paragraph leaves the judge
very wide discretion in its application.

To what an extent the increase in the number of divorces influences the
existing marriages is seen as soon as we compare the number of divorces
with the number of marriages. It appears that in the years 1900 and
1901, for every 10,000 marriages, there were 8·1 divorces; in 1902, 9·3
divorces; in 1903, 10·1 divorces; and in 1904, 11·1 divorces. Thus in
the year 1904, there were 3 more divorces per 10,000 marriages than in
the year 1901.

I have already referred to the enormous importance of divorce in
relation to the recognition on the part of the State of the temporary
character of every marriage, whereby, in principle, free love, which is
no more than a temporary marriage, receives a civil justification, and
is legitimized. This fact stands out still more clearly when we
recognize the legal possibility of =repeated= divorces on the part of
one and the same person. Numerous actual examples of this can be given.
Thus a well-known author was divorced no less than =four= times, and of
his four wives one, on her side, had been divorced by other men. Two
divorces on both sides are by no means rare. If we consider the matter
openly and unemotionally, it must be admitted that this is nothing else
than the much-opposed “free love,” the bugbear of all honest
Philistines, =a free love which has already received the official
sanction of the State=.

When four or five divorces are possible to the same individual by
official decree, when, that is to say, this procedure has received civil
sanction, the number may for theoretical purposes be multiplied at
discretion.

He who knows human nature, he who knows that the consciousness of
freedom in mature human beings--and only such should enter upon
marriage--strengthens and confirms the =consciousness of duty=--such a
one need not fear the introduction of free marriage. On the contrary, it
may be assumed that divorces would be far less common than they are in
the case of coercive marriage.

According to the Civil Code, divorces are obtainable on the ground of
adultery, hazard to life, malicious abandonment, ill-treatment, mental
disorder, legally punishable offences, dishonourable and immoral
conduct, serious disregard of conjugal duties. As we saw, the last
clause empowered the judge in difficult cases, by a humane, reasonable
interpretation of the idea “disregard of conjugal duties,” to pronounce
a divorce. It is obvious that in every divorce the interests of the
=children= of the marriage (if any) must be especially safeguarded.

Marriage in France, to which hitherto the clauses of the Code Napoléon,
analogous to those of our Civil Code, have been applicable, is said to
have recently undergone reform, both in respect of moral and of legal
rights. In Paris there has been constituted a standing “Committee of
Marriage Reform,” composed of well-known authors, jurists, and women,
among the number being Pierre Louys, Marcel Prevost, Judge Magnaud,
Octave Mirbeau, Maeterlinck, Henri Bataille, Henri Coulon, and Poincaré.

In an address to the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate by the President
of this Committee, Henri Coulon, in which he gives the reasons for
desiring a change in the present marriage laws,[183] he says:

  “It would be childish to disguise the fact that the institution of
  marriage has entered upon a critical phase; philosophers and novelists
  lay odds on the complete disappearance of the institution. In this,
  perhaps, they go too far. But it is none the less true that it is a
  matter of profound interest and importance to reform the institution
  of marriage. Granted this, how shall we begin?

  “The entrance into marriage must be made as easy as possible; in this
  way the number of marriages which are based upon love will rapidly
  increase. Then, the married pair must have =equal rights, equal
  duties=, and =equal responsibilities=; in this way marriage will
  become more practical and less immoral than it is at present.
  Finally--and this is the most important of all--it is necessary =to
  facilitate divorce=. Divorce will then become the worthy separation of
  two thinking beings, and will no longer be the disgusting comedy that
  it is at the present day.

  “For those determined to live apart, for those whose morals are loose,
  indissoluble marriage itself is no longer a bond. Absolute freedom is
  no hindrance to conjugal fidelity and constancy; on the contrary,
  =freedom is the cause of constancy=.

  “Divorce is not happiness, but it is a help towards happiness. For two
  human beings who hate one another to continue to live together is a
  much greater evil than divorce. Certainly it would be preferable if
  husband and wife could continue to love one another as they did during
  the first days of their married life; that they should love their
  children and be honoured by them. But since humanity is not free from
  faults and vices, this does not always happen. Divorce, as we wish for
  it, makes marriage worthier and more profound. Such marriages will be
  better suited to the new social movements and to the modern spirit.

  “=The civil equality of the two sexes must be a fundamental principle
  of modern law.= The French Civil Code already recognizes for both
  sexes equal rights in some respects; but the wife still loses a
  certain portion of her rights in the moment that she marries. She is
  in fact rendered incapable of business. The contrast between the
  incapacity for business of the married woman and the capacity for
  business of the unmarried is one of the characteristic traits of our
  legislation.

  “Divorce, as it now exists, contradicts the indissolubility of the
  marriage bond demanded by the Church. Adultery should only be regarded
  as a ground for divorce, and should not exonerate the murderer who
  kills his adulterous wife or her accomplice.

  “We demand the abolition of the punishment for adultery, because
  prosecutions of this character arise either from revengeful feelings
  or from litigiousness.”

Justice demands that with this facilitation of divorce, as advocated in
the French scheme of marriage reform, there should be associated
=increased= security for the care of the dependent wife and children
after divorce. In this connexion, =conjugal responsibility= is merely a
part of =sexual responsibility= in general. If two independent, free
individuals have sexual relations one with the other, in or out of
marriage, they thereby both undertake in respect of their =own persons=
and of all possible =offspring=, the duty and the responsibility which
are the outcome of a natural instinctive feeling, namely, “the sense of
sexual responsibility.” This must dominate the entire sexual life of
every human being, as a categorical imperative. In this is to be found
the necessary ethical counterpoise to the activity of boundless sexual
egoism.

For the love of the future and its social regulation, the three
following conditions appear to me to be determinative; they form a part
also of the French programme of marriage reform:

1. =Equal rights, equal duties, equal responsibilities on the part of
husband and wife.=

2. =Facilitation of divorce.=

3. =Individual freedom to be regarded as preferable to coercion. Freedom
best promotes constancy in love.=[184]

If these principles were strictly carried out in practical life, without
doubt, and as a matter of absolute certainty, the number of divorces
would not increase, but would diminish, and we should sooner witness the
realization of the ideal of true marriage, as the lifelong union of two
free personalities, fully conscious of their duties and their rights.

The high ethical and social significance of family life will ever
continue, even under the freest love, by which, as I must again and
again insist, I do not understand unrestricted and continually changing
extra-conjugal sexual intercourse. Against this the gravest
considerations must be urged. What “free love” is, is already apparent
from the preceding exposition, but in the next chapter the subject will
be more thoroughly discussed.


APPENDIX

  ONE HUNDRED TYPICAL MARRIAGES AND SOME CHARACTERISTIC PICTURES OF THE
  MARRIED STATE, AFTER GROSS-HOFFINGER

In a long-forgotten, but very interesting, book by Dr. Anton J.
Gross-Hoffinger, entitled “The Fate of Women, and Prostitution in
Relation to the Principle of the Indissolubility of Catholic Marriage,
and especially in Relation to the Laws of Austria and the Philosophy of
our Time,”[185] we find a collection, equally interesting to
psychologists and to students of human character, to the physician, the
jurist, and the sociologist, of a hundred typical marriages, and also a
more detailed description of the course of a few marriages. These
sketches deserve to be preserved from oblivion, because they will serve
equally well as an example of marriages of our time.

In the first place, the author discusses the principal difficulties of
marriage. He then asks whether, in view of the smallness of the number
of those comparatively happy persons who have found it possible to live
a legal and at the same time a natural family life, the existing
marriage laws, religious ideas, and social customs have attained their
aim, whether they give rise, as a general rule, to happy and fruitful,
honourable and blessed unions. The author hesitated long before
presenting for the first time “to the Catholic world the picture of the
actual state of marriages in that world, a picture based upon numerous
experiences and observations.” He investigated one hundred marriages of
persons belonging to the most diverse classes, without selection, as
they came under his observation by chance; then, again, another hundred,
and once again a third hundred. Always the results were equally sad;
always the ratio between happy and unhappy marriages was the same. The
result of his investigations was, he states:

  “Although I have earnestly sought for happy marriages, my search has
  to this extent been vain, that I have never been able to satisfy
  myself that =happy= marriages are anything but =extremely isolated
  exceptions to the general rule=.”

In his view this is not the unhappy result of erroneous observation, but
depends upon exact observation during a long series of years, and in
conditions which brought him into intimate relationship with numbers of
persons in all classes of society.

Thus, after a long, difficult, and careful investigation into a
=hundred= marriages among persons of different classes, he obtained the
following results, here briefly summarized:


Upper Classes.

  1. The marriage not unhappy, wife suffering from disorder arousing
  suspicion of syphilis; conjugal fidelity of the husband prior to the
  occurrence of this illness doubtful. Children sickly.

  2. Both parties to the marriage happy =in advanced age=, after the
  husband had lived freely.

  3. Both parties happy =in advanced age=--childless.

  4. Husband impotent, wife unhappy.

  5. Husband an old man, wife =unfaithful=.

  6. Husband and wife apparently happy--children scrofulous.

  7. The husband removed from home by circumstances, wife unfaithful.

  8. Both parties unhappy, the husband a libertine.

  9. Both parties apparently content in advanced age.

  10. Husband a dissolute old libertine, wife unhappy, but resigned--no
  children.

  11. Condition precisely similar to No. 10.

  12. A happy mésalliance.

  13. The husband phlegmatically happy, wife dissolute, children ill,
  mother sickly.

  14. Husband dissipated, wife resigned. Husband and wife have come to
  an understanding.

  15. Husband a libertine, wife a Messalina. Both parties syphilitic.
  Children sickly.

  16. Both parties unhealthy and miserable. Husband dissipated, coarse.
  Wife ill, in a decline.

  17. Husband a coarse libertine, wife separated from him and unhappy.


Upper-Middle Classes.

  18. Both parties unhappy. Husband impotent. Wife, who is elderly, a
  Messalina. Marriage childless and unceasingly stormy.

  19. Both parties tolerably happy, owing to gentleness and
  good-heartedness. Husband a sensualist and unfaithful. Wife faithful,
  ailing.

  20. Both parties unhappy. Incessant domestic warfare in the house.

  21. Phlegmatic rich husband, poor suffering wife--marriage
  childless--happily, as it seems.

  22. Both parties in very advanced age, apparently happy. Their past
  doubtful. Scrofulous children.

  23. Childless marriage between a former high-class mistress and a
  dissolute man.

  24. An apparently happy marriage between a still young husband and an
  elderly wife. The former compensates himself secretly.

  25. Unhappy marriage. Both parties unsatisfied. Husband dissolute.
  Wife resigned.

  26. Happy marriage.

  27. Doubtfully happy marriage.

  28. Extremely unhappy marriage. Husband a libertine, unprincipled;
  wife half insane; children syphilitic.

  29. Unhappy marriage, the husband formerly somewhat fickle, the wife
  unforgiving.

  30. =Happy marriage.= Both parties immoral, dissolute; the wife
  carries on secret prostitution with the knowledge of the husband, who
  on his side keeps several mistresses. They take matters
  philosophically!

  31. The husband a libertine and seducer by profession, the wife
  separated from him.

  32. Happy marriage. The husband inclined to gallantry, without being
  absolutely dissolute. Wife gentle, patient, fond of her husband, and
  faithful.

  33. The husband ill as the result of dissipation, the wife frivolous.
  Indifferent marriage.

  34. The husband made happy by means of his wife’s money, but neglects
  her; she is very ill, wasting away. Childless marriage.

  35. Husband impotent. Wife, with knowledge of her husband, on intimate
  terms with a friend of the family. In its way a happy marriage.

  36. Dissolute husband, dissolute wife, both shameless and
  =free-thinking=--in mutual indifference they =seem= fairly happy.

  37. Husband old and sickly, a worn-out libertine. The wife on intimate
  terms with a friend of the house. =Happy marriage!=

  38. Unhappy marriage. Husband phlegmatic, wife extremely passionate
  and voluptuous.

  39. Unhappy marriage. A worthless speculator who led astray the wife
  of a wealthy man and then deserted her. Childless.

  40. Husband debilitated by excesses; wife immoral. =Happy marriage!=

  41. Husband debilitated by excesses; wife patient. =Happy marriage!=

  42. A similar state of affairs.

  43. Happy marriage. Both parties still very young, untried.

  44. Happy marriage. Husband phlegmatic--wife faithful.

  45. Husband debilitated by excesses, wife rich. At the moment, a happy
  marriage.


Professional and Trading Classes.

  46. Happy marriage. The husband phlegmatic and =seldom= unfaithful;
  wife forbearing, good, and faithful.

  47. Happy marriage. Both parties rich and young. Husband, without his
  wife’s knowledge, loves the joys of Venus.

  48. Unhappy marriage. An enforced marriage of prudence. The husband
  lives with a concubine, wife separated from him.

  49. Unhappy marriage. Poverty, jealousy, and childlessness.

  50. Happy marriage, owing to the forbearance and consideration of the
  wife towards the sullen, irascible husband.

  51. Unhappy marriage. Husband lives happily with a concubine, the wife
  unhappily with a false friend.

  52. Unhappy marriage. Phlegmatic husband, immoral wife, continuous
  quarrelling.

  53. Unhappy marriage. The husband henpecked, impotent. The wife
  masterful, quarrelsome, and ill-tempered.

  54. Husband and wife have separated.

  55. Happy marriage. The husband is good-humoured and deceived; the
  wife a sensual libertine; children sickly; wife incurably ill.

  56. Happy marriage. The husband a worn-out debauchee, the wife a
  worn-out prostitute. Both incurably ill, for the same reason.

  57. Happy marriage, happy from necessity and phlegm.

  58. Happy marriage. The husband, a swindler, does everything possible
  for those dependent on him. The wife, formerly a prostitute, is happy
  in consequence of his care.

  59. A happy, artistic marriage. Happy on account of mutual laxity and
  accommodation.

  60. Similar circumstances.

  61. Happy marriage. The husband conceals his diversions with success.
  Wife faithful and always gentle.

  62. Unhappy marriage. Light conduct on both sides, with usual results.

  63. Happy marriage. The conjugal fidelity of the husband not above
  suspicion.

  64. }
      } Similar circumstances.
  65. }

  66. Unhappy marriage. A marriage of prudence. The husband set himself
  up with his wife’s money, but spends it on light women; the wife
  revenges herself by boundless ill-temper.

  67. Unhappy marriage. Marriage of prudence. The young husband settled
  in business on the money of his elderly wife; she nags, and he is
  drinking himself to death.

  68. Marriage happy owing to =avarice= on both sides.

  69. Marriage compulsorily happy owing to =poverty= on both sides.

  70. Happy marriage! Husband a drunkard. Wife avaricious. Childless.

  71. Husband and wife are separated; the husband abandoned his wife to
  poverty and prostitution.

  72. Unhappy marriage. Husband impotent, wife lustful. Continued
  unhappiness.

  73. Young married pair; wife mistress of a wealthy Jew, who supports
  the family.

  74. Unhappy marriage. Husband dissolute, no longer cares for his wife;
  the latter incurably ill; children syphilitic.

  75. Unhappy marriage. Both parties sickly and poor.

  76. A marriage of speculation. Husband has sold his wife three times
  to different wealthy men; in this way he makes his living.

  77. Immoral marriage. The husband lives by a swindling industry. The
  wife lives on a pension given by one whose mistress she formerly
  was--children brought up to prostitution.

  78. Easy-going marriage. Husband formerly a domestic servant, now in
  business; wife formerly a prostitute who had saved money. Childless.

  79. Happy marriage, between a fool and a clever woman.

  80. Unhappy marriage. The husband dislikes his wife, is plagued to
  death by her; she brought the property into the house.

  81. Dissipated husband, dissipated wife, separated from one another.
  The children scrofulous.

  82. Impotent husband, licentious wife, sickly children; angry and
  stormy scenes.

  83. Worn-out libertine, young wife; the parties are not unhappy, owing
  to affluence and freedom from cares.

  84. Artistic marriage. Wife the mistress of a great man. The household
  goes on comfortably.


Lower Classes.

  85. Dissolute husband. Formerly well-to-do, owing to his wife’s dowry,
  now reduced with her to beggary. Living by a trifling commission
  business. Wife sickly. Children dead.

  86. Marriage happy, in consequence of great poverty.

  87. A procurer’s family.

  88. =Happy marriage.= Husband a thief, wife a prostitute.

  89. The marriage unhappy in consequence of poverty.

  90. Unhappy marriage. The husband a drinker, the wife working amid
  trouble and poverty.

  91. Unhappy marriage. Poverty, misunderstanding, jealousy, and
  illness.

  92. A family of servants. Wife and daughter at the disposal of the
  master.

  93. Unhappy marriage. Frequent brawls. Mutual mistrust, hatred, and
  contempt.

  94. Unhappy marriage. Upright husband deceived by his wife, and, in
  consequence of great poverty, is unable to control her.

  95. Unhappy marriage. Husband has run away.

  96. Immoral marriage. Husband, wife, and children live on the wages of
  unchastity.


  97. }
      }
  98. }Miserable marriages, which ended in the poor-house.
      }
  99. }

  100. A happy pair, who had endured all the severe trials of life, had
  forgiven each other everything, and never abandoned one another, a
  =virtuous= marriage in the noblest sense.

Thus, among these hundred marriages there were:

  Unhappy, about                                       48
  Indifferent                                          36
  Unquestionably happy                                 15
  Virtuous                                              1
  Virtuous and orthodox                                --

Further, among these hundred marriages there were:

  Intentionally immoral                                14
  Dissolute and libertine                              51
  Altogether above suspicion                            ?

Further:

  Wives who were ill owing to the husband’s fault      30
  Wives who were ill not owing to the husband’s fault  30
  Wives who were unhappy, and had themselves to
  blame for it                                         12

Among these hundred marriages only one was happy owing to mutual
faithfulness; all the other slightly happy marriages, if one may call
them so, were so only because the wife did not disturb herself with
regard to the question of her husband’s faithfulness.

From these statistics Gross-Hoffinger draws the following conclusions:

1. About =one-half= of all marriages are =absolutely unhappy=.

2. Much more than one-half of all marriages are obviously
=demoralized=.

3. The morality of the remaining smaller moiety is preserved only by
avoiding questions regarding the husband’s faithfulness.

4. Fifteen per cent. of all marriages live on the earnings of
professional unchastity and procurement.

5. The number of orthodox marriages which are entirely above every
suspicion of marital infidelity (assuming the existence of complete
sexual potency) is in the eyes of every reasonable man, who understands
the demands which Nature makes, and the violence of those demands,
=equivalent to nil=. Hence the =ecclesiastical= purpose of marriage is
=generally=, =fundamentally=, and =completely evaded=.

  “No =compulsion=,” thus concludes the author, “is more unnatural than
  that of the Catholic (Protestant, Jewish, Greek Orthodox) religion, by
  which is prescribed a compulsory continuance of marriage, with its
  fantastic code and ridiculous conjugal duties and rights.

  “First of all, this compulsion--this sacrament of marriage--marriage
  which is nothing, can be nothing, =according to nature= should be
  nothing, but =a free union and a civil arrangement=--results in the
  =avoidance of marriage=.

  “Secondly, it results that in marriage the purposes of marriage are
  not and cannot be completely fulfilled.

  “Thirdly, that marriage has ceased to be the natural marriage which it
  should be, and has become merely a business, a speculation, or a
  hospital for invalids.”

In illustration of this proposition, Gross-Hoffinger finally describes
from life twenty-four marriages, some of which, being especially
interesting, we will here record.


  1.

  Countess B., owing to unavoidable difficulties, was unable to contract
  a suitable marriage, and attained the age of thirty whilst still
  unmarried. The result of this was she gave herself to a servant,
  consequently became infected, and died of syphilis some months after
  she had, finally, married. Her husband was left with an unhappy
  memorial of this brief marriage.

  2.

  Count C., a man of high rank, lost his beloved wife through death.
  Circumstances made it impossible for him to marry again. He was afraid
  of acquiring venereal disorders, and therefore abstained from natural
  connexion. Through lack of natural sexual gratification his sexual
  impulse became perverse, and he took to the practice of Greek love.

  3.

  Prince D., young, impotent, concluded a marriage of convenience with a
  beautiful, very passionate lady, who, on account of her husband’s
  impotence, compensated herself with domestic servants, members of her
  retinue, and cavalry soldiers, and gave birth in these conditions to
  several children, which inherited the title of the putative father. In
  such circumstances the marriage has been very unhappy, but necessity
  compels the husband to bear his fate with patience.

  4.

  Count E., in other respects a man of fine character, made a marriage
  of convenience with a lady of good family, who, however, was not in a
  position to make him happy. From natural nobility of character, he was
  unwilling to distress his unhappy wife by entering openly into
  relations with a concubine, and therefore sought sexual gratification
  with prostitutes. He became infected, and transmitted the illness to
  his wife, who became seriously ill, and gave birth to diseased
  children. Although the poor sufferer is unaware of the origin of her
  troubles, and bears them with patience; although her husband takes all
  possible care of her, and does his best to bring about the restoration
  of her health; the marriage, owing to the uneasy conscience of the
  husband and the physical suffering of the wife, is obviously a very
  unhappy one.

  5.

  Baron F., a man of wide influence, in youth a libertine--frivolous,
  and of an emotional disposition, insusceptible to finer feelings,
  contracted successively four marriages of convenience, which in all
  cases terminated in the death of the wife. There is reason to believe
  that the unceasing libertinism and unscrupulous conduct of the husband
  had shortened the life of his wives--and this is all the more probable
  because all the Baron’s children are sickly and scrofulous.

  6.

  Count G., dissipated libertine, wasted his property in wild
  extravagance, and compelled his wife to live apart from him, whilst he
  spent enormous sums on professional singers and dancers and common
  prostitutes. Being ruined as completely financially as physically, he
  was despised by persons of all classes, persecuted by his creditors,
  and absolutely detested by his wife. Although his pleasures consist
  chiefly in reminiscences, he still devotes enormous sums to them, the
  money being obtained by a continued increase in his debts.

  7.

  Count H. has been married for many years, but lives on the most
  unpleasant terms with his wife, and devotes his spare time to the
  society of prostitutes. The scum of the street form his favourite
  associates; but his voluptuous adventures carry him also into family
  life, and no respectable middle-class wife or girl, however innocent,
  is safe from his advances, which are all the more incredible because
  he is quite an old man and completely impotent. He uses all possible
  means to make the woman of his choice compliant--presents, promises,
  threats.

  8.

  Dr. S., husband of an immoral wife, public official, libertine,
  philosopher, enjoying a small secured income. Lives with his wife on a
  footing which permits both parties unlimited freedom. The worthy
  couple devote their whole energies to earning money by their industry,
  in part by secret prostitution on the part of the wife, in part by
  direct and indirect procurement by the holding of piquant evening
  parties for youthful members of the aristocracy. The family has an
  extraordinary vogue. Persons of high position are engaged in
  confidential intercourse with them; young girls of the better classes
  gladly attend their soirées, since there they meet the élite of the
  young aristocracy, rich Jews, and officers. This interesting pair get
  through an almost incredible amount of money; they keep a magnificent
  carriage, they have a country house, a valuable collection of
  pictures, etc. It is only from their servants that both of them
  receive little respect, since the male portion of the household
  subserve the lustful desires of the wife, the female domestics those
  of the husband, and all must be initiated into the secrets of the
  household industry.

  9.

  Dr. U. was till recently an old bachelor, who had never wished to
  share his property with a wife and children, and found it much cheaper
  and more agreeable to impregnate servant-girls and other neglected
  characters than to keep a mistress, or to seek his pleasures in the
  street. Finally, becoming infirm at sixty-two years of age, and
  needing nursing, on account of an occasional gouty swelling of the
  leg, he discovered that it was not good for man to be alone. Having
  rank and wealth, it would have been easy for him to find a young and
  pretty girl who, under the title of wife, would have undertaken to
  play the part of sick nurse. But the old practitioner knew too well
  the value of what he had to offer to throw himself away on a poor
  girl. He considered that it would be reasonable to choose such a
  partner that he would not be obliged to divide his income, and to find
  some one to take care of him in his old age who would cost him nothing
  at all, but would rather provide for her own needs. He thought less,
  therefore, of youth than of property, less of beauty than of thrifty
  habits; and finally found an old maid, a woman with some property,
  who, on account of a somewhat unattractive exterior, had failed to
  obtain a husband. Now one can see the prudent husband, who is as
  faithful to his wife as the gout is faithful to him, walking from time
  to time in the street on the arm of his life companion, whose aspect
  is somewhat discontented. She still wears the same clothes which she
  wore before her marriage, and which have a sufficiently shabby
  appearance, but she endures her lot with patience, because she is now
  greeted as “gnädige Frau,” and people kiss her hand, as they did not
  do formerly.

  10.

  Count J., a man of unblemished character, lived for some time a happy
  married life. The increasing age of the wife, however, associated with
  the exceptional constitution of the Count, whose youth seemed
  remarkably enduring, led to scenes of jealousy, which embittered the
  life of both. We can hardly suppose that this jealousy is altogether
  unfounded; but surely it is a matter for regret that two human beings
  of distinctly noble character should by marriage be exposed to
  lifelong unhappiness.

  11.

  Herr von K., a young merchant in the wholesale trade, is married to
  the daughter of a man of position, and the wife by a rich dowry helped
  to found her husband’s fortunes; hence she enjoys the distinction over
  other wives that her husband pretends a great tenderness for her, and
  conceals his indiscretions with the greatest possible care. For this
  reason, she has always been devoted to him; she regards him as the
  example for all other husbands, as a true phenomenon in the midst of
  an utterly depraved world of immoral men. And as an actual fact, if
  one sees this man, how he lives in appearance only for his business,
  with what delicate modesty he avoids any conversation about loose
  women, if one hears him zealously preach against husbands who deceive
  their wives, how inconceivable it is to him that a man should find any
  pleasure in immoral women--one would be willing to swear that he is
  everything that his wife enthusiastically describes him to be. But
  some wags amongst his acquaintances, by taking incredible pains,
  discovered that this honourable merchant had no less than =seven
  mistresses=, two of whom belonged to the class of prostitutes, two to
  the class of grisettes; the remaining three had been decent
  middle-class women. To these last he presented himself under various
  names and in the most diverse forms--now as attaché to an embassy, now
  as an officer, now as a journeyman mechanic. To all these latter
  mistresses he had promised marriage, and by a succession of presents,
  oaths, and lies, he had in each case attained his end, and thereafter
  abandoned them without remorse to the consequences of the adventure,
  whilst he himself set out to seek in a fresh quarter of the town new
  sacrifices for the altar of his lusts. Since he never had anything to
  do with known prostitutes and procuresses, but by personal pains
  provided the materials for his pleasures, he succeeded both as a
  merchant and as a husband in preserving the reputation of a man free
  from illicit passion and deserving of all confidence.

  12.

  Major W., a distinguished officer, a man of honour in every respect,
  had in youth married a chambermaid, naturally, as one can imagine,
  from pure inclination. But the marriage remained barren, because the
  wife suffered from organic troubles; and soon her sexual powers were
  completely extinguished. Whilst the husband still remained virile, the
  wife was already an old woman, suffering from spasmodic and other
  affections, surrounded always by medicine-bottles and medical
  appliances, always ill-humoured and nagging, a true torment for the
  good-natured and amiable husband. The latter bears with Christian
  patience and inexhaustible love the ill-humour of his wife; but Nature
  is less pliable than his kind heart: his conjugal tenderness
  diminishes, and his ardent temperament seeks other outlets for the
  gratification of his natural sexual desires. The sick wife notices
  this coolness, and revenges herself by a refined cruelty. She knows
  that sulkiness on her part makes him ill and miserable; she therefore
  afflicts him with coldness of manner, and by jealousy and ill-temper
  she makes his life a hell. There occur horrible scenes of domestic
  brawling, which more than once have led the husband to attempt to end
  his troubles by suicide. He suffers in a threefold fashion: by the
  continued irritation of his healthy natural impulse, by the illnesses
  he contracts in gratifying that impulse, and by the sorrows of his
  really loved wife. He imposes upon himself a voluntary celibacy in
  order that he may not make her ill; but this sacrifice does not
  suffice, it does not make his wife gentler towards him. She demands
  from him, tacitly, all the ardency of the bridegroom; there is no
  rescue possible from this inferno. The husband surrenders himself to a
  quiet despair. He is faithful in his vocation; he lives only for the
  wife, who torments him continually. The neighbours see a very
  unedifying example of an extremely unhappy marriage, originally
  contracted as a pure love match, and none the less entailing martyrdom
  alike on husband and wife.

NOTE.--That in Vienna the conjugal conditions so graphically described
in the above extracts are still much the same as formerly, and that
marriage needs and marriage lies are there exceptionally painful is
shown by the foundation in Vienna of a “Society for Marriage Reform,”
which sent to the Assembly of German Jurists, meeting at Kiel in the
beginning of September, 1906, the telegraphic request that they would
undertake a revision of Austrian marriage law, since hitherto no cure
had been found for unhappy marriage in Austria, no divorce was possible,
and those who had obtained a judicial separation could, according to
Canon Law, sue one another on account of adultery (_cf._ _Neue Freie
Presse_, No. 15108, September 13, 1906). It is hardly credible, but,
according to a report in the _Berlin Aerzte-Correspondenz_, 1907, No. 8,
it is true, that the Medical Court of Honour for the town of Berlin and
the province of Brandenburg, in the year of our Lord 1906, punished
physicians on the ground of adultery!

  [155] P. Näcke, one of the most trustworthy authorities on sexual
  anthropology, writes as follows: “That in ancient times, before
  monogamy, there was polygamy, or even a state resembling promiscuity,
  =is very probable= (Westermarck notwithstanding), =and can, in fact,
  be assumed a priori=” (“Einiges zur Frauenfrage und zur sexuellen
  Abstinenz”--“A Contribution to the Woman’s Question and to the Problem
  of Sexual Abstinence”), published in the _Archiv f.
  Kriminalanthropologie_, vol. xiv., p. 52 (Hans Gross, 1903). _Cf._
  also Lohsing’s “Zustimmung zur Annahme einer ursprünglichen
  Promiscuität,” _ibid._, vol. xvi., p. 332.

  The question of sexual promiscuity has recently been further
  considered by P. Näcke (“Earliest Beginnings of Human Society,” in
  _Die Umschau_ of August 17, 1907). He believes that the state of pure
  promiscuity lasted a short time only, and gave place to certain nuclei
  of family structure, a kind of semi-promiscuity, which, prior to the
  complete development of the family union, lasted much longer than the
  state of pure promiscuity. Still, these earliest families were merely
  temporary, and only later became fixed and permanent. This assumption,
  however, does not affect the fact of a primordial pure promiscuity.
  Näcke himself also recognizes promiscuity as the natural state of
  primitive man.

  [156] H. Schurtz, “Altersklassen und Männerbünde: eine Darstellung der
  Grundformen der Gesellschaft”--“Age Classes and Associations of Men: a
  Demonstration of the Fundamental Forms of Society,” p. 176 (Berlin,
  1902).

  [157] N. Melnikow, “The Buryats of the District of Irkutsk,” published
  in the Transactions of the Berlin Society of Anthropology, Ethnology,
  and Primeval History, p. 440 (1899).

  [158] Marco Polo, translated by Yule, 2nd edition, vol. ii., pp. 38,
  39 (London, 1875).

  [159] _Cf._ my “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia
  Sexualis,” vol. i., pp. 165-169.

  [160] _Cf._, regarding group-marriage, the writings of Joseph Kehler,
  more particularly “Zur Urgeschichte der Ehe”--“The Primitive History
  of Marriage” (Stuttgart, 1897); “Rechtsphilosophie und
  Naturrecht”--“The Philosophy of Law and Natural Right,” published in
  Holtzendorff-Kohler’s “Encyklopädie der Rechtswissenschaft,” pp. 27-36
  (Leipzig, 1902); “Die Gruppenehe”--“Group-Marriage,” in “Aus Kultur
  und Leben,” pp. 22-29 (Berlin, 1904); finally the chapter on
  “Group-Marriage” by Schurtz (_op. cit._). [A quite modern instance of
  group-marriage was the Oneida community, “a league of two hundred
  persons to regard their children as ‘common.’” For an account of the
  Oneida experiment see Noyes, “A History of American
  Socialisms.”--TRANSLATOR.]

  [161] J. J. Bachofen, “Das Mutterrecht”--“Matriarchy” (Stuttgart,
  1861).

  [162] Ludwig Stein, “Die Anfänge der Kultur”--“The Beginnings of
  Civilization”--pp. 106, 107.

  [163] Eduard von Mayer, “Die Lebensgesetze der Kultur”--“The Vital
  Laws of Civilization”--p. 210.

  [164] G. F. W. Hegel, “Fundamental Outlines of the Philosophy of Law,
  or Natural Rights and Political Science in Outline,” edited by Eduard
  Gans, second edition, p. 218 (Berlin, 1840).

  [165] That is to say, it is not sufficient to replace the father-right
  by the mother-right, as, for example, Ruth Bré demands (“The Children
  of the State, or the Mother-Right?” Leipzig, 1904).

  [166] There is a most apposite remark in one of George Meredith’s
  novels. He imagines that an Oriental vizier (from a Mohammedan
  country) is visiting our “Christian” capital, and late one evening,
  after a dinner-party at a distinguished house, walks homeward by way
  of Piccadilly. He asks, and is told, who are the numerous ladies
  walking the streets at that late hour. “_I perceive_” said the vizier,
  “_that monogamic society has a decent visage and a hideous
  rear_.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [167] M. Nordau, “The Conventional Lies of our Civilization,” pp.
  263-317 (Leipzig, 1884).

  [168] Georg Hirth estimates the percentage of marriages of convenience
  as even higher--viz., 90 per cent. _Cf._ his “Ways to Love,” p. 607.

  [169] _Cf._ my “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia
  Sexualis,” vol. i., pp. 165-174; vol. ii., pp. 190, 191, 208, 209,
  363, 364.

  [170] Schopenhauer’s Collected Works, edited by E. Grisebach, vol.
  ii., p. 1337 (Leipzig, 1905).

  [171] Ernest Stiedenroth, “Psychologie zur Erklärung der
  Seelenerscheinungen,” pp. 224, 225 (Berlin, 1825).

  [172] Max Nordau, “Conventional Lies,” p. 305.

  [173] _Cf._ in this connexion the feuilleton of the _Vossische
  Zeitung_, No. 286, June 17, 1904. Jean Paul, also, was an enthusiast
  in theory and practice for such double love. He called it
  “simultaneous love.” The idea of simultaneous love has also been
  employed in a recently published French novel, “A la Merci de
  l’Heure,” by Jean Tarbel (Paris, 1907). The heroine has need of two
  lovers--a celebrated literary professor for head and heart, and in
  addition, a young physician for the gratification of her sensual
  needs. Contrariwise, Knut Hamsun, in “Pan,” and Guy de Maupassant in
  “Notre Cœur,” describe the double love of a man for a woman of the
  world and for a child of Nature.

  [174] Friederich Schleiermacher, “Philosophic and Other Writings,”
  vol. i., p. 473 (Berlin, 1846).

  [175] _Cf._ Eduard von Hartmann, “Philosophie des Unbewussten,” p.
  205. In a French collection--“L’Amour par les Grands Écrivains,” by
  Julien Lemer, p. 14 (Paris, 1861)--we find the saying, “Ordinairement,
  lorsqu’on se marie par amour, il vient ensuite de la haine; c’est que
  j’ai vu de mes yeux” (“Ordinarily, when one marries for love, hate
  takes its place. I have seen it with my own eyes”).

  [176] _B. Z. am Mittag_, No. 210, September 7, 1906.

  [177] “Annales d’Hygiène Publique,” 1900, p. 340.

  [178] Elard H. Meyer, “Deutsche Volkskunde,” p. 166 (Strasburg, 1898).

  [179] Ludwig Stein, “Der Sinn des Daseins”--“The Sense of Existence,”
  p. 235 (Tübingen and Leipzig, 1904).

  [180] H. Th. Buckle, “History of Civilization in England.”

  [181] G. Schmoller, “Elements of General Political Economy,” vol. i.,
  p. 250 (Leipzig, 1901).

  [182] § 1568 runs: “A husband or wife can sue for divorce when the
  wife or husband =by serious disregard of the duties entailed by
  marriage=, or by dishonourable or immoral conduct, has brought about
  so profound a disorder of the conjugal relationship that to the
  offended party the continuation of the marriage appears impossible.
  Gross ill-treatment is also to be regarded as a serious infringement
  of these duties.” It is clear that the emphasized passage is capable
  of manifold interpretations, and it thus compensates for the abolition
  of the earlier grounds for divorce based upon incompatibility of
  temper.

  [183] Taken from the newspaper _Le Jour_, No. 337, July 6, 1906.

  [184] Compare Browning’s lines, in “James Lee’s Wife”:

  “How the light, light love, he has wings to fly
   At suspicion of a bond.”--TRANSLATOR.


  [185] “Die Schicksale der Frauen und die Prostitution im Zusammenhange
  mit dem Prinzip der Unauflösbarkeit der katholischen Ehe und besonders
  der österreichischen Gesetzgebung und der Philosophie des Zeitalters”
  (Leipzig, 1847).




