CHAPTER XXVII

NEO-MALTHUSIANISM, THE PREVENTION OF CONCEPTION, ARTIFICIAL STERILITY
AND ARTIFICIAL ABORTION


  “_Formerly the use of such devices was regarded as immoral and
  punishable, and was actually punished; it was condemned as an
  interference with the Divine plan. But such views and measures are
  extreme. Here, as everywhere, human foresight and methodical
  interference are permissible._”--GUSTAV SCHMOLLER.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXVII

  Importance of the problem of population -- Malthus and hie doctrine --
  Its fallacies -- Temporary validity -- “Moral restraint” --
  Neo-malthusianism -- The foundation of the Malthusian League -- Great
  antiquity of malthusian practices -- Disharmony of the family instinct
  -- The mica operation of the Australian indigens -- Artificial
  abortion among primitive races -- Methods of preventing pregnancy in
  ancient times -- In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries --
  Relative justification of the use of preventive measures -- Views of
  recent physicians on this subject -- Summary of the principal methods
  of preventing conception -- Limitation of coitus to particular times
  -- Advice of Soranos and Capellmann -- Feskstitow’s “conception-curve”
  -- Influence of particular seasons of the year -- Prolongation of the
  period of lactation -- Buttenstedt’s “Happiness in Marriage” and
  Funcke’s “New Revelation” -- Criticism of these fantasies --
  Divergences from the normal method of coitus -- Passive demeanour of
  the woman -- _Coitus interruptus_ -- Exaggerated views of its
  injurious influence -- _Coitus interruptus_ and anxiety-neurosis --
  Trifling effect in healthy individuals -- Repeated interruptions of
  coitus -- Mechanical means of preventing conception -- Compression --
  Muscular action -- Mensinga’s “occlusive pessary” -- Holweg’s
  “obturator” -- The condom -- Chemico-physical preventive measures --
  Douches -- The “Lady’s Friend” -- Antiseptic powders and security
  sponges -- Combination of chemical and mechanical means -- The “Venus
  apparatus” -- The duplex occlusive pessary -- Inflammatory affections
  after the use of chemical preventive measures -- Herpes progenitalis
  -- Artificial sterility -- Operative methods of inducing it --
  Vaporization and castration -- The “ovariées” -- Wide diffusion of
  artificial abortion -- Critical remarks regarding the punishment of
  abortion in Germany -- The right of the unborn child -- Rape and
  abortion -- The methods of expelling the ovum -- Internal means --
  Mechanical means -- Danger and consequences of both -- Social means
  for limiting abortion.


CHAPTER XXVII

Whereas in former times opinions on social questions were determined
principally by =economic= considerations, to-day we are to a great
extent influenced also by the aims and endeavours of individual and
social =hygiene=; for this reason the so-called =problem of population=
has come to occupy the consciousness of civilized mankind to a far
greater extent than before it has passed from the stage of theory into
that of practice. Serious critical political economists, such as, for
example, B. G. Schmoller,[709] have recognized this. The increasing
understanding of the conditions of social life, knowledge of the
connexion between economic conditions and the number and quality of the
population, must of itself lead to the discussion of the question
whether the regulation of the number of children born is not one of the
principal duties of modern civilization. The Englishman Robert Malthus
was the first who, stimulated by an idea of Benjamin Franklin, in the
year 1798, in his “Essay on the Principles of Population,” discussed
this serious, and even alarming, question of the natural =consequences=
of unrestricted sexual intercourse, and answered it in an extremely
pessimistic sense. For, according to him, whereas human beings tend to
increase in number according to a geometrical progression--that is, in
the ratio 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and so on--the means of subsistence increase
only in arithmetical progression--that is, in the ratio of 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, and so on. Hence it follows that the numbers of the population can be
kept within bounds, so as to remain proportional to the nutritive
possibilities, only by means of decimating influences, such as vice,
poverty, disease, the entire “struggle for existence,” by preventive
measures, and by the so-called “moral restraint” in and before marriage.
Although this celebrated theory, which filled with alarm, not only all
those already living in Europe, but also all those who wished to
=produce= new life, has to-day been generally recognized as false,[710]
since it failed to take into account technical advances in the
preparation of the soil[711] and other ways in which it will become
possible to increase the means of subsistence; and he equally ignored
the possibility of a better division of property. None the less does his
theory remain apposite in respect of many of the social relationships of
more recent times; the doctrine has, in fact, temporary validity for
certain periods of civilization, such as our own. Malthus recommended,
as the principal means of preventing over-population, =abstinence= from
sexual intercourse (moral restraint) before marriage, and the
=postponement= of marriage; thus he was an apostle of the “relative
asceticism” recommended in the twenty-fifth chapter of the present work.

In England this early view found utterance among the political
economists and sociologists, such as Chalmers, Ricardo, John Stuart
Mill, Say, Thornton, etc. It was also actively discussed in wide circles
of the population, so that as early as the year 1825 the “disciples of
Malthus” were a typical phenomenon of English life.

A further development of malthusianism in the practical direction was
represented by the so-called “neo-malthusianism”--that is, an actual
diffusion of instruction in the means for the prevention of pregnancy
and for the limitation of the number of children. Such a procedure was
first publicly recommended by Francis Place, in the year 1822; but no
widespread teaching of practical malthusianism occurred till a
considerably later date, notably after the foundation of the Malthusian
League, on July 17, 1877. The principal advocates of neo-malthusianism
in England were John Stuart Mill, Charles Drysdale, Charles Bradlaugh,
and Mrs. Besant.

Malthusian practice is, however, much older than the theory.
Metchnikoff[712] declares the endeavour to diminish the number of
children to be a very widely diffused “disharmony of the family
instinct,” which in itself is much more recent, and is much less widely
diffused in the animal kingdom than the sexual instinct. Animals, at any
rate, know nothing of the prevention of conception; that is a
“privilege” of the human species. By primitive races such preventive
measures are very widely employed. Among these measures one of the best
known is the “mica” operation of the Australian natives--the slitting up
of the urethra of the male along the lower surface of the penis, so that
the semen flows out just in front of the scrotum, and is ejaculated
outside the vagina.[713] Regarding the wide diffusion of artificial
abortion among savage races, Ploss-Bartels gives detailed reports. The
pursuit of material enjoyments, characteristic of civilized peoples, is
not here (as recent authors have erroneously assumed) the determining
influence; we have, in fact, to do with a widely diffused disharmony of
the family instinct,[714] for which in certain =definite= conditions
some justification must be admitted. The period for the unconditional
rejection of malthusianism by pietists and absolute moralists has passed
away definitely. Not only physicians, but also professional political
economists, recognize the relative justification and admissibility of
the use of preventive measures in certain circumstances for the
limitation of the procreation of children. It has rightly been pointed
out[715] that in =every= marriage a time must eventually arrive when
preventive measures in sexual intercourse are employed, and necessarily
must be employed, because, in respect of the state of health of the
wife, and also in view of economic conditions, their use is urgently
demanded. These relationships have been discussed with great insight by
A. Hegar,[716] and he has proved the justification of practical
neo-malthusianism in every ordinary marriage, as well as for the
population at large. By means of a “regulation of reproduction,” an
immoderate increase of the population is prevented; by diminishing the
quantity we improve the quality of the offspring. Late marriages, long
pauses between the separate deliveries, and the greatest possible sexual
abstinence, subserve this purpose.

Like Hegar, the Munich hygienist Max Gruber[717] also recognizes the
necessity for setting bounds to the number of children to be brought
into the world, since the capacity of the human species to increase is
far greater than its power to increase the means of subsistence. He
describes very vividly the physical and moral misery of the parents and
the children when the latter are too numerous; he also shows that from
the birth of the fourth child onwards the inborn force and health of the
children diminish more and more. Naturally, also, diseases affecting the
parents, and the pressing danger of the inheritance of these diseases,
renders necessary the use of sexual preventive measures, or else of
moral restraint. Gruber enunciates the thoroughly neo-malthusian
proposition:

  “The procreation of children must be kept within bounds, if mankind
  wishes to free itself from the cruel condition by which, in irrational
  nature, the balance is maintained--death in the mass side by side with
  procreation in the mass!”

L. Löwenfeld[718] also sees in the recommendation of such measures for
the prevention of pregnancy “nothing either improper or immoral”; he
sees in these measures “means for diminishing the poverty of the lower
classes, and for abolishing, to a great extent, the high infantile
mortality of these classes, although neo-malthusianism is in no way a
panacea for all the social evils of our time”; and he writes very
strongly against the condemnation of preventive measures by a “perverse
medical zealotry”; in fact, he assigns to preventive measures an immense
hygienic importance. Many other physicians also, such as Mensinga[719]
(the discoverer of the occlusive pessary, the first medical man in
Germany to assert with energy the justification of employing means for
the prevention of pregnancy, and the first to establish with precision
the indications for the use of these measures, especially in relation to
the disadvantageous consequences to women’s health of bearing a large
number of children), Fürbringer,[720] Spener,[721] and others, have
drawn attention to the eminent hygienic and social importance of
measures for the prevention of pregnancy; whereas, on the other hand, in
France, in view of the alarming decline in the population of that
country, scientific medicine has adopted a more hostile attitude; no
longer, however, so bitterly hostile as in the work (now somewhat out of
date, but nevertheless containing interesting details) of Bergeret.[722]
A layman also, Hans Ferdy (A. Meyerhof),[723] has published a number of
interesting works on practical neo-malthusianism.

We shall now proceed to give a brief account of the means commonly
employed for the prevention of pregnancy.

l. =The Restriction of Intercourse to Particular Periods.=--It is clear
that by means of relative asceticism, and by restriction of the number
of individual acts of sexual intercourse, the possibilities of
fertilization can be limited to a considerable extent. Thus, Capellmann,
in a work published in 1883, entitled “Facultative Sterility, without
Offence to Moral Laws,” recommended abstinence from intercourse for
fourteen days =after= the cessation of menstruation and for three or
four days =before= the commencement of the flow, in the belief that
fertilization occurs principally during the days immediately before and
after menstruation. Capellmann thus revived the prescription of Soranos,
a gynecologist of the days of antiquity. According to the researches of
the physiologist Victor Hensen, it is true that the greatest number of
fertilizations take place during the =first= few days after the
menstrual period; but conception =may= also occur on any other day of
the menstrual cycle, although the probability of conception at other
periods than those named is a diminishing one. Feskstitow has based upon
statistical data an interesting “conception curve,” according to which
the frequency of fertilization on the last day of menstruation, on the
first, ninth, eleventh, and twenty-third days after the end of the flow,
varies respectively according to the ratios 48, 62, 13, 9, 1; between
these points the course of the curve is almost straight. On the
twenty-third day after menstruation the probability of conception is
thus one-sixty-second of the maximum. Thus, though the probability of
fertilization following intercourse on the twenty-third day after the
cessation of the flow is much =less= than the probability of
fertilization as a result of intercourse shortly after menstruation,
still, the possibility of conception in the former case cannot be
absolutely excluded.

It has also been recommended that in certain =seasons of the year=, to
which a peculiar influence upon fertility has been ascribed, more
especially the months of May and June, abstinence from intercourse
should be observed. But this is naturally =quite untrustworthy=, since
the same mother can conceive in all months of the year, as is
sufficiently proved by the ordinary variations in the birthdays of
children.

Somewhat more trustworthy, but still =not= absolutely to be depended
upon, is the practice, after the birth of a child, of =artificially
prolonging the period of lactation=, since it is well known that during
lactation the menstrual periods often fail to occur, and that
fertilization is exceptional. Upon the recognition of this causal
sequence, notwithstanding the fact that it does not possess any absolute
validity, there has recently been founded a very remarkable method of
practical malthusianism, which the two discoverers, Karl
Buttenstedt[724] and Richard E. Funcke,[725] have announced to their
astonished contemporaries as a “new revelation,” and as the realization
of “happiness in marriage.” These remarkable apostles have combined
another observation with the one mentioned above of the relative
infertility of women during lactation, the new observation being that
sometimes by the mammary glands of women who are not pregnant, and even
by those of virgins, milk is secreted, especially during menstruation.
This fact was known to earlier gynecologists, as, for example, to
Dietrich Wilhelm Busch.[726]

Buttenstedt, to whom the “priority” of the new doctrine of happiness
unquestionably belongs, an advocate of the extremely optimistic theory
of the possibility of an everlasting life for humanity and of the
cessation of death (!), also conceived the idea of evoking lactation
artificially in =all= women by means of the sucking of their breasts by
men! In this way he believed that artificial sterility and amenorrhœa
might be produced.

Naturally, also, woman’s milk is regarded as an elixir of life for old
men, a true panacea for the elongation of life _ad infinitum_; and this
“happy marriage” in itself is to be a means by which all the possible
ills of degenerate humanity are to be cured. In this pæan he is joined
by Funcke, who regards woman’s milk as “the best, most natural, and most
valuable drug,” and on p. 70 of his book preaches to girls and women the
“new categorical imperative” (_sic_).

  “Thou shalt not leave thy vital force unutilized; thou shalt not
  menstruate unless thou hast the firm will and desire to become
  pregnant; thou shalt allow thy vital force in the form of milk to flow
  from thy breasts for the benefit and enjoyment of other human beings.”

Buttenstedt, who possesses some historical knowledge, wishes also to
make the breasts of men lactiferous (p. 24), so that the sexes can
exchange their “blood through the breasts,” thus become more and more
alike one another, and ultimately become urnings!

This beautiful lactation idyll or, more correctly, mammalian idyll, will
not bear the test of scientific criticism. In the first place, the
effect of the proposed manipulations is exceedingly =dubious=, and would
only produce the desired result in exceptional cases; in the second
place, such an artificial lactation, continued for a long period, would
be extremely =harmful=, just as an excessive protraction of lactation
after normal delivery is known to be deleterious; and in the third
place, last, not least, the reputed anticonceptional effect would, in
the majority of cases, =fail to occur=. At any rate, there appears to be
no reason why pregnancy should not ensue, since the condition of the
genital organs would apparently permit this, and would certainly differ
from that which obtains in women who give suck in a normal manner after
giving birth to a child.

2. =Divergences from the Normal Mode of Coitus.=--Attempts have been
made to prevent fertilization by means of various modifications of the
sexual act. Thus, starting from the old belief that active participation
in the sexual act on the part of the woman, as well as libido and the
sexual orgasm on her part, are indispensable prerequisites of the
occurrence of impregnation, a more passive demeanour of the woman has
been recommended--a distraction of the mind and the senses from the
sexual act, after the manner of the _cong-fou_ of the Chinese, who
frequently employ this trick during intercourse. This opinion is
deceptive, for, in the absence of all activity and orgasm on the part of
the woman, in the most diverse conditions possible, conception may
ensue.[727] Thus, in this case also we have to do with a quite
untrustworthy method.

=Trustworthy=, on the other hand, and therefore extremely widely
diffused, is the so-called =coitus interruptus=--interrupted
intercourse, in which the penis is withdrawn from the vagina shortly
before the ejaculation of the semen (so-called “withdrawal,”
“Zuruckziehen,” “Sichinachtnehmen,” “fraudieren,” “congressus
reservatus, onanismus conjugalis”). The views regarding the harmfulness
of this method, by which pregnancy can certainly be prevented, have in
recent years undergone considerable change, in so far as the
disadvantages are to-day considered less serious than they formerly
were. More especially, Dr. Alfred Damm, in his work “Neura,”
overestimated the harmful effects of _coitus interruptus_, inasmuch as
he attributed to it the entire degeneration of a race. These extreme
views, supported by no facts whatever, of the degeneration fanatic Damm
are briefly described in a little book by E. Peters, “The Sexual Life
and Nervous Energy” (Cologne, 1906).[728]

It cannot be denied--and has, in fact, been maintained by other
physicians such as Gaillard Thomas, Goodell, Valenta, Bergeret,
Mantegazza, Payer, Mensinga, Beard, Hirt, Eulenburg, Freud, von Tschich,
Gattel, and others--that the “ineffective” excitement occurring during
_coitus interruptus_, the absence of the natural discharge of sexual
tension, the voluntary postponement of ejaculation, the strain put upon
the will during the sexual act, may have a transient harmful influence
upon the nervous system; but, according to recent researches, it is only
in those who are =already= neuropathic that permanent troubles result,
in the form of “=anxiety-neurosis=” (which, as Freud[729] has proved, is
actually dependent upon _coitus interruptus_), or in the form of other
neurasthenic and hysterical troubles, and also sometimes of local
irritative conditions. The harmful influence of frustrated sexual
excitement is shown also by the frequency of nervous troubles during the
period of engagement, which, as a witty colleague of mine remarked, must
be regarded as a single, long-drawn-out _coitus interruptus_. But it has
not been proved that in healthy individuals _coitus interruptus_, even
when the practice is continued for a long time, gives rise to serious
and permanent injuries to health. According to the experience of
Fürbringer, Oppenheim, von Krafft-Ebing, Rohleder, Spener, and, above
all, of L. Löwenfeld, who has instituted exceptionally exact researches
into the matter, such consequences are quite exceptional. This is also
true of the disorders which _coitus interruptus_ is reputed to cause in
women.

Another method for the prevention of pregnancy, which, according to
Barrucco, is practised especially in Italy, is the prolongation of
sexual enjoyment by means of =repeated= interruptions of the act,
followed by =renewed= erections. This, naturally, is extremely harmful.
Fürbringer, however, reports the case of certain frigid men who were
able to extend the act of conjugal intercourse for long periods, without
any disastrous effect upon their health. One of these men was able to
find time during the act for smoking and reading!

3. =Mechanical Means for the Prevention of Conception.=--According to
Kisch, in Transylvania and in France a method is in use according to
which, during the sexual act, the woman, at the commencement of
ejaculation in the male, presses her finger forcibly upon the root of
his penis just in front of the prostate gland. In this way the passage
through the urethra is temporarily occluded, and ejaculation of the
semen is prevented: it regurgitates into the bladder, and is
subsequently evacuated with the urine. Unquestionably this manipulation
would be likely to prove exceedingly injurious to health.

In Italy and in New Guinea many women expel the semen from the vagina,
as soon as coitus is completed, by means of muscular action, by vigorous
movements of the perineum.

A mechanical apparatus for the prevention of conception which is
unquestionably carefully thought out is the so-called =occlusive
pessary= of Dr. Mensinga--a hemisphere of rubber surrounded by a steel
ring, introduced into the vagina before coitus, and even left _in situ_
for prolonged periods, so that the os uteri is occluded. When accurately
applied, it does, in fact, definitely prevent fertilization. Various
considerations, however, render its use undesirable: (1) the difficulty
of the introduction, which most women are unable to master; (2)
liability to displacement of the pessary during the act; (3) the
occurrence of irritative conditions of various kinds (discharges,
diseases of the uterine annexa, etc.), if, as often happens, the pessary
is allowed to remain in the vagina for a long time. Recently a pessary
has been constructed of waterproof cambric, which is said not to
produce any such irritative reaction. Moreover, Mensinga himself, and
Earlet, have made other improvements upon the occlusive pessary. Easier
to introduce is Gall’s “balloon occlusive pessary.” In this instrument,
by means of a compressible rubber ball and tubing, air is blown into the
interior of a thin-walled rubber ring which surrounds a soft elastic
rubber disc. A =dangerous= article, and =one to be avoided=, is
Hollweg’s “obturator.” The ideal mechanical means for the prevention of
pregnancy is, once more, the =condom=, regarding the application and
qualities of which we have already said all that is necessary (_vide
supra_, pp. 378, 379). Simple in its mode of application, it is, when of
good quality, certain in its effect, and is relatively the =most
harmless= of all preventive measures. When it is used, coitus runs a
perfectly normal course, with the sole exception of the sensation during
ejaculation. We must reject as harmful the use of the so-called
“stimulant condom,” which bears a ring of spines or points, in order to
increase libido in the woman.

4. =Chemical Physical Preventive Measures.=--To these belong, above all,
=douching= of the vagina immediately after sexual intercourse, for which
purpose cold water, solutions of alum (1 per cent.), copper sulphate
(1/2 to 1 per cent.), sulphate of quinine (1 : 400), etc., may be used.
The douching must be effected when the woman is in the recumbent
posture, and the vaginal tube must be introduced deeply. This method,
however, is very =untrustworthy=.[730]

The same is true of attempts to destroy the spermatozoa by the
insufflation of chemically active =powders=; or by the insertion of
antiseptic “=security sponges=,” which Rohleder has rightly named
“insecurity sponges”; untrustworthy also is the combination of these
with mechanical apparatus.

  The number of articles belonging to this category is legion. I need
  mention a few only: “Security ovals,” containing boric acid, quinine,
  or citric acid; “little vaginal plugs”; “salus ovula”; Kamp’s
  anticonceptional cotton-wool plugs; Hüter’s vaginal insufflator “for
  the malthusian”; Noffke’s tampon-speculum; “spermathanaton”;[731]
  Weissl’s preservative (a combination of speculum and rubber disc with
  a steel spring and a cotton-wool plug impregnated with a drug); the
  “Venus apparatus” (a double rubber ball, the smaller ball filled with
  “Venus powder” (_sic_) being introduced within the vagina, whilst the
  woman herself, at the moment of ejaculation, presses the larger ball
  lying near to her thighs, whereupon the powder is expelled from the
  smaller ball into the vagina); the “duplex occlusive pessary” (an
  occlusive pessary with double walls, perforated with round apertures,
  containing in its interior boric acid tablets for the purpose of
  killing the spermatozoa).

It may be that now and again, by some of the means just mentioned,
conception may be prevented. But on the whole they are very uncertain;
and, on the other hand, it is doubtful if the chemical substances
introduced in this way are harmless. It is possible that many peculiar
inflammatory conditions of the male and female genital organs may be
referred to their use. For example, Blumreich[732] reports the case of a
man who, after coitus in which a means of this kind had been used, had
an extremely obstinate inflammatory eruption upon the penis.

  I take this opportunity of pointing out that the so-called =herpes
  progenitalis=, a peculiar vesicular eruption of the genital organs,
  occurring chiefly in males, which alarms a great many patients,
  because they regard it as the result of syphilitic infection, is, in
  the great majority of cases, a perfectly harmless affection caused by
  some transient irritation.[733]

Besides the above-mentioned methods for the prevention of pregnancy, we
have also to consider two radical means of practical malthusianism which
belong to the =purely medical= province, and can =only= be employed when
life and death are involved, when pregnancy and parturition would entail
upon the woman severe illness or certain death. These two means are the
operative induction of =artificial sterility= and =artificial abortion=.

Artificial sterility can be produced by various measures, as by the
intentionally effected =malposition= of the uterus, such as is practised
among the indigens of the Malay Archipelago; by =section of the
Fallopian tubes=, as recommended by Kehrer; by the so-called _castratio
uterina_ by means of =vaporization= (the application of superheated
steam by the method of Pincus, whereby menstruation is suspended and the
uterine cavity is obliterated); and finally by =castration= proper, the
=extirpation of the ovaries=[734] (=oöphorectomy=, spaying, Battey’s
operation), which was carried out in ancient times by quite savage
races, in order to prevent reproduction.[735] In France, theoretically
anti-malthusian, but practically through and through malthusian, in the
country from which the song originates--

   “Ah! l’amour, l’amour!
    C’est le plaisir d’un jour
    Pour le regret d’ neuf mois.”

  [“Ah! love, love!
    ’Tis the pleasure of a day
    For the regret of nine months”]

--it appears, according to recent descriptions,[736] that oöphorectomy
is greatly prized by distinguished ladies as a means for the prevention
of pregnancy. It is said that there even exist “specialists” for the
production of these child-hating “_ovariées_,” men who undertake this
operation at a high fee. In Germany, happily, this radical measure for
the prevention of conception is not employed in healthy persons; the
operation is performed only in women who are seriously ill, and strictly
for therapeutic purposes.

The preventive measures previously mentioned, if we except _coitus
interruptus_ and the condom, are all very untrustworthy, as we learn
from the extreme frequency of deliberate, artificial abortion in all
countries, and among all classes of the population.[737] Artificial
abortion is, as is well known, a criminal offence, punishable by a long
term of imprisonment for all those concerned, the pregnant woman herself
and her accomplices. In the Orient and among savage races, however,
abortion is not punishable. Among the civilized nations of Europe
artificial abortion is punished; in Germany the mere =attempt= at
abortion is punishable, even though only an imaginary pregnancy is
present. That the State must take steps to prevent abortion, as an
immoral and unnatural action, is obvious, and this is necessary above
all because intentional abortion in so many cases endangers the life and
health of women. But in order that such punishment should be
reasonable, it is essential that society should work to this end, that
the =social conditions= upon which the frequency of the practice depends
should be abolished; =society should abandon the artificial defamation
of illegitimate motherhood=, and should in every possible way work for
the improvement of the possibilities of motherhood--should found homes
for mothers and for pregnant women, should provide for the insurance of
mothers, etc. It is a remarkable contradiction, to which Gisela von
Streitberg[738] draws attention, that illegitimate pregnancy is regarded
as sinful and shameful: simultaneously the life of the child =about to
be born= is regarded as sacred; whilst this same child, =as soon as it
is born=, is once more regarded as infamous. In fact, to the
illegitimate child, in the social morality of our time, which is at once
ridiculous and profoundly perverted, there inevitably attaches something
despicable and dishonourable. It is right that those who make the
procuring of abortion a =professional occupation= should be severely
punished; but, on the other hand, it is doubtful whether it is right to
punish mothers, and more particularly the mothers of illegitimate
infants, against whom the Criminal Code is especially directed, for
artificially inducing abortion. It is, in fact, open to question whether
the punishment is even legal. It is well known that according to § 1 of
the Civil Code the rights of a human being are said to begin only with
the completion of birth,[739] and it is certainly open to question
whether the as yet undeveloped human fœtus has any personal rights at
all. Without doubt we have to do with a being which has not yet begun to
exist, but which is only in process of becoming. Thus, juristically, and
from the standpoint of the philosophy of law, the foundation for the
punishment for abortion is a very unstable one. Consider, for example,
impregnation resulting from =rape=. Should not the woman concerned have
the right to employ any and all means available to her to destroy at the
very outset the child thus =forced upon her=?

The means for the induction of abortion[740] prior to the twenty-eighth
or thirtieth week of pregnancy are very various, and may be considered
under the two categories of =internal= and =mechanical= means
respectively. Infallible internal abortifacients =do not exist=; and
almost all abortifacients are =dangerous= owing to their toxic effects.
Those most commonly employed are ergot, ethereal oil of savin
(_Juniperus sabina_), varieties of thuja, yew (_Taxus baccata_),
turpentine, oleum succini, tansy, rue, camphor, cantharides, aloes,
phosphorus, etc. Mechanically, abortion may be effected by blows, by
violent movements (for example, during coitus), massage, perforation of
the membranes, hot injections, steam, manipulations with the finger at
the os uteri, the introduction of sounds and other objects through the
os uteri, venesection, application of the electric current, etc. With
all these practices there is involved great danger of injury, poisoning,
infection, rupture and perforation of the uterus, the entry of air into
the uterine veins, scalding of the internal genital organs, etc. It is,
therefore, not to be wondered at that death so frequently ensues, and
that almost always severe illnesses result from the use of these
abortifacients.

The State would in this way best put a stop to artificial abortion if,
in addition to the above-mentioned removal of the disgrace attached to
illegitimate motherhood, it diffused widely among all classes of society
a knowledge of the =permissible= means for the prevention of pregnancy.

The fact that neo-malthusian methods are chiefly employed =in large
towns=, indicates their dependence upon economical considerations, and
upon the struggle for existence, which is especially severe in large
towns. Hope for the future rests upon the removal of moral and legal
coercion in marriage, in which Gutzkow (“Säkularbilder,” i. 174, 175)
saw the principal causes of social and sexual misery; and upon the
rational regulation of methods for the prevention of pregnancy, which
must be regarded as in no way identical with the hostility to
“fruitfulness” in the sense of Weininger. On the contrary, the yearning
for children, and the joy in their possession, will then, for the first
time, obtain their natural satisfaction.

  [709] _Cf._ his classical essay, “Population: its Natural Subdivision
  and Movement,” published in “Elements of General Political Economy,”
  vol. i., pp. 158-187 (Leipzig, 1901).

  [710] _Cf._ Franz Oppenheimer, “The Law of Population of T. R.
  Malthus, and the more Recent Political Economists: a Demonstration and
  a Criticism” (Bern, 1900). See also the interesting demonstration and
  criticism of the malthusian doctrine in the work of Henry George,
  “Progress and Poverty.”

  [711] A notable example of such advances is found in the recently
  discovered method of =inoculating the soil with nitrifying organisms=,
  whereby barren lands are made fertile at trifling cost.-TRANSLATOR.

  [712] Eli Metchnikoff, “The Nature of Man.”--English translation by
  Chalmers Mitchell, pp. 101-107; Heinemann, London, 1903.

  [713] A more detailed account of this interesting
  “politico-economical” operation will be found in the work of Max
  Bartels, “Medicine among Savage Races,” pp. 297, 298 (Leipzig, 1893).

  [714] The ancients were also familiar with preventive methods of
  intercourse and with abortion. Widely renowned is the passage of the
  historian Polybius (XXXVII. ix. 5) in which we read: “In my time the
  whole of Greece suffered from =an insufficiency of children=--speaking
  generally, from =a lack of men=; for men had become so much accustomed
  to good living, to the greed for money, and to every comfort, that
  =they no longer wished to marry, or, at any rate, they wished to have
  only a few children=. Not the sword of the enemy was it that
  depopulated the ancient States, but the lack of offspring.” In Spain
  also, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in consequence of
  the wealth acquired in the New World, there resulted an overwhelming
  dread of marriage and child-bearing, so that the population became
  reduced to nine millions, and the bringing up of four children was
  rewarded with a title of nobility (_cf._ J. Unold, “Duties and Aims of
  Human Life,” p. 110; Leipzig, 1904).

  [715] _Cf._ E. H. Kisch, “Artificial Sterility,” published in
  Eulenburg’s “Real-Enzyklopädie,” third edition, 1900, vol. xxiii., p.
  372. See also the elaborate discussion of artificial sterility and
  means for the prevention of conception in Kisch’s work, “The Sexual
  Life of Woman,” English translation by M. Eden Paul (Rebman Limited,
  London, 1908).

  [716] A. Hegar, “The Sexual Impulse,” pp. 58, 59, 104, 105 (Stuttgart,
  1894).

  [717] M. Gruber, “Hygiene of the Sexual Life,” pp. 60-62 (Stuttgart,
  1905).

  [718] L. Löwenfeld, “The Sexual Life and Nervous Disorders,” pp.
  154-156.

  [719] C. Hasse (Mensinga), “Facultative Sterility,” fourth edition
  (Berlin and Neuwied, 1885); same author, “How is the Life of Married
  Women best Safeguarded?” (Berlin and Neuwied, 1895); same author,
  “Prognosis of Married Life for Women” (Berlin and Neuwied, 1892); same
  author, “Vom Sichinachtnehmen” [_Coitus interruptus_, see p. 702]
  (Neuwied, 1905).

  [720] P. Fürbringer, “Sexual Hygiene in Married Life,” published in
  Senator and Kaminer’s, “Health and Disease in Relation to Marriage and
  the Married State,” p. 209 (London, Rebman Limited, 1906).

  [721] Spener, the article “Artificial Sterility,” published in
  Eulenburg’s _Encyclopedic Annual of the Medical Sciences_, vol. i.,
  pp. 456-459 (Berlin and Vienna, 1903).

  [722] L. Bergeret, “Des Fraudes dans l’Accomplissment des Fonctions
  Génératrices,” fourteenth edition (Paris, 1893). See also Toulouse,
  “Les Conflits Intersexuels,” pp. 41-58 (Paris, 1904).

  [723] H. Ferdy, “Means for the Prevention of Conception,” eighth
  edition, two parts (Leipzig, 1907); same author, “Moral
  Self-restraint: the Reflections of a Malthusian” (Hildesheim, 1904).

  [724] Karl Buttenstedt, “Happiness in Marriage (Revelation in Woman):
  a Nature Study,” third edition (Friedrichshagen, 1904).

  [725] Richard E. Funcke, “A New Revelation of Nature: a Secret of the
  Sexual Life. No more Prostitution” (Hanover, 1906).

  [726] Dietrich Wilhelm Busch, “The Sexual Life of Woman in
  Physiological, Pathological, and Therapeutical Relations,” vol. ii.,
  p. 94 (Leipzig, 1840): “The gradual swelling of the breasts, and the
  presence of milk in these organs, arouses to a high degree the
  suspicion of pregnancy, but gives no certain proof of the existence of
  this condition. These organs often swell very gradually in certain
  pathological states, and in virgins, unimpregnated wives, widows, old
  women, and even in men, milk has been found in the breasts.”

  [727] Mensinga, in a most readable short study, “A Contribution to the
  Mechanism of Conception” (Berlin and Neuwied, 1891), has considered
  this question in detail.

  [728] To propagate Damm’s idea, the German Society for Regeneration
  was founded, whose first president was the above-named Peters; the
  organ of the society is the newspaper _Volkskraft_.

  [729] S. Freud, “Collection of Minor Writings upon the Doctrine of
  Neurosis,” pp. 70, 71 (1906).

  [730] The most convenient and complete apparatus for vaginal douching
  is the American irrigating syringe known as the “Lady’s Friend.” The
  technique of vaginal douching is very thoroughly described by L.
  Volkmann, “Solution of the Social Problem by Means of Woman,” pp.
  29-31 (Berlin and Leipzig, 1891).

  [731] R. Braun recently reported (“Experiments made with
  Spermathanaton Pastilles,” _Medizin. Woch._, 1906, No. 13) successful
  results with this means. But, in general, this, like all chemical
  means, cannot be absolutely depended upon to prevent pregnancy.

  [732] L. Blumreich, “Diseases of Women, including Sterility,” in
  Senator-Kaminer, “Health and Disease in Relation to Marriage and the
  Married State,” p. 769 _et seq._ (London, Rebman Limited, 1906).

  [733] _Cf._ the account of herpes progenitalis given in Iwan Bloch’s
  “Origin of Syphilis,” part ii., pp. 385-388.

  [734] A detailed account of “Operative Sterility” will be found in
  Kisch’s “The Sexual Life of Woman,” English translation by M. Eden
  Paul (Rebman Limited, 1908).

  [735] _Cf._ the accounts of this operation among the Australians given
  by Max Bartels, “Medicine among Savage Races,” pp. 306, 307 (Leipzig,
  1895).

  [736] _Cf._ R. Schwaeblé, the chapter “Ovariées” in “Les Detraquées de
  Paris,” pp. 255-258. [This aspect of the operation of oöphorectomy is
  the foundation of some of the most striking incidents in Zola’s novel
  “Fécondité.”--TRANSLATOR.]

  [737] _Cf._ H. Ploss, “The History of Abortion” (Leipzig, 1883);
  Galliot, “Recherches Historiques sur l’Avortement Criminel” (Paris,
  1884).

  [738] Countess Gisela von Streitberg, “The Right to Destroy the
  Germinating Life: § 218 of the Criminal Code, from a New Point of
  View” (Oranienburg, 1904).

  [739] In a work recently published, which I have not yet been able to
  obtain, entitled “Nasciturus: Life before Birth, and the Legal Rights
  of the Being about to be Born,” the gynæcologist F. Ahlfeld discusses
  this question very thoroughly.

  [740] _Cf._ Lewin and Brenning, “Abortion induced by Means of Poisons”
  (Berlin, 1899); E. von Hoffmann’s “Textbook of Forensic Medicine,”
  edited by A. Kolisko, ninth edition, pp. 220-258 (Berlin and Vienna,
  1903).




