CHAPTER XIII

PROSTITUTION


  “_On that one degraded and ignoble form are concentrated the passions
  that might have filled the world with shame. She remains, while creeds
  and civilizations arise and fall, the eternal priestess of humanity,
  blasted for the sins of the people._”--LECKY.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XIII

  Prostitution and venereal disease the central problem of the sexual
  question -- My belief in the possibility of the suppression of both --
  Only in recent years has the scientific attack on both begun -- The
  _plaie sociale_ -- Internal and local treatment -- The scientific
  literature of prostitution -- Rosenbaum’s work on prostitution in
  antiquity -- Aretino, Delgado, and Veniero on the prostitution of the
  renascence -- Franckenaus’s first medical polemic against brothels --
  The commencement of the scientific study of prostitution and venereal
  diseases in the eighteenth century -- Rétif de la Bretonne and his
  “Pornographe” -- “Moral Control” -- Parent-Duchatelet’s fundamental
  work -- Analysis of this book -- Contemporary works on prostitution in
  Paris, London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Lisbon, Lyons, and Algiers -- First
  employment of the term “male prostitution” -- A peculiar species of
  souteneur -- Prostitution in Hamburg -- Dr. Lippert’s book -- “Memoirs
  of a Prostitute,” the predecessor of the “Diary of a Lost Woman” --
  Gross-Hoffinger’s book on “Prostitution in Austria” -- Demonstration
  of the connexion between prostitution and coercive marriage --
  Celebrated chapter on “Maidservants and Prostitution” -- Schrank on
  prostitution in Vienna -- Prostitution in Leipzig -- In New York --
  General works on prostitution -- Jeannel, Acton and Hügel -- Books on
  secret prostitution, on prostitution of girls under age, on regulation
  and on brothels, and on the social importance of prostitution --
  Blaschko’s recent critical investigation on the subject of
  prostitution -- Results of this investigation -- Lombroso’s
  anthropological theory -- The works of Tarnowsky and Ströhmberg, of
  Fiaux and von Düring.

  Conception and definition of prostitution -- Genuine and
  pseudo-prostitutes -- Prostitution among primitive peoples --
  Religious prostitution as the germinal form of modern prostitution --
  This latter the product of the growth of large towns -- Medieval
  conditions -- Diminution in the number of brothels since that time --
  The demand for prostitutes -- Relation between the number of
  prostitutes and the male population -- The supply greater than the
  demand -- Causes of the male demand for prostitutes -- Prostitution as
  a product of civilization -- Repression of primitive sexual instincts
  by civilization -- The sexual supra- and sub-consciousness --
  Transient elemental activities of the sub-consciousness -- Reports of
  J. P. Jakobsen and other writers on this subject -- Gratification of
  these instincts by means of prostitution -- This in part the product
  of the physiological masochism of men.

  The numerous causes of prostitution -- The anthropological theory and
  the doctrine of the congenital prostitute -- Criticism of this view --
  Proof that many of the physical and mental peculiarities of
  prostitutes are acquired -- The obliteration of the secondary and
  tertiary sexual characters in prostitutes -- The nucleus of Lombroso’s
  theory -- The economic factors of prostitution -- Actual and relative
  poverty as a cause -- Poverty a cause of prostitution in the mass --
  Women’s and children’s work -- Prostitution as an accessory occupation
  -- Insufficient wages -- The inquiries of 1887 and 1903 on this
  subject -- Examples -- The large proportion of maidservants who become
  prostitutes -- Explanation of this -- Relative poverty of maidservants
  -- Psychological factors of maidservant prostitution -- Overcrowded
  dwellings -- Families living in single rooms, and taking in lodgers
  for the night -- Alcoholism -- The traffic in girls -- Sources of this
  -- National and international preventive measures -- Work done by the
  Jewish Committee to prevent the traffic in girls in Galatia --
  Measures taken in Buenos Ayres -- The central police organization in
  Berlin for the suppression of the traffic in girls.

  The localities of prostitution -- Public prostitution -- Street
  prostitution -- Character and dangers of street prostitution -- Still
  _greater_ dangers of brothels -- Brothels as centres of sexual
  corruption and perversity, and as foci of venereal infection -- The
  high school of psychopathia sexualis -- The brothel jargon --
  “Animierkneipen” -- Dancing saloons, variety theatres, low
  music-halls, cabarets, and “Rummel” -- “Pensions” and houses of
  accommodation -- Massage institutes -- Cafés with female attendants.

  _Appendix: The Half-World._ -- Origin of the name -- The “Demi-Monde”
  of the younger Alexandre Dumas -- Change undergone by the conception
  at the present day -- Analogy with the Greek hetairæ -- Connexion of
  the half-world with high life -- Origin -- The social influence of the
  “grandes cocottes” -- The half-world in Germany -- The international
  prostitute.


CHAPTER XIII

=Prostitution=, and the =venereal diseases= so intimately connected with
it, constitute, properly speaking, the =nucleus=, the =central problem=,
of the sexual question. The abolition of prostitution and the
suppression of venereal diseases would be almost tantamount to the
solution of the entire sexual problem. Imagine the extension and the
intension of the idea: No prostitution, no more venereal disease!

There is, in fact, no more gratifying notion, no more illuminating
ideal, than that of moral and physical purity in the relations between
the sexes. At a time in which, especially in social spheres, such
abundant activity and such far-seeing ideas of reform are apparent, this
notion of a campaign against prostitution and venereal diseases, in the
hope of eradicating both evils, should stand in the forefront of all the
demands of civilization, in order that finally the tragical influence,
the poisonous sting, should be removed from the disordered, unhappy,
amatory life of the present day, and herewith, unquestionably, a proper
=foundation= should be laid for a more beautiful future for that life.
This idea is unique; it is the greatest of all that man, at length
become self-conscious,[243] has ever grasped; and to this idea belongs
the future!

The French term prostitution and venereal diseases _une plaie sociale_,
a rodent ulcer in the body of society. I take this apt comparison, and
carry it a stage further, to show a clear picture of the way along which
we must go in order to eradicate prostitution; for in this respect I am
a confirmed optimist. I =believe= in the possibility of the eradication
of venereal diseases, and of the abolition of prostitution within the
civilized world by national and international measures. I do not join in
the chorus of those who say, “because prostitution has always existed,
it must always exist in the future; because venereal diseases have
always[244] existed, they are unavoidable accompaniments of
civilization.”

=How long is it=, then, since any attempt has been made to oppose
prostitution and venereal diseases? As regards the latter, it is only
within the =last few years= that we have begun, in the battle against
them, to make systematic use of the results of scientific research; and
the study of prostitution, and the measures based on that study for its
control and prevention, do not date further back than the second half of
the eighteenth century. In fact, for practical purposes, they date from
the appearance of the classical and epoch-making work of
Parent-Duchatelet (1836).

We are, indeed, =in the very first stages= of the campaign against
prostitution and venereal diseases. All that has hitherto been done has
been to make inadequate, isolated attempts to introduce unsuitable and
half-considered regulations, based upon successive misconceptions, which
have only made matters worse. =To-day= medicine, social science,
pedagogy, jurisprudence, and ethics have combined in a =common=
campaign; and this is not national merely, but unites all civilized
nations in a common cause.

Here we find an actual prospect, a credible hope, of a radical cure of
the _plaie sociale_. But such an ulcer can only be radically cured when
we are not content merely with the =local= treatment of the existing
sore; we must simultaneously attack the =internal= causes of this
chronic disease, and in the case with which we have to do the internal
causes are even more important than the external--that is to say,
=ethics=, =pedagogy=, and =social science= are even more important and
indispensable in the campaign against prostitution than =medicine= and
=hygiene=. We shall never attain our goal by considering and fighting
prostitution and venereal diseases, the consequences of prostitution,
purely from the medical and hygienic standpoint. In this case,
one-sidedness will prove tantamount to failure. The problem of
prostitution must be approached from many sides, because the causes that
have to be considered are =manifold=, alike anthropological, economic,
social, and psychological, in their nature. There are =many varieties=
of prostitution; in the same way there are numerous and various =types=
of prostitutes. It is, therefore, impossible for one who is acquainted
with actual life to hold fast in a one-sided manner to a single theory.
Thus, in one and the same case the most various points of view have to
be considered.

The =history= of prostitution is an extremely interesting chapter of the
general history of civilization, which has =not hitherto= been written
in a manner satisfying scientific and critical demands; but the
=literature= of prostitution is already alarmingly comprehensive. Here,
also, critical grasp and mode of presentation are still entirely
wanting. It is impossible, in this place, in which we speak only of the
present-day conditions, to enter at any length into the historical and
literary aspects of the question of prostitution. This I must leave for
a later, comprehensive work, for which I have for several years been
collecting the materials. Here I shall only briefly refer, for the sake
of the reader interested in the matter, to the most important writings
on the subject of prostitution which have any scientific and historical
importance.

Prostitution in antiquity is treated in a masterly manner by Julius
Rosenbaum in his celebrated “History of Syphilis in Antiquity” (Halle,
1839); this is, down to the present day, the chief source of our
knowledge of the conditions in antiquity. It is true that he starts from
the false assumption that syphilis already existed in ancient times, a
view which in the second volume of my book on the “Origin of Syphilis”
(now in course of preparation) I show to be incorrect; this work will
also contain a thorough study of prostitution among the ancients, based
upon the more recent researches published since the year 1839, when
Rosenbaum’s book appeared.

The first truly classical descriptions of the nature of modern
prostitution dated from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries; these
are not scientific, belonging rather to the province of belles-lettres;
but they are of great value in respect of the accuracy of their
observations, and of their psychological insight into the nature of
prostitution. I refer above all to the celebrated “Ragionamenti” of
Pietro Aretino;[245] next, to the not less important work, published
earlier, in 1528, “Lozana Andaluza,” by Francisco Delgado (Francesco
Delicado).[246] Both these books, and also the celebrated “Zafetta” of
Lorenzo Veniero (_circa_ 1535), describe the conditions of prostitution
at the time of the Italian renascence; these display a most astonishing
similarity to the conditions of the present day, and the books mentioned
have therefore still an instructive value.[247]

From the seventeenth century we have as important documents of
civilization the description of prostitution in Holland in the
interesting work “Le Putanisme d’Amsterdam” (Brussels, 1883; the
original Dutch edition, Amsterdam, 1681), and also in the work published
in the same year, 1681, “Disputatio Medica qua Lupanaria ex Principiis
quoque Medicis Improbantur,” by Georg Franck von Franckenau,[248]
noteworthy as being the first medical polemic against brothels.

Down to the middle of the nineteenth century the study of prostitution
was most active in France.[249] In the second half of the eighteenth
century, according to the expression of the de Goncourts,
“pornognomonie” was a scientific problem. Various attempts at reform
were made; as early as 1763 “=moral control=” was recommended; and in
1769 there appeared the celebrated “Pornographe” of Rétif de la
Bretonne,[250] the first extensive work on the =state regulation= of
prostitution, the great historical importance of which was recognized by
Mireur, the well-known syphilologist of Marseilles, by the publication
of a new edition (Brussels, 1879).

But it was with the publication of the immortal and most admirable work
of Parent-Duchatelet,[251] on prostitution in Paris, that in the year
1836 the modern =scientific= literature of prostitution really began. It
is the first work in which full justice is done to the importance of
prostitution in =all= its relations, and it is based upon exact medical
observations and psychological and social studies. Even to-day it
remains unique in its kind, and a standing example of critical research
and of French learned zeal.

A very short account of the contents of this epoch-making book of
Parent-Duchatelet will best teach us its importance, and will give us an
insight into all the problems connected with prostitution, and
considered by the French author.

In the introduction, Parent-Duchatelet explains the reasons which led
him to undertake the work, and the literary sources he has consulted.
The first chapter then proceeds to the consideration of certain general
problems, gives a =definition= of the term prostitute, an estimate of
the =number= of prostitutes in Paris, their =origin= in respect of
native country, position, culture, profession, their =age=, and the
=first cause of their adoption of this profession=. The second chapter
discusses the =manners and customs= of prostitutes, the opinion they
have of themselves, their religious ideas, their sense of shame, their
spiritual qualities, tattooing, occupation, uncleanliness, speech,
defects and good qualities, the various classes of prostitutes, and,
finally, the _souteneurs_. The third chapter contains =physiological
observations= concerning prostitutes--namely, concerning their obesity,
the changes in their voice, peculiarities in the colour of the hair and
the eyes, the stature, the condition of the genital organs, and
fertility. In the fourth chapter he deals with the =influence of
professional prostitution on the health of the girls=, and describes the
various morbid conditions which may result from their occupation. The
fifth chapter treats of the public =houses of prostitution= (brothels),
their advantages and disadvantages, the question of brothel streets, and
the localization of prostitution in definite quarters of the town. In
the sixth chapter the =inscription of prostitutes in police lists= is
discussed; in the seventh =procurement and the owners of brothels=.
Chapters eight, nine, and ten deal with =secret prostitution= in houses
of accommodation, drinking-saloons, coffee-houses, tobacconists’ shops,
etc.; chapter eleven discusses =street prostitution=; chapter twelve,
the =diffusion of prostitution= in the various parts of Paris; chapter
thirteen, the =relation of prostitution to military life=; chapter
fourteen, =prostitution in the environs of Paris=. The fifteenth chapter
describes the =ultimate destiny= of prostitutes; the sixteenth deals
with their =medical treatment=--above all, the methods of examination to
ascertain their state of health are accurately described. Chapters
seventeen and eighteen deal with =hospitals= and =prisons= for
prostitutes; chapter nineteen, with the former taxation of prostitutes;
chapter twenty considers =questions relating to administration, and the
special branch of police dealing with the institution=--for example, the
suggestion (recently revived) is discussed of the medical examination of
the male clients of prostitutes; prurient pictures and books are also
considered, and thefts in brothels. The twenty-first chapter is devoted
to the question which still attracts attention at the present day, viz.,
the =peculiar relationship between the owner of a house and the
prostitutes living there=, and deals also with the legal aspect of the
punishments decreed against prostitutes. Chapter twenty-two is occupied
with a general discussion of the =legal questions= connected with
prostitution. At the conclusion, in chapters twenty-three and
twenty-four, the author discusses the question =whether prostitutes are
necessary=, and this question (_nota bene_, from the standpoint of
coercive marriage morality) he answers in the affirmative; he asks also
=whether the police should be entrusted with the application of measures
for the prevention of venereal diseases=, and this he agrees to
conditionally only, for he considers that the =public= recommendation of
protective measures should be forbidden by police ordinance. Finally, in
the last chapter, the twenty-fifth, he speaks of the =institutions for
the rescue of fallen women=, and he concludes his comprehensive work, in
which he has dealt so thoroughly with all the subdivisions of his
general topic, with the words:

  “My work is at an end. When I commenced it, I pointed out what reasons
  I had for undertaking it, what aim I wished to attain. Had I not been
  firmly convinced that the investigations begun by me regarding the
  nature of prostitutes might favour health and morality, I should not
  have published them. I have exposed to the public gaze great
  infirmities of mankind; thoughtful men, for whom I have written, will
  thank me for doing so. He who loves his fellow-men will without
  anxiety follow me into the department of knowledge I have described,
  and will not turn away his glance from the pictures I have drawn. =He
  who wishes to know the good that remains to be done, and who wishes to
  learn how to pursue with good results the way by which something
  better is to be attained, must first know what actually exists; he
  must know the truth.=

  “The profession of prostitution is an evil of all times, all
  countries, and appears to be innate in the social structure of
  mankind. It will perhaps never be entirely eradicated; still, all the
  more we must strive to limit its extent and its dangers. With
  prostitution itself it is as with vice, crime, and disease; the
  teacher of morals endeavours to prevent the vices, the lawgiver to
  prevent the crimes, the physician to cure the diseases. All alike know
  that they will never fully attain their goal; but they pursue their
  work none the less in the conviction that he who does only a little
  good yet does a great service to the weak man. I follow their example.
  A friend whose loss I shall always mourn drew my attention to the fate
  of the prostitute. I studied them, I wished to learn the causes of
  their degradation, and wherever possible to discover the means by
  which their number could be limited. What experience has taught me on
  this subject I have openly stated, and I am convinced that the
  lawgiver, the man whom the State has empowered with authority to care
  for public health and morality, will find in my book useful
  information.”

Parent-Duchatelet’s book, no less admirable in its execution than in its
design, still remains the foundation for the scientific study of
prostitution. It is the exemplar for all contemporary and subsequent
works.

The powerful influence exercised by this book was shown above all in
this--that works on prostitution appeared in rapid succession in the
various capitals of the civilized world. These were all based to a
greater or less extent upon the work of Parent-Duchatelet, and thus they
constitute extremely valuable scientific monographs regarding the
conditions of prostitution in particular towns, such as since that date
have not been issued. Here there still lies hidden a wealth of material,
a large part of which has not yet been utilized.

As an enlargement and continuation of the work of Parent-Duchatelet,
there appeared three years later, in the year 1839, the work of the
Commissary of Police Béraud[252] on the prostitutes of Paris and on the
Parisian _police des mœurs_. The book is more especially distinguished
by an elaborate history of prostitution, and by the wealth of
psychological observations it contains; also by its exact information
regarding secret prostitution.

In the same year a well-known London physician, Dr. Michael Ryan,[253]
published his important book on =Prostitution in London=,[254] with a
comparison of the conditions in Paris and New York. Ryan first dealt
with the general =social= and =economic= causes of prostitution, with
critical acumen, as we could not but expect from an Englishman. His book
also contained an interesting account of the extraordinary diffusion in
England at that time of pornographic books and pictures,[255] and
concerning their publication and sale by pedlars, and the measures
undertaken to repress this traffic. Valuable also are the detailed
reports given in this book, on pp. 212-252, regarding prostitution in
the United States, and especially in New York.

The example of Ryan was followed by his countrymen, Dr. William Tait and
the Rev. Ralph Wardlaw. The former treated in a comprehensive work the
subject of prostitution in Edinburgh;[256] the latter, in a shorter
book, described prostitution in Glasgow.[257]

Very interesting is the book, of which a few copies only ever reached
Germany (one of which is in my own possession), and which even in
Portugal is extremely rare, of Dr. Francisco Ignacio dos Santos Cruz
regarding prostitution in Lisbon,[258] in which the whole subject of
Portuguese prostitution is admirably described, with special reference
to the capital city. Santos Cruz gives most careful attention to the
legislative aspect of the question. He was the first to advocate a
measure which has recently been proposed also by Lesser (doubtless in
ignorance of the work of his predecessor)--viz., the =formation of
polyclinics for the gratuitous treatment of prostitutes=.[259]

Regarding prostitution in the town of Lyons, renowned for its
immorality, Dr. Potton wrote a celebrated book, which received a prize
from the Medical Society of Lyons in the year 1841. This work was based
on official sources, and had especial reference to the relationships of
prostitution to the hygienic and economic conditions of the
population.[260]

A valuable book, also, is the work on prostitution in Algiers by E. A.
Duchesne.[261] It contains an elaborate account of “=male
prostitution=”--that is, prostitution of men for men--an expansion of
the idea of prostitution which is, as far as my knowledge goes, found
here for the first time. Naturally, in earlier works we find allusions
to men who practise pederasty for money, but the idea “prostitution” had
hitherto been strictly limited to the class of purchasable women.

We see this, for example, in the anonymous book “=Prostitution in
Berlin, and its Victims=,”[262] published in Berlin seven years before
the appearance of the work of Duchesne. The author definitely states
that “the admirable book of Parent-Duchatelet on prostitution in the
town of Paris, and its remarkable success, have chiefly given occasion
to the publication of my own work.” The book is, however, quite
independent in character, and treats of the individual relationships of
prostitution in Berlin, on the basis of =official= sources and
experience, in historical, moral, medical, and political relations, and
also from the point of view of police administration. It contains an
appendix on “=prostituted men=” (p. 207), who, however, are not
homosexual prostitutes, but, according to the writer’s own definition,
“men who make it their profession to serve for payment =voluptuous
women= by the gratification of the latter’s unnatural passions.” This
species still exists at the present day, but there is no particular name
for the type. (In the seventies, in Vienna, men who could be hired to
perform coitus were known locally as “stallions”--Ger. =Hengste=.) We
must include them in the great army of _souteneurs_, although the term
is not strictly applicable. Later we shall return to the consideration
of this peculiar variety of male prostitution.

As an enlargement of the work just mentioned, we can regard the book
published in the same year, 1846, by the Criminal Commissary, Dr. Carl
Röhrmann, on =Prostitution in Berlin=.[263]

This book is especially remarkable from the fact that it contains
“complete and candid biographies of the best-known prostitutes in
Berlin,” an idea which has recently been revived, for example, in W.
Hammer’s “The Life-History of Ten Public Prostitutes in Berlin” (Berlin
and Leipzig, 1905).

Very valuable official material is, finally, to be found in a third work
on prostitution in Berlin, written by the celebrated syphilologist F. J.
Behrend.[264] It begins with a careful history of the police regulations
regarding prostitution in Berlin, then discusses the consequences of the
abolition of the Berlin brothels in the year 1845, and proceeds to
demand new measures and regulations for the control of prostitution and
for the prevention of syphilis in Berlin. As a collection of material,
the book is of considerable value.

Little known, but thoroughly original, is the work of the Hamburg
physician, Dr. Lippert, on =prostitution in Hamburg=.[265] Blaschko even
fails to mention it in the bibliography at the end of his own work,
presently to be described. Lippert adduces numerous and interesting new
contributions to our knowledge of “the many-headed hydra, the
colour-changing chameleon,” of prostitution. After an introductory
sketch regarding the historical development of prostitution in Hamburg,
he gives a “characterization of the present moral condition of Hamburg,”
embodying important information regarding the number of brothel
prostitutes and street-walkers, the topographical distribution of
prostitution and of brothels, the secret houses of accommodation, the
remarkable decline in the number of marriages, the relationship between
legitimate and illegitimate births, and the number of drinking-saloons
and dancing-halls; and he goes on to describe with more detail these
individual factors of prostitution, and especially the opportunities
for prostitution. The third chapter contains an extremely interesting
physiological and pathological description of the Hamburg prostitutes.
According to Lippert, the principal motives of prostitution are
“=idleness=, =frivolity=, and, above all, the =love of finery=.” He
rightly lays especial stress upon the last-named cause, which, in the
more recent scientific investigations regarding the causes of
prostitution, has, unfortunately, been too much neglected. Then follow
data regarding the age, nationality, class, and occupation of
prostitutes. We learn that as early as the date of this book of
Lippert’s the greatest number of public prostitutes had originally been
=maidservants= (p. 79), not girls of the labouring classes. Thus the
fact that prostitutes recruit their ranks chiefly from the servant class
is not, as recent writers assert, exclusively the consequence of the
increasing mental culture of the modern proletariat, but is most
probably rather connected with the freer configuration of the amatory
life among the labouring classes, where the nobler form of “free love”
has long been dominant. From the very nature of the case, this must lead
to a limitation of the supply of prostitutes from this class. The
chapter closes with an elaborate description of the physical and mental
peculiarities of the Hamburg prostitutes, and of the diseases observed
in them. In the fourth chapter the various classes of prostitutes are
considered more closely--the brothel prostitutes (with an exact
description of the celebrated brothel streets of Hamburg), the
prostitutes living alone, the street-walkers, the “kept women,” the
large group of secret prostitutes. There follow in an appendix
interesting accounts of the public places which are related to
prostitution; of prostitution in the Hamburger Berg and in the suburb of
St. Pauli; and of the rescue work of Hamburg.

A very good account of prostitution in Hamburg is also found in a book
contemporary with that of Lippert, entitled “=Memoirs of a Prostitute,
or Prostitution in Hamburg=” (St. Pauli, 1847). This work, which is now
extraordinarily rare, resembles the book which recently gained such
celebrity, the “Tagebuch einer Verlorenen” (“Diary of a Lost Woman”), by
Margaret Böhme, in that it was edited by a Dr. J. Zeisig, professedly
after the “original manuscript.” As usual, it has all happened before!

In the preface to his book, Lippert remarks that, since prostitution in
Berlin and in Hamburg has now been adequately described, it was
desirable that an analogous book should be compiled regarding Vienna, in
order that we might have the necessary comparative statistics of “the
three principal towns and principal factors of German prostitution.”

The actual account of prostitution in Vienna did not, however, appear
till forty years later, in the year 1886. Still, as early as 1847 the
book of Dr. Anton J. Gross-Hoffinger was published, describing
exclusively the conditions of prostitution in Austria, and naturally
chiefly concerned with conditions in Vienna.[266] In my opinion, this
book has an epoch-making significance, because therein we find asserted
for the first time, with all possible emphasis, that the institution of
=coercive marriage= is the ultimate cause of prostitution, to which all
the other causes are subsidiary. In no other book do we find so painful
a description, drawn with such astonishing clearness, of the horrible
conditions resulting from the artificial preservation of the official
and ecclesiastical coercive marriage, which was really based upon
economic conditions peculiar to the remote past. The two first sections,
“Woman the Slave of Civilization” and “Woman in her Degradation,” are
the most frightful accusations of conventional marriage. On pp. 190 and
191 the author formulates in fifteen paragraphs a law of marriage
reform, which has a very close resemblance to the previously described
ideas of Ellen Key. A perfect classic is the chapter on servant-girls
(pp. 226-284), unique in its thoroughness, and affording an admirable
description of the legal, moral, and economic relationships of domestic
service.

  “=The great army of domestic servants=,” he writes, “=constitute the
  ever-ready reserve force of prostitution. Daily from this reserve are
  drawn new recruits for the regular service, and daily the vacant
  places in the reserve are once more filled.=”

Gross-Hoffinger, in 1847, came also to the conclusion that in “free
love” or “free marriage” was to be found the only salvation from the
misery of prostitution.

The comprehensive work of Schrank upon prostitution in Vienna[267] is
distinguished by an abundance of interesting isolated observations, and
these are especially to be found in the earlier historical portion. The
second part is occupied with the administration and hygiene of
prostitution in Vienna. The work gives an exhaustive account of Viennese
prostitution down to the year 1885.

Prostitution in Leipzig was described in three chapters of a general
work on prostitution, published in the year 1854.[268] The titles of
these three chapters are: “Moral Corruption in Leipzig”; “Tolerated
Prostitutes and Tolerated Houses in Leipzig”; “Tolerated Prostitutes in
Leipzig: their Morals, their Customs, their Hygienic Condition, their
End.” Very interesting is the statement of the author that of the 3,000
maidservants in Leipzig, _one-third_ were engaged in secret
prostitution.

The prostitution in the largest town of the new world, in New York, also
found an admirable description in the sixth decade of the nineteenth
century in the great historical work of the New York physician, William
M. Sanger.[269] Of the 685 large octavo pages which the book contains,
pages 450 to 676 are devoted to the description of the conditions of
prostitution in New York. The historical portion of the book is also
extremely valuable, being based upon the best historical authorities.

With the year 1860, or thereabouts, this first period of the scientific
literature of prostitution, characterized by monographs dealing with
individual =towns=, in pursuance of the example of Parent-Duchatelet,
came to a close. Just as Parent-Duchatelet had inaugurated this kind of
description, so the French now undertook the introduction of the further
researches into prostitution. First of all, Dr. J. Jeannel summarized
the results of the books we have already mentioned in a general work on
prostitution,[270] which contained a comparative view of the conditions
in various countries and towns. An Englishman, W. Acton, also wrote a
similar general work on prostitution;[271] whilst yet another general
work on the subject was written by the German Hügel.[272]

The extremely important question of =secret= prostitution has been
elucidated especially by the writings of Martineau[273] and
Commenge;[274] the not less important question of prostitution practised
by =girls under full age= is treated by Augagneur;[275] the =problems
of regulation and of brothels= have been studied by Fiaux, whose work is
comprehensive and based upon carefully compiled statistics, and the
author attempts the solution of these problems;[276] the sometime French
Minister Yves Guyot has discussed the problem of prostitution from the
higher philosophical and social point of view;[277] in short, the French
physicians illuminated this obscure province of thought from every side,
and =laid the foundations for the scientific and critical study of
prostitution=, which began with the last decade of the nineteenth
century.

To Alfred Blaschko unquestionably belongs the credit of having broken
entirely new ground in connexion with the problem of prostitution, by
means of the debate instituted by him in the year 1892 in the Medical
Society of Berlin, and by several works distinguished by a
sharp-sighted, critical faculty.[278] Upon his exhaustive scientific
studies, and upon the most careful practical considerations, Blaschko
bases the demands:

  “=Abolish Regulation!=
   =Away with Brothels!=”

At the same time, Blaschko is a convinced advocate of the economic
theory of prostitution.

Almost at the same time, Cesare Lombroso, the celebrated alienist and
criminal anthropologist of Turin, propounded his =anthropological=
theory of prostitution, and enunciated the doctrine, which attracted so
much attention, of the “Donna delinquinte e prostituta,” of the
“=congenital prostitute=.”[279] This doctrine found an unconditional
supporter in the St. Petersburg syphilologist Tarnowsky; whilst the
latter strongly opposed the efforts made by the International
Federation, founded in 1875 by Mrs. Josephine Butler, for the abolition
of the regulation of prostitution.[280] Ströhmberg, in an interesting
work on prostitution,[281] takes the same standpoint as Lombroso and
Tarnowsky.

It is, however, noteworthy that quite recently the French observers
also, and, above all, the experienced Fiaux, are inclining to the views
of Blaschko, of the accuracy of which I myself am now fully convinced,
notwithstanding the fact that in my work on prostitution in
England,[282] which appeared eight years ago (October, 1900), I still
advocated regulation. E. von Düring also, who, as professor of medicine
in Constantinople for many years, has made elaborate study of the
conditions of prostitution in that town, adheres, in an essay well worth
reading, without qualification to the opinion of Blaschko regarding the
uselessness of regulation and of brothels.[283]

After this brief enumeration of the most important descriptive and
scientific studies of prostitution, we shall now proceed to a short
account of the conditions that obtain at the present day.

The idea of “=prostitution=” is in no respect clearly and sharply
limited. Parent-Duchatelet considered that prostitution only occurred

  “when a woman was known to have accepted money for this purpose on
  several successive occasions, when she was openly recognized as being
  engaged in this occupation, when an arrest had occurred and the
  offence had thus been definitely discovered, or when in any other way
  it was proved to the satisfaction of the police” (vol. i., p. 11).

But in this way he entirely excluded the so-called “secret”
prostitution--that is to say, he excluded by far the largest category of
prostitution.

As soon as we take this latter into consideration, we find it necessary
to have a wider conception of the term “prostitution.” This is
recognized by the French physician Rey in his little book on “=Public
and Secret Prostitution=” (German edition, p. 1; Leipzig, 1851). He
regards as prostitution the act “by which a woman allows the =use of her
body by any man, without distinction=, and =for a payment made or
expected=.”

In this admirable definition we see the two most important
characteristics of prostitution: =complete indifference with regard to
the person of the man demanding the use of her body=, and the fact that
=the act is done for reward=. The only point omitted from consideration
is the condition mentioned by Parent-Duchatelet--namely, the =frequent
repetition= of the act of prostitution with =different= men.

Schrank combines all these characteristics of prostitution in a much
briefer phrase, by defining them as “=professional acts of fornication
performed with the human body=,” by which, in the first place, we
include male and female =homosexual= prostitution, which are not covered
by the definitions previously quoted, and, in the second place,
Schrank’s definition lays stress on the fact that in =genuine=
prostitution the =monetary reward= is the aim of the act of prostitution
much more than any kind of enjoyment. Where enjoyment plays a prominent
part, =in addition to= the earning of money, we are no longer concerned
with genuine prostitution. Even a prostitute, who in other respects is
typically a woman of that class, ceases at that moment and for that time
to be a prostitute, when her earnings become a secondary consideration,
and the =man= to whom she gives herself the principal consideration.

For this reason, strictly speaking, a large proportion of secret
prostitutes and numerous members of the half-world cannot be reckoned as
prostitutes in the proper sense of the term--at any rate, =not always=;
not when, for instance, the man who supports and pays them is at the
same time their “lover”;[284] they then belong for the time being to the
not less dangerous province of “wild love.” But in practice this
distinction cannot be strictly maintained, for the =same= woman will
very frequently undertake a genuine act of prostitution.

It is only the “sale of the sweet name of love,” as the celebrated
politician Louis Blanc expresses it, which constitutes prostitution--the
=complete lack= of all spiritual and all personal relationships on the
one side, and the ignominious predominance of the =mercantile= character
of the sexual union on the other. Hence there may be prostitution in
marriage, although this always remains widely different from the sale of
the body to =numerous= and =frequently changing= individuals.

The “prostitution” of primeval times, in which social relationships were
so utterly different from ours, unquestionably resembled rather the wild
love of the present day than our own prostitution. It was sexual
promiscuity, not professional fornication. According to Heinrich
Schurtz, prostitution is indeed not an exclusive product of higher
civilization, but occurs also among primitive peoples, and appears
everywhere where the unrestricted sexual intercourse of youth--wild
love--is prevented, without early marriage taking its place. But what he
describes as prostitution--for example, the living of several unmarried
girls in the houses of men--is still no more than a peculiar form of
wild love. Still, according to the reports of numerous travellers, there
are among primitive peoples also =purchasable= women, and this must be
explained, just as in our own case, from the combined influence of
individual, social, and economic conditions.

To my mind there is no doubt that the so-called “=religious=”
prostitution is to be regarded as at least a =germinal form= and
=predecessor= of the prostitution of the present day. In this case also
we had to do with =professional= fornication; only, although the
temple-girls, just like our modern prostitutes, gave themselves
=indifferently to any man= that offered the money paid for this service,
that money did not, in the case of religious prostitution, go to the
girl herself, but to the deity, or to the crafty priests who represented
him; thus the priests really played the part of our modern
brothel-keepers. It is absolutely unquestionable that in this religious
prostitution a more ideal element also played a part. This subject was
discussed at considerable length above (pp. 100-112).

Prostitution is everywhere a product of the =growth of large towns=; its
peculiar characteristics are developed only in large towns. To the
country it was always foreign until those beautiful times of the middle
ages, in which prostitution was regarded as a =necessary of life=, like
eating and drinking, and was organized in guilds, so that everywhere
“women-houses” were instituted for the public, unconstrained use of all
classes, for peasant and prince. At that time quite small towns also had
their brothels. The appearance of syphilis, and the awakening of modern
individualism, brought these conditions to an end; the brothels
disappeared everywhere; and this tendency to a =continuous decrease= of
barrack prostitution, to a progressive diminution in the number of
brothels, has continually strengthened. On the whole, the rural
districts to-day do not know prostitution; there we have only free love
and wild love. The existence of prostitution is confined to the large
towns, because in these all the necessary conditions are fulfilled, and,
above all, because in large towns the possibilities for the
gratification of the sexual impulse by marriage or by free love are in
the case of men much more limited than they are in the country. In the
town there is even a =demand= for prostitutes, but not in the country.
It is true that the demand on the part of men does not correspond to the
extension which modern prostitution has assumed in the large towns; this
demand corresponds, as it were, to a portion only of prostitution. In
his admirable work on the campaign against prostitution (_Journal for
the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_, vol. ii., pp. 311-313) F.
Schiller proves that prostitution has not increased merely in proportion
to the increase in the male population, =but that in reality, in recent
decades, it has increased, on the whole, in a much greater proportion
than the population, and that different towns exhibit the most
remarkable contrasts in the respective ratios of prostitutes to male
population=.

For example, in Berlin prostitution has increased =to an extent almost
double= that of the increase in male population. A similar relationship
is to be observed in other large towns. Everywhere the supply of
prostitutes =exceeds= the demand; and we cannot doubt that by this great
supply the need for prostitutes is to a large extent at first aroused.
Street-walkers and brothels =allure= many men to sexual intercourse who
otherwise would not have felt any need for it.

But, on the other hand, the existence of a =voluntary demand= for
prostitutes on the part of =men= is a fact which cannot be denied. In
this sense prostitution has been described as mainly a “man’s question.”

Here we touch upon an extremely difficult problem, and one which, as far
as I can see, no one before myself has definitely stated, perhaps
because no one has =ventured= to do it--and yet, for our knowledge of
prostitution, the question is one of great importance.

What precisely is the “need of man for prostitution” of which Blaschko
speaks? Is it merely the sexual impulse? Or is there any other factor in
operation?

Certainly the sexual impulse, simple sensuality, plays a large part in
this male demand for prostitutes; but this does not explain the fact why
married men, and so many men who, if not married, have yet opportunities
for other sexual intercourse, have recourse to prostitutes; it does not
explain the fact, by which I am myself continually and anew astonished,
of the peculiar attractive force which prostitutes exercise upon
cultured men with delicate æsthetic and ethical perceptions. Is there
any deeper physiological relationship here involved?

I answer this question unconditionally in the affirmative.

It is not by chance that prostitution is mainly a product of
civilization, that it finds in civilization its proper vital conditions,
whereas in primitive states it cannot properly thrive.

In primitive times, unrestrained by the (just) demands of a higher
civilization, and by the social morality intimately associated
therewith, men could, without fear or regret, satisfy their wild
impulses, no less in the sexual sphere than in others; they could
give free play to those peculiar biological instincts of a sexual
nature which lie hidden in every man. Their sexual “supra- and
sub-consciousness,” to use the happy phrase which Chr. von Ehrenfels
invented to denote the dualism of modern sexuality, were still
=monistic=. To-day, however, the primitive instincts are =repressed= by
the necessities of civilized life, and by the coercive force of
conventional morality; but these instincts still slumber in every one.
Each one of us has also his sexual sub-consciousness. Sometimes it
awakens, demands activity, free from all restraint, from all coercion,
from all convention. In such moments it seems as if the man were an
entirely different being. Here the “two souls” in our breast become a
reality. Is this still the celebrated man of learning, the refined
idealist, the sensitive æsthetic, the artist who has enriched us with
the most magnificent and the purest works of poetry or of plastic art?
We recognize him no longer, because in such moments something quite
different has awakened to life; =another= nature stirs within him and
urges him with an elemental force to do things from which his
“supra-consciousness,” the consciousness of the civilized man, would
draw back in horror.

Such a delicate sensitive nature, open to the finest spiritual
activities, as that of the Danish poet J. P. Jakobsen, must feel this
contrast in an especially painful manner; it is precisely such
natures--those in which the extremes we have described appear most
sharply and most clearly--which afford us proof of the existence of a
double consciousness. The primitive instinct breaks out, like a
monomania--of which old psychiatric doctrine of “monomania” we are
involuntarily reminded when we see how even men of light and leading,
men who in other respects live only in the highest regions of the
spirit, are subjected to the domination of this purely instinctive
sexualism, so that they lead a “secret” inner life, of whose existence
the world has no suspicion.

In “Niels Lyhne” J. P. Jakobsen has admirably characterized this double
life.

  “But when,” he writes, “he had served God truly for eleven days, it
  often happened that =other powers= gained the upper hand in him; by an
  overwhelming force he was driven to the coarse lust of coarse
  enjoyments; he yielded, overcome by the human passion for
  self-annihilation, which, while the blood burns as blood only can
  burn, demands degradation, perversity, dirt, and foulness, with no
  less force than the force which inspires the equally human passion for
  becoming greater than one is, and purer.”

These human instincts can be satisfied only by prostitution. By the
purchasable prostitute this desire, described so aptly and with so much
insight by Jakobsen, can be fully satisfied. To the origin of the desire
we shall return in another connexion. The common, the rough, the brutal
animal in the nature of prostitution, exercises a formal magical
attractive force on large numbers of men.

Ludwig Pietsch, in his “Recollections of Sixty Years,” vol. ii., p. 337
(Berlin, 1894), tells of the celebrated cocotte of the Second French
Empire, Cora Pearl, whom he saw in Baden-Baden:

  “I have never been able to understand how it was that she exercised so
  powerful an attraction. In her appearance, her tumid, painted
  ‘pug-face,’ the secret was certainly not to be found. Perhaps the
  influence which she exercised on so many men rested principally in the
  quality which the royal friend of the Danish Countess Danner described
  to the latter, when explaining to her the reason of the power, to
  others quite incomprehensible, which Cora Pearl had exercised on his
  own heart. He said: ‘=She is so gloriously vulgar=.’”

This word speaks volumes, and illuminates the peculiar influence of
prostitutes and prostitution upon man in an apt and powerful way.[285]

Admirably, also, has Stefan Grimmen, in his novelette “Die Landpartie”
(published in _Die Welt am Montag_, No. 22, May 28, 1906), described
this influence, which in this case was exercised by two demi-mondaines
lying in the grass, upon the masculine members of a picnic-party, who
were so enthralled as completely to forget the ladies of their company.
The de Goncourts were also aware of the specific allurement exercised by
prostitutes, for in one place in their diary they recommend a wife to
adopt certain customs of prostitutes, in order to bind her husband to
her for a long time.

In this respect, we cannot fail to recognize a certain masochistic trait
in the sensibility of men, which appears especially remarkable when we
call to mind the contrast between the nature of the above described
spiritually lofty persons and the nature of a prostitute. In this way we
should be led to the view that =prostitution is in part a product of the
physiological male masochism=--that is to say, of the impulse from time
to time to plunge into the depths of coarse, brutal, sexual lust and of
self-mortification and self-abasement, by surrender to a comparatively
worthless creature. This attraction towards prostitutes is one of the
most remarkable phenomena in the psyche of the modern civilized man; it
is the curse of the evolution of civilization.

  “The most ideal man also is unable to free himself from his body,”
  says Heinrich Schurtz; “refinement leads ultimately to an unnatural
  over-nicety, =which must necessarily be permeated from time to time by
  a breath of fresh unrefinement and coarse naturalism=, if it is not to
  perish from its own inward contradiction.”

In a certain sense the same need finds expression also in Gutzkow’s
remark in the “Neue Serapionsbrüder,” vol. i., p. 198 (Breslau, 1877),
that man sometimes has a need for “=woman-in-herself=,” not woman with
the thousand and one tricks and whimsies of wives, mothers, and
daughters.

Without question, this need is much more characteristic of man than of
woman. Still, I am not prepared altogether to deny its existence in the
latter. In another connexion I shall return to this extremely important
question.

Naturally in this we see no more than a =favouring factor= of the
appearance of prostitution =in the mass=; we do not speak of it as the
definite cause of the production of any individual prostitute.

Speaking generally, I consider the dispute regarding the causes of
prostitution as superfluous; a number of causes are in operation, and in
each individual case it is always an unfortunate =concatenation= of
circumstances, of subjective and objective influences, which have driven
the girl to prostitution. The various =theories= regarding the causes of
prostitution have therefore only a relative value. Not one of them
explains it wholly; each explanation demands the assistance of others.

This is, above all, true of the celebrated theory of Lombroso, regarding
the “=born prostitute=,” a theory which states, to put the matter
shortly and clearly, that the girl is born with all the =rudimentary
characteristics= of a prostitute, and that these rudimentary
characteristics have also a =physical= foundation, in the form of
demonstrable =stigmata of degeneration=.

Lombroso’s “born prostitute” is, above all, distinguished by a complete
lack of the moral sense, by typical “moral insanity,” which is the true
“=root=” of the prostitute life, for he regards that life as very little
dependent upon the sexual. Prostitution, therefore, according to
Lombroso, “is only a special case of the early tendency to all evil, of
the desire which characterizes the morally idiotic human being from
childhood upwards, to do that which is forbidden.”[286] The individual
cause of prostitution, according to this view, is to be found, not in
the sexual, but in the ethical province. With the ethical defects are
associated greediness, the love of finery, a tendency to drink, vanity,
dislike of work, mendacity, and an inclination towards criminality. To
this moral degeneration there corresponds the presence of stigmata of
degeneration, such as anomalies of the teeth, cleft palate, abnormal
distribution of the hair, prominent ears, asymmetry of the face, etc.

The above-described type of degenerate woman does, as a fact, exist.
But, in the first place, such women constitute only a small fraction of
prostitutes, and such women are found =following other occupations=.
Thus, the expression “born prostitute” is a false one; it should run,
“born degenerate,” for not all born degenerates become prostitutes.

In the second place, =not all degenerate prostitutes are born
degenerates=. In many cases the degeneration is a result of the
professional unchastity.

  “No one,” says Friedrich Hammer, “who has not personally investigated
  the matter can conceive how =rapidly= and =completely= the =process of
  transformation from an honourable girl into a prostitute
  proceeds=--the transformation into a street-walker. A few weeks before
  she was clean-looking and trim, perhaps with a somewhat frivolous
  appearance, but still able to understand the position in which she
  found herself; now, however, she seems to have completely ‘gone to
  pieces’; she is dirty and verminous, and on her face is an expression
  of absolute wretchedness, not, as you perhaps might imagine, of
  unbridled sensuality--=no, rather one of indifference=, of complete
  helplessness and loss of will, of unresponsiveness alike to punishment
  and to benefit.”[287]

The earlier investigators of prostitution, including the first of all,
Parent-Duchatelet, did not fail to recognize that the mental and
physical abnormalities of the prostitute were =changes= due to her mode
of life. In many prostitutes we can observe a =typical obliteration of
the secondary and tertiary sexual characters= after a prolonged practice
of their profession. Virey remarked, very justly, that “in consequence
of the frequent embraces of men, prostitutes gain a more or less
masculine appearance”: their neck is thicker, their voice harsher and
more masculine (J. J. Virey, “Woman,” pp. 157, 158; Leipzig, 1827).

Most prostitutes have done more or less injury to the functions of the
human body, have completely disordered their sexual life, and are
sterile. It is not to be wondered at that this sometimes manifests
itself in their outward appearance--as, for example, in the slight
development of the breasts, which often amounts to a simple atrophy. The
“unmistakable development” of the tertiary characters of the male in
individual prostitutes, which has led Kurella to propound the
interesting hypothesis that prostitutes are a sub-variety of the
homosexual,[288] rests for the most part upon their assumption of a
masculine mode of life and masculine habits, which in the long-run
cannot fail to influence also the bodily development--as, for example,
smoking and the excessive use of alcohol, pot-house life, gluttony, and
other masculine habits. The “deep masculine voice” of many prostitutes
is unquestionably in most cases the result of the excessive use of
tobacco and alcohol. To this striking =gradual= change in the voice
Parent-Duchatelet devoted considerable attention (vol. i., pp. 86-88, of
the German edition); it also attracted Lippert’s notice.
Parent-Duchatelet refers the common development in prostitutes of the
masculine voice to their excessive indulgence in alcoholic beverages,
and to their exposure to frequent changes of weather (catching cold,
etc.). Smoking also certainly plays a part.

Lippert draws attention to other changes (“Prostitution in Hamburg,” pp.
80 and 90):

  “By the daily practice of their profession for many years their eyes
  acquire a piercing, rolling expression; they are somewhat unduly
  prominent in consequence of the continued tension of the ocular
  muscles, since the eyes are principally employed to spy out and
  attract clients. In many the organs of mastication are strongly
  developed; the mouth, in continuous activity either in eating or in
  kissing, is conspicuous; the forehead is often flat; the occipital
  region is at times extremely prominent; the hair of the head is often
  scanty--in fact, a good many become actually bald. For this reasons
  are not lacking: above all, the restless mode of life; the continued
  running about in all weathers in the open street, sometimes with the
  head bare; the often long-lasting fluor albus from which they
  suffer;[289] the incessant brushing, manipulation, frizzling, and
  pomading of the hair; and, among the lower classes of prostitutes, the
  use of brandy.

  “The rough voice is the physiological characteristic of the woman who
  has lost her proper functions--those of the mother.”

However, the =majority= of =youthful prostitutes= exhibit purely
=feminine= characteristics; it is only late in life that the
above-described type becomes predominant, and this shows us that the
masculine characteristics are the result of =objective= influences. From
five to ten years bring about a notable difference. In the year 1898 I
treated a maidservant for syphilis. At that time she was of an elegant,
genuinely feminine appearance. Seven years later, in the year 1905, I
saw her once more. What a change! Her face was bloated and widened; her
eyes, once so bright and clear, had become cloudy and expressionless;
her voice was rough; all the specific feminine forms and characters had
been obliterated by extreme corpulence. It was no longer a woman, it was
a “prostitute,” a special type of humanity, but one which had been
=gradually produced=, and as a result of no more than six years of the
practice of professional prostitution.

These facts do not by any means exclude the existence of =genuine
degenerates= among prostitutes in a greater percentage than among
non-prostitutes;[290] nor do they exclude the existence of genuine
homosexuals among prostitutes. To this extent Lombroso’s theory contains
a nucleus of truth; but it concerns only a fraction of the entire world
of prostitutes. Lombroso has himself been repeatedly compelled to
recognize the frequency with which he has encountered among prostitutes
women of normal appearance, and even beautiful women.[291]

Finally, the doctrine of the “born prostitute” is contradicted by the
fact that the same types of degenerate which are described by Lombroso
among prostitutes are found also among women who are not
prostitutes.[292] In fact, Lombroso has been led to this view by the
recognition of an “equivalent of prostitutes among the upper classes”;
but in this way he has only proved that the =same= moral degeneration
that is encountered in a certain proportion of prostitutes is also seen
in misconducted women of other and higher classes. There are, in fact,
prostitute natures among the “upper ten thousand.”

The best limitation of the general value of the doctrine of the “born
prostitute” is the concluding chapter of Lombroso’s book upon
“Occasional Prostitutes.” He begins with the pertinent remark:

  “Not all prostitutes are ethically indifferent--that is to say, they
  are =not all born prostitutes=; in this province =opportunity= also
  plays its part.”

Lombroso proceeds to develop this thesis, thus markedly limiting the
application of his own theory, and recognizing that, in addition to
natural predisposition, quite other causes and influences come into play
in the production of prostitution.

Above all, the =economic= factors are of greater importance in the
genesis and growth of prostitution, even though their influence is not
an exclusive one.

I distinguish here between =real, genuine poverty= (lack of food, proper
housing accommodation, etc.) and merely =relative poverty=. Hitherto, in
considering the economic causes of prostitution, these two elements have
not been distinguished with sufficient clearness.

=The fact that real, absolute poverty and lack of the necessaries of
life drives many girls to a life of prostitution can, in view of recent
statistical data, no longer be disputed.= More exact material dealing
with this subject is to be found in the above mentioned writings of
Blaschko, one of the principal advocates of the economic theory of
prostitution; also in the works of Georg Keben,[293] Oda Olberg,[294]
Anna Pappritz,[295] Pfeiffer,[296] Paul Kampffmeyer,[297] E. von
Düring,[298] and many others. Here we have a superabundant material, a
quantity of distressing and tragical individual data and proofs of
Gutzkow’s thesis, that =the material evils of society always and
everywhere undergo transformation into immorality=. Here unquestionably
must we =first= apply the lever for the removal of this economic
predisposing condition of prostitution. _Hic Rhodus, hic salta!_ I am
myself firmly convinced of this fact, although I do =not= consider that
the causes of prostitution are to be found =exclusively= in economic
conditions--an opinion which Anna Pappritz, for example, maintains in
the most extreme form. It is quite true, however, that our entire sexual
life at the present day is so intimately connected with the =social
question= that the reform of the sexual life demands as an unconditional
preliminary a reform of economic conditions. Prostitution =on the large
scale=, as it manifests itself in modern days, and its =continuous
increase= to an extent quite unparalleled in former times, is only
explicable by the rapid transformation of economic conditions--as, for
example, by the concentration of population in large towns, by the
industrial revolution, and by the development of great aggregations of
capital, by the consequent greatly increased severity of the struggle
for existence, the postponement of marriage, and the ever-increasing
number of individuals who are not economically and professionally
independent. The increase in =child-labour= (naturally we refer
especially to children of the female sex) has also to be considered as a
remarkable phenomenon of modern industrial life; but, above all, we must
take into account the fact that =woman’s work= is on the average
regarded at a very low valuation, and is paid accordingly.

The insufficiency of their earnings is the immediate cause of the fact
that so many women and girls seek =accessory earnings= in the form of
prostitution. It is well known that employers reckon on this fact in
drawing up their pay-lists, and frequently are so brutally cynical as to
point out to their female employees the possibility of increasing their
earnings in this manner--one very convenient to the employer!

The _Reichsarbeitsblatt_, No. 2, of the year 1903, publishes a very
remarkable account of the conditions of work and life of the =unmarried
female factory employees= in Berlin. It is based upon the reports of the
professional factory inspectors in Berlin, who have access to material
affording them accurate information regarding the mode of life of
factory women. The reports concern 939 unmarried factory hands, and
include all occupations in which in Berlin a considerable number of
women were employed. The average age of the women who came under
observation was 22-1/2 years; the oldest was 54 years; 53·5 % of the
whole number were over 21 years of age; 42 % were between 16 and 21
years of age; 4·5 % were below 16 years of age. The average number of
hours of daily work was 9-1/2; 3·2 % of all the women worked from 7-1/2
to 8 hours; 37·2 %, 8 to 9 hours; 47·7 %, 9 to 10 hours; and 11·9 %, 10
to 11 hours. The weekly wage amounted on the average to 11·36 marks
(shillings); individually, the wages were very variable; 4·3 % of the
women were paid less than 6 marks (shillings); 1·1 % were paid from 20
to 30 marks (shillings). =In a very large majority of instances the
wages varied between 8 and 15 marks.= Supplies from a source independent
of their wages, in the form of money, clothing, and means of
subsistence, were received, according to their own statement, by 88 of
the women; among these, 41 were assisted by parents, 4 by other
relatives, 3 in other ways; 542 of those examined lived with their
parents, 57 with other relatives--that is, altogether 64·2 of the total
number--21·5 % lived in common lodging-houses, 14 % in their own rooms.
The worst-paid workwomen lived chiefly with their parents; as soon as
the wage sufficed to support them away from home a great many left their
parents’ houses. The housing accommodation was ascertained in 846
instances; in 758 of these a single room constituted the dwelling, in 82
cases a kitchen, in 2 cases an attic, in 3 some other room. In isolated
cases quite unsuitable places were used to sleep in. =Speaking
generally, the conditions were worse= than appears from the above
figures. Of 832 workwomen, only 169 had a room to themselves; 193 slept
in a room with one other person, and 470--that is, 56·6 %--=with several
persons=. With regard to the cost of their dwellings, there were 464
reports; the average payment was 1·79 marks (shillings) per week. The
cost of the food (dinner and lesser meals) amounted on the average, in
the case of 568, to 6·77 marks (shillings); of these, 205 paid less than
6 marks (shillings), 109 more than 8 marks (shillings) per week. The
total cost for lodging and food amounted in the case of 867 workwomen on
the average to 7·62 marks; 44·7 % had their principal meal at midday;
55·3 % in the evening; 79·4 % took it at home; 9·4 % in the factory;
11·2 % in a public kitchen, a cooking-school, or an eating-house. With
regard to the expenditure for clothing, etc., =very scanty= details were
obtained--too scanty to be worth recording. Of the 939 workwomen of whom
inquiry was made on the point, 197, or 21 %, contributed money to the
education or support of relatives or children; about 10 % paid (direct)
taxes, with a mean expenditure of 8 pfennige (one penny) per week. For
amusement, 233 women recorded an average weekly expenditure of 1 mark
(shilling). To a considerable number of those examined it was possible
to put a little money by; in most cases the amount averaged from half to
one mark (sixpence to one shilling) per week; in many cases, however,
the money saved =was spent at some other time during the year=, in
consequence of diminished earnings or illness. The figures obtained,
although in many cases they require further examination, elaboration,
and illustration, still suffice to show that much remains to be done for
the improvement of the conditions of life of female factory employees.

That these wages are quite insufficient is shown by the following table
of the daily expenditure of a sempstress for food and lodging (based on
the reports of von Stülpnagel):

                              Mk.  Pf.
  Bedroom and coffee          0    20
  Second breakfast            0    15
  Dinner (midday)             0    30
  Afternoon tea               0    15
  Supper                      0    20
  Two bottles of beer         0    20
                              -------
                       Total  1    20

That amounts per week to 8 marks 40 pfennige (eight shillings and
fivepence) for board-lodging. For the rest, clothing, washing, and a
little amusement, have to be provided for, and this is only possible in
the case of the highest wages, varying from 12 to 15 marks; but this
higher wage =often enough= suffices, as Anna Pappritz herself admits. In
many cases the weekly wage is only 5 to 8 marks. In the majority of
occupations connected with the manufacture of ready-made clothing, trade
is only brisk for four to six months in each year. Thus, there is
necessarily a great deal of unemployment.

According to the Statistical Annual for the town of Berlin for the year
1907, the =annual wages= amounted:

  For tailoresses                    to  457  marks
   „  sempstresses                    „  486    „
   „  hand buttonhole workers         „  354    „
   „  machine buttonhole workers      „  700    „
   „  other women factory employees   „  354    „

According to the report of the Statistical Bureau, the average yearly
income of women factory employees throughout the German Empire was only
322 marks!

It is, therefore, no matter for surprise that the industrial councillors
of Frankfurt-on-the-Main and of Wiesbaden, in their published reports on
the wages of female factory employees for the year 1887, state:

  “In Frankfurt, at the end of last month, among 226 persons under the
  observation of the _police des mœurs_ (that is, not reckoning secret
  prostitution), 98 were female factory employees. Since for their
  necessary bare support (food and sleeping accommodation only), the
  minimum daily sum needed is 1·25 marks, it appears that the wages
  which can be earned by female employees of 1·50 to 1·80 marks can
  hardly suffice to provide for all their needs. It would seem,
  therefore, that the lowness of their earnings must play some part in
  the matter under discussion.”

The reports of the industrial councillors of Düsseldorf, Posen, Stettin,
Neuss, Barmen, Elberfeld, Gladbach, Erfurt, etc., have a similar
signification.

Important in relation to the incontrovertible connexion between material
poverty and prostitution is the fact that in the majority of cases the
prostitution of female factory employees is only =occasional=, and not
professional prostitution--that is to say, such women have recourse to
prostitution only when compelled thereto by deficient means.

As regards genuine =professional= prostitution, female factory
employees, who live in a state of comparative freedom, contribute a
smaller contingent of recruits than =maidservants=, whose position is
always a =more dependent= one, and who are much less experienced in the
struggle for existence, although, generally speaking, they live in
better conditions. From a computation based upon figures for the years
1855, 1873, and 1898 (those for 1855 and 1898 relating to far too small
a number of cases), Blaschko derives the opinion that formerly female
factory employees provided a greater number of recruits to prostitution
than they do at present; but that, on the contrary, the contribution of
maidservants to the ranks of professional prostitution has enormously
increased. This assertion cannot pass without contradiction.
Gross-Hoffinger, in the work previously mentioned, pointed out that the
class of maidservants was the true nucleus of prostitution, and devoted
to this fact a long and illuminating chapter of his book. And at about
the same time (1848) Lippert also wrote (_op. cit._, p. 79): “The
principal sources of prostitution are =maidservants=, sempstresses,
flower-girls, tailoresses, hairdressers, shop-girls, and barmaids.”
(Gross-Hoffinger himself emphasizes the word “=maidservants=.”)

We see, therefore, that the preponderance of ex-maidservants in the
ranks of professional prostitution is by no means a new phenomenon,
although, possibly, that preponderance is even =greater= now than it was
in former times. And though in isolated instances it may happen that
simple poverty forces a maidservant to become a prostitute, this
explanation does not suffice for the generality of cases. The same
reservation must be made in respect of seduction and illegitimate
motherhood as causes of prostitution. And in so far as poverty is a
cause, we must speak rather of =relative= poverty, poverty which has
more of a subjective than an objective character.

Schiller rightly remarks, in his admirable essay on the “Prevention of
Prostitution,” that in respect of prostitutes who have been
maidservants, in the majority of cases there can be no question of
insufficient wages and actual poverty (if we except the badly paid
servants in public-houses, laundry-maids, and a few others), since the
maidservant receives, in addition to her wages, free board and lodging,
and therefore is in a much better position than the majority of female
factory employees and of women engaged in home industries.
Notwithstanding this, maidservants supply the largest proportion of
prostitutes.

The majority of maidservants come from the country, where lax views
prevail regarding sexual relationships. In addition, girls usually come
to town when still very young. The want of education and experience of
life is, in their case, very striking; and this is increased by their
permanently dependent position, in contrast with the early independence
of the town factory-women, who are speedily initiated into all the
possible evils of town life. In addition, there comes into the question
an influence which hitherto has been underestimated: the =love of
finery=. Among maidservants this is especially powerful, since, in this
respect, they are continually exposed to suggestive influences, arising
from the clothing of their mistresses. This love of dress, in
association with a far greater unscrupulousness in sexual matters than
exists among workwomen, drives many servant-girls, even =without= real
poverty, to prostitution. After they have lost their place, after they
have acquired a distaste for work, have given birth to an illegitimate
child, or have been infected with venereal disease, they very readily
enter the ranks of professional prostitution.

This =subjective psychological= factor plays nearly as great a rôle as
the economic factor. Blaschko himself draws attention to the fact that,
in proportion to the hundreds of thousands of women who are compelled to
earn their bread by hard, badly paid toil, the number of those who
ultimately become prostitutes is really almost infinitesimally small;
and that, therefore, we must regard as accessory causes of prostitution,
defective will-power, want of industry, of perseverance, and
of moral instincts, and, finally, also--and here Lombroso is
justified--congenital deficiency. Hellpach is right when, in his most
readable essay on “Prostitution and Prostitutes” (Berlin, 1905), he lays
the principal stress on this “social-psychological” explanation of
prostitution, and regards the purely economic factor as “the ultimate
turning-point” in the fatal road that leads to prostitution. (Earlier
than Hellpach, Anton Baumgarten attempted to give a social-psychological
explanation of prostitution. See his essays, containing much valuable
material, “Police and Prostitution,” and “The Relations of Prostitution
to Crime,” published in the eighth and eleventh volumes respectively of
the “Archives of Criminal Anthropology.”)

We must, therefore, hold firmly to the fact that the most =diverse= and
=heterogeneous= vital conditions may ultimately lead to prostitution.
Among these, =lack of education=, =premature habituation= to sexual
depravation by =casual observation= and by =deliberate seduction=, play
an important rôle. And these causes are themselves to a large extent
secondary to the =miserable housing conditions= in great towns, recently
so dramatically described by von Pfeiffer and Kampffmeyer.

  “It is easier,” says Pfeiffer, “to thunder against immorality from the
  top of a lofty tower, than it is to resist every allurement in dull,
  narrow dwellings, in the midst of poverty and deprivation.... The
  lodger flirts with the wife; the married or free-loving pair, also
  living in the house, do not wait to begin their caresses until the
  children are out of the way. The children are witnesses of many scenes
  which are little adapted to the preservation of pure morals; they see
  things which they later come to regard as matters of course, and when
  they have the opportunity they act in the same way themselves, for
  they have not learned otherwise, and they think that every one does
  the same....

  “The servant-girl becomes pregnant; no one knows what has become of
  her child’s father. Driven out of her place, she remembers that she
  has a married sister, and after long search she finds her in a damp
  basement dwelling. This dwelling consists of a single room and a dark
  kitchen; three shivering, dirty children are playing on the floor; the
  husband is out of employment; but still they can find room for this
  sister-in-law and her illegitimate child. Then perhaps there are
  better days for a time. But within the narrow limits of the one-roomed
  dwelling the association is too intimate, and the sister-in-law again
  becomes pregnant, and ultimately in the same week both the sisters are
  delivered as the result of impregnation by the same man. When we think
  how all this has taken place in the =only= available room, we can
  understand that the children must have seen a great deal little suited
  to childish eyes.”

The housing statistics of Berlin for the year 1900 give horrible reports
regarding this, and even much worse conditions--conditions which are
sufficiently explained when we consider how often families living in a
single room take in a =male= or a =female lodger= for the night.
One-roomed dwellings in which from four to seven sleep every night are
common; those in which eight to ten sleep are by no means rare!

After what has been said above, no elaborate demonstration is needed to
show that =alcoholism= everywhere, in the most diverse conditions,
prepares the soil for prostitution. Kräpelin and O. Rosenthal have
thoroughly exposed this intimate connexion between prostitution and
alcoholism.

An even more important source of prostitution is to be found in
=procurement= and in the =traffic in girls=--this grave social evil of
our time. How often are children initiated into the practice of
prostitution, for the sake of pecuniary gain, by their own parents, or
by some other individual devoid of all moral feeling, and taught to
serve as mere instruments of earning money by lust! Paris offers more
examples of this traffic than any other European city, but London is not
far behind, as was proved by the _Pall Mall Gazette_ scandals of 1883,
to which we shall return in another connexion. In Berlin itself in
recent years the number of half-grown, and even childish, prostitutes
has enormously increased. Prostitutes from thirteen to fourteen years of
age are no longer rare.

An even sadder phenomenon is the modern =traffic in girls=, a
characteristic product of the age of commerce, although earlier times
were, indeed, familiar with it, especially France in the eighteenth
century,[299] witness more especially the accounts of the celebrated
_Parc-aux-Cerfs_.

The modern traffic in girls[300] is intimately connected with the
=brothel question=. We can, in fact, assert that if there were no
brothels there would be no traffic in girls. This is proved also by the
=growing dislike= to brothels felt by prostitutes, who prefer a free
life. For this reason, it becomes more and more difficult for the
keepers of brothels to obtain inmates, and the international traffic in
girls attempts to fill the continually increasing deficiency in the
number of girls entering brothels.

The traffic in girls is to-day almost exclusively recruited from Eastern
Europe. As regards its original sources, we find that Galicia--_i.e._,
Austrian Poland--supplies 40 %, Russia 15 %, Italy 11 %, Austria-Hungary
10 %, Germany 8 %, of the “White Slave Trade.” Most of the girls are
transported to the Argentine, where we find them in the brothels.[301]

The traders in girls, or “kaften” as they are called in Brazil, are, for
the most part, Polish Jews. Rosenack shows, in his report on the
campaign against the traffic in girls (a campaign actively taken up by
the Western European Jewish Unions, and especially by the Jewish
Association for the Protection of Girls and Women), that five out of six
of the Galician Jews engaged in this traffic are what are called
“Luftmenschen” (men of air)--that is, men without any definite or secure
means of livelihood--and that only an improvement in their social
conditions can put an end to the traffic in girls. As regards that part
of the world, he considers that the measures resolved upon by the
=National= and =International Conference for the Suppression of the
Traffic in Girls= (Berlin, 1903; Frankfurt-on-the-Main, 1905) are not
adapted to offer any important hindrances to the traffic. More effective
has been the work of the Jewish Branch Committee in Germany for the
suppression of the Galician traffic in girls. Dr. Rosenack, Berta
Pappenheim, and Dr. Sera Rabinowitsch, in furtherance of the work of the
committee, studied the local conditions; the population was instructed
verbally and by leaflets and pamphlets. Endeavours have been made to
improve the economic condition of the workwomen of Galicia. For this
purpose, instructed female assistants are sent from Germany to Galicia.
It has been possible to awaken in Galicia general interest in the work
of the suppression of traffic in girls. In a Conference held at Lemberg,
the Galician clubs and Jewish committees made representations to German
and other societies, in order to formulate a plan, and to devise
measures for the improvement of Galician conditions.

In Buenos Ayres, the principal town of entry for Galician girls, a
committee has been formed to oppose the traffic in girls, the members of
this committee being of all religions and nationalities. This has had
one good effect--that the traders in girls have become alarmed; they no
longer practise their profession so openly as before. The Argentine
police are also taking an active part in the fight with the traffic. Not
more than two of the judges at Buenos Ayres were found to make common
cause with the “traders,” and to discharge them on receipt of large
bribes. A law has been drafted for the punishment of those engaged in
this traffic, by imprisonment for six years and confiscation of their
property.

The traders in girls constitute an international ring, and the centre of
their organization is in Buenos Ayres.

In Berlin, since 1904, there has existed a =central police organization=
for the suppression of the international traffic in girls, the activity
of which extends throughout the Empire. Every case of this traffic which
comes to the notice of the police in Germany is reported to the central
police organization. This draws up a list of all the traders in girls
whose names are definitely known. It has started an album containing
photographs of traders who have been punished, and it exchanges
experiences with the police of other countries. It is to be hoped that
in comparison with the other countries of Europe the number of German
girls exported to brothels abroad will continually grow smaller, and
that the local measures undertaken in Galicia and the Argentine will
have a good effect in limiting, and ultimately suppressing, this
traffic.

Henne am Rhyn has shown that to and from other countries--for example,
from England to Belgium and Germany (Hamburg), from Galicia to Turkey,
from Italy to North America, etc.--individual girls are transported.
According to Felix Baumann, the number of traders in girls in New York
approaches 20,000. They have close relations to the police, and they
employ young handsome men, called “cadets,” to attract the girls. The
abolition of brothels would here also be the best means of abolishing
the traffic in girls.

Having now learned the sources of prostitution, we must proceed to give
a brief account of the places in which it is carried on. Here we have
first of all to distinguish =public= from =secret= prostitution.

As regards public prostitution, there are only =two= principal varieties
to consider: street prostitution, where the women seek their victims in
the streets, in order to carry them off either to their =own dwellings=
or to =houses of accommodation=; and =brothel prostitution=. At the
present day in most countries public street prostitution is far the most
general form, and this is especially true as regards Germany, where in a
few towns only brothels continue to exist. In many places this street
prostitution--for example, in the Friedrichstrasse of Berlin, and also
on the boulevards of Paris--gives rise to conditions which recall the
worst days of imperial Rome. The =contact= between public life and
professional prostitution is unquestionably a great evil. The activity
of prostitutes in the open streets, the shameless and lascivious display
of their sexual charms, their bold solicitation _coram publico_, the
stimulating character of professional unchastity--all these poison our
public life, obliterate the boundary between cleanliness and
contamination, and display daily a picture of sexual corruption--alike
before the eyes of the pure, blameless girl, those of the honourable
wife, and those of the immature boy. Aptly has this =street=
prostitution been termed the _cloaca_ of our social life, which empties
into the open street, whereas at least =brothel= prostitution only
represented a hidden _cloaca_, whose offensive odour need not annoy all
the world, as inevitably happens in the case of street prostitution. In
addition, we have to consider the serious dangers involved in the
practice of professional fornication in private dwellings and houses of
accommodation, as they involve the decent families living in such
houses. What do the children living in such houses see and hear?
Frequently prostitutes are admitted to confidential family intercourse,
and they seduce the daughters of poor people to join them in the
practice of prostitution, and the sons to a vicious life or to become
souteneurs. That the danger of contamination of the lower classes of the
population by means of prostitution is by no means imaginary, is clearly
shown by numerous examples from actual life. I subscribe to all that the
advocates of brothels say in this respect.

And yet =brothels= are a =still= greater evil! They constitute an
incomparably =more dangerous= centre of =sexual corruption=, a worse
=breeding-ground of sexual aberrations= of every kind, and last, not
least, the =greatest focus of sexual infection=. With reference to the
last point, the matter will be discussed more fully in the chapter
dealing with the question of regulation in connexion with the
suppression of venereal diseases.

The brothel is the =high-school= of refined sexual lust and perversity.
The detailed proof of this I must leave to the descriptions of the two
writers most experienced in the life of brothels, Léo Taxil[302] and
Louis Fiaux.[303]

It is a fact well known to all that many young men learn in brothels for
the first time the manifold and artificial ways in which natural sexual
intercourse can be replaced by perverse methods of sexual activity.
=Here, in the brothel, psychopathia sexualis is systematically taught.=
And what the old debauchee demands from the prostitute and pays her for,
perverse intercourse, is =spontaneously offered to the youthful
initiate=, because competition between the prostitutes, and the hope of
a higher payment, lead them to do so. The opinion of the French authors
just mentioned is perfectly credible--that there are young men who in
this way have learned about perverse sexuality =before= they were fully
acquainted with natural sexuality, and who thus have permanently
acquired more inclination for these mysteries of Venus than for a
natural and normal sexual intercourse.

“=Brothel-jargon=,” or “=brothel-slang=,” contains a number of words
almost peculiar to this dialect, by which the contra-natural, abnormal
methods of sexual intercourse are denoted in a more or less cynical
manner; for example, _faire feuille de rose_ = anilinctus; _sfogliar la
rosa_ (to pluck the leaves from the rose) = pædicare; _faire tête-bêche_
= reciprocal cunnilinctus of two tribades; _punta di penna_ =
masturbatio labialis; _pulci lavoratrici_ (learned fleas!) = tribades,
etc.

A learned investigator like Fiaux is led by his observations of many
years to the conclusion that =brothels= constitute not only the most
=dangerous= form of public prostitution, but the most dangerous kind of
prostitution that exists at all, and that it is urgently necessary that
they should be abolished in all countries as soon as possible.

In addition to the two varieties and localities of “public”
prostitution--that is, prostitution carried on under the observation of
the police--there is a much more extensive =secret= prostitution, in
connexion with which, however, the word “secret” must always be accepted
with reserve, since in its case also it comes more or less under the eye
of the public. This secret prostitution is, for example, accessible at
numerous places, and these are very different one from another. Secret
prostitution also has its types, its peculiarities--in short, its
definite local colouring, according to the place in which it is
practised. Let us give a brief account of the various localities of
secret prostitution.

1. =Public-houses with Women Attendants, the so-called
“Animierkneipen.”=--The =waitress= (barmaid) is the true exemplar of the
secret prostitute, and further, in consequence of the perpetual
association with alcoholism, is the most dangerous variety;[304] for the
barmaid allures the guest even more to the excessive consumption of
alcohol than to sexual indulgence. For this purpose barmaids receive a
percentage of the receipts from the sale of liquor, and this sum, in
addition to free board, is their only wage.

The “animierkneipen”[305] and the restaurants with women attendants can
be plainly distinguished from a considerable distance by their
=curtained= windows, and by the =red, green, or blue glass panes= over
the doors of entry. These coloured panes are so characteristic of these
places of lust and gluttony that at the last year’s District Synod of
the Friedrichswerder section of the town of Berlin the attempt was made
(_cf._ _Vossische Zeitung_, No. 248, May 30, 1906) to forbid the use of
such illuminated panes for the advertisement of the houses of
entertainment in Berlin with female attendants. To this proposal the
reasonable objection was made that if this distinguishing mark were
abolished, there would be no means of recognizing such places, and
therefore no warning signal for blameless individuals.

Many “animierkneipen”--the French similarly term the girls in such
places “_les inviteuses_”[306]--by their mysterious-looking interior; by
the heavy curtains, which produce semi-obscurity; by small very discreet
_chambres séparées_, lighted by little coloured lanterns and with erotic
pictures on the walls; by their Spanish walls and their enormous
couches--obtain the appearance of small lupanars. To these the richer
customers and the initiates are brought, whilst the ordinary habitual
guests commonly assemble in the larger bars, where also music--it must
be admitted very bad music--in the form of a piano- or a zither-player,
is not wanting.

The whole shameless activity of these “animierkneipen,” in which alcohol
and indecency play the principal rôle, has recently been described by
Hermann Seyffert in a manner no less perspicuous than true to life.[307]
The clients of such places are, for the most part, immature lads, who
squander here the money of their parents or their employers; but we find
there also the habitual guests, usually elderly married men, who find in
this atmosphere a welcome variety in comparison with the monotony of
their homes. The quantities of alcohol which are consumed in the
“animierkneipen,” both by the guests and by the attendants, are
enormous. The barmaids must always drink at the cost of the guests, in
order that the sales of liquor may be larger. O. Rosenthal[308] speaks
of barmaids who consume twenty to thirty glasses of beer a day, and
more, without mentioning brandy and liqueurs!

2. =Ball-Rooms and Dancing-Saloons.=[309]--Properly speaking, these are
only a sub-variety of the places described in Section 1; they are
enlarged “animierkneipen,” with the addition of (better) music and of
dancing. But the beautiful days of the Bal Mabille and the Closerie des
Lilas, or of Cremorne Gardens, the Portland Rooms, the Argyll Rooms, and
the Orpheum have long passed away. The majority of the ball-rooms of
Berlin and Paris (in London they disappeared long ago) have sunk to a
lower level. Prostitution is now dominant. The “intimacy,” which in the
earlier more idyllic ball-rooms felt so much at home, is now no longer
to be found there. It is only necessary to visit the celebrated
ball-rooms of Berlin--the Ballhaus in the Joachimstrasse, the
“Blumensäle,” etc., not to speak of the seats of baser prostitution, as,
for example, Lestmann’s Dancing-Saloon--in order to be aware of this
fact. Here also the principal thing is drinking, and always more
drinking! In Paris, in the dancing-rooms of Montmartre, we can see the
“inviteuses” in full cry; some of the French dancing-rooms, however,
appear more attractive from the æsthetic point of view than the haunts
of Terpsichore in Berlin. A dancing-saloon that was not exclusively
concerned with prostitution was that of Emberg in the Schumannstrasse,
but in the year 1906 this was closed for ever. Now, similar great
ball-rooms exist, properly speaking, only in the suburbs--in Halensee,
Grünau, Nieder-Schönhausen, etc. Here also, however, the dance is not
the principal thing--procurement and prostitution are widely diffused,
as was pointed out fifty years ago by Thomas Bade in his essay, in this
respect most convincing, “Ueber Gelegenheitsmacherei und Öffentliches
Tanzvergnügen”--“Procurement in Relation to Public Ball-Rooms” (Berlin,
1858).

3. =Variety Theatres, Low Music-Halls, and Cabarets.=--The principal
object of these places, so characteristic of our time, is “to kill time”
in as amusing a manner as possible, “amusement” being what the “average
sensual man” of to-day, dull and empty-headed, demands. What he wants is
the satisfaction of his desire for sensations by the appearance of more
or less décolleté singers, dancers, acrobats, male and female, by the
representation of tableaux vivants in which the parts are played by
beautiful women, by the kinematograph, or by pantomime, by spicy songs,
by the performance of clever jugglers, by wrestling and boxing matches
between men and women, by juggling, and all kinds of spectacles, etc. In
short, the most diverse “varieties”--hence the name--of amusement are
offered here, and it is significant that these places of pleasure first
appeared in the great seaports of Liverpool, London, Hamburg, and
Marseilles, where the sailors, after the weary monotony of long sea
voyages, found satisfaction in the variegated display of enjoyment
offered to them in such places. Now the monotony, the emptiness of their
life, drives innumerable crowds of townsmen to the variety theatres,
which, even though as little as the drinking-saloons can they be called
true “places” of prostitution, still serve as localities in which
prostitutes meet their clients; and in this way evening after evening a
large number use them as the field of their activities.

The lowest class of variety theatre, the “_Tingel-Tangel_” (low
music-hall), also euphemistically called “Academy of Music,” is, in
fact, nothing more than a brothel, the only difference being that the
actual sexual intercourse does not take place in the house itself, as so
often occurs in the similar “animierkneipen.” The singers appearing in
these “tingel-tangel” are all low-class prostitutes. In most cases,
whilst one of their number is practising the “art of song” (_sit venia
verbo_), the others, sitting about the hall in shameless décolleté,
display their charms, and incite (“animieren”) the visitors to drink.
Clerks and students form the indulgent audience; in seaport towns the
audience consists generally of sailors. Who is not familiar with the
most celebrated tingel-tangel streets in the world, the Spielbudenplatz
and the Reeperbahn, in St. Pauli, near the docks of Hamburg? In these
streets we see one variety theatre after another, and all are crowded by
a smoking, drinking audience, taking part in the choruses of the songs.
A peculiar kind of these places of pleasure is constituted by the
so-called “=Rummel=,” a speciality of Berlin. Wherever, within or
without the town limits, by the demolition of old houses or in any other
way, a large area remains free from building for a considerable time,
these tingel-tangel proprietors invade the place, erect merry-go-rounds
and cake-stalls, and there develops in the place a manifold activity, in
which the lower classes of the population exclusively share. Here the
very lowest types of prostitute seek their prey, and find it.

4. “=Boarding-Houses=” (“=Pensionate=”) =and Maisons de Passe= (=Houses
of Accommodation=).--Anyone walking through the streets of Berlin will
not fail to notice boards at the doors of certain houses, bearing the
inscription, “Here rooms can be hired by the month, week, or day.” I do
not assert that this announcement =always= represents an invitation to
fornication, or the provision of an opportunity therefor; but in many
cases these announcements serve as indications of the “intercourse”
obtainable in such dwellings. Often several stories, or even the entire
house, is devoted to this purpose. It professes to be a “Private Hotel”
or Furnished Lodgings; but in reality it is a masked brothel, a “house
of accommodation” for prostitutes and their clients, a place in which
the landlord--in most cases the landlord is of the female sex--has for
principal occupation the practice of procurement. Other dwellings,
=without= these sufficiently well-known and suspicious boards attached
to the door-posts, passing under the less striking name of a “pension,”
are adapted rather for the exquisite and artificial enjoyment of the
richer classes, and are employed for sexual orgies of a more extensive
character, for the procurement and seduction of young girls, and for the
assignations of the higher classes of the demi-monde and their
clientèle.

5. “=Massage Institutes.=”--To these distinctly modern establishments,
which mainly subserve the purposes of masochistic prostitution, we shall
return in the chapter on masochism. Many prostitutes have some knowledge
of massage, and masquerade as “masseuses”; their supplementary
profession is ordinary prostitution, and for this reason we are
justified in alluding to them in this section.

6. =The Weibercafés.=--These are found in all the large towns,
especially in London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, and Buda-Pesth, and they
serve as the principal places in which =prostitution is carried on by
day=. Prostitutes sit here in great numbers hour after hour, and wait
for their clients, who, of course, must pay for drinks which are
consumed. Certain cafés in Berlin--as, for example, the “Café National,”
the Café Keck in the Leipziger Strasse, etc.--are typical =nocturnal
cafes=, in which from the onset of darkness until early in the morning
prostitutes await their clients.

Naturally, the above classification does not include all varieties of
modern prostitution, which exhibits many other modes of activity. Most
of these others, however, have some sort of relationship to the
varieties already described, and it is, therefore, unnecessary to deal
with them all at length. Prostitution can, of course, be practised
anywhere; and its allurements are found in all places in which great
numbers of human beings come together.


APPENDIX

THE HALF-WORLD

To prostitution in the wider sense of the term belongs also the
“=half-world=” (“demi-monde”), under which name, first used by the
younger Dumas, we include the various categories of “mistresses,” femmes
soutenues (kept women), lorettes, cocottes, and fast women.

Alexandre Dumas, in the celebrated passage of his play “Demi-Monde” (Act
II., Scene 9), gives by the mouth of Olivier de Jalin the following
definition of the half-world:

  “All these women have made a false step in their past; they have a
  small black spot upon their name, and they go in company as much as
  possible, so that the spot may be less conspicuous. They have the same
  origin, the same appearance, the same prejudices as good society; but
  they no longer belong to it, and they form that which we call the
  half-world (demi-monde), which floats like an island upon the ocean of
  Paris, and draws towards itself, assumes, and recognizes, everything
  which falls from the firm land, or which wanders out or runs away from
  the firm land, without counting the foreign shipwrecked individuals
  who come no man knows whence.

  “Since the married men, under the protection of the legal code, have
  had the right to banish from the bosom of the family a woman who has
  forgotten her duty, the morals of married life have undergone a
  revolution which has created a new world--for what becomes of all
  these expelled, compromised women? The first of them who found herself
  shown the door, bewailed her fault, and hid her shame in retirement;
  but--the second? She sought the first one out, and as soon as there
  were two of them, they called the fault a misfortune, the crime a
  mistake, and began to make excuses for one another mutually. Having
  become three, they asked one another to dinner; having become
  four--they danced a quadrille. Now round these women there grouped
  themselves young girls also who had begun their life with a false
  step; false widows; women who bore the name of the lovers with whom
  they lived; some of those rapid ‘marriages’ which had lasted as
  liaisons of many years’ duration; finally, all the women who wished
  people to believe that they were something else than they really were,
  and did not wish to appear in their true colours. At the present day
  this irregular world is in full bloom, and its bastard society is
  greatly loved by young men. For here love is less difficult than in
  circles above--and not so expensive as in circles below.”

From the last sentence we see that the original idea of the “half-world”
was not so wide as that of the present day; above all, the former notion
did not, as it does at present, include the idea of prostitution. The
ladies of the half-world of Dumas were “not so expensive” as ordinary
prostitutes. Our modern demi-mondaines are characterized by the fact
that their price is high. They are prostitutes for the upper ten
thousand. And yet they have this in common with the other
demi-monde--that they do not, like prostitutes properly speaking, give
themselves indifferently to anyone able to pay the price, but they lay
stress on the social position of their lover for the time being, and
upon his character as a “gentleman.” They can even exhibit something of
the nature of love. The modern half-world can most aptly be compared
with the Greek hetairism. It forms a characteristic constituent of
modern “high life.” Whether this especially manifests itself on the
racecourse, at first nights at the theatre, in great charitable bazaars,
at masked balls, at fashionable seaside resorts, at Monte Carlo, at
floral festivals, and the like, there also we encounter the half-world;
and its members, in respect of beauty, toilet, distinguished appearance,
cultivation, and conversation, are in no way to be distinguished from
the ladies of high society. Certain types of the demi-monde realize, in
fact, the ideal of the Greek hetairæ; but even more than these, the
modern demi-mondaine represents elaborated enjoyment. These women are
thoroughly cultivated, the true law-givers of fashion, the arbiters in
every question of taste. Mondaines and demi-mondaines are in outward
appearance hardly to be distinguished one from the other; at least,
this is the case in Paris, where a witty writer defined the distinction
between them in this way--that the former received their lovers only in
the daytime, the latter also by night.[310] It is only the connoisseur
who is able to detect the “half-world aroma,” that indefinable quality
which gives the demi-mondaine such an exceptional value in the eyes of
the _jeunesse dorée_.

From what circles do the recruits of the half-world come? The ladies of
the theatre, the stars of the variety stage and of the ballet, send
their contingent; the aristocracy is also represented in their ranks;
but many a distinguished lorette or “fille de marbre” is of low origin,
and yet understands admirably how to adapt herself rapidly to all the
demands of high life, to drive her dog-cart as smartly as the most
genuine Countess, and in Longchamps, Karlshorst, Ostend, or Trouville,
to play the part of the fine lady.

The one distinction between them--and it is the distinction of half a
world--is the fact that this fashionable life of the demi-monde is not
provided out of their own means, but out of the pockets of one, or more
often of several, rich galants.

The type of the “grande cocotte” is encountered in its genuine and
unadulterated form only in Paris. Here the demi-mondaine plays a great
part in public life. The time of the earlier mistresses of princes, with
their political intrigues and their far-reaching spheres of influence,
is indeed over--a Lola Montez, an Aurora Königsmark is to-day no longer
possible; and yet the Parisian demi-mondaine maintains influential
relationships with the new great power of our time--the power of the
=press=. The journalists who are in the service of the demi-monde are by
George Dahlen termed the “Press-Fridoline,” because “their pens are
paid, not with ducats, but with more or less enviable hours of love in
distinguished boudoirs”;[311] and Victor Joze also describes the
advertisements--paid for by a night of love, or perhaps only by a
smile--which the writers of Paris give in the newspapers to the
distinguished cocottes of the Quartier Marbœuf or of the Avenue du Bois
de Boulogne, in order to attract the attention of Indian nabobs, Russian
Grand Dukes, or American millionaires, to this or that fashionable
beauty. This is characteristic of Paris. In other great capitals
marketable gallantry does not seek publicity in this way, but pursues a
more hidden course.

For what the German, and especially what the Berliners, term the
“half-world” is very different from the type we have just described of
the true Parisian demi-mondaine. Our half-world (the half-world of
Berlin) is recruited for the most part from intelligent prostitutes, who
are to be found chiefly in the public gardens, in the Zoological
Gardens, in the Lehrter Ausstellungspark, and in the leading
restaurants. Here =every evening= they seek new prey, every evening they
sell their charms to a new lover for a definite sum of money; whereas
the true lady of the half-world never has at any time more than one or
two admirers, who provide for all the expenses of her life, and she
never--at any rate =in public=--practises professional prostitution, as
do the women just described.

Finally, there is yet another type, which must not be confused with the
demi-monde. This is the =international prostitute=, who journeys from
one place to another, has indeed often the appearance of a distinguished
lorette, but leads a much more insecure, unstable life than the true
demi-mondaine, and often combines with prostitution the profession of an
adventuress. Now she is in Paris, now in London, now at Biarritz, now at
Monte Carlo (the principal field of her activity), now in
Constantinople, Smyrna, St. Petersburg, or Berlin. Sometimes she
undertakes a voyage of discovery to the New World. Germany provides a
not insignificant percentage of these international cocottes. Such
wanderers are especially well known in the circles of officers and of
speculators on the Bourse; by these they are not seldom “recommended,”
after the manner in which a traveller is given letters of introduction.
They may even be “raffled for,” as recently happened in an officers’
mess in Munich, and so pass to the share of the fortunate (generally
much to be commiserated) winner. Abroad they prefer to adopt French or
exotic names.

  [243] Here, in the phrase “man at length become self-conscious,” we
  have the animating idea of this work, as it is of all fruitful efforts
  at the amelioration of the human lot. See the admirable development of
  this idea in E. Ray Lankester’s Romanes lecture, “Nature and Man”; and
  also in H. G. Wells’s later writings, more especially “A Modern
  Utopia” and “New Worlds for Old.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [244] That this opinion is false, I have proved incontestably as
  regards syphilis in my book, “The Origin of Syphilis” (Jena, 1901).
  For the European and Asiatic world, syphilis is a specifically modern
  disease, not more than 400 years old.

  [245] Venice, 1534.

  [246] “La Lozana Andaluza” (“The Gentle Andalusian”), by Francesco
  Delicado. Traduit pour la première fois, texte Espagnol en regard par
  Alcide Bonneau, 2 vols., Paris, 1888. Regarding this work, see my book
  “The Origin of Syphilis,” vol. i., pp. 36-43.

  [247] _Cf._ also the interesting work of Salvatore di Giacomo,
  “Prostitution in Naples in the Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth
  Centuries, based on Unpublished Documents,” revised in accordance with
  the German translation, and provided with an introduction by Dr. Iwan
  Bloch (Dresden, 1904).

  [248] Reprinted in his “Satyræ Medicæ XX.,” pp. 528-549 (Leipzig,
  1722).

  [249] _Cf._ my work on “Rétif de la Bretonne,” p. 504 _et seq._
  (Berlin, 1906).

  [250] The contents of this work are enumerated in my above-mentioned
  book, pp. 505-512.

  [251] A. J. B. Parent-Duchatelet, “De la Prostitution dans la Ville de
  Paris,” third edition, 1857 (Paris, 1836).

  [252] F. F. A. Béraud, “Les Filles Publiques de Paris” (Brussels,
  1839, 2 vols.).

  [253] Dr. Michael Ryan was an acquaintance of Arthur Schopenhauer, who
  in June, 1829, sent Ryan a copy of his book “Theoria Colorum.” _Cf._
  Eduard Grisebach, “Schopenhauer: the History of His Life,” p. 168
  (Berlin, 1897).

  [254] M. Ryan, “Prostitution in London, with a Comparative View of
  that of Paris and New York” (London, 1839).

  [255] _Cf._ in this connexion also the report from other sources given
  in my “Sexual Life in England,” vol. iii., pp. 315-319, 440-447
  (Berlin, 1903).

  [256] W. Tait, “Magdalenism: An Inquiry into the Extent, Causes, and
  Consequences of Prostitution in Edinburgh,” second edition (Edinburgh,
  1842).

  [257] R. Wardlaw, “Lectures on Female Prostitution; its Nature,
  Extent, Effects, Guilt, Causes, and Remedy,” third edition (Glasgow,
  1843).

  [258] F. I. dos Santos Cruz, “Da Prostituiçao na Cidade de Lisboa”
  (Lisbon, 1841).

  [259] “Estabelecimentos de Beneficencia para as Consultas Gratuitas,”
  pp. 203-206.

  [260] A. Potton, “De la Prostitution et de ses Conséquences dans les
  Grandes Villes, dans la Ville de Lyon en Particulier” (Paris and
  Lyons, 1842).

  [261] E. A. Duchesne, “De la Prostitution dans la Ville d’Alger depuis
  la Conquête” (Paris, 1853).

  [262] “Die Prostitution in Berlin und ihre Opfer” (Berlin, 1846).

  [263] C. Röhrmann, “Der sittliche Zustand von Berlin nach Aufhebung
  der geduldeten Prostitution des weiblichen Geschlechts”--“The Moral
  Condition of Berlin after the Abolition of Tolerated Prostitution of
  the Female Sex” (Leipzig, 1846).

  [264] F. J. Behrend, “Prostitution in Berlin, and the Measures it is
  Desirable to Adopt against Prostitution and against Syphilis,” etc. A
  work based on official sources, and dedicated to His Excellency the
  Minister von Ladenberg (Erlangen, 1850).

  [265] H. Lippert, “Prostitution in Hamburg” (Hamburg, 1848).

  [266] A. J. Gross-Hoffinger, “The Fate of Women and Prostitution, in
  Relation to the Principle of the Indissolubility of Catholic Marriage,
  and especially in Relation to the Laws of Austria and the Philosophy
  of our Time” (Leipzig, 1847).

  [267] Josef Schrank, “Prostitution in Vienna in Historical,
  Administrative, and Hygienic Relations” (Vienna, 1886, 2 vols).

  [268] “The Moral Corruption of Our Time and its Victims in their
  Relationship to the State, to the family, and to Morality, with
  especial Reference to the Conditions of Prostitution in Leipzig”
  (Leipzig, 1854).

  [269] W. M. Sanger, “The History of Prostitution” (New York, 1859).

  [270] J. Jeannel, “Prostitution in Large Towns in the Nineteenth
  Century, and the Abolition of Venereal Diseases.”

  [271] W. Acton, “Prostitution in its Various Aspects,” second edition
  (London. 1874).

  [272] Hügel, “The History, Statistics, and Regulation of Prostitution”
  (Vienna. 1865).

  [273] L. Martineau, “La Prostitution Clandestine” (Paris, 1885).

  [274] O. Commenge, “La Prostitution Clandestine à Paris” (Paris,
  1897).

  [275] V. Augagneur, “La Prostitution des Filles Mineures” (Paris,
  1888).

  [276] L. Fiaux, “La Police des Mœurs en France et dans les Principales
  Villes de l’Europe” (Paris, 1888); “Les Maisons de Tolérance, leur
  Fermeture,” 3me édition (Paris, 1862); “La Prostitution ‘Cloitrée’”
  (Brussels, 1902).

  [277] Yves Guyot, “La Prostitution: Étude de Physiologie Sociale”
  (Paris, 1882).

  [278] A. Blaschko, “The Problem of Prostitution,” published in the
  _Berliner Klin. Wochenschrift_, pp. 430-435 (1892); “Syphilis and
  Prostitution from the Hygienic Standpoint” (Berlin, 1893); “Hygiene of
  Prostitution and of Venereal Diseases” (Jena, 1900); “Prostitution in
  the Nineteenth Century” (Berlin, 1902); “The Dangers to Health
  resulting from Prostitution, and the Contest with these Dangers”
  (Berlin, 1904).

  [279] C. Lombroso and G. Ferrero, “Woman as Criminal and Prostitute.”

  [280] B. Tarnowsky, “Prostitution and Abolitionism” (Hamburg, 1890).

  [281] C. Ströhmberg, “Prostitution: a Socio-Medical Study” (Stuttgart,
  1899).

  [282] E. Dühren (Iwan Bloch), “The Sexual Life in England,” vol. i.,
  pp. 201-445 (Charlottenburg, 1901).

  [283] E. von Düring, “Prostitution and Venereal Diseases” (Leipzig,
  1905).

  [284] Goethe, in the poem “Der Gott und die Bajadere,” has very
  beautifully described the ennoblement of gross love by means of ideal
  love.

  [285] Henry Murger, in his “Vie de Bohème,” also alludes to the
  “incomprehensible” fact that “persons of standing who sometimes
  possess spirit, a name, and a coat cut according to the fashion, out
  of their love for the common will go so far as to raise to the level
  of an object of fashion a creature whom their very servant would not
  have chosen as a mistress.”

  [286] C. Lombroso, “Woman as Criminal and Prostitute,” p. 550.

  [287] Friedrich Hammer, “The Regulation of Prostitution,” published in
  _The Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_, vol. iii., No.
  10, p. 380 (Leipzig, 1905).

  [288] H. Kurella, “A Contribution to the Biological Comprehension of
  Physical and Psychical Bisexuality,” published in the _Zentralblatt
  für Nervenheilkunde_, 1896, vol. xix., p. 239.

  [289] Syphilis is not to be forgotten.

  [290] This modified Lombrosism is advocated by B. A. H. Hübner in his
  interesting work concerning prostitutes and their legal relations
  (_Monatsschrift für Kriminalpsychologie_, 1907, pp. 1-11). He found
  that among sixty-four insane prostitutes, under observation in the
  Hertzberg Asylum in Berlin, not less than 59·45 % were already
  intellectually defective at the time they had come under police
  control as prostitutes.

  [291] C. Lombroso, “Recent Advances in the Study of Criminals.”

  [292] Schrank observes (“Prostitution in Vienna,” vol. ii., p. 216)
  that striking physical peculiarities do not appear to be either more
  or less frequent among prostitutes than they are among the generality
  of the population.

  [293] G. Keben, “Prostitution in its Relation to Modern Realistic
  Literature” (Zurich, 1892).

  [294] Oda Olberg, “Poverty in the Domestic Industry of Making
  Ready-made Clothing” (Leipzig, 1896).

  [295] Anna Pappritz, “The Economic Causes of Prostitution” (Berlin,
  1903).

  [296] Pfeiffer, “Poverty and Overcrowding in Great Towns and in
  Relation to Prostitution and to Venereal Diseases,” published in _The
  Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_, 1903, vol. i., pp.
  135-144.

  [297] P. Kampffmeyer, “Poverty and Overcrowding in Great Towns,” etc.,
  published in _The Journal for the Suppression of Venereal Diseases_,
  1903, vol. i., pp. 145-160; “Bad Housing Accommodation in Relation to
  Prostitution and ‘Night-Lodgers’; the Necessary Legal Reforms,” _op.
  cit._, 1905, vol. iii., pp. 165-229.

  [298] E. v. Düring, “Prostitution and Venereal Diseases.” p. 11.

  [299] _Cf._ the description of the astonishing development of the
  French procurement of that day which is given in my “New Researches
  concerning the Marquis de Sade,” pp. 88-98 (Berlin, 1904). The Marquis
  de Sade, in his novel “The One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom,” has
  very fully described the traffic in girls of his time. Incredible
  revelations of this traffic, of the almost absolute power of the
  procuresses, and of their relations to the police, led in October,
  1906, to an action against the procuress Regine Riehl, who, under the
  mask of a dressmaker’s shop, had for years conducted a brothel, in
  which the girls were entirely robbed of their freedom, were subjected
  to corporal punishment, and never received payment for their “work.”
  _Cf._ A. Blaschko, _The Journal for the Suppression of Venereal
  Diseases_, 1906, vol. v., pp. 427-433; also Karl Kraus, “The Riehl
  Trial” (Vienna, 1906).

  [300] The literature of the “White Slave Trade” is extensive. I shall
  mention a few works only: Alfred S. Dyer, “The Trade in English Girls”
  (Berlin, 1881); the celebrated work of Alexis Splingard, “Clarissa,
  from the Dark Houses of Belgium,” with an introduction by Otto Henne
  am Rhyn, fourth edition (Leipzig, 1897); Otto Henne am Rhyn,
  “Prostitution and the Traffic in Girls” (Leipzig, 1903); Julius
  Kemény, “Hungara--Hungarian Girls in the Market: Revelations regarding
  the International Traffic in Girls” (Buda-Pesth, 1903). _Cf._ also the
  extensive references in _The Journal for the Suppression of Venereal
  Diseases_, 1904, vol. ii., pp. 207-212 (Report of the Jewish
  Commission for the Suppression of the Traffic in Girls). Regarding the
  traffic in girls in Holland, _cf._ J. Rutgers, “Sketches from
  Holland,” _ibid._, 1906, vol. v., pp. 531-355.

  [301] _Cf._ regarding the conditions in South America, the report of
  Major D. Wagner, Secretary of the German National Committee for the
  Suppression of the Traffic in Girls, published in _The Journal for the
  Suppression of Venereal Diseases_, 1900, vol. v., pp. 378-382.

  [302] Léo Taxil, “La Corruption Fin-de-Siècle,” p. 169 _et seq._
  (Paris, 1894).

  [303] Louis Fiaux, “Les Maisons de Tolérance: leur Fermeture,”
  troisième édition, pp. 169 _et seq._, 248, 250, 251 (Paris, 1892).

  [304] According to recent statistical data, from 80 to 90 % of
  barmaids (in Germany) are infected with venereal diseases, so that
  they perhaps represent the most dangerous class of prostitutes.

  [305, 306] “=Animierkneipen.=”--_Kneipe_ signifies a drinking-saloon
  or pothouse, equivalent to the French _cabaret_. The _Animierkneipe_
  is a beer-saloon at which the attendants are women (_Kellnerinnen_),
  who are engaged on the terms described in the text, and whose
  function, therefore, is to attract the male customers of the place, to
  incite them (_animieren_) to drink freely, and to play the part of
  prostitutes when required. Thus they correspond to _les inviteuses_ of
  the similar drinking-saloons in Paris.--TRANSLATOR.

  [307] H. Seyffert, “Die Animierkneipen und ihre Geheimnisse”
  (“Animierkneipen and their Secrets”), published in _Freie Meinung_,
  1906, Nos. 26 and 27. See also “Impropriety at Inns with Female
  Attendants in Prussia, with especial Reference to the Conditions in
  Cologne” (1891).

  [308] O. Rosenthal, “Alcoholism and Prostitution,” p. 46 (1905).

  [309] _Cf._ the elaborate descriptions by Hans Ostwald, “Berliner
  Tanzlokale” (Berlin and Leipzig); regarding the earlier dancing-rooms
  of London, see my “Sexual Life in England,” vol. i., pp. 324-334.

  [310] Victor Joze, “Paris-Gomorrhe. Mœurs du Jour,” p. 173 (Paris,
  1898).

  [311] Georg Dahlen, “Sketches of European Society,” p. 126 (Berlin,
  1885).




