CHAPTER XIX

THE RIDDLE OF HOMOSEXUALITY


“_Through Science to Justice!_”--MAGNUS HIRSCHFELD.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XIX

  Actual existence of original congenital homosexuality -- Its
  distinction from pseudo-homosexuality -- Homosexuality an
  anthropological phenomenon, not a manifestation of degeneration --
  Secondary origin of “homosexual neurasthenia” -- Rarity of stigmata of
  degeneration among homosexuals -- Early spontaneous appearance of
  homosexuality -- As an essential product of personality --
  Homosexuality in the child -- Physical and mental characteristics of
  completely developed homosexuality -- Effeminate and virile urnings --
  Physical peculiarities of the homosexual -- Mental peculiarities --
  Diffusion -- Numbers -- Ethnology of homosexuality -- Earlier history
  and literature -- Celebrated homosexual individuals -- Modes of
  activity of homosexual love -- Relations between homosexual and
  heterosexual individuals -- Mode of sexual intercourse -- Examples --
  Social relationships of the homosexual -- Places of rendezvous -- The
  “Allée des Veuves” of Paris -- An adventure of Victor Hugo’s -- Urning
  clubs in the Second Empire -- Urning balls at Paris -- Social
  relationships of the homosexuals of Berlin -- Meeting-places of
  urnings -- Men’s balls in Berlin -- Male prostitution -- Male brothels
  -- Blackmail -- § 175 -- Criticism of this section -- Demonstration of
  the necessity for its repeal -- Blackmail of homosexuals and suicide
  -- Need for the diffusion of general enlightenment regarding
  homosexuality -- Activity of the Scientific Humanitarian Committee --
  Homosexuality in women -- The smaller percentage of genuine female
  homosexuals -- “Thoughts of a Solitary Woman” -- Relations of
  homosexual women to men -- The Woman’s Movement and homosexuality --
  Sexual relationships of tribades -- The “protectrices” -- Social life
  of tribades -- Lesbian prostitution.

  _Appendix: Theory of Homosexuality._ -- Homosexuality a heterogeneous
  sexuality -- Insufficiency of the theory of intermediate stages -- My
  own theory of homosexuality -- The significance of homosexuality in
  relation to civilization.


CHAPTER XIX

Homosexuality--=love between man and man= (uranism), or =between woman
and woman= (tribadism), a =congenital state=, or =one spontaneously
appearing in very early childhood=--I consider “a riddle,” because, in
fact, the more closely in recent years I have come to know it, the more
I have endeavoured to study it scientifically, the more enigmatical, the
more obscure, the more incomprehensible, it has become to me. But it
=exists=. About that there is no doubt.

In the years 1905 and 1906 I was occupied almost exclusively with the
problem of homosexuality, and I had the opportunity of seeing and
examining a very large number of genuine homosexual individuals, both
men and women. I was able to observe them during long periods, both at
home and in public life. I learnt to know them--their mode of life,
their habits, their opinions, their whole activity, not only in relation
to one another, but also in relation to other non-homosexual individuals
and to persons of the opposite sex. This experience taught me the
indubitable fact that the diffusion of true homosexuality as a
congenital natural phenomenon is =far greater= than I had earlier
assumed;[502] so that I find myself now compelled to separate from true
homosexuality the other category of =acquired, apparent, occasional
homosexuality=, of the existence of which I am now, as formerly, =firmly
convinced=. I denote this latter by the term “=pseudo-homosexuality=,”
and treat of it in a separate chapter.

Formerly I believed that true homosexuality was only a variety of
pseudo-homosexuality--in a sense larval pseudo-homosexuality. Now,
however, I must recognize that true homosexuality constitutes a =special
well-defined group=, sharply distinguishable from all forms of
pseudo-homosexuality. From my medical observations, which have been as
exact and objective as possible, I must draw the conclusion that among
=thoroughly healthy individuals= of both sexes, not to be distinguished
from other normal human beings, there appears =in very early childhood=,
and certainly not evoked by any kind of external influence, an
=inclination=, and after puberty a =sexual impulse, towards persons of
the same sex=; and that this inclination and this impulse are =as
little to be altered= as it is possible to expel from a heterosexual man
the impulse towards woman.

Above all, in this definition of true original homosexuality I lay the
stress upon the word “=healthy=”; for von Krafft-Ebing, though he admits
the existence of congenital homosexuality yet regards it as a morbid
degenerative phenomenon, as the expression of severe hereditary taint
and of a neuro-psychopathic constitution; and this view is shared by
many alienists.[503] Now, we must admit that a =portion= of genuine
homosexuals--just as is the case with a portion of heterosexual
individuals--possess such a morbid constitution; and we must acknowledge
that yet =another portion= exhibit =manifestations of nervousness= and
neurasthenia, which, beyond doubt, have developed during life out of an
originally healthy state, in consequence of the struggle for life, the
painful experience of being “different” from the great mass of people,
etc.; but we ascertain that a =third=, and, in fact, the =largest,
section= of original homosexuals are thoroughly =healthy, free from
hereditary taint, physically and psychically normal=.

I have observed a great number of homosexuals belonging to all ages and
occupations in whom not the slightest trace of morbidity was to be
detected. They were just as healthy and normal as are heterosexuals. At
an earlier date, though I was not yet aware of the relatively great
frequency of true original homosexuality, it had become clear to me, on
the ground of my own anthropological theory of sexual anomalies, that
homosexuality might just as well appear in healthy human beings as in
diseased. Therein I have always agreed with Magnus Hirschfeld, the
principal advocate of this view, in opposition to the theory of the
degenerative nature of homosexuality. For me there is no longer any
doubt =that homosexuality is compatible with complete mental and
physical health=.

It is very interesting to note that von Krafft-Ebing himself later came
to the same view, and thus formally abandoned the degenerative
hypothesis. In his “New Studies in the Domain of Homosexuality” he
writes:[504]

  “In view of the experience that contrary sexuality is a congenital
  anomaly, that it represents a disturbance in the evolution of the
  sexual life, and of the physical and mental development, in normal
  relationship to the kind of reproductive glands which the individual
  possesses, =it has become impossible to maintain in this connexion the
  idea of ‘disease.’= Rather, in such a case we must speak of a
  malformation, and treat the anomaly as parallel with physical
  malformation--for example, anatomical deviations from the structural
  type. At the same time, the assumption of a simultaneous psychopathia
  is not prejudiced, for persons who exhibit such an anatomical
  differentiation from type (_stigmata degenerationis_) =may remain
  physically healthy throughout life, and even be above the average in
  this respect=. Of course, a difference from the generality so
  important as contrary sexual sensation must have a much greater
  importance to the psyche than the majority of other anatomical or
  functional variations. In this way it is to be explained that a
  disturbance in the development in the normal sexual life may often be
  antagonistic to the development of a harmonious psychical personality.

  “Not infrequently in the case of those with contrary sexuality do we
  find neuropathic and psychopathic predispositions, as, for example,
  predisposition to constitutional neurasthenia and hysteria, to the
  milder forms of periodic psychosis, to the inhibition of the
  development of psychical energy (intelligence, moral sense), and in
  some of these cases the ethical deficiency (especially when
  hypersexuality is associated with the contrary sexuality) may lead to
  the most severe aberrations of the sexual impulse. And yet we can
  always prove that, relatively speaking, the heterosexual are apt to be
  much more depraved than the homosexual.

  “Moreover, other manifestations of degeneration in the sexual spheres,
  in the form of sadism, masochism, and fetichism, are relatively much
  commoner among the former.

  “That contrary sexual sensation =cannot= thus be necessarily regarded
  as =psychical= degeneration, or even as a manifestation of disease, is
  shown by various considerations, one of the principal of which is
  =that these variations of the sexual life may actually be associated
  with mental superiority=.... The proof of this is the existence of men
  of all nations whose contrary sexuality is an established fact, and
  who, none the less, are the pride of their nation as authors, poets,
  artists, leaders of armies, and statesmen.

  “A further proof of the fact that contrary sexual sensation is =not
  necessarily disease, nor necessarily a vicious self-surrender to the
  immoral=, is to be found in the fact that all the noble activities of
  the heart which can be associated with heterosexual love can equally
  be associated with homosexual love... in the form of noble-mindedness,
  self-sacrifice, philanthropy, artistic sense, poietic activity, etc.,
  but also the passions and defects of love (jealousy, suicide, murder,
  unhappy love, with its deleterious influence on soul and body, etc.).”

According to my own investigations and observations, the =relationship
between health and disease= is among homosexuals =originally identical
with that among heterosexuals=, and only in the course of life, in
consequence of the social and individual isolation of the homosexual,
which acts on them as a =psychical trauma=, is this relationship
somewhat altered in favour of the predominance of disease. Here,
however, we have, as a rule, to do chiefly with =acquired= nervous
troubles and disorders, with the development of a peculiar type of
“=homosexual neurasthenia=,” and in these cases by superficial observers
there may easily be a confusion between _post hoc_ and _propter hoc_.

Magnus Hirschfeld, who unquestionably possesses, relatively and
absolutely, the greatest experience in the domain of homosexuality,
maintains[505] that, according to his material of investigation--and
this is of gigantic extent--at least 75 % of homosexuals are born of
healthy parents and of happy marriages, often prolific marriages, and
that nervous or mental anomalies, alcoholism, blood-relationship, and
syphilis are no more frequent among the ancestors of homosexuals than
among the ancestors of those endowed with normal sexuality. Only among
from 20 to 25 % of homosexuals was he able, in conjunction with E.
Burchard, to find hereditary taint. Only in 16 % could they find
well-developed “stigmata of degeneration”; and, indeed, those with
stigmata were throughout hereditarily tainted. This view is supported
also by the facts (to which I already alluded in my “Etiology of
Psychopathia Sexualis”) that homosexuality is universally diffused in
space and time; that it is independent of civilization, occurs among
savage races who are not exposed to the conditions giving rise to
degeneration in the same degree as civilized races; and that it is
prevalent in the country, where the degenerative influence of life in
large towns is not operative.

The most important characteristic of genuine homosexuality, its
=spontaneous appearance very early in life=, which can only be referred
to natural inheritance, appears to me to be a fact proved altogether
beyond dispute. Men of the highest and most respected professions--above
all, =judges=, =practising physicians=, =men of science=, =theologians=,
and =scholars=--have described themselves to me as having been through
and through homosexual from early childhood, so that I am thoroughly
convinced that primary homosexuality makes its appearance at any rate
very early in life.

The reports of physicians are of especially great importance. Hirschfeld
(_op. cit._, p. 12) quotes the utterance of a leading alienist, himself
homosexual: “I can and must declare that I have never known a case of
homosexuality which I could regard as other than congenital,” and the
accuracy of this statement has been confirmed to me personally by
several homosexual physicians. The idea “congenital” harmonizes very
well with the demonstrable casual =objective= cause of the first
homosexual tendencies, which we are able to learn in almost every case
of homosexuality. These can, as is well known, also occur transiently in
heterosexual individuals--a matter which is discussed in the chapter
“Pseudo-Homosexuality.” In the case of genuine homosexuality, however,
these homosexual activities play from the very beginning a predominant
rôle, and =remain permanent=, because they result from a natural
inheritance, from a deeply rooted impulse. This is shown in the
following interesting autobiography of a man of letters thirty years of
age:

  “From my earliest childhood there was something girlish in my whole
  nature, both outwardly and (more especially) inwardly. I was very
  quiet, obedient, diligent, sensitive to praise and blame, rather
  bright. I associated chiefly with adults, and was generally beloved.
  Sexual activity began in me unusually early. When I was about six
  years of age a tutor sat down on my bed, in which I was lying in a
  fever. He caressed me, and with his hand _membrum meum tetigit_. The
  voluptuous sensation which resulted was so intense that it has never
  disappeared from my memory. At school, where I always distinguished
  myself by my application and success, I sometimes enjoyed mutual
  ‘feeling’ with several other boys. From which side I inherited the
  unusual intensity of the sexual impulse I do not know, but I remember
  that when I was about twelve years old I already suffered a good deal
  from sexual desire, and that it came to me as a solution of a great
  difficulty when a comrade instructed me in the practice of
  masturbation. It is remarkable that for some time afterwards there was
  no evacuation of semen. When this first appeared I was very much
  alarmed and disquieted, but I soon became accustomed to it, and this
  the more readily because I had no doubt whatever that all men
  regularly indulged in the same pleasure. This ‘paradisaical’ state did
  not, however, last for long; and after a time, when I recognized the
  unnatural and dangerous nature of my conduct, I conducted a severe and
  unsuccessful contest against my desires. In my life generally I had a
  good deal to bear, and I can say that I have hardly preserved a single
  really pleasant memory of my past; and yet I could look back to this
  past with a certain pride and satisfaction if it had not been that the
  sexual side of my life has left such gloomy shadows in my soul.

  “I remember that from very early days my eyes involuntarily turned
  with longing towards elderly vigorous men, but I did not pay much
  attention to this fact. I believed that I only practised masturbation
  (the influence of which I doubtless exaggerate in memory to some
  extent) because it was not possible for me to have sexual intercourse
  with women. I was accustomed sometimes to have friendly association
  with young girls, who appeared to be extremely attracted towards me. I
  always took care, however, that such love tendencies were nipped in
  the bud, because I felt that it was impossible for me to go any
  further with them. Ultimately I determined to seek salvation in
  intercourse with prostitutes, although they were disagreeable to my
  æsthetic and moral feelings; but I got no help here: either I was
  unable to complete the normal sexual act, or in other cases it was
  completed without any particular pleasure, and I was always consumed
  with anxiety with respect to infection. I had, indeed, often the
  opportunity of forming an ‘intimacy’ with a woman, but I did not do
  it, and always supposed that my failure to do so depended upon my
  ridiculous bashfulness and upon the excessive sensitiveness of my
  conscience. But though there is some truth in both of these
  suggestions, I have not taken into account the principal
  grounds--namely, that I am congenitally homosexual, and that I feel no
  physical attraction, or almost none, towards the other sex. This
  suffices to explain the fact (which can be explained in no other way)
  that when masturbating I almost always represented in imagination
  handsome elderly men. In my lascivious dreams, also, such men play the
  principal rôle. These longings were so powerful that it was impossible
  that I should not soon have my attention directed to them; but as I
  could not understand them and would not take the matter seriously (I
  knew, indeed, that man =must= feel drawn towards woman, and not
  towards man), I continued unceasingly and despairingly to fight
  against these fixed ideas, while at the same time with varying success
  I endeavoured to cure myself of masturbation; for in the first place
  it now gave very little satisfaction, and in the second place it
  destroyed my hopes of eventually procreating healthy children. I had
  almost come to believe myself no longer competent for the sexual life
  when I noticed one day that the view of a _membrum virile_ set my
  blood flowing fiercely. I then remembered that this had sometimes
  happened before, although to a less marked extent. I was now compelled
  to recognize that I was not the same as every one else. This fact,
  which I had before suspected, and of which I now became more and more
  firmly convinced, reduced me to despair, which was all the greater
  because in other ways I felt extremely unhappy, and because I did not
  dare to speak of it to any human being. Sometimes I still thought that
  there must be some ‘misunderstanding,’ and that there must be some
  salvation for me. Then it happened that a simple girl fell in love
  with me, and I went so far as to enter into an intimacy with her,
  although I openly assured her that as far as I was concerned it was
  simply a matter of physical enjoyment, and that I could not in any way
  make myself responsible for her future, for which reason care must be
  taken that there should be no offspring. During this intimacy, which
  lasted several months, I sometimes overcame my enduring inclinations
  towards men, but completely to suppress them was impossible. My
  association with the girl was still continuing, when one day in a
  public lavatory I saw an elderly gentleman whose appearance greatly
  pleased me. He looked at me tentatively. Cautiously he leaned over, in
  order _membrum meum videre_; he gradually drew near to me, moved his
  shaking hand and ... _membrum meum tetigit_. I was so much surprised
  and alarmed that I ran away, and avoided for some time afterwards
  passing by the same place. All the stronger, however, was the impulse
  to find this remarkable man once more, and this was not at all
  difficult. What an enigma such a man seemed to me! How could it
  happen that he dared to do that of which I had always been able only
  to think, to dream, with heart-quaking and horror? Could there,
  perhaps, be another man like this--perhaps several such exceptional
  beings? A short period convinced me that I was not quite alone in my
  way of feeling; but this was a weak consolation. Rather, since that
  time--that is to say, during the last five years--my inward battle has
  become more unbearable, for earlier my only battle was to reject
  homosexual ideas, and to overcome the habit of solitary self-abuse.
  Now sometimes I practise with another mutual onanism (to me the proper
  ‘natural’ mode of sexual gratification), and yet I cannot forgive
  myself for doing it because it is effected in so unæsthetic a manner,
  and is associated with such dangers. Notwithstanding all my
  endeavours, however, I have never been able to resist the temptation
  for a long time together; and thus I am hunted always by my impulse as
  by a wild animal, and can nowhere and in nothing find repose and
  forgetfulness. I have frequently changed my place of residence, but I
  always before long form new ‘relationships.’ The tortures which I
  suffer in consequence of the incomparable power of the impulse are
  greater them I can possibly express in words. I can only wonder that I
  did not lose my reason, and that in the eyes of my friends and
  acquaintances I am now, as before, ‘the most normal of all human
  beings.’ In the senseless and utterly unsuccessful contest with an
  impulse which, as far as I am concerned, is wholly, or almost wholly,
  congenital, I have lost the best of my powers, although I have long
  recognized the fact that this impulse in and by itself is neither
  morbid nor sinful, for a divergence from the norm is not a disease,
  and the gratification of a natural impulse, which in no respect and
  for no human being leads to evil consequences, cannot be regarded as
  sinful. Why, then, must I continue to strive against this impulse like
  a madman? Because it is very generally misunderstood, so unpardonably
  condemned. What help is it that I am now surrounded by love and
  respect? I know that so many would turn away from me with horror if
  they were to learn my sexual constitution, although it is a matter
  which does not concern them at all. Scorn and contempt would then be
  my lot. I should be regarded by the majority of human beings as a
  libertine; whereas I feel and know that, notwithstanding all the
  sensuality of my nature, I have been created for some other purpose
  than simply to follow my lustful desire. Who will believe that I
  suffer in the struggle with myself? Who will have compassion upon me?
  This idea is intolerable. I am condemned to eternal solitude. I have
  not the moral right to found a home, to embrace a child who would give
  me the name of ‘father.’ Is not this punishment sufficiently severe
  for God knows what sins? Why, then, should the consciousness be
  superadded that I am a pariah, an outcast from society? Owing to the
  opinion of society regarding the homosexual--an opinion based upon
  ignorance, stupidity, and ill-nature--society drives these unhappy
  beings to death (or to a marriage which in their case is criminal),
  and then triumphantly exclaims: ‘Look what degenerate beings they
  are!’ No, they are not degenerates, those whose lives you have made
  unbearable; they are for the most part spiritually and morally very
  healthy human beings. I will speak of myself. Why do I long for death?
  Certainly not because I am mentally abnormal. I am no morbid
  pessimist, and I know well enough that life can be very beautiful.
  But, unfortunately, it cannot be so for me; for my life is a hell; I
  am intolerably weary of my internal conflict; it has become horribly
  difficult to me to play the hypocrite, to pretend continually to be a
  happy man rejoicing in life; I am bending beneath the burden of my
  heavy iron mask. Recently I had myself hypnotized, in order to have my
  thoughts turned away as far as possible from sexual matters. My
  hypnotist said to me: ‘You see, you will be at rest now,’ and
  involuntarily in sleep I had to swallow these words, ‘Be at rest’!
  Good God, is that possible? Does the ‘normal’ man know how this word
  sounds in our ears? Who will understand my intolerable pain? Perhaps
  my dear parents could have done so, as they loved me above all, as if
  they had a presentiment that I should be the most unhappy of their
  children; but they have been dead for several years, and so,
  notwithstanding my numerous relatives and friends, I stand quite alone
  in this world, and vainly seek an answer to the questions ‘Why?’ and
  ‘Wherefore?’”

Genuine homosexuality exhibits, like heterosexuality, the character of
an impulse arising from the =very nature= of the personality, which, in
activity from the cradle to the grave, expresses the =continuity of the
individual= in respect also of this peculiar sexual tendency. Thus there
does not exist a homosexuality =limited= merely to a certain age of
life, as to childhood or youth, to maturity, or even to old age. Hence
we must distinguish from genuine homosexuality the pæderasty of old men
described by Schopenhauer, which does not begin till old age appears. We
must distinguish, also, the love of Greek boys for elderly men; these
must be included in the category of =pseudo-homosexuality=. An
inclination which, like original homosexuality, is an =outflow of the
essential nature= of the individual concerned, cannot disappear so long
as the individual himself persists, cannot begin or end except with the
beginning or end of his life. Homosexuality extends throughout the
lifetime, and if by any cause whatever--for example, enforced
marriage--it is apparently temporarily suppressed, it always reappears.
It seems very doubtful if there really exists, as von Krafft-Ebing[506]
assumes, a genuine =retarded= homosexuality--that is, original
homosexuality which does not manifest itself until a comparatively
advanced age. There do, doubtless, exist transient cases of
pseudo-homosexuality, which have in some cases developed in those
previously heterosexual, and which in other cases are superimposed upon
a bisexual basis. These belong to the category of “=acquired=”
homosexuality, which is always a pseudo-homosexuality.

The course of life of genuine homosexuals is a complete expression of
the results of simple inversion of the sexual impulse, and the
homosexual type makes its appearance in childhood. The fact of the
“=difference=” between the homosexual and others is not experienced
merely by the person himself, but is also noticed =very early= by those
who have care of him. The “girlish” (in the case of female
homosexuality, “boyish”) and “peculiar” nature is often observed by
members of the family, by comrades, and by tutors, and gives rise to the
use of nicknames. These manifestations and perceptions are a valuable
objective confirmation of the subjective sensations of homosexual
children. A Protestant clergyman whose homosexual son also studied
theology remarked to M. Hirschfeld: “He was from the very beginning
different from my five other sons.” The physical and moral peculiarities
presently to be described are often manifested in very early childhood.
Hirschfeld has frequently been able to diagnose “homosexuality” in
children from ten to fourteen years of age. He alludes, among others, to
a very timid boy, twelve years of age, who suffered from migraine, who
cried frequently, who kept himself apart from his schoolfellows, and
corresponded daily with a boy friend. He was fond of flowers and music;
he had very little inclination to mathematics (according to Hirschfeld,
a somewhat characteristic phenomenon in cases of homosexuality). The
examination of the boy, who was extremely bashful, showed that =the
genital organs were still completely undeveloped=, the penis resembling
that of a boy of four years, whilst the breasts were markedly developed
like those of a girl at the commencement of puberty.

I doubt whether the fondness on the part of boys for girls’ games, or on
the part of girls for boys’ games, can be regarded as a symptom of
diagnostic importance in regard to the existence of homosexuality, for a
fondness for playing with girls and for cooking may often be observed in
boys who later prove thoroughly heterosexual. Still, these things do
play a great part in the autobiography of homosexuals, and have, in
fact, great importance in cases in which these tendencies persist
=after= puberty, when the heterosexually differentiated psyche would,
after the transitory episode of these youthful games, display activities
now corresponding to the fully developed sexual sensibility.

Puberty is the most important period with regard to the final
=determination= of homosexuality by means of particular =physical= and
=mental= characteristics.

The consideration of the physical and mental characters of male
homosexuals leads clearly to the distinction of two different types--the
=effeminate= and the =virile= urnings. With regard to the relative
numbers of these two types there exist no definite data. Hirschfeld, in
his “Urnings,” describes chiefly the type of the more or less effeminate
urnings--that is, of those who show the greatest resemblance to the
feminine nature--and does not express an opinion as to whether the
number of effeminate homosexuals is greater than the number of virile
homosexuals--that is, of those whose nature is predominantly masculine.
Another experienced observer of urnings, Dr. J. E. Meisner,[507] is of
opinion that in the =majority= of cases the male type of homosexuals is
encountered rather than the female. According to my own observations, it
appears to me that the number of virile and of effeminate urnings is
about identical.[508] There are certainly numerous virile homosexuals,
or rather homosexuals of a thoroughly =masculine= build of body, without
great deviations from the normal type, who yet have a more or less
feminine mode of sensibility. The distinction between effeminate and
virile homosexuals would appear therefore to be only relative, and for
the majority of cases Hirschfeld’s remarks (“Urnings,” p. 86) apply:

  “A homosexual who was not distinguishable physically and mentally from
  the complete man is a being I have not yet encountered among fifteen
  hundred cases, and I am therefore unable to believe in the existence
  of such until I personally encounter one.”

More especially after removing any beard or moustache that may be
present, we sometimes see much more clearly the feminine expression of
face in a male homosexual, whilst before the hair was removed they
appeared quite man-like. Still more important for the determination of a
feminine habitus are direct physical characteristics. Among these there
must be mentioned a =considerable deposit of fat=, by which the
resemblance to the feminine type is produced, the contours of the body
being more rounded than in the case of the normal male. In
correspondence with this the =muscular system= is less powerfully
developed than it is in heterosexual men, the skin is delicate and soft,
and the complexion is much clearer than is usual in men. Last winter I
attended an urnings’ ball, and I was much impressed, when looking at the
_décolleté_ men, with the remarkable whiteness of their skin on the
shoulders, neck, and back--also in those who had not applied powder--and
by the fact that the little acne spots almost always present in normal
men were absent in these. The peculiar rounding of the shoulders was
also remarkable, from its resemblance to what one sees in women.

According to Hirschfeld, the skin of the urning almost always feels
warmer than his environment. He refers the expression commonly used
among the people (in Germany), “warm brothers,” to this circumstance,
and derives the Latin _homo mollis_ (“soft man”) from the softness of
the skin and of the muscular system (though in my opinion this term is
applied rather to the =entire= effeminate, soft nature of the urning).
Of great interest is the relation =between the breadth of the shoulders
and the width of the pelvis= in homosexual men. Whilst the breadth of
the shoulders of heterosexual men is several centimetres in excess of
the width of the pelvis, and in women the width of the pelvis is greater
than the breadth of the shoulders, according to Hirschfeld in the urning
there is little or no difference between these two measurements. This,
in respect of the bodily structure, would completely justify the
expression “intermediate stage,” and would give the homosexual man a
position between the heterosexual man and the heterosexual woman. Still,
there are, without doubt, numerous virile homosexual men in whom this
great width of the pelvis is not present. Investigations regarding the
corresponding relationships among homosexual women have not to my
knowledge hitherto been made. Very striking is the =often luxuriant
growth of hair=, especially in the effeminate types, whereas the virile
homosexuals are in this respect more approximate to normal men, baldness
being common among them.

Our attention having been recently directed by the investigation of H.
Swoboda to the existence of =equivalents of menstruation= in men, the
occurrence of such equivalents among urnings is of interest. Hirschfeld
reports the case of an effeminate homosexual who since the age of
fourteen had suffered at intervals of twenty-eight days from migraine,
associated with severe pains in the back and loins, so that his
stepmother said to him: “It is with you just as it is with us.”

The =gait= and the =movements= of effeminate urnings also have a
somewhat womanly appearance, and attract the attention even of one who
is not in the secret. Short, tripping paces and elegant movements are
characteristic of the effeminate.

In an earlier chapter we came to the conclusion that the fully adult
normal woman was approximate in physical characteristics rather to the
child and to the youthful human being than to the adult man; and in this
connexion it is of interest that we must describe as a distinctively
=feminine= characteristic the peculiarity of many male homosexuals,
which enables them =for a long time to preserve a youthful appearance
and demeanour=.

Very remarkable is the behaviour of the voice. The change in the voice
may not occur at all, or does not occur till very late. The capacity for
singing soprano or falsetto is also long preserved. Others, in whom the
change of voice had failed to occur, were able to lower the pitch
considerably by practice. A typical and well-known example is that of
the baritone singer Willibald von Sadler-Grün, whom I had the
opportunity of hearing recently, when, under the name of “Urany Verde,”
he made a professional journey through Germany, and sang his songs
dressed as a woman. He said of himself: “My voice has never cracked in a
definite way. At twenty-three years of age I could sing soprano, and can
still do so to-day, at the age of thirty. The deeper tones for speech
and singing I acquired only by instruction and practice” (Hirschfeld,
“Urnings,” p. 65). In this typical effeminate, the breasts also had a
completely feminine character, as, according to Hirschfeld, is by no
means rare in boy urnings, who at puberty experience swelling of the
breasts, associated with painful sensations.[509] I must, however,
maintain, in opposition to Hirschfeld, that abnormally marked
development of the breasts is by no means rare in perfectly normal
heterosexual men. For the diagnosis of homosexuality, the imperfect
development of the larynx, and the failure of the voice to crack, are
more important than the marked development of the breasts. I remember
distinctly that in the case of a fellow-student of mine years ago his
high voice used greatly to strike me. To-day I am able to understand how
this fact was associated with his complete disinclination to sexual
intercourse with women and his insensibility to feminine charms in
general; and I am able in his case to diagnose homosexuality with
absolute certainty.

In the case of =virile= homosexuals, all the above-mentioned physical
peculiarities are far less noticeable. In their outward appearance they
much more nearly resemble heterosexual men, but still they always have
=comparatively= more of the feminine in their nature than the latter.
Such a typically virile homosexual, in whose appearance the impression
of femininity was entirely absent, I was able recently to recognize
during a railway journey, in the course of which he confided to me
misogynous opinions against other fellow-travellers, and also said that
in the whole of his life--he was a man of a little over thirty--he had
not had intercourse with women more than three or four times. During the
long wait of the train at a station I took the opportunity, having
mentioned that I was a physician by profession, to ask him if he was not
homosexual, a fact which he at once admitted. Already in very early
childhood he had felt himself distinctly drawn only towards masculine
beings, and had =never= experienced the least inclination towards women.
In this case also any kind of outward influence was excluded, because he
had grown up at home and chiefly in a =feminine= environment. As I have
already said, in appearance he was masculine, and he himself stated that
he had no physical characteristics which suggested a feminine
impression. That this is the case in numerous virile homosexuals is
proved by the distinctive fact that many of them are =professional
soldiers=, especially officers, in respect of whose appearance virility
is very strongly insisted on.

The =mental= qualities of male homosexuals correspond fully to the
physical, and occupy a middle region between the psyche of the
heterosexual man and that of woman. But every =emotional element= is in
them more prominent than energetic will-power and clear-sighted reason.
Something soft and pliable is characteristic of the majority of urnings.
This adaptability manifests itself in good-humouredness, in inclination
to self-sacrifice, but, above all, in a most astonishing =mobility of
the imaginative life=, which seems to be something characteristic of the
homosexual, and to explain his frequent artistic capacity, above all his
talents for =music=, for which vocation, indeed, his less fixed and more
sketchy nature especially fits him, but also for poetry, painting,
acting, and sculpture. “For all the fine arts,” says Hirschfeld, “from
cooking and artistic needlework to sculpture, we find that urnings have
exceptional talent.” The inclination to intellectual occupation is
distinctly greater among homosexuals than the inclination to bodily
work. Associated with this is the ambition to distinguish themselves
mentally above those by whom they are surrounded. Hirschfeld’s assertion
that homosexuals belonging to the lower classes exhibit intellectual
predominance over their environment, I am able emphatically to confirm,
after frequent conversations with homosexual workmen and menservants.
The peculiarity of their congenital tendencies has here early given rise
to a certain intellectual profundity, has early taught these men to
=reflect= about the world and about human existence. Every homosexual is
a philosopher for himself. Most heterosexuals, especially those of the
lower classes, never arrive at thinking so much about themselves and
about their relations to the external world, as is a matter of course
among homosexuals. The =imaginative=, the =dreamy=, is much more
predominant in the homosexual than a crude sense of reality. This
expresses itself particularly in his love, which far less frequently and
exclusively than among the heterosexual takes the form of a gross and
material sensuality. On the contrary, it permits us to recognize the
inward need for tenderness and delicacy, for a peculiar ideal colouring.
Goethe has contrasted this latter with the more sensual heterosexual
love; he speaks of the

  “remarkable phenomenon of the love of men for each other. Let it be
  admitted that this love is seldom pushed to the highest degree of
  sensuality, but rather occupies the intermediate region between
  inclination and passion. I am able to say that I have seen with my own
  eyes the most beautiful manifestations of this love, such as we have
  handed down to us from the days of Greek antiquity; and as an
  observant student of human nature I was able to observe the
  intellectual and moral elements of this love.”[510]

The ideal conception of Platonic--that is, of homosexual--love was a
non-sensual, assexual love. The psychical element also plays an
important part in modern uranism--a part overlooked or underestimated,
whereas the sensual side is exaggerated.

Homosexuality as an anthropological phenomenon is diffused throughout
all classes of the population. We find it among workmen just as much as
among aristocrats, princely personalities, and intellectual heroes.
Physicians, lawyers, theologians, philosophers, merchants, artists,
etc., all contribute their contingents to uranism. If the
extraordinarily frequent occurrence of homosexuality in the highest
classes of society, especially in the leaders of the aristocracy, may
possibly be brought into relationship with the processes of
“degeneration,” still, on the other hand, numerous homosexuals are
derived from healthy families, such as have not transmitted hereditary
taint through a long series of ancestors. Recently G. Merzbach[511] has
studied the relationship between homosexuality and the choice of a
profession, and has proved that this choice is usually a consequence of
the natural tendency. Thus we find an especially large number of
homosexuals engaged in the production of ready-made clothing and in
other manufacturing trades; others become music-hall comedians playing
women’s parts, actors, dancers. Actors and singers appearing on the
stage as women are to a large extent original homosexuals.[512] Among
hairdressers and waiters we find also a relatively large number of
urnings.

As regards the =diffusion= of homosexuality, the data obtainable up to
the most recent times have been extremely contradictory. The first exact
information is to be found in the work of a physician, published under
the name of M. Kertbeny,[513] on “§ 143 of the Prussian Criminal Code of
April 14, 1851, and its Continuance as § 152 in the Proposal for a
Criminal Code for the North German Bund” (Leipzig, 1869). The author
enumerates in Berlin 10,000 homosexuals among 700,000 inhabitants (equal
to 1·425 %). A patient of von Krafft-Ebing, living in a town of 13,000
inhabitants, was acquainted with 14 urnings; and in another town of
60,000 he knew of at least 80. Many other equally uncertain estimates
are recorded by Magnus Hirschfeld. They vary between 2 % and
0·1 %--vary, that is to say, within very wide limits. In view,
therefore, of the importance of the exact determination of the number of
homosexuals, which I myself had earlier declared to be desirable, we owe
great thanks to Magnus Hirschfeld for having made an attempt[514] to
obtain some exact data regarding this matter. He deduces from a
compilation of thirty test investigations (reports regarding homosexuals
in various classes of the population), and by means of an inquiry made
with sealed letters, that the proportion of male homosexuals to the
population =is about= 1·5 %. That is a very much =greater= percentage
than has hitherto been assumed to exist. Formerly I doubted the accuracy
of this figure, but since numerous respected, honourable, well-behaved
persons, of whom I had not suspected it, have assured me that they have
been homosexual since childhood, I have no longer any doubt regarding
the approximate accuracy of Hirschfeld’s statistics. The enquiry made by
Dr. von Römer in Amsterdam gave similar results, for he found the
proportion of homosexuals to be 1·9 %. A third enquiry made by
Hirschfeld among the metal-workers of Berlin gave a proportion of 1·1 %.

=Normal heterosexual= love was reported in about 94 to 96 % of the three
inquiries.

  “An imposing recognition of the love of man for woman, a powerful
  manifestation of the provision for the preservation of the species,
  and a contradiction to the fear that the uranian element in the
  population could ever seriously impair the well-being of the great
  majority” (Hirschfeld).

As “=bisexual=”--that is, as exhibiting tendencies towards both
sexes--the average of the three enquiries reported 3·9 %, of whom,
however, 0·8 % were mainly homosexual.

The total number of the purely and mainly homosexual was thus 2·2 %.
Hence, according to the results of the last census of 1900, in the total
population of the German Empire, numbering 56,367,178, there would be
about 1,200,000 =homosexuals=; whilst of the population of Berlin,
numbering 2,500,000, 56,000 would be homosexual.

In the interest of the scientific and social study of homosexuality, it
is urgently necessary that these statistical investigations should be
pursued, for if it should appear that the above estimates really apply
to the whole Empire--which I do not feel justified in assuming without
further evidence, since it is naturally possible that Berlin might
contain a relatively greater number of homosexuals--uranism would, in
fact, have a greater social importance than it has hitherto been assumed
to possess. In any case, the number of urnings is large enough to make
them appear a remarkable anthropological variety of our race.

The truth of this assertion is supported by the fact of the ubiquitous
diffusion of uranism in time and space. In addition to homosexuality as
a popular custom, genuine homosexuality also played a part in antiquity;
and F. Karsch[515] has proved in an admirable book its occurrence among
all savage races, although unquestionably numerous cases of non-genuine
homosexuality must have been included. That homosexuality is in no
way a sign of “degeneration” is proved also by the fact that it is
more widely diffused among the still thoroughly vigorous Germans and
Anglo-Saxons than it is among the Latin peoples. It is especially
frequent in the German Ostsee provinces. It existed among the ancient
Scandinavians.[516] Recently F. Karsch has announced the publication of
ethnological researches on homosexuality, the first volume of which
has already been issued, under the title “Homosexual Life among
the Inhabitants of Eastern Asia: the Chinese, the Japanese, and
the Koreans”[517] (Munich, 1906). In the preface he states expressly
that he treats not only of original homosexuality, but also of
artificially produced or acquired homosexuality--that which I call
“pseudo-homosexuality.”

My earlier view, that true homosexuality is rare among the =Jews=, I
find it necessary to revise, for recently I have made the acquaintance
of numerous Jewish homosexuals.

For the =earlier history and literature of homosexuality= the most
important, and, in fact, nearly exhaustive, sources are the article
“Pæderasty,” by Meier, in Ersch and Gruber’s “General Encyclopædia,”
section iii., part 9, pp. 149-189 (Leipzig, 1837); Rosenbaum’s “History
of Syphilis in Antiquity,” pp. 119-227[518] (Halle, 1893); and, finally,
the writings of the earliest German student of homosexuality, containing
numerous interesting data, the Hanoverian official Karl Heinrich
Ulrichs,[519] who, under the pseudonym “Numa Numantius,” published
numerous works devoted to the emancipation of homosexuals, and to the
proof of the congenital nature of homosexuality. The general title of
these works is “Anthropological Studies on the Sexual Love of Man for
Man.” They were published under various peculiar separate titles, such
as: “Vindex” (Leipzig, 1864); “Inclusa” (Leipzig, 1864); “Vindicta”
(Leipzig, 1865); “Formatrix” (Leipzig, 1865); “Ara Spei” (Leipzig,
1865); “Gladius Furens” (Kassel, 1868); “Memnon” (Schleiz, 1868);
“Incubus” (Leipzig, 1869); “Argonauticus” (Leipzig, 1869); “Araxes”
(Schleiz, 1870); “Uranus” (Leipzig, 1870); “Kritische Pfeile”
(Stuttgart, 1879). In addition, Ulrichs, whose lifetime extended from
1825 to 1895, published uranian poetry under the title of “Auf Bienchens
Flügeln” (“On the Wings of the Bee”); Leipzig, 1875. These writings,
most of which are very rare in their original editions (although many
were reprinted in the year 1898), contained a number of new points of
view for the consideration of homosexuality, which have been recognized
as sound by recent investigators.

Important contributions to the knowledge of homosexuality are afforded
us by the studies of the life and works of celebrated and intellectually
distinguished urnings. As unquestionably homosexual we may mention the
poet Platen,[520] Michael Angelo,[521] Heinrich Hössli,[522] Heinrich
Bulthaupt,[523] Johannes von Müller (the historian),[524] King Henry
III. of France,[525] the musician Franz von Holstein,[526] Peter
Tschaikowsky,[527] the authors Count Emmerich von Stadion and Emil Mario
Vacano,[528] Duke August von Gotha,[529] George Eekhoud,[530] and the
Belgian sculptor Jérôme Duquesnoy (1602-1654).[531] The following
celebrated persons have also been regarded as urnings, but, as it
appears to me, on insufficient proofs: Frederick the Great; J. J.
Winkelmann, who at most was bisexual, since we know of passionate
letters written by him to a woman; and Alexander von Sternberg,[532] of
whom the same is true; the reformers Beza[533] and Calvin,[534] who have
unquestionably been wrongfully accused; and finally Byron and
Grillparzer,[535] without troubling to enumerate hypotheses utterly
without foundation. It is unquestionably a fact that a large number of
intellectually prominent men were genuine homosexuals, and that their
abnormal congenital tendencies did not prevent their doing important
work in other spheres of activity. But this happened =notwithstanding=,
and =not=, as many talented apologists wish to prove, =because of= their
uranism.

When we pass to consider the =activity= of homosexual love, we find that
homosexuals may, and actually do, love either other homosexual or
heterosexual individuals. According to the account given by Meisner
(“Uranism,” pp. 19, 20), the amatory ideal of most homosexual men is a
heterosexual man, and intercourse between two urnings is, properly
speaking, only a matter of necessity. But by several homosexuals with
whom I discussed the matter this view was declared to be erroneous; in
the majority of cases the attraction between two homosexuals plays the
principal rôle. Ulrichs endeavoured to provide a theoretical
justification for the sexual relationship between two homosexuals, and
maintained (_cf._, for example, “Inclusa,” pp. 64, 65) that Nature
destined the heterosexual, or “dioning,” as he calls them, by no means
for woman alone, but also for the urning, for the “fulfilment of the
sexual purposes of Nature, not directed towards reproduction.” According
to Hirschfeld (“Urnings,” pp. 22, 23), it is unquestionable that, whilst
many homosexuals greatly prefer to associate with those who also feel in
a uranian manner, and whilst to many also it is a matter of indifference
whether or not those with whom they have sexual relations are themselves
endowed with contrary sexuality, quite a number of urnings feel
attracted =exclusively= to normal, sexually powerful natures. As a rule,
it is not difficult for homosexuals to gratify their inclinations in
intercourse with heterosexual individuals. A middle-aged urning informed
me that young heterosexual men =almost always= acceded in this matter
to the expressed wish of homosexuals--in the first place from simple
curiosity, and in the second place by no means rarely from sexual
excitement. Indeed, according to this authority, effeminate homosexual
men often produce in powerfully sensual heterosexual men the impression
of femininity, and are seduced by the latter to mutual masturbation,
especially in a state of alcoholic intoxication. Not infrequently does
it happen--a striking example having come to my knowledge--that a young
heterosexual has a love intimacy with a girl, and yet occasionally, when
he is for any reason unable to have sexual intercourse with her, he
=very willingly= transfers his affections to a homosexual man. Male
prostitutes are also, to a large extent, heterosexual men who give
themselves to homosexuals for pecuniary reward. Occasionally, moreover,
heterosexual men mistake very effeminate urnings going about in women’s
clothing for genuine women, and have intercourse with them in this
belief--a belief which these latter are clever enough to keep up until
the last possible moment.

Passing now to the consideration of the special circumstances of sexual
attraction, we find that the true love of boys,[536] or rather the love
of children (=pædophilia=), is rare in homosexuals. The age chiefly
preferred is that between seventeen and twenty-five years, alike by
mature homosexual men and by old men. On the other hand, it =is by no
means an exceptional phenomenon= for youths, or even mature men, to feel
attracted exclusively by elderly men (the so-called “=gerontophilia=”).
There exists also a heterosexual “gerontophilia”--that is to say,
abnormal love exhibited by young men for old women, or by young women
for old men. Thus Féré reports (“Note sur une Anomalie de l’Instinct
Sexuel: Gerontophilie,” published in the _Journal de Neurologie_, 1905)
the case of a man twenty-seven years of age who was sexually attracted
only by white-haired, elderly women. He referred this to an impression
received in very early youth. When four years old he slept in the same
bed with an elderly lady, a family friend, who was visiting the house,
and he then for the first time experienced sexual excitement. He had a
dislike to young girls and young married women. A white-haired elderly
woman whom he loved dyed her hair light brown, whereupon he ceased to
care for her. Further, effeminate urnings prefer virile homosexuals;
whereas many of these latter have a great dislike to effeminates and to
men in women’s clothing--to those male “women” who adopt by preference
feminine nicknames, such as Louisa instead of Louis, Georgina instead of
George, and who speak to one another as “sister,” just as the Roman
Emperor Heliogabalus wished to be addressed as “mistress” instead of
“lord.” Many urnings love beardless men; others love men with a
moustache or a full beard; many homosexuals are fascinated by
bright-coloured cloth, just as women are. Moreover, every possible
individual detail may here have an attractive force, just as is the case
with heterosexual love (the hair, the stature, the gait, the eyes, the
intelligence, and the character).

Ideal love and the gratification of the grossest sensuality are also the
two poles between which the =amatory manifestations= of male homosexuals
oscillate. Many confine themselves to simple contacts, caresses, kisses
and embraces. Most frequently sexual gratification is obtained by mutual
masturbation. The idea that the non-homosexual especially associates
with the word “pæderasty” is “pædication”[537]--that is, _immissio
membri in anum_. This sexual act is, however, far less frequent than it
is commonly assumed to be by heterosexuals. According to Magnus
Hirschfeld, it occurs only in 8 %, according to G. Merzbach only in 6 %,
of all cases of intercourse between male homosexuals. In an essay on
pædication which I possess, written by a homosexual, it is represented
as much commoner, and as “the most natural and least harmful means of
gratification.” According to a verbal communication made to me, the
author of this essay knew of one hundred cases of pædication in which no
harm had resulted. Frequently _coitus inter femora_ takes the place of
pædication; still more frequently “fellation,” or _coitus in os_, and
the widely diffused “tongue kiss.”[538] Other perverse manifestations of
the homosexual impulse also occur, such as anilinctus, fetichism,
masochism, sadism, exhibitionism, etc., just as they occur in
heterosexual individuals.

With regard to the relations of true homosexuals to women, generally
speaking they =loathe sexual intercourse= with woman, but they do not
dislike woman herself. Women, on the contrary, are greatly liked by most
homosexuals; effeminate urnings more especially gladly seek their
society, in order to gossip with them about all kinds of feminine
belongings. =Marriages= are often contracted by homosexuals who are
really ignorant as to their own condition, or who hope to conceal it
from the world, or simply for pecuniary considerations. They result most
unhappily if the wife has need of love, and understands the real nature
of the case; or, again, if she becomes jealous of her husband’s male
lovers; but when the wife is frigid, they may turn out quite happily.
They are, however, always very unnatural. Hirschfeld[539] has thoroughly
discussed the question of the marriage of homosexuals, and has also
alluded to the occasional marriages between homosexual men and
homosexual women. The fact proved by him that among homosexuals the
impulse towards the preservation of the species is almost entirely
wanting--not more than 3 % have the wish to possess children--shows how
little fitted they are for the purposes of marriage.

The above-described sexual relationships may be illustrated by a few
original reports taken from the autobiographies of homosexuals. For
example, a homosexual man, twenty-seven years of age, writes:

  “When I was young, from four to six years of age, I loved to look at
  the male generative organs, without knowing why they attracted me. I
  liked to look at sculpture and pictures representing male nudity. I
  detest woman’s work and the fashions of the day: a simple costume
  suffices for me. I learned the ‘great secret of the world’ when I was
  twelve years old, but woman had no interest for me, and I was always
  asking little boys of from ten to fourteen years of age to show me
  their private parts. I commenced to have carnal intercourse with boys
  (aged eighteen to twenty-four) when I was myself twenty-four. Only
  _coitus inter femora_, face to face, never from behind. I always
  assume the active rôle. A young man from eighteen to twenty-four years
  of age is to me like a woman. A woman is to me a thing (!), not so a
  man. Perhaps it is original, odd for our time; but what is to be done?
  Woman is a machine for producing children, and nothing more. I am not
  married, and never shall marry.”

Another homosexual writes:

  “I was about five years old when, walking with a nursemaid in the
  pleasure gardens, I saw a man masturbating. Although I did not know
  what he was doing, the picture busied my imagination for many years.
  In my dreams, up to the age of fourteen years, the thought of living
  together with a companion of the same age as myself played the
  principal part. At the age of thirteen I fell in love with a
  schoolfellow, who was, however, but little inclined towards me. What
  perhaps especially interested me in him was that he brought sexual
  enlightenment to our class. Through moving to another town I lost
  sight of him. Although at that time I knew nothing of the real sexual
  life, still I sought for objects which excited my sensuality.

  “An unknown man of about thirty-five years of age seduced me, and
  practised pæderasty with me on the first occasion that he met me. I
  felt that there was something altogether wrong about this practice,
  but was too weak to withdraw myself from his influence. After about
  three months he disappeared. Now also I knew what masturbation was,
  for in the school this practice was common.

  “At the age of eighteen I left the school, and as in my comrades the
  impulse towards women now showed itself, I, for my part, felt all the
  more how everything directed me towards man. I often endeavoured, in
  obedience to the urging of my friends, to form relationships with
  women of the half-world, but this always filled me with the greatest
  horror and repugnance. To me it is a dreadful feeling when I notice
  that a woman is interested in me. All the more, on the other hand, did
  the male sex interest me. When I love a man I do not think (only) of
  sexual union, but I try to read in him what I am myself prepared to
  give: a sole interest, faithfulness, unselfish surrender. If I love a
  man, anyone else is nothing to me.

  “Every man of standing of twenty to forty years of age is interesting
  to me--every one who is not positively repulsive--but most of all
  anyone who possesses a distinguished psyche. In isolated cases
  sympathy has also led me to love.

  “The kiss is of the highest importance to me, and precisely because I
  regard love as created only for a holy purpose, so that human beings
  may be mutually ennobled and morally advanced by this passion, it has
  always been repulsive to me to observe how men flirt with one another,
  just as is the case with heterosexuals. For this reason I am
  disinclined to visit places of general resort--such as, for example,
  the Casino of Dresden, where all kinds of people come together. I have
  met hardly any other urning who shares my sentiments in this respect.”

A homosexual physician, thirty-two years of age, gives the following
account of his sexuality:

  “I cannot tell you at what age sexual inclinations first appeared in
  me. My sexual impulse is directed towards males. Before and during the
  time of puberty the impulse was quite indeterminate. I believe that at
  this time I even cherished the idea of some day carrying out
  intercourse with a girl. But this was not love; it was a purely
  physical desire. The spiritual side of the impulse was at this time
  completely wanting. The sexual impulse now extends only towards young
  men. I have hitherto had sexual intercourse neither with males nor
  with females, but I believe that I should be competent for the normal
  sexual act. This act, however, would give me no pleasure; it would be
  nothing more than masturbation. I feel complete indifference towards
  the female sex, but I do not feel hatred or disgust. Sexual
  dreams[540] relate always to persons of the same sex. On the stage,
  in the circus, it is always the men who interest me more than the
  women. In addition, I admire celebrated actresses and female singers,
  but my interest in them is purely artistic. From this standpoint also
  I am fully able to do justice to the beauty of young women, and have
  often wished to paint a girl, but this interest is always that of a
  painter--the colour of the hair, the complexion, interesting features.
  Social intercourse with persons of the other sex is quite
  unrestrained. The sense of shame I feel more in regard to women, but
  still I have also a strong sense of shame with regard to men. I always
  have a great difficulty to overcome when I have to take off my clothes
  in the presence of other men, and it is also very difficult to me to
  urinate when other men are present.

  “My love exists only towards youths from the ages of seventeen to
  twenty-four, or, to speak more strictly, towards youths at the time of
  puberty. One of these of whom I am fond is sixteen years of age, but
  sexually he is completely mature, so that every one imagines him to be
  twenty.

  “The direction of my sexual impulse has first become perfectly clear
  to me since reading the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_. I was
  already fully aware of the fact that young men were especially
  interesting to me, but had not previously understood that this
  interest was of a sexual nature. I had, indeed, heard of
  pæderasty--the case of Krupp and others--but I imagined that these
  individuals had developed such a tendency in consequence of satiety.
  ‘You,’ I said to myself, ‘are purer and nobler in sentiment. Pæderasty
  is loathsome to you; no human being will ever understand you.’

  “Every young man at the age of puberty awakens in me a certain sexual
  interest. This is especially the case when they are slender and wiry
  in build, not fat, with well-developed, but not excessively powerful,
  muscles, with gentle and modest character. Roughness always suffices
  to destroy completely the commencement of inclination. Sturdy, plump
  youths, and those with an excessive development of fat under the skin,
  or with a wide, feminine aspect of the buttocks, leave me
  comparatively cold. The youthful forms embodied in Grecian sculpture
  are my ideal type. It is indispensable that they should be beardless,
  or at most have the merest beginnings of a beard. A youth with a heavy
  moustache leaves me cold; he is too masculine for me. Intellectual
  culture plays no part in the attraction; modesty and gentleness are
  necessary to render an intimate relationship possible. I find no
  preference for any particular profession. I have, indeed, pedagogic
  inclinations, but these appear to me to play no part in producing
  attraction, but come into action only later. One whom one loves is one
  in whom one would be glad to produce spiritual perfection. The
  attraction depends, in the first place, upon beauty of the body;
  beauty of the face is only of secondary importance. Smell has no
  influence upon the attraction.”

It will be noted that this writer, now thirty-two years of age, has
hitherto had no experience of sexual intercourse, either heterosexual
or homosexual. This is characteristic. Homosexuals in general, in
contrast to heterosexuals, often proceed =at a comparatively late age=
to actual experience of their sexual impulse in action. He goes on to
describe the first beginnings of his love for a beautiful youth,
eighteen years of age. He writes:

  “My eyes watched every movement of the body, which continually
  displayed new beauties. I should have loved to fall upon his neck and
  kiss him. For sexual intercourse he appeared to me too pure, too
  noble; I should rather have lain before him in the dust and prayed to
  his beauty. I felt that I should have been a poet in order to be able
  to clothe in the right words this delicate and holy sentiment. And I
  must shut this all up within myself, must remain outwardly cold. It
  was enough to drive me to madness! Have compassion on us, and allow us
  at least an embrace, a kiss. That certainly can do no one any harm,
  and for me it would be a good action. The distressing tension which
  tortures us to death would be for the time relaxed. I always have a
  feeling that the process of sexual attraction must be of an electrical
  nature. I seem to myself to be charged with electricity, the tension
  increasing up to the highest point when the beloved is near me, and a
  prolonged contact or a stroking with the hand already suffices to
  bring about a certain calming of the nerves. The tension is to some
  degree diminished. The various components of sexual enjoyment appear
  to be developed in human beings with very different strength. In this
  way it is explicable that in one person the odour of the loved one, in
  another the changing tones of the voice, in a third the taste of the
  kiss (the tongue kiss), is most stimulating. It is, indeed, even
  conceivable that there exists a purely mental sexual enjoyment, and
  that to some individuals merely to look at the beloved person, or to
  read a letter from him, suffices.

  “Sexual intercourse had hitherto never been practised, but I can
  asseverate that the mode of my desire is rather feminine. It would be
  my ideal if the loved one should feel sexual ardour for me; I should
  be a willing sacrifice. I should like to possess feminine sexual
  organs, in order to appear desirable to the loved one.

  “I have battled powerfully against my nature, and have felt very
  unhappy. I regard myself as physically and mentally healthy. I have
  received at birth a double nature (alas! two souls dwell within my
  breast). My body is that of a man, my soul rather that of a woman;
  hence the conflict, hence my sexual desires, considered outwardly and
  only from the physical point of view, are contrary to nature. Alas! my
  soul can be seen by no one.

  “Why do I only love a young man? Because he in ideal fashion enlarges
  my nature. My sexual sensibility is mainly feminine, and is directed,
  therefore, towards the masculine, and more especially towards the
  masculine in the time of youth, because the feminine sensibility in my
  nature is damped by a small masculine note. The effeminate urning
  probably loves the complete man as the best complement of his own
  nature. The slightly masculine note of my own sexual perception
  demands also in the man whom I love a slight feminine note, such as we
  find in the youth. He has, in fact, something feminine in
  him--beardlessness, no immoderate strength of the muscular system, a
  gentle disposition, receptive emotions--and yet he is masculine and
  sexually mature. Sexual maturity is a necessary part of every love.
  The young man, therefore, is the ideal conception of my nature. My
  love is as great, as holy, and as pure, as heterosexual love; it is
  capable of self-sacrifice. Believe me, for a loved one who fully
  understood me in every respect, I would gladly go to my death.

  “Ah! how painful it is to us when we are regarded as debauchees or as
  sick persons!”

I must say that the above account, given to me by a much respected
medical colleague, one whose nature is characterized alike by
intellectual power and ideal sensibility, has made the deepest
impression upon me, and has been an important influence in confirming my
views regarding the nature of original homosexuality. Similar oral
communications have been received by me from other physicians who have
been homosexual from childhood onwards, one a neurologist and the other
an alienist, and I attribute the greatest importance to the account
given by this colleague of mine, who has a =twofold= understanding of
the matter in question--as physician and as homosexual. It is also
important to note that uranian physicians declare the majority of
homosexuals to be physically and mentally healthy, a fact which I myself
had not previously doubted, and that they contest the general validity
of the degeneration theory.

Whilst in the smaller provincial towns and in the country homosexuals
are for the most part thrust back into themselves, compelled to conceal
their nature, or at most able to communicate only with isolated
individuals of like nature with themselves, in the larger towns from
early days the homosexuals have been able to get into touch with one
another. Certain meeting-places--places of rendezvous for urnings
only--have been formed; in certain =streets= and =squares= there have
been formed urning-clubs, boarding-houses, and restaurants, and even
urning-balls, while certain health resorts are to a degree monopolized
by them. Moreover, the individual social groups of the homosexuals form
unions. Thus, for example, Hirschfeld[541] reports the existence of an
evening association consisting exclusively of homosexual princes,
counts, and barons. Such pæderastic meeting-places and unions existed in
the eighteenth century in Paris. From this time until about 1840 certain
dark lateral alleys of the Champs Elysées, the thickets from the Place
de la Concorde to the Allée des Veuves, between the Grand Avenue des
Champs Elysées and the Cour de la Reine, served from the commencement
of twilight for the rendezvous of homosexuals, not simply as a place of
masculine prostitution, but as a meeting-place of urnings in general,
who here in the dark sought and found love. The central point of this
evening activity was the Allée des Veuves (now known as the Avenue
Montaigne), the “Widow’s Alley”--“widow” was at that time the term used
to denote the passive pæderast. This region of the Champs Elysées was to
a certain extent monopolized by the homosexuals. They would not tolerate
here the presence of any heterosexuals; they closed the entrances with
cords, and placed guards at the openings of the alleys, who demanded a
pass-word from every comer. Even the police did not venture into this
dark region.

  “Victor Hugo, who in the year 1831 lived in the Rue Jean Goujon in
  this neighbourhood, often accompanied his friends who had been
  visiting him part of the way home at a late hour of the night. They
  walked in groups, talking of literature and art as far as the Place de
  la Concorde. There the celebrated poet parted from his guests and
  returned alone homewards, composing new verses by the way. He often
  noticed individuals who, as he passed the entrance to the Rue des
  Veuves, watched him from afar off without speaking to him. He could
  not believe that these people were thieves, and asked himself what
  could be the cause of their always waiting in this lonely place; but
  notwithstanding the frequent occurrence of these scenes, he made no
  further inquiry into the matter. But once in the midst of his poetical
  reverie he was disturbed by a man who stepped forward from the
  darkness of a thicket, and with a polite greeting said to him: ‘Sir,
  we beg you not to wait any longer in this place. We know who you are,
  and we should not wish that any one of us who does not know you should
  cause you any uneasiness.’ ‘What are you doing there, then?’ answered
  Victor Hugo. ‘Every evening I see people walking about here, and
  disappearing among the trees.’ ‘Don’t concern yourself about it, sir,’
  was the brisk answer; ‘we disturb no one and do no one any harm, but
  we shall not permit anyone to disturb us or to do us any harm; =we are
  here in our own grounds=.’ Victor Hugo understood, bowed, and pursued
  his way. As on another evening, walking with his friends, he wished to
  pass through another alley running parallel to the Allée des Veuves,
  he found that this was closed by a number of chairs, which were
  fastened together with cords. ‘There is no thoroughfare,’ called out a
  threatening voice; but another, speaking more quietly, added: ‘We beg
  Monsieur Victor Hugo on this occasion to pass along the other side of
  the Avenue des Champs Elysées.’”[542]

During the Second Empire the Allée des Veuves maintained its former
position as a place of rendezvous for homosexuals. An urnings’ club, the
members of which belonged to the highest classes of society, being
persons of the Imperial Court, senators, great financiers, etc., had
their meeting-place in a beautifully furnished hotel in the Allée des
Veuves, in which soldiers of the Empress’s bodyguard (Dragons de
l’Impératrice) and of the Hundred Guard of the Emperor served, in return
for valuable presents, as the beloved of the various distinguished
urnings, for which function the term “faire l’Impératrice” came into
use. In the hotel there also lived from time to time transient unknown
persons, who were only admitted after showing a kind of medal bearing a
secret inscription. When the police made an examination of the hotel,
they found a number of women’s dresses and similar articles, such as
those which the Empress Eugénie was accustomed to wear on festival
occasions. Numerous letters were also discovered which had been
exchanged by the members of the club and their favourites of the Hundred
Guard or of the Empress’s guard. A report was made to the Emperor of the
results of the examination of this house. When he saw that persons of
the highest position, and bearing most celebrated names, were involved
in the affair, he at once ordered that the matter should be dismissed,
and said to the Procureur-General: “We must spare our people and our
country from such a scandal, which would do no one any good, and would
do a great deal of harm.” In fact, almost no details of this affair
became public.[543] Tardieu gave an account of another urnings’ club of
the Second Empire, where there were concealed closets, on the walls of
which erotic pictures were displayed. The manner in which the urnings
made acquaintance with homosexuals is shown in a police report of July
16, 1864, in which the conduct of a literary homosexual, “un vieux
monsieur fort bien et puissamment riche,” is described in the following
terms:

  “He enters the Café Truffaut, sees a young soldier who pleases him. By
  the intermediation of the waiter he makes an appointment, and departs
  without waiting for an answer. If the soldier agrees, he goes to the
  appointed place of meeting, and never goes alone, because Father
  C----n (the elderly urning) is well known. As soon as the two have
  met, other soldiers make their appearance, beat the old man, and
  compel him to give them all the money which he has about him. He does
  this willingly, and without ceasing prays for pardon. When he has not
  a single sou left, and when he has also given up his watch, he goes
  away weeping, and continually repeating the words, ‘What a miserable
  man I am!’”

This elderly urning was manifestly also a masochist, and therefore a
very suitable victim of blackmailers, whom we here see at their work. In
the police report to which we have already referred homosexual orgies
are also described, the participants in which assumed women’s names and
practised mutual masturbation and fellation, and also carried out
obscene practices with a bitch. When Oscar Metenier in his book “Vertus
et Vices Allemands” (Paris, 1904) states that Berlin has a monopoly in
the matter of urnings’ balls, which, in his opinion, were not possible
in Paris, he is unquestionably wrong as regards the time of the Second
Empire. In this police report two typical urnings’ balls are mentioned.
One of these took place in a house in the Place de la Madeleine,
belonging to E. D., a man of business, who gave the ball on January 2,
1864. The second urnings’ ball was given by the Vicomte de M. in the
Pavilion Rohan, Rue de Rivoli, on January 16, 1864, at which at least
150 men, many of them in woman’s clothing, took part. In many cases the
appearance was so deceptive that even those who had invited the guests
were not always able to determine the sex with certainty.

It is doubtless true that there is no other town in which there are so
many social unions of homosexuals as there are in Berlin. Hirschfeld
records--in addition to private parties--dinners, suppers, evening
parties, five o’clock teas, picnics, dances, and summer festivals of
homosexuals, which are arranged every winter by urnings, and by female
homosexuals or their friends. Moreover, the male and female homosexuals
meet in certain restaurants, cafés, eating-houses, and public-houses
frequented only by themselves.[544]

Such localities exclusively for the use of urnings exist in Berlin to
the number of eighteen to twenty. There are also social literary unions,
such as the club “Lohengrin,” the antifeministic “Gesellschaft der
Eigenen,” the “Platen-Gemeinschaft,” etc. There are also cabarets
(public-houses) for urnings. Hirschfeld, in his book “Berlin’s Third
Sex,” written in a popular style, but extremely valuable owing to the
clearness of his descriptions, gives an exhaustive account of all these
institutions for urnings, and for further details I may refer my readers
to this interesting work, the authenticity of which I am able to confirm
as the result of my own visits to the above-mentioned places of meeting
for urnings.[545]

In Paris there no longer exist places of entertainment frequented solely
by urnings. In this respect they are replaced by certain Turkish baths,
whose patrons are almost without exception homosexuals--men whose age
varies from about twenty years upwards. In the industrial quarter, in
the neighbourhood of the Place de la République, there existed a few
years ago a Turkish bath, visited almost exclusively by young
homosexuals between the ages of fifteen and twenty years. On the great
boulevard there is a bath of a very expensive character, visited only by
wealthy homosexuals, frequented, among others, by a celebrated French
composer.[546]

A peculiar species of meeting-places for the urnings of Berlin is
represented by the soldiers’ public-houses in the neighbourhood of the
barracks, where soldiers are met and treated by homosexuals, and where
arrangements are made for subsequent meetings. There also exists a
“soldiers’ promenade,” where the soldiers walk up and down and offer
themselves to homosexuals. Athletes also enter freely into relationships
with homosexuals.

Urnings’ balls are to-day especially characteristic of Berlin. Von
Krafft-Ebing has described them in detail, and recently also Hirschfeld
has alluded to them in the above-mentioned work. I myself not long ago
attended such a “men’s ball,” at which from eight hundred to a thousand
homosexuals were present, some in men’s clothing, some in women’s
clothing, some in fancy dress. The homosexuals dressed as women could
have been distinguished from real women only by those in the secret.
More particularly do I recall an elegant sylph, who, on the arm of a
partner, glided across the hall--“glided” is the correct expression.
During the dance his delicate features were leaning on the shoulder of
the man, and he coquetted continually with ardent black eyes. I really
believed this was a woman, but was assured that it was a male
hairdresser. In the case of another urning dressed as a woman the
diagnosis was rendered easier by a well-developed moustache.

The seamy side of the relationships of homosexuals in public life is
constituted by the so-called “=male prostitution=,” which existed even
in ancient times, and in our own day was especially well organized
during the Second Empire, as we learn from the details given by Tardieu.
The ranks of male prostitution are recruited partly from homosexual and
partly from heterosexual men of the lower and more poverty-stricken
classes, who give themselves for payment to well-to-do urnings, and are
practised in all the arts of elaborate coquetry (they use rouge, make a
coquettish display of male charms, etc.). These are the so-called
“aunts.” In all large towns there exists what is called a “Strich”
(promenade), where male prostitutes are accustomed to walk, in order to
attract their clients. In Berlin the principal promenades are the
Friedrichstrasse, the Passage,[547] and some of the walks in the
Tiergarten. Like female prostitution, so also male prostitution has its
“=houses of accommodation=”; and in France there even existed, and still
exist, typical “=male brothels=.” From 1820 to 1826 such a brothel was
to be found in the Rue du Doyenne in Paris. In the neighbourhood of the
Louvre the male inmates of this establishment were even subjected to
regular medical examination, in order to protect their clients from
venereal infection. With the fall of twilight the visitors made their
appearance, and were received by young effeminates.[548] Still worse was
another form of male prostitution, at the time of the Restoration, and
in the earlier years of the reign of Louis Philippe--namely, the
so-called _grande montre des culs_ in the Rue des Marais, where a number
of male prostitutes displayed and offered their charms to the
homosexuals visiting the place. A detailed account of the way in which
this was done cannot be given, but is sufficiently indicated by what has
already been said.[549]

Male brothels exist even at the present day in Paris. Thus, at the end
of the year 1905 in the Rue St. Martin there was a small hotel whose
homosexual proprietor not only let rooms to urnings for a brief stay,
but also kept on the premises five or six young men between the ages of
fifteen and twenty-two years, whose services were always available for
homosexuals for payment. Besides this hotel there existed also in the
year 1905 a kind of male brothel in the house of an urning, where at
midday half a dozen young fellows were to be found, or could be fetched
at brief notice, for the choice of homosexual visitors, for whose use a
room was available at so many francs per hour.[550]

A phenomenon intimately related with male prostitution is =blackmail=,
or “=chantage=.” Tardieu (_op. cit._, pp. 128-130) describes these
relationships in vivid colours, and lays stress on the close
relationship between male prostitution and criminality. Blackmail has
become to-day a kind of special profession,[551] which is not directed
solely against homosexuals, but also against heterosexuals, and the
punishment of which cannot be too severe. Frequently these individuals,
whose activity is a danger to the community at large, persecute their
victims for many years in succession. Tardieu reports the case of a
celebrated literary man, “whose purse the blackmailers regarded as their
own.” =For more than twenty years in succession= he was plucked by
successive generations of blackmailers, who considered him an assured
source of income. He was “passed on from one to another.” As a rule,
blackmailers wait for their victims in public lavatories; they suddenly
assert that they have been indecently assaulted, and demand hush-money,
which is commonly given to them, even by heterosexuals. A case of the
last-mentioned kind recently occurred in Berlin, when a quite innocent
young merchant was being plundered in this way, and his wife, by a
courageous denunciation of the shameless blackmailer, freed him from
this tyranny. It is, however, unquestionable that blackmail often ensues
upon real advances on the part of homosexuals, and after the performance
of sexual acts; and there is no doubt that in Germany the existence of §
175 of the Criminal Code has been most advantageous to professional
blackmailers, has led to numerous scandals (alike disagreeable and
dangerous to the community), and has given rise to numerous suicides.

This celebrated § 175 runs as follows:

  “Unnatural vice between two persons of the male sex, or between a man
  and an animal, is punishable with imprisonment; it can also be
  punished with loss of civil rights.”

This paragraph of the Imperial Criminal Code is identical with § 143 of
the former Prussian Criminal Code. Similar ordinances,[552] in some
cases even more severe, are found in the laws of Austria-Hungary,
Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Russia, Bulgaria, the State of New York, most
of the cantons of Switzerland, and more especially in Great Britain,
where the most severe punishments are inflicted, and, at any rate
logically, are inflicted also on women who practise homosexual
intercourse. On the other hand, punishment for homosexual intercourse
has been completely =abolished= in France, Belgium, Holland, Portugal,
Turkey, Italy, Spain, the Swiss Cantons of Genf, Wallis, Waadt and
Tessin, the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, the Principality of Monaco, and in
Mexico.

§ 143 of the Prussian Criminal Code was adopted as the basis of § 175 of
the German Criminal Code, in view of “the consciousness of right of the
people,” who “condemn such practices not only as vicious, but also as
criminal.” But this consciousness of right is based upon defective
knowledge, and upon an erroneous view of homosexuality. As soon as we
recognize that in homosexuality we have to do with a primary natural
disposition, and as soon as this view has permeated wide circles of the
population, the old consciousness of right will be replaced by a =new=
one, =which will demand the repeal of a criminal law=, by which =a
natural phenomenon= is regarded as a vice and a crime, and is esteemed
as infamous. My studies in recent years having convinced me that in
homosexuality we have to do with a typical biological phenomenon, I feel
that I must unhesitatingly approve of the efforts of the =Scientific and
Humanitarian Committee=, founded by Dr. Magnus Hirschfeld, which aims at
making the people understand the nature of homosexuality, and demands
the repeal of § 175 of the German Criminal Code. All the more is this
reform demanded because real homosexual =crimes= can be very readily
dealt with by means of the sections of the Criminal Code relating to
sexual delinquencies in general.

Apart from this general codification of the injustice of § 175, and
apart from the above-mentioned tragical consequences of the existence of
this section, it is also necessary to point out that the expressions
used therein are absurd and illogical.

1. Unnatural vice between men is punished, whereas that between women is
left impune. But why should this latter be the case, if we adopt the
standpoint (which we have, indeed, seen to be untenable) that homosexual
intercourse is in itself vicious and criminal--why should homosexual
intercourse between women be less vicious and criminal than homosexual
intercourse between men?

2. The idea “unnatural vice” is equally absurd and inconsequent, and
makes justice in respect of these offences absolutely impossible. By
this term is understood not merely pædication (_immissio membri in
anum_), but also any kind of intercourse between men “resembling sexual
intercourse”--that is, _coitus in os_, _coitus inter femora_, even
simple _frictio membri_--whilst mutual masturbation and other perverse
practices are not punishable.

3. § 175 does not safeguard any citizen,[553] for the sexual freedom of
the individual is not disturbed in any way by the intercourse between
two adult men who fully understand what they are doing, nor is the
general moral sense injured in any way if the act is not seen by any
third person. In this latter respect, however, § 183 of the Criminal
Code, which punishes annoyance to the public by improper conduct,
already affords sufficient protection.

4. If § 175 is maintained with especial reference to the existence of
professional male unchastity, von Liszt has rightly replied to this
contention that the latter form of unchastity can be rendered harmless
by a modified reading of § 361_b_ of the Criminal Code, just as the
protection of virtue can be safeguarded by other sections of the Code.

5. The effectiveness of § 175 is extremely limited. According to
Hirschfeld (“Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages,” vol. vi., p. 175),
no more than 0·007 % of the existing punishable homosexual practices of
the present day are detected and punished. Therefore a few =isolated=
individuals are punished for an offence which thousands of others commit
with impunity.

6. When § 175 of the Criminal Code was drawn up, the law-givers knew
absolutely nothing about the homosexual impulse as an essential outcome
of the personality; they merely wished to punish heterosexuals who
committed homosexual practices, not to punish genuine homosexuals (_cf._
Numa Prætorius, “The Question of the Responsibility of Homosexuals,”
published in the _Monthly Review of Criminal Psychology_, edited by G.
Aschaffenburg, 1906, p. 561).

The worst and most tragic consequence of § 175 is the permanent infamy
and social contempt suffered by persons who, =without any blame to
themselves=, have a mode of sexual perception diverging from that of the
great majority. The state itself commits a crime when it enrols in the
category of vice and crime a biological phenomenon which has recently
been recognized as such even by the Evangelical and Catholic
Churches,[554] and has been freed by these Churches from the stigma of
immorality. The continuance of this great injustice is the frequent
cause of the =suicide= of homosexuals, especially of such as are men of
exceptional spiritual and moral cultivation, and =frequently before they
have actually indulged in their homosexual impulse=, the best proof that
we have to do, not with vicious, but with unhappy men, who are unable to
bear the misery of being socially despised and unjustly misunderstood by
their associates. How many suicides from homosexual grounds occur it is
impossible to establish exactly. We can only suspect the cause from
certain attendant circumstances. A highly respected literary man writes
to me regarding this question of the suicide of homosexuals: “When a
fine young fellow, suffering frightfully as a result of his inherited
disposition, shoots himself, his family will rather suggest that the
cause was a chancre (which he has never had), than they will admit his
homosexuality.” Several such cases have come under his notice. “A better
cause,” he suggests, “for the suicide would have been unhappy love, for
that is the actual truth.” Zola,[555] speaking of the letters of a
homosexual, says that they exhibited “the most heart-breaking cry of
human agony” that he had ever known.

  “He earnestly resisted yielding to such shameful, lustful love, and he
  longed to know whence came this contempt of all men, whence this
  continuous readiness of the law-courts to crush him down, when in his
  flesh and blood were inborn a disgust towards woman, whilst he had
  brought into the world with him a true feeling of love towards man.
  Never had one possessed by a demon, never had a poor human body given
  up to and tortured by the unknown powers of the sexual impulse, so
  painfully expressed his misery. Have we not here a truly physiological
  case definitely displayed before our eyes--an inversion, an error, on
  the part of Nature? Nothing, in my opinion, is more tragical, and
  nothing demands more urgently investigation and a means of cure, if
  such can possibly be found.”

The =complete enlightenment= of the people would give rise to a
spontaneous change in their conception of homosexuality, to which,
moreover, the greater number of homosexuals belonging to the better
classes could contribute, if they would freely and openly admit their
tendencies. The secrecy and hypocrisy of many urnings is partly
responsible for the hitherto prevailing false views on homosexuality. We
cannot spare them this reproach.

Finally, § 175 is not merely an injustice to homosexuals, but it is also
a danger to heterosexuals, in consequence of the =blackmail= which is so
intimately associated with the existence of this section. It is not
enough that these criminals of the most debased kind, who to a small
extent only are recruited from the ranks of male prostitutes, reduce
numerous unhappy urnings to social and financial ruin, and drive many
others to suicide or to crime, of which the remarkable case of a County
Court Judge a few years ago afforded a typical example. These wretches
also dare with ever-greater success to make use of § 175 for the purpose
of blackmailing =completely normal heterosexuals=. In fact, they often
succeed better with these latter than they do with homosexuals, because
to the normal man the idea of being regarded as homosexual is so
repulsive.

A remedy for all these evils--for the suicides as well as for the
blackmailing--can only be found in the =enlightenment= of the whole
people--the first and most important thing to do--and in the
=unconditional repeal= of § 175 of the Criminal Code.

It has been a most useful service on the part of the Scientific and
Humanitarian Committee--a service the value of which has not yet been
sufficiently recognized--that it has endeavoured, above all, to bring
about the enlightenment of the people by means of popular writings,[556]
and of the learned by means of scientific publications, such as the most
successful _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_ (8 volumes,
1899-1906), and by means of lectures, by the convocation of public
meetings, by petitions, etc.

The petition of the committee to the legislative bodies of the German
Empire, asking for the repeal of § 175 of the Criminal Code, was signed
by 5,000 persons belonging to the circles of men of science, judges,
physicians, priests, schoolmasters, authors, and artists, among whom
were some of the most celebrated names of cultured Germany. I cite here
a few only: Ferdinand Avenarius, Hans von Basedow, Woldemar von
Biedermann, H. Bulthaupt, Professor Crédé, Albert Eulenburg, Theodor
Gaedertz, Rudolf von Gottschall, Franz Görres, O. E. Hartleben, Gerhart
Hauptmann, S. Jadassohn, Hermann Kaulbach, R. von Krafft-Ebing, Joseph
Kürschner, H. Kurella, Walter Leistikow, Leppmann, Max Liebermann, G.
von Liebig, Detlev von Lilieneron, Franz von Liszt, Berthold Litzmann,
Ph. Lotmar, John Henry Mackay, Mendel, Friedrich Moritz, P. Näcke, Paul
Natorp, Albert Neisser, Max Nordau, A. von Oechelhäuser, A. von
Oppenheim, J. Pagel, Pelman, R. Penzig, Placzek, Felix Poppenberg,
Rainer Maria Rilke, O. Rosenbach, Wilhelm Roux, Max Rubner, Benno
Rüttenauer, Johannes Schlaf, Arthur Schnitzler, A. von Schrenck-Notzing,
Alwin Schulz, Moritz Schwalb, Georg Schweinfurth, Adolf von Sonnenthal,
K. von Tepper-Laski, H. Unverricht, Max Verworn, A. Vierkandt, Richard
Voss, Hans Wachenhusen, Felix Weingartner, Adolf Wilbrandt, Ernst von
Wildenbruch, F. von Winkel, E. von Wolzogen, Ernst Ziegler, Theobald
Ziegler, Theophil Zolling.

In addition, we might mention that in the year 1904 not less than 2,800
German physicians, as well as 750 head masters and masters of higher
schools, signed the petition to the Reichstag for the repeal of § 175.
Owing to certain scandals by which the highest circles were
sympathetically affected--I need recall only the cases of Hohenau,
Krupp, Israel, von Schenk, etc.--the conviction has been forced upon
members of the most influential political circles that the repeal of the
paragraphs of the Criminal Code relating to urnings is an unconditional
necessity. We may, therefore, expect that the repeal will be effected
within the next few years.

       *       *       *       *       *

Compared with true original homosexuality in men, the same condition in
women is of considerably less importance, because in women homosexuality
is undoubtedly =much less common= than it is in men. In comparison with
the number of urnings, the number of =female homosexuals=--of
“=urnindes=,” “=Lesbian lovers=,” or “=tribades=”--is relatively small;
whereas in many women, even at a comparatively advanced age, the
so-called “pseudo-homosexuality” (see the next chapter) is much more
frequently met with than it is in men. In the case of heterosexual men
it is usually impossible to induce a homosexual mode of perception or to
give rise to any kind of taste for homosexual activity; whereas in
heterosexual women the corresponding change certainly occurs much more
easily. Tendernesses and caresses play, indeed, among normal
heterosexual women a rôle which makes it easier for us to understand how
readily in woman pseudo-homosexual tendencies may arise. =Still, it is
impossible to doubt the existence also of original homosexuality in
women.= These are the cases in which, just as in urnings, the homosexual
impulse appears in very early childhood, often long before puberty, in
which case also the girl is distinguished from her heterosexual comrades
in external appearance, exhibiting indications of a masculine build of
body (slight development of the breasts, narrowness of the pelvis,
development of a moustache, a deep voice, etc.); but such indications
may be entirely absent, and the girl may not be distinguished from
others in any respect beyond the perverse direction of the sexual
impulse. These true tribades are much rarer than the false tribades, the
pseudo-Lesbian lovers. For example, when visiting an urnings’ ball we
may be quite sure that 99 % of the male homosexuals assembled there are
true homosexuals; but at a tribades’ ball--such, also, are given in
Berlin--certainly a much smaller percentage are “genuine”; the bulk of
the women present are pseudo-homosexuals. I here append the interesting
reminiscences of a genuine urninde, by which this relationship between
original homosexuality and pseudo-homosexuality in women is very clearly
shown:

  THOUGHTS OF A LONELY WOMAN!

  “Born in the country, the daughter of a merchant, I grew up as a very
  dreamy being, with an unceasing yearning after something unknown,
  beautiful, great--with a longing to become a singer or an artist. At
  the age of twelve I was already completely ‘woman,’ very luxuriantly
  developed, although still half a child, =filled always with an
  uncontrollable longing for a beloved feminine being who should kiss me
  and caress me=, whom I was to regard with love and with a sentiment of
  self-sacrifice. At the age of thirteen I came to live with relatives
  in a provincial town, where for a year I attended a young ladies’
  school. Of my dreams no single one could be fulfilled. My mother, who
  was widowed when I was only three years old, had a severe economical
  struggle, being encumbered with six small children. After my elder
  brothers and sisters were married, I myself, being then twenty-four
  years of age, had to go out into the world to seek my own living,
  ignorant of the world and its dangers, delivered up to commonness and
  intrigue. I got a position in the house of a widow, filling the post
  of ‘companion.’ My ‘principal,’ a woman sixty years of age, was at
  first unsympathetic to me, but she treated me in a loving and motherly
  manner, which pleased me, for I was of a pliant and receptive
  disposition. Gradually I became her confidante. Every evening I had to
  get into bed with her (I slept close by); I must touch her with my
  hands. I did not then really understand why I had to stroke her legs;
  but one evening this sexagenarian guided my hand into a forbidden
  place. Now it became clear to me that this woman still had erotic
  perceptions. I felt how she quivered under my touch, pressed me firmly
  to herself, etc.; but I, for my part, felt nothing. It might have
  been different had she been a friend of my own age. I had not at that
  time any idea that ‘psychically’ I was different from other girls. I
  had an unceasing yearning for love, not directly sensual love, but
  spiritual love, out of which sensual love might later develop. Among
  the inmates of our house was a young merchant, a fine-looking man, who
  besieged me with his love, and, after long hesitation, I at length one
  day consented to give him the best that woman has to give. He took
  possession of my body with brutal voluptuousness. I was under the
  delusion that he would make me his wife. I had in the sexual act =no
  perception at all=, and was disillusioned. One day my seducer told me
  that he was going to be married, asking me to return him the ring he
  had given me, and offering me money. Moved to the inmost soul, without
  any human being to give me counsel or help (from a feeling of shame I
  had not disclosed the matter to my principal), I threw the ring at
  him, resigned my position, and made myself independent. I will only
  say in a few words how I had to struggle, to fight for my existence,
  how I was lied to and deceived by rascally men. When I came to Berlin
  I heard and read of homosexual love, but could not find what I dreamed
  of--namely, spiritual love, out of which sensual love might spring. I
  learned to know homosexual women, but they exhibited to me such
  elemental passion, brutality, sensuality, that, notwithstanding all my
  yearning for ‘homosexual’ love, I remained unresponsive. Only in
  kissing the lips of a woman sympathetic to me I have experienced an
  agreeable sensation, but that sweet state which I was able to induce
  in others by contact with them was =in me= not forthcoming. I began to
  wonder whether Nature had denied me this sensation, though I was
  myself also a normally developed woman. For years I lived
  ‘ascetically,’ since I regarded myself as a ‘psychological’ problem--I
  avoided every kind of intercourse--I only had a desire for tenderness
  and caresses. I often loved handsome women, feeling the wish to kiss
  them and to touch them, and I had learned to know women of the kind
  who prostitute themselves to other women for money. These were hateful
  to me, and never could I form a friendship with such, because they
  knew only common brutal sensuality, towards which I was not
  responsive.

  “Some years ago I suffered from a severe abdominal and nervous
  disorder. I have already passed my fortieth year. After an illness
  lasting two years, I still feel the desire for homosexual love.
  Hitherto I have lived unhappily, continually asking myself why Nature
  has treated me so cruelly. Is it not possible once at least to enjoy
  this perception? A few weeks ago I made the acquaintance of a married
  woman, whose husband has been impotent for years, whilst she, on the
  other hand, is a very passionate character. Unfortunately, this woman,
  although in other respects she is very sympathetic to me, is upon a
  comparatively low plane of culture, and, what frightens me more, she
  has an intimacy with a female friend who is quite uncultured, but who
  resembles her in respect of sexual love, and who night after night
  lies with her in bed =beside the husband=, and the two women indulge
  their perverse voluptuousness, the friend playing the ‘man’s’ part. I
  have seen many strange things in my course through life, but =such a
  marriage= is a new experience to me. The man terms himself an artist,
  a painter, and allows his wife free play in bisexual love. I believe
  that this man himself experiences a titillation of the senses when he
  sees the two women together, and also that he makes drawings of
  ‘acts,’ out of which he makes a profit. In this house I have seen into
  a deep abyss, yet other bisexual women visit it. Although I have found
  my peace disturbed by these women, although I have been to a certain
  extent intoxicated, the conditions are too repulsive to me--since this
  woman is sunk into a morass deeper than she herself understands. Only
  through me does she begin to understand it. But a longer intercourse
  with her is impossible, for she lacks all the qualities that I look
  for in a woman whom I could love. In actual fact I envy this creature,
  for she is happy, since she experiences to the full those sweet
  sensations which Nature denies to me. Are there any more beings
  unhappy like myself? Perhaps the acquaintanceship with a woman whose
  feelings were similar to my own would be a happiness, if Fate would
  only have so much pity upon me as to throw a sorrowful companion in my
  way. I hope for it, but I do not believe that it will happen.

  “To what sex do I really belong?”

In the love-history of this genuine urninde the ideal element is
especially manifest; likewise the instinctive disinclination to man,
which, remarkably enough, is often more powerfully developed in strongly
feminine characters than in the more masculine tribades, as the
prototype of which latter we may mention the painter Rosa Bonheur.
During childhood Rosa Bonheur felt herself to be a boy, and preferred
the society of boys to that of girls.[557] Throughout her life,
notwithstanding her homosexual love, she felt strong sympathy with men.
Such a double relationship occurs also among urnindes of the first kind.
Even the true urninde, I may say, is =not so extremely homosexual= as is
the true urning. Take, for example, the following account[558] of an
original homosexual, and you will see the difference:

  “I have not lost any of the valuable things of life--far otherwise.
  Many-sided, many-shadowed intellectual sympathy leads any man of lofty
  mind into harmony with me. There emanates unconsciously from my soul a
  profound, tender charm. My friends find me necessary to them. I share
  their interests. In our relationship there pass between us the most
  wonderful shades of sympathetic feeling--what the French so
  expressively speak of as _l’amitié amoureuse_. Thus my mode of being
  becomes absorbed into that of my friend, a peculiar melody passes to
  and fro between us, and a peculiar melody sounds in the stillness of
  my own soul. All the fine and delicate sensations which I have
  received from my friends become in me transformed into poietic
  force--the ecstasies of my spirit assume form and substance. From the
  spiritualization of the impulse there springs a stream clear as
  crystal, there arise passion and ardour; my exceptional soul lifts me
  upwards, above all sorrows and vexations. In this way is a talent
  conceived, and amid ecstasy it is born.”

The need for a spiritual contact with men is among homosexual women much
stronger than the corresponding inclination on the part of urnings for
spiritual contact with woman natures. For this reason there is no doubt
that the “=Woman’s Movement=”--that is, in the movement directed towards
the acquirement by women of all the attainments of masculine
culture--homosexual women have played a notable part.[559] Indeed,
according to one author,[560] the “Woman’s Question” is mainly the
question regarding the destiny of virile homosexual women. I find it
necessary to doubt whether, as Hammer maintains,[561] the raging hatred
of men--the converse quality to the anti-feminism of the male
urnings--really proceeds from the uranian group of the Woman’s Movement,
for there exist no literary documents of importance to prove the
suggested connexion. Homosexual women of intellectual weight have also
assured me that among them there does at times exist an enmity to men on
principle, just as, _mutatis mutandis_, misogyny has been developed as a
system both from the heterosexual and from the homosexual side. For the
diffusion of pseudo-homosexuality the Woman’s Movement is of great
importance, as we shall see later.

The individual and social relationships of feminine uranism are nearly
the same as those of male uranism. In both cases there exists an entire
scale, running from pure Platonism to ardent sensuality. One kind of
Platonic tribades are those described by Catulle Mendés in his sketch
“Protectrices.” These are ladies of position who allow themselves the
luxury of a “protégée,” generally a girl employed at the theatre, with
whom during the performances they exchange glances, whose expenses they
pay, with whom they go out driving, without the matter proceeding to
actual sexual relations. In other cases, however, sensual gratification
is the desired goal, which is attained by kisses, embraces, friction of
the genital organs, or cuninilinctus (the so-called “=Sapphism=”). In
this intercourse one party--the “father”--plays the active part, the
other--“the mother”--the passive part. There exist passionate and
intimate relationships of long duration--true “marriages”--among
tribades. Thus, d’Estoc reports (“Paris-Eros,” p. 58) relationships of
this kind which have lasted thirty years. Still, as a general rule,
feminine homosexuals change their relationships more frequently than
male homosexuals. An elderly tribade, whose correspondence lies before
me, had within four years three love relationships. In these
relationships jealousy plays an even greater part than in heterosexual
liaisons. Two sympathetic urnindes who lived together described to me
very vividly the joys and sorrows of the _amor lesbicus_. The cause of
the troubles is always a _tertia_, never a _tertius gaudens_.

Like the urnings, the tribades also have their meeting-places, _jour
fixes_. One such meeting, at which four genuine female homosexuals and
one male homosexual assembled, I had the opportunity of attending. They
have their parties, and even their balls, at which the virile tribades
appear in men’s clothing,[562] and (as also when at home) use male
nicknames. There also exist female prostitutes who devote their services
entirely to urnindes. This tribadistic prostitution is especially
widespread in Paris. Such prostitutes are called _gouines_, or
_gougnottes_, or _chevalières du clair de lune_. Theatrical agents are
said to be especially occupied with tribadistic procurement. There also
exist tribadistic brothels in Paris.[563]


APPENDIX

THEORY OF HOMOSEXUALITY

Original, congenital, enduring homosexuality would appear to be an
exclusively human peculiarity. It is very doubtful whether a similar
condition exists among animals. We recognize among the lower animals
homosexual acts, but no homosexuality.[564] Thus we have no philogenetic
starting-point for the explanation of homosexuality. Moreover,
homosexuality is fundamentally different from the other sexual
perversions, sadism and masochism. These represent quite =extreme= forms
of biological phenomena, an abnormal increase of physiological impulsive
manifestations that occur in the normal heterosexual life, as part of
sexuality in general. But homosexuality is an alteration =in the
direction of the very impulse itself=--a change in the very nature of
sexuality. To put the matter shortly, it is the appearance of a
sexuality =heterogeneous to and not corresponding with the bodily
structure=. To define homosexuality as the appearance of a feminine
sexual psyche in a masculine body, or of a masculine sexual psyche in a
feminine body, does not apply to all cases--for example, it does not
apply to virile urnings or to tribades who remain womanly. The
definition of homosexuality as a sexuality which does not correspond to
the bodily structure embraces both these possibilities.

Whenever homosexuality in men is associated with a marked development of
feminine secondary sexual characters, or in women with a marked
development of masculine secondary sexual characters, the homosexual
sensibility may be said to have to some extent a physical basis, but not
completely so. For the “intermediate stage theory” proposed by
Hirschfeld--the intermixture of feminine and masculine characters--may
apply satisfactorily to “bisexuality,” to indeterminate sexual
sensibility; but it does not apply to the thoroughly one-sided, monistic
sexual sensibility, directed =only= towards members of the same sex, and
often appearing very early, before the days of puberty. Moreover, in
heterosexual male individuals the external appearance may at times
suggest that there is a strong intermixture of feminine characters.
These men, though heterosexual, have a womanly appearance.

The “intermediate stage theory” of Hirschfeld, which von Krafft-Ebing
also appears to have recognized in his last work (“New Studies in the
Subject of Homosexuality”), a theory which explains homosexual phenomena
as dependent upon the existence of transitional stages between the sexes
(“sexual links” of Hirschfeld), and which, moreover, erroneously
includes the typical hermaphrodite states--this interesting theory
explains =a portion only= of original homosexuality. It fails in cases
=in which homosexuality occurs in the absence of any divergence from
type=--for example, in those cases in which male individuals with
thoroughly normal masculine bodies exhibit marked homosexual sensibility
in early childhood, long before puberty. But these are the cases which
offer the greatest possible difficulties to a scientific explanation.
_Hic Rhodus, hic salta!_

Ulrich’s “feminine soul in a masculine body” applies to =effeminate
urnings=, such as he was himself. But is the mode of sensibility of
=virile= homosexuals “effeminate”? Why do we speak of a third sex? Here
lie difficulties which we cannot overcome without further assistance.

How does it come to pass that the central organs in homosexuals do not
correspond to the peripheral sexual organs, although the latter are
formed embryologically long before the former, so that the central
organs should properly be guided in their development by the peripheral
organs? But they are not so guided. That is only explicable in this
way--that the association between the central organs and the peripheral
organs is interrupted by a third influence, and that =this last
influence has a peculiar effect= upon the central organs =altogether
independent of the nature of the reproductive glands=.

I will formulate this new theory of homosexuality in the following
terms:

1. The so-called “undifferentiated stage” of the sexual impulse (Max
Dessoir) may often fail to appear in cases in which the sexual impulse,
either in heterosexuals or homosexuals, is definitely directed before
puberty unmistakably towards the members of one particular sex.
Especially in homosexuals do we often see =before= puberty the clear and
unmistakable direction of the sexual impulse towards members of the
=same= sex.

2. A critical theory of homosexuality must also explain the extreme
cases; above all, it must also explain male homosexuality associated
with complete virility.

3. The sexual organs and the reproductive glands cannot be the
determining cause, because homosexuality makes its appearance in
association with thoroughly typical male reproductive organs; nor can
the brain be the determining cause in cases of true homosexuality, for,
notwithstanding the intentional and unintentional operation of
heterosexual influences on thought and imagination, homosexuality cannot
be eradicated, and continues to develop.

4. Since this homosexuality often makes its appearance as an inclination
(not as the sexual impulse) long =before= puberty, and =before= the
proper activity of the reproductive glands is developed, it appears a
reasonable suggestion that in homosexuality some physiological
manifestation associated with “sexuality,” but not directly associated
with the reproductive glands, undergoes a =change= which results in an
alteration of the direction of the sexual impulse.

6. The most obvious influences to think of in this connexion are
=chemical= influences, changes in the chemistry of sexual tension, which
latter is certainly to a large extent =independent= of the reproductive
glands, since it may persist in eunuchs. But the nature of this sexual
chemistry is still entirely obscure.

Such a way of conceiving the process is thoroughly reasonable and
tenable on scientific grounds, as was shown by E. H. Starling and L.
Krehl[565] in their communication to the Scientific Congress at
Stuttgart in the year 1905, regarding disturbances of chemical
correlation in the organism, especially disturbances of the chemical
influences proceeding from the reproductive organs. All minuter details
regarding these “sexual hormone” (to use Starling’s own phrase) are
still unknown, but the experiments to which we alluded in an earlier
chapter have proved their existence. In my view, the anatomical
contradiction, the natural monstrosity, of a feminine--or, at any rate,
an unmanly--psyche in a typical masculine body, or that of a feminine or
unmanly sexual psyche associated with normally developed and normally
functioning male genital organs, can only be explained in this manner by
taking into account this intercurrent third factor. This can be deduced
very readily from some early =embryonic disturbances= of sexual
chemistry. This would also explain why it is that homosexuality so often
occurs in perfectly healthy families, as an isolated phenomenon which
has nothing to do either with inheritance or with degeneration. When von
Römer, on the contrary, describes homosexuality as a process of
“regeneration,” we must maintain that for this view there are no
sufficient grounds. Here begins the =riddle= of homosexuality; for me,
at any rate, it is one. My own theory only attempts to explain the
proper physiological connexions of homosexuality better, and, above all,
more scientifically than earlier theories. With regard to the ultimate
cause of the relatively frequent occurrence of homosexuality as an
original phenomenon, this theory has, however, nothing to say.

I do not suggest that I am able for a moment to find the ultimate reason
of the being and nature of homosexuality. There remains here a riddle to
be solved. But from the standpoint of civilization and reproduction
homosexuality is a senseless and aimless dysteleological phenomenon,
like many another “natural product”--as, for example, the human cæcum.
In an earlier chapter I drew attention to the fact that civilization has
entailed an increasingly sharp sexual differentiation--that is, the
antithesis between “man” and “woman” has become continually clearer.
The distinction between the sexes is a product rather of civilization
than of primitive nature. All sexual indifference, all sexual links, are
primitive characters. Eduard von Mayer rightly believes that in the
earliest days of the human race homosexuality was much more widely
diffused than it is at present, that, in fact, it came into being side
by side with heterosexual love. Civilization by means of inheritance,
adaptation, and differentiation, has continually more and more limited
the extent of the homosexual impulse. Unquestionably the homosexual
human being, =as human being=, has the same right to exist as the
heterosexual. To doubt it would be preposterous. Also, as a sexual
being, in so far as only the individual aspect of love comes under
consideration, the homosexual has an equal right. But for the species,
and also for the advancement of civilization, homosexuality has no
importance, or very little. It is obvious that, as a kind of enduring
“monosexuality,” it contradicts the purposes of the species. Equally
obvious is it that the whole of civilization is the product of the
physical and mental differentiation of the sexes, that civilization has,
in fact, to a certain extent, a heterosexual character. The greatest
spiritual values we owe to heterosexuals, not to homosexuals. =Moreover,
reproduction first renders possible the preservation and permanence of
new spiritual values.= In the last resort the latter are not possible
without the former. However obvious it may appear, we must still repeat
that spiritual values exist only in respect of the =future=, that they
only attain their true significance =in the connexion and the succession
of the generations=, and that they are, therefore, eternally dependent
upon heterosexual love as the intermediary by which this continuity is
produced. The monosexual and homosexual instincts permanently limited to
their own ego or their own sex are, therefore, in their innermost nature
=dysteleological= and =anti-evolutionistic=. In speaking thus we leave
entirely out of consideration the possibility that temporarily and for
the purposes of individual development they may possess a relative
justification.[566]

Moreover, the majority of homosexuals have a deeply rooted sentiment of
the lack of purpose and the aimlessness of their mode of sexual
perception, and this often gives them a very tragical and pitiable
expression. Especially in the case of noble, spiritually important
homosexuals, true carriers of civilization, is this sense of the
incongruity between homosexuality and life most plainly felt. Even the
talented Numa Prætorius (_Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, vol.
vi., p. 543) recognizes that--

  “The love of the majority of men towards the other sex, based upon
  heterosexual impulse, has undergone a development and refinement, and
  has obtained a significance which makes homosexual love, in comparison
  with it, play quite a subordinate part.”

  [502] “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol.
  i., p. 219.

  [503] Lombroso, at the Sixth International Congress of Criminal
  Anthropologists at Turin, May, 1906, actually drew a parallel between
  congenital homosexuality and the congenital tendency to crime! That
  this parallel is utterly non-existent and that crime and homosexuality
  differ toto cælo is shown luminously by Paul Näcke (“Comparison
  between Criminality and Homosexuality,” published in the
  _Monatsschrift für Kriminalpsychologie_, 1906, pp. 477-487).

  [504] Published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, edited
  by Magnus Hirschfeld, vol. iii., p. 5 (Leipzig, 1901). _Cf._ also the
  account of the newer views by P. Näcke, “Problems in the Domain of
  Homosexuality,” published in the _Allgemeine Zeitschrift für
  Psychiatrie_, 1902, vol. lix., pp. 805-829 (this writer also maintains
  the existence of normal, healthy homosexual individuals).

  [505] Magnus Hirschfeld, “Der Urnische Mensch,” p. 139 _et seq._
  (Leipzig, 1903).

  [506] Von Krafft-Ebing, “Retarded Homosexuality,” published in the
  _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1901, vol. iii., pp. 7-20.

  [507] J. E. Meisner, “Uranism, or the so-called Homosexual Love,” p.
  11 (Leipzig, 1906).

  [508] Max Katte (“Virile Homosexuals,” published in the _Annual for
  Sexual Intermediate Stages_, vol. vii., p. 94; Leipzig, 1905) remarks
  that it is an error on the part of recent writers in the domain of
  homosexuality to describe and vindicate so prominently the effeminate
  type of homosexual man, and to neglect the virile type. The same is
  true as regards the description of the corresponding types of
  homosexual women.

  [509] This occurs also in heterosexual boys. I extract the following
  passage from the unpublished autobiography of a homosexual
  =physician=: “When puberty occurred I am not able to say--I expect it
  was about the age of sixteen or seventeen--but I know certainly that I
  noticed at the time of puberty a swelling of the breasts. There was
  only a slight forward curvature, which did not extend much beyond the
  areola, and was painful on pressure. I remember distinctly that I was
  anxious about the matter, and was afraid that there was some
  inflammation beginning. =However, the same seems to occur in every
  normal man.= A student whom I asked about the matter said that he had
  noticed a swelling of the mammary glands about the age of fifteen;
  recently, at the age of seventeen, he has had his first pollutions;
  his sexual sensibility is normal.”

  [510] “Goethe’s Letters,” vol. vii., p. 314: letter of December 29,
  1787, from Rome to Karl August (Weimar, 1890).

  [511] G. Merzbach, “Homosexuality and Occupation,” published in the
  _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1902, vol. iv., pp. 187-198.

  [512] _Cf._ W. S., “Woman-Man on the Stage,” published in the _Annual
  for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, vol. ii., pp. 313-325.

  [513] This writer is also the inventor of the word “homosexual,” which
  is found for the first time in his book.

  [514] Magnus Hirschfeld, “Result of the Statistical Investigations
  regarding the Percentage of Homosexuals,” published in the _Annual for
  Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1904, vol. vi., pp. 109-178.

  [515] F. Karsch, “Uranism or Pæderasty and Tribadism among Savage
  Races,” published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_,
  1901, vol. iii., pp. 72-201.

  [516] “Traces of Contrary Sexuality among the Ancient Scandinavians:
  Reports of a Norwegian Literary Man,” published in the _Annual for
  Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1902, vol. v., pp. 244-263.

  [517] Regarding homosexuality in Japan, _cf._ also “Pæderasty in
  Japan,” by Suyewo Iwaya, published in the _Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, 1902, vol. iv., pp. 264-271.

  [518] In the second volume, now in course of preparation, of my work
  on “The Origin of Syphilis,” will be found a detailed critical
  investigation, based upon the most recent data, of homosexuality and
  pseudo-homosexuality in ancient times and during the middle ages.

  [519] _Cf._ “Four Letters of Carl Heinrich Ulrichs (‘Numa Numantius’)
  to his Relatives,” published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate
  Stages_, 1899, vol. i., pp. 36-96 (with portrait).

  [520] Ludwig Frey, “The Spiritual Life of Count Platen,” published in
  the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1899, vol. i., pp.
  159-214; and 1904, vol. vi., pp. 357-448.

  [521] Numa Prätorius, “Michael Angelo as an Urning,” _op. cit._, 1900,
  vol. ii., pp. 254-267.

  [522] F. Karsch, “Heinrich Hössli,” _op. cit._, 1903, vol. v., pp.
  449-556. Hössli was the author of the work “Eros: the Greek Love of
  Men” (Glarus and St. Gallen, 1836 and 1838, 2 vols.), which, according
  to Karsch, represented for our own time what Plato’s “Symposium” and
  “Phædrus” represents for antiquity. Karsch gives an excellent table of
  the contents and an analysis of the books under consideration.

  [523] J. E. Meisner, “Uranism,” p. 16 (Leipzig); also verbal
  communications by Meisner, who was personally acquainted with
  Bulthaupt, to myself.

  [524] F. Karsch, “Our Sources for the Consideration of Reputed and
  Real Urnings,” “Johann von Müller the Historian (1752-1809),”
  published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1902, vol.
  iv., pp. 349-457.

  [525] L. S. A. M. von Römer, “Henry III., King of France and Poland,”
  _op. cit._, vol. iv., pp. 572-669.

  [526] J. E. Meisner, _op. cit._, p. 17.

  [527] Magnus Hirschfeld, “Sexual Transitional Stages,” Plate XXXII.
  (Leipzig, 1905).

  [528] _Op. cit._, Plate XXXII.

  [529] F. Karsch, “Duke August the Fortunate (1772-1822),” published in
  the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1903, vol. v., pp.
  615-693.

  [530] Numa Prätorius, “Georges Eekhoud: a Preface,” published in the
  _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1900, vol. ii., pp. 268-277.

  [531] G. Eekhoud, “An Illustrious Urning of the Seventeenth Century,
  Jerom Duquesnoy, the Flemish Sculptor,” _op. cit._, pp. 277-287.

  [532] F. Karsch, “A. von Sternberg, the Novelist,” _op. cit._, 1902,
  vol. iv., pp. 458-571. He obtained sexual gratification by
  masturbating while looking at masculine posteriora, but also
  frequently had relations with women.

  [533] F. Karsch, “Theodor Beza, the Reformer (1519-1605),” _op. cit._,
  pp. 291-349.

  [534] H. J. Schouten, “The Alleged Pæderasty of the Reformer John
  Calvin,” _op. cit._, 1905, vol. vii., pp. 291-306.

  [535] Hans Rau, “Franz Grillparzer and his Amatory Life.” (Berlin,
  1903).

  [536] The love of boys, the “pæderasty,” of the Greeks related to
  young adult men.

  [537] I have used the established spelling for this word, although
  probably its more correct spelling would be “pedication” (derived from
  pedex = podex).

  [538] _Cf._ P. Näcko, “The Kiss of the Homosexual,” published in the
  _Archives for Criminal Anthropology and Criminal Statistics_, by H.
  Gross, 1904, vol. xvii., Nos. 1, 2, p. 177. _Cf._ also the reports on
  the tongue kiss published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate
  Stages_, 1905, vol. vii., pp. 757-759.

  [539] M. Hirschfeld, “Are Sexual Intermediate Stages Suited for
  Marriage?” published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_,
  1901, vol. iii., pp. 37-71.

  [540] We owe to Näcke the recognition of the importance of sexual
  dreams in the diagnosis of homosexuality and heterosexuality. _Cf._
  his essay, “The Forensic Significance of Dreams,” published in _the
  Archives for Criminal Anthropology_, 1889, vol. iii.; also P. Näcke,
  “The Dream as the Most Delicate Reagent for the Detection of the Mode
  of Sexual Sensibility,” published in the _Annual Review of Criminal
  Psychology_, 1905.

  [541] M. Hirschfeld, “Berlin’s Third Sex,” p. 26 (Berlin and Leipzig,
  1905).

  [542] The description of this interesting scene, with other details
  regarding the organization of the homosexuals of Paris, is found in
  the work of Pisanus Fraxi (Henry Spencer Ashbee). “Centuria Librorum
  Absconditorum,” pp. 406-416 (London, 1879) (based upon personal
  reports by Paul Lacroix).

  [543] Ambroise Tardieu, “Offences against Morality from the Point of
  View of State Medicine,” German translation by F. W. Theile, pp. 133,
  134 (Weimar, 1860).

  [544] There are also numerous places of public resort which are indeed
  largely attended by urnings, but are also frequented by heterosexuals.

  [545] _Cf._ in this connexion also the remarks of P. Näcke, “A Visit
  to the Homosexuals of Berlin,” published in the _Archives of Criminal
  Anthropology_, 1904, vol. xv., Nos. 1 and 2.

  [546] _Cf._ P. Näcke, “Quelques Détails sur les Homosexuels de Paris,”
  published in the _Archives d’Anthropologie Criminelle_, 1905, new
  series, iv., No. 138. See the reference in the _Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, 1906, vol. viii., pp. 795, 796.

  [547] _Cf._ “The Secrets of the Berlin Passage,” pp. 19, 20 (Berlin,
  1877).

  [548] _Cf._ Pisanus Fraxi, “Centuria Librorum Absconditorum,” pp.
  404-406 (London, 1879) (according to the reports of Paul Lacroix, who
  himself was a witness of the occurrences).

  [549] _Op. cit._, pp. 404-407.

  [550] _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1906, vol. viii., pp.
  796, 797. According to d’Estoc (“Paris-Eros,” pp. 207, 208), the male
  prostitutes in these brothels are more especially men from southern
  countries--Italians, Orientals, Berbers, and negroes.

  [551] _Cf._ Ludwig Frey, “Characterization of Blackmail,” published in
  the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1899, vol. i., pp. 71-96.

  [552] _Cf._ Numa Prætorius, “The Criminal Character of Homosexual
  Intercourse, Considered Historically and Critically,” published in the
  _Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1899, vol. i., pp. 97-158.

  [553] _Cf._ Z. Richter, “Does § 175 afford any Protection? A
  Criminalogical Study,” published in the _Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, 1900, vol. ii., pp. 30-52.

  [554] “Opinions of Roman Catholic Priests on the Attitude of
  Christianity towards the Criminal Prosecution of Homosexual Love”
  (_Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1900, vol. ii., pp.
  161-203); “What Position should the Church Assume towards Homosexual
  Love and its Criminal Prosecution?” by an Evangelical Theologian (_op.
  cit._, vol. iii., pp. 204-210); Caspar Wirz, “Urnings before the
  Church and Scripture” (Orthodox-Evangelical) (_op. cit._, vol. iv.,
  pp. 63-108); “Homosexuality in the Bible,” by a Catholic priest (_op.
  cit._, vol. iv., pp. 199-243); “From the Memoirs of a (Catholic)
  Priest” (_op. cit._, pp. 1172-1178).

  [555] A letter from Emile Zola to Dr. Laupts on the problem of
  homosexuality; translated, with an introduction, by Rudolf von
  Beulwitz (_Annual for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, 1905, vol. ii., pp.
  371-386).

  [556] “What should the People know about the Third Sex?” An
  instructive work, published by the Scientific and Humanitarian
  Committee (Leipzig, 1904).

  [557] _Cf._ “The Truth about Myself: Autobiography of a
  Contrary-Sexual,” published in the _Annual for Sexual Intermediate
  Stages_, vol. iii., pp. 292-307.

  [558] M. F., “How I See the Matter,” _op. cit._, pp. 308-312.

  [559] _Cf._ Anna Rüling, “What Interest has the Woman’s Movement in
  the Solution of the Homosexual Problem?” (_Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, vol. vii., pp. 131-151).

  [560] Arduin, “The Woman’s Question and Sexual Intermediate Stages”
  (_op. cit._, 1900, vol. ii., pp. 211-223).

  [561] W. Hammer, “Tribadism in Berlin,” p. 97 (Berlin, 1906).

  [562] _Cf._ “A Description of an Urnindes’ Ball,” given by M.
  Hirschfeld, “Berlin’s Third Sex,” pp. 56, 57.

  [563] _Cf._ Martial d’Estoc, “Paris-Eros,” p. 59 _et seq._

  [564] _Cf._ F. Karsch, “Pæderasty and Tribadism among Animals as
  recorded in Literature,” published in the _Annual for Sexual
  Intermediate Stages_, 1900, vol. ii., pp. 126-160; P. Näcke,
  “Pæderasty in Animals,” published in the _Archives of Criminal
  Anthropology_, 1904, vol. xiv., pp. 361, 362.

  [565] L. Krehl, “The Disturbance of Chemical Correlations in the
  Organism” (Leipzig, 1907). Here, on p. 3, we find: “If we are
  compelled to assume that many varieties of cells in their rudimentary
  condition already bear the imprint of a masculine or feminine nature,
  =still this masculine or feminine nature doubtless only undergoes its
  real development under the enduring chemical influence of the ovaries
  and the testicles=.”

  [566] This latter view has been maintained especially by Max Katte, in
  his treatise “The Purpose of the Existence of Homosexuals” (_Annual
  for Sexual Intermediate Stages_, vol. iv., pp. 272-288), but he
  completely ignores the evolutionary points of view. In the same way,
  Hans Freimark neglects them (“The Meaning of Uranism,” p. 14; Leipzig,
  1906); he regards homosexuality as a transition to a state in which
  “mankind will no longer need gross material contact for purposes of
  reproduction.”




