CHAPTER VI

THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT IN LOVE--RELIGION AND SEXUALITY


“_The more dearly we understand how the indeterminate sexual attractive
force of the most lowly organisms has, by a continuous addition of
psychical elements, slowly developed into the love of the higher species
of animals and of mankind, the sooner shall we be inclined to attribute
to this sentiment the importance which it deserves. Then we shall no
longer be able to regard it as an individual imagination, which has no
relation to reality and no roots in the depths of life. It will become
to us a measuring rule for the stage of evolution to which we have
attained._”--CHARLES ALBERT.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER VI

  Influence of the development of the brain upon the sexual impulse --
  Relations between speech and love -- The psychic-emotional roots of
  love -- Love as a product of civilization -- Relation between the
  physical and the spiritual poietic impulse -- The “function-impulse”
  of Dr. Santlus -- Psychical sexual equivalents -- Schopenhauer, Hirth,
  and Mantagazza, on this subject -- Rôle of sexuality in the feelings
  of life -- The organic necessity of love -- Sexual philosophy -- The
  Marquis de Sade -- Otto Weininger -- Max Zeiss -- Relations of love to
  the individual feelings of personality -- The reproductive impulse and
  the conjugative impulse -- Love and love’s embrace as a personal aim.

  The psychogenetic fundamental law of love -- The way of the spirit in
  love -- Its tendency from the general to the individual -- From the
  remote to the proximate -- Love as a transcendental and as a personal
  relationship.

  The association of religio-metaphysical ideas with the sexual life --
  A general anthropological phenomenon -- Anthropomorphistic-animistic
  explanation of the relation between religion and the sexual life --
  Billroth’s scientific analysis of religious perception -- L.
  Feuerback, M’Lennan, and Tylor on this subject -- My own description
  of the psychological processes in the association between the
  religious and the sexual life -- The deification of love according to
  E. von Mayer -- Strongest in women -- Vicarious religions and sexual
  perceptions -- History of religio-sexual phenomena -- Religious
  prostitution -- Single and repeated acts of religious prostitution --
  Sexual self-surrender to the deity or his representative --
  Defloration by divine symbols -- Defloration deities among the
  Indians, the Jews, and the Romans -- Religious defloration by
  representatives of the deity -- The Babylonian Mylitta-cult --
  Diffusion and explanation thereof -- Religious prostitution in India
  -- Among primitive peoples -- Bachofen’s brilliant explanation of
  religious prostitution as a counteraction to the individualization of
  love -- Contempt for virginity among primitive peoples -- Permanent
  religious prostitution -- Sexual intercourse as a consecrated act --
  The temple-girls of the Greeks, Phœnicians, and Indians -- The Indian
  “nautch-girls” -- The sense of eternity in the religious and the
  sexual impulse -- Sexual mysticism -- Religio-erotic festivals --
  Their wide diffusion -- Examples from antiquity, from India, and from
  Central and South America -- Sexual mysticism in Christianity --
  Religio-sexual sects -- The “unio mystica” -- The primiz, or mystical
  marriage -- Mariolatry -- A religious poem.

  Asceticism -- Its origin -- Metchnikoffs explanation of the origin of
  asceticism -- Disharmonies of the sexual life -- Psychology of
  ascetics -- Their hypersexuality -- Great antiquity and ubiquity of
  asceticism -- The asceticism of the Indians, Mohammedans, and
  Christians -- Preoccupation of Christian ascetics with sexual matters
  -- Sexual visions -- Dissolute sects -- Monastic and cloistral life --
  Modern asceticism -- Its difference from ancient asceticism -- Its
  connexion with actual experiences -- Example of Schopenhauer --
  Hitherto unpublished evidence of the relationship between his ascetic
  views and his own life -- Tolstoi on the sorrows of voluptuousness --
  His relative asceticism -- Weininger’s renewal of early Christian
  asceticism -- Its cause -- Characteristics of Weininger’s book.

  The belief in witchcraft -- The principal source of all misogyny and
  contempt of women -- Not a Christian discovery -- Primeval association
  between sexuality and magic -- The sexual origin of the belief in
  witchcraft -- Devil’s mistresses -- The predisponents of the medieval
  belief in witchcraft -- Continuance of this belief into our own times
  -- Rôle of sexuality in pastoral medicine -- External and internal
  causation of the theological treatment of sexual problems -- Sexual
  casuistic literature -- The religious factor in the sexual life of the
  present day -- Sexual excesses of modern sects -- The revival of
  romanticism -- Experiences of an elderly physician regarding religion
  and sexuality -- Deprivation of love and satiety of love as sources of
  religious needs -- Significance of the religious factor in the history
  of love -- Subordinate rôle of this in the individualization of the
  sentiment of love.


CHAPTER VI

If, with Friedrich Ratzel, we understand by civilization the sum total
of all the mental acquirements of a period, then also human love, this
specific product of civilization, is merely a mirrored picture of the
mental activities of the existing epoch of civilization. We can follow
this =way of the spirit in love= from the primitive age down to the
present day, and we can detect, in each successive epoch of
civilization, the association with sexuality of peculiar spiritual
states; and after thus passing in review the thousands of years of human
history, we can discern once more in our own epoch the individual
psychical elements which characterize the love of modern civilized man.

The increasing spiritualization and idealization of sensuality in the
course of civilization, =notwithstanding= the persistence of the
elementary intensity of the sexual impulse, is associated with the fact
to which we have already alluded--namely, the preponderance of the brain
characteristic of the genus homo--a preponderance which was
unquestionably gradually acquired, and arose in consequence of an
accumulation of original variations which gave their possessors a
certain advantage in the struggle for existence.

Thus very gradually the primary, instinctive, still powerful animal ego
underwent expansion into the secondary ego (in Meynert’s sense), into
the =spiritual personality=, to which a fixed foundation was given by
the possession of =speech=. With some justice the origin of speech has
been singled out as extremely significant for the development of the
feeling of love; and the conquest of the primitive animal instinct has
been, above all, attributed to this faculty. A. Cabral, in his
interesting work, “La Vénus Génitrix” (Paris, 1882, p. 155), expresses
the opinion that speech and song developed solely on account of sexual
relations; and he alludes in support of this view to the well-known
manifold noises made by various animals in conditions of sexual
excitement. It is very significant in this connexion that
anthropological science has proved, as an important fact in racial
psychology, that the development of poetry =preceded= that of prose.[33]
The original form of speech was rhythmical noise, a poem, a song. And
we saw above that this was subservient to more suggestive purposes, and,
above all, to sexual allurement. Thus the primitive natural connexion
between speech and sexuality appears somewhat probable. With these
earlier erotic noises and alluring tones were subsequently associated
the first elements of intellectual comprehension, the first =thoughts=.

This “withdrawal of mankind from pure instinct,” which Schiller, in his
essay on the earliest human society, describes as the “most fortunate
and most important occurrence in human history,” from which time the
struggle towards freedom may be said to begin, gradually enabled the
higher =feeling-tones= of sensation to become more predominant. The
elementary impulses became associated with sensations of pleasure and
pain as psychical reactions. The “organic sensations” entered the sphere
of consciousness, and so gave rise, in association and reciprocal
working with the higher sensory stimuli, to the psychico-emotional roots
of the impulses. Thus, in the sexual sphere, out of pure voluptuousness,
the simple instinctive impulse towards copulation, arose =love=, whose
essence is an intimate association of physical sensations with feelings
and thoughts, with the entire spiritual and emotional being of
mankind.[34]

  “Love,” says Charles Albert, “is the result of all the forward steps
  of human activity in all departments, and in every direction, as
  manifested in their effects upon the sexual life. It is an advance
  which goes hand in hand with all other advances. Man is an inseparable
  whole, and in theory only can he be subdivided into separate
  faculties. In reality, indeed, all departments of human development
  are so intimately associated that progress in any one of them must
  place something to the credit of all.”

Increasing psychical refinement and differentiation of the human type,
domination of the intelligence and of emotion over brute force,
transformation of the social relations between man and woman in
consequence of economic conditions or of religious and moral ideas,
respect for personality, a secured provision for the most pressing vital
needs, and a consequent elevation and complication of the sexual life,
the influence of a longing for ideal beauty in a psychical and moral
sense--all these and much more have contributed to constitute sexual
love in the sense in which we understand and experience it at the
present day. The speech of the lover of our own time is the
comprehensive expression of all human progress. The difference between
animal rutting and the lofty sensation of love corresponds exactly to
the gulf which separates primitive man, capable only of chipping for
himself a few almost useless flint tools, from civilized man who, with
the aid of innumerable machines, has tamed to his service the elementary
forces of Nature.

We must recur to the earliest beginnings of the evolution of the human
psyche in its association with sexuality, in order to understand the
=profound= and =primitive= connexion between the bodily and the
spiritual formative impulse; this connexion has been expressed by the
saying that the sexual impulse is the father of all those intellectual
impulses peculiar to man which have made him a thinker and a discoverer.
In the time of Schelling’s natural philosophy, they went so far as to
speak of the “testicular hemispheres” as analogous to the hemispheres of
the brain. And is not this connexion also expressed etymologically (in
German) in the verbal association of _Zeugung_ (procreation) and
_Ueberzeugung_ (certainty, _i.e._, higher, or intellectual,
procreation), and, further, by the fact that in the Hebrew tongue the
ideas of “procreation” and “cognition” are jointly represented by a
=single= term? And, returning to the physical sphere, it may be
mentioned that, according to Moebius (“Ueber die Wirkungen der
Kastration”--“Concerning the Effects of Castration,” Halle, 1906),
sexuality is the common product of testicular and cerebral activity.

Plato was already aware of this relationship when he called thought a
sublimated sexual impulse, and Buffon likewise when he described love as
“le premier essor de la sensibilité, qui se porte ensuite à d’autres
objets.” In more recent times, Dr. Santlus, in his valuable essay, “On
the Psychology of the Human Impulses” (_Archiv für Psychiatrie_, 1864,
vol. vi., pp. 244 and 262), alluded to this combination of the sexual
sphere with the highest spiritual interests of mankind under the name of
the “function-impulse.”

From these intimate relations between sexual and spiritual productivity
is to be explained the remarkable fact that certain spiritual creations
may take the place of the purely physical sexual impulse; that there are
psychical =sexual equivalents= into which the potential energy of the
sexual impulse may be transformed. Here belong numerous emotions, such
as ferocity, anger, pain, and the productive spiritual activities which
find their vent in poetry, art, and religion--in short, the whole
=imaginative life= of mankind in the widest sense is able, when the
natural activity of the sexual impulse is inhibited, to find such sexual
equivalents, the importance of which in the evolutionary history of
human love we shall have later to study in further detail.

Interesting observations regarding this intimate connexion between the
spiritual and the physical procreative impulse are to be found in the
work of a thinker who made no secret of his intense sensuality, and in
whose life and thought sexuality played a peculiar part--in the work of
Schopenhauer. In his “New Paralipomena” he lays stress on the similarity
between the work of productive genius and the modification of the sexual
impulse peculiar to the human race. In another place in which, as
Frauenstädt also insists, he is speaking from personal experience, he
writes: “In the days and hours when the =voluptuous= impulse is most
powerful, not a dull desire, arising from emptiness and dullness of the
consciousness, but a burning longing, a violent ardour, =precisely then
also are the highest powers of the spirit available, the finest
consciousness is prepared for its intensest activity=, although at the
moment when the consciousness has given itself up to desire they are
=latent=; but it needs merely a powerful effort to turn their direction,
and instead of that tormenting, despairing lust (the kingdom of
darkness), the activity of the highest spiritual powers fills the
consciousness (the kingdom of light).”

Georg Hirth, who, in the section of his “Ways to Love” entitled
“Stark-naked Thoughts,” gives in aphorisms an interesting account of the
psychology of love, affirms the “delightful phenomenon of a peculiarly
active enhancement of our impulse to thought and production,” =after=
erotic satisfaction, =after= a fortunate love-night. Very ably, also,
has Mantegazza described the spiritual activity produced by a happy and
victorious love.[35]

Many great thinkers have complained of the alleged impairment of pure
spirituality by the sexual life, and have recommended asceticism in
order to arrive at a truer internal enlightenment. This, however, would
imply pulling up the roots of spiritual poietic[36] activity, the
suppression of a rich inner life of thought and feeling, the
destruction of all true poetry and art. There would be left behind only
the wilderness of a cold abstraction. Look at the letters of Abelard
before and after his emasculation. Sexuality first breathes into our
spiritual being the warm and blooming life.

  “The world,” says Philipp Frey, “would be conceived by us in sharply
  bounded intellectual pictures, unless we saw it in the changing lights
  of our sexuality. From the green of gently dreaming desire, through
  the yellow of surging emotion, and from the blood-red of eager desire
  to the cool blue of satisfaction--all things appear to us in the light
  of our sexuality. Life would be better ordered if we were purely
  intelligible machines for the purposes of nutrition, work, and
  production. But without the dualism of desire and satisfaction, the
  world would become torpid in a great yawn.”

This intimate connexion between the psychic-emotional being and the
sexual impulse gave rise to a deepening, a concentration, and an
increasing intensity, of the feeling of love, whereby the latter becomes
the most powerful influence affecting mankind in bodily and spiritual
relations. Voltaire, in his “Pensées Philosophiques,” says aptly:
“L’amour est de toutes les passions la plus forte, parce qu’elle attaque
à la fois la tête, le cœur, et le corps.” That it is in love that the
immediate admixture of organic processes most clearly manifests itself
is a fact pointed out already by Aristotle, and among modems emphasized
by Griesinger.[37]

Thus love discloses itself as a =nucleus=, the =axis= of the individual,
and therewith also of the social life, a fact indicated already in
Schopenhauer’s phrase, describing love as the “focus of the will,” and
in Weismann’s expression “the continuity of the germ-plasma.” And we can
easily understand that there are literary advocates of a consequent
“=sexual philosophy=,” who base their view of the universe solely and
entirely upon the sexual. To them the sexual problem becomes a world
problem, eroticism expands into metaphysics. These sexual philosophers
start from love to unveil the mysteries of life. The most celebrated
advocate of such a sexual philosophy was the Marquis de Sade, of whom I
have myself given an account in a pseudonymous work entitled “New
Researches concerning the Marquis de Sade” (Berlin, 1904). According to
de Sade, it is only through the sexual that the world can be grasped and
understood.

In a certain sense the antipodes of the Marquis de Sade is a remarkable
sexual philosopher of our own time, the author of “Sex and Character,”
Dr. Otto Weininger. His whole circle of thought also revolves
exclusively round the sexual. It forms the basis, the starting-point of
his exposition; though, indeed, it does so in a purely negative sense.
For Weininger is the apostle of =asexuality=; to him the highest type of
human being is the non-sexual, the one who renounces all sexuality. And
woman, as the incorporation of sexuality, is to him “nothingness,” the
“radically evil” which must be annihilated.

A positive sexual philosopher of a nobler kind than these two anomalous
spirits is Max Zeiss, whose book, “Ragnarök, a Philosophico-Social
Study,” was published at Strasburg in 1904. He regards work, effort,
creation, the strife for material position, for honour and renown, only
as subordinate aims for the attainment of one aim--=love=.

The ever more intimate association of love with the spiritual life, its
increasing depth, the inclusion within its sphere of influence of all
feelings and thoughts, necessarily give rise to a stronger development
of the =feeling of individual personality=, which, in contrast with the
earlier instinctive impulse, came more and more to dominate the amatory
life. Now love gained at least an =equal= importance for the individual
that in former conditions it had for the purposes of reproduction, and
therewith subjectively the reproductive idea was unquestionably thrust
into the background, in comparison with the idea of personal living, of
personal enrichment and development, by means of love. Hegel says aptly
(“Æsthetics,” Berlin, 1837, vol. ii., p. 186): “The sorrows of love,
these frustrate hopes, the very state of being in love, the never-ending
pains which the lover actually experiences, this never-ending happiness
and joy to which he looks forward in imagination--these are matters
devoid of all general interest; =they concern only the lover himself=.”
Schleiermacher also insists, in his letters concerning “Lucinde,” on the
great importance of love for the spiritual development of the
individual.

The individualization of love has certainly resulted in a great decline
in the predominance of the reproductive idea, of the subjective sense of
race, without it ever being possible for it to lose its eminent
=objective= significance. Nietzsche, therefore, declares a
“reproductive impulse” to be pure “mythology;”[38] and Carpenter, also,
in his book, “Love’s Coming of Age,” says that human love is mainly a
desire for complete union, and only in much less degree a wish for the
reproduction of the race. The profound significance of individual love
in the =promotion of civilization= is exceedingly well described by him
when he says:

  “Taking union as the main point, we may look upon the idealized
  sex-love as a sense of contact pervading the whole mind and
  body--while the sex-organs are a specialization of this faculty of
  union in the outermost sphere: union in the bodily sphere giving rise
  to bodily generation, the same as union in the mental and emotional
  spheres occasions generation of another kind.”

Proof of the fact that love, in its purely individual relations, is also
of great importance for human civilization, that it is profoundly
significant for the higher evolution of humanity, =in addition to= its
importance for the perpetuation of the species--the proof of this thesis
is very important in view of certain problems connected with the theory
of population and in view of the practical conclusions deduced from that
theory, as, for example, the doctrine of neo-malthusianism. =Love and
love’s embrace do not exist only for the purposes of the species: they
are also of importance to the ego; they are necessary for the life, the
evolution, and the internal growth of the individual himself.=

And we must not fail to recognize to what extent the fact that the
individual has gained much from love ultimately reacts also to the
advantage of the species. For the species, as well as for the
individual, the true path of progress lies in the direction of the
individualization of the sexual impulses.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we study in detail the gradual permeation of sexuality with
spiritual elements, the gradual development of love, and its advance
towards perfection by means of civilization, we ascertain that for the
love of the modern civilized man there exists a kind of biogenetic, or
rather psychogenetic, fundamental law. In modern love we encounter all
the spiritual elements which were actively operative in the love of past
times; the love of the civilized man of the present day is an extracted,
shortened, compressed repetition of the entire developmental course of
love from the earliest times to the present day. And the general course
of this development reappears also in the love of the individual.

This course is, to put the matter shortly, from the general to
the individual, from the remote to the proximate. We can further
divide the history of human love into two great epochs. In the first
epoch, love was, above all, a =transcendental relationship= of a
religio-metaphysical nature. The transcendental relationships played a
more important part than the purely human and personal. Everywhere an
ulterior element played its part. In the second epoch, love underwent an
evolution into a more =personal= relationship, in which the human being
himself took foremost place, as compared with any transcendental
considerations. The history of love is, in fact, an illustration of
Compte’s replacement of the theologico-metaphysical epoch of mental
development by the anthropological. In individual love, however, there
still remain active and demonstrable many transcendental elements. The
oldest spiritual elements of love continue to form a portion of the
content of modern love, and to play a more or less dominant part in its
genesis.

To this primeval and psychical phenomenon belongs, above all, an
intimate association between =religious= ideas and feelings and the
sexual life. In a certain sense, the history of religion can be regarded
as the history of a peculiar mode of manifestation of the human sexual
impulse, especially in its influence on the imagination and its
products.

Certain modern writers, members of the laity far from learned in the
history of civilization, have considered the Roman Catholic Church
pre-eminently responsible for the appearance of this sexual element in
ritual and dogma. This, however, is grossly unjust. A =scientific= study
of these relations teaches us that =all= religions exhibit to a greater
or less degree this sexual admixture, and if this appears more prominent
in the Roman Catholic Church, it is due, in the first place, to the fact
that this religion is nearer to us in time than many of the religions of
antiquity, and, in the second place, it is explicable on the ground that
the Roman Catholic Church has always displayed greater openness and less
hypocrisy than, for example, the Protestant pietists, who, as the
Königsberg scandal, the Eva van Buttler affair, etc., show, are no less
blameworthy in respect of sexual vagaries.

A really =objective= basis for an opinion regarding the relations
between religion and sexuality can only be obtained when we cease to
consider these relations as an affair of dogma and of the confessional,
and study them upon the basis to which they properly belong--to wit, the
=anthropological=. For these relationships are peculiar to the genus
homo as such. The sexual element is quite as prominent in the religions
of primitive peoples as in those of modern civilized nations.

Anthropological science has hitherto been occupied more with the fact
than with the explanation of the remarkable relations between religion
and sexuality. There can, however, be no doubt that these relations
arise out of the very nature of mankind. The various anthropologists and
physicians who have occupied themselves with these problems are in
agreement upon this point: that the connexion between religion and the
sexual life can be explained only on =anthropomorphic-animistic=
grounds--that is, by the same kind of ideas which Tylor has proved to be
the foundation of the primitive mental life.

Thus, the great physician and anthropologist Theodor Billroth doubts the
existence of any pure religious perception entirely free from all
sensual elements. In a letter to Hanslick, dated February 21, 1891, he
writes:

  “In my opinion, it is nonsensical to speak of a special religious
  perception. What we call by this name is either a purely fanciful and
  imaginative opinion, which may rise to the intensity of hallucination,
  and has for substratum any kind of imaginative product which excites a
  yearning in the believing or loving individual--or else, in fanatics,
  it is an actual erotic excitement, like the rhythmical
  prayer-movements of the Mohammedans, the dancing of the Dervishes, or
  the jumping of the Flagellants. The Church as bridegroom for the nun,
  as bride for the monk, has a similar signification. It is, in a
  certain sense, the continuation of the service of Isis, and of the
  festivals of Aphrodite and Bacchus. Man has always created his gods or
  his god in his own image, and prays and sings to him--that is,
  properly speaking, to himself--in the artistic forms of the period.
  Since the so-called divine is always a mere abstraction or
  personification of one or several human attributes in the highest
  conceivable potency, it follows that human and divine, worldly and
  religious, cannot really be of differing natures. Man cannot, in fact,
  think anything supernatural, nor can he do anything unnatural, because
  he never can think or act except with human attributes.”

This explanation coincides with the view of Ludwig Feuerbach, who has
especially insisted on the anthropomorphistic element in religio-sexual
phenomena in his essay “Concerning Mariolatry.”

M’Lennan and Tylor were among the chief discoverers of the animistic
aspect of religio-sexual ideas. In a way analogous to his attitude
towards other phenomena, primitive man assumed the activity of spirits
in explanation of the sexual impulse and everything associated
therewith; and he paid divine worship to the sexual impulse, as the
visible and palpable manifestation of those spirits.

I myself have more fully described this physiological process in a
somewhat different manner (“Contributions to the Etiology of
Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. i., pp. 76, 77), and I quote here my
account of the primitive deification of the sexual.

As something elemental, incredible, supernatural, the sexual impulse
made its appearance in man’s life at the time of puberty; by its
overwhelming force, by the intensity, spontaneity, and multiplicity, of
the perceptions to which it gave rise, it awakened feelings which
enriched, vivified, and inflamed the imagination in an unexpected
manner. This phenomenon, overwhelming him with elemental force, filled
primitive man with a holy fear. He ascribed it to a supernatural
influence, =and this supernatural influence became associated in his
circle of perceptions with those others which he had previously
experienced=, and which had aroused in him the feeling of =dependence
upon one or several higher powers=, before which he knelt in worship. To
what an extent the =metaphysical= invaded the whole sexual life of man,
Schopenhauer has clearly shown in his “Metaphysic of Sexual Love.”
Religion and sexuality come into the most intimate association in this
perception of the metaphysical and in this feeling of dependence; hence
arise the remarkable relations between the two, and that easy transition
of religious feelings into sexual feelings which is manifest in all the
relations of life. In both cases the surrender, the renunciation, of the
individual personality is experienced as a pleasurable sensation.
Schopenhauer has described in a classical manner the metaphysical
impulsive force of love striving onward towards the infinite and the
divine, whose analogy with the religious impulse we cannot fail to
recognize.

In his thoughtful book, “The Vital Laws of Civilization” (Halle, 1904,
p. 52), Eduard von Mayer has also discussed the religio-sexual problem.
He starts from the idea that man regarded as higher than himself that
which he was unable to master, and, above all, hunger and love.

  “The pains of ungratified hunger or love plough deep furrows, into
  which falls the seed of voluptuousness, of satisfied hunger, or of the
  joys of love. And to primitive man, to whom the entire universe is
  full of living beings, hunger and love also appear as =divine powers=,
  which pain and plague him until their will is satisfied.”

The association of sexuality with religion affects both sexes equally,
although the phenomenon appears more intense in woman, and is more
enduring in her, owing to the greater depth of her emotional life. The
brothers de Goncourt, in their diary, describe religion as simply a
portion of woman’s sexual life. Feminine sexual activity thus appears
something religious, pious, holy. And those priests who pretended to
“sanctify” by their love the women whom they seduced, were certainly
more accurate, from the =physiological= point of view, than the Church
was in its condemnation of carnal lust as sin and the work of the devil.
In the middle ages it was a view commonly held in France that women who
had intercourse with priests were in some sort sanctified thereby. The
mistresses of priests were called the “consecrated.”

The identity of religious and sexual perceptions explains the frequent
transformation of one into the other, and the continuous association
between the two. A sexual emotion will often function vicariously for a
religious emotion, in part or wholly.

The unusually interesting history of the complicated and remarkable
religio-sexual phenomena renders clear to us individual processes of
this kind and certain peculiarities of racial psychology; and thereby we
are led to understand the powerful after-effects of these phenomena in
the customs, the morals, and the conventions of our time, and we are
enlightened as to the rôle still played by the religio-sexual factor in
the life of many men even of our own day.

One of the oldest, if not the oldest, of religio-sexual phenomena is
=religious prostitution=--the “lust-sacrifice,” as Eduard von Mayer
happily expresses it--since therein the sexual act is regarded as a
sacrifice made to the deity. We have here the unrestricted offering by a
woman of her body to every chance comer without love, =as an act of
simple sensuality, and for payment=, and thus we find all the
characteristics of what at the present day we term “prostitution.”

According to the researches I have myself previously published regarding
religious prostitution, this may be divided into two great groups:

1. =A single act of prostitution in honour of the deity.=

2. =Permanent religious prostitution.=

A single act of religious prostitution mostly consists in the offering
of virginity; sometimes also in the single, not repeated, offering of an
already deflowered woman. In the single act of religious prostitution,
the woman either offers herself =directly to the deity=, the bodily act
of defloration being effected by a divine physical symbol--as, for
instance, by a penis made of stone, ivory, or wood--or by direct
intercourse with the statue of the god; or else the woman gives herself
to a =human representative= of the deity--for instance, to the king, to
a priest, to a blood-relative (not seldom to her own father, this being
a variety of religious incest), and sometimes to a passing stranger.[39]

With regard to the first mode of defloration, by means of a divine
symbol, we have especially full reports from the East Indies. Here, in
the sixteenth century, in the Southern Deccan, the Portuguese Duarte
Barbosa first saw the religious defloration of girls effected by means
of the “lingam,” the divine phallus. Girls aged ten years only were
sacrificed to the deity in this brutal manner. From a later time come
the accounts of Jan Huygen van Linschoten and Gasparo Balbi, regarding
the customs of the inhabitants of Goa. The bride was taken into the
temple, where a penis of iron or ivory was thrust into the vagina, so
that the hymen was destroyed. In other cases, the girl’s genitals were
brought into contact with the stone penis of an image of the god, at a
shrine eighteen miles distant from Goa. W. Schultze, in his “East Indian
Journey” (Amsterdam, 1676, p. 161_a_), relates:

  “By means of this priapus, with the assistance of friends and
  relatives, the maiden was deprived of her virginity with force and in
  a painful manner; at the same time the bridegroom rejoiced that the
  foul and accursed idol had done him this honour, in the hope that as a
  result of this sacrifice he would enjoy greater happiness in his
  marriage.”

This process of defloration of Indian virgins by the lingam idol is
confirmed by the reports of John Fryer, Roe, Jeon Moquet, Abbé Guyon,
Démeunier, and others.

The god Baal Peor, worshipped by the Moabites and Jews, seems also to
have possessed such a divine power of defloration. His name, “Peor,” “to
open,” is supposed to relate to the destruction of the hymen.[40]

This relationship is more distinctly expressed in the names of certain
gods of the ancient Romans, such as Dea Perfica, Dea Pertunda, Mutunus
Tutunus, regarding whose functions in connexion with defloration, shown
unquestionably by the etymology of their names, I have referred to at
greater length in my essay on “Ancient Roman Medicine” (published in
Puschmann’s “Handbook of the History of Medicine,” p. 407; Jena, 1902).

For the honour of the sexual divinities, the bride was compelled, as
Augustine, Lactantius, and Arnobius report, to seat herself upon the
“fascinum”--that is, the _membrum virile_ of the priapus statue--and in
this way, either physically, or at least symbolically, sacrifice her
virginity to the deity. According to the legend, the conception of
Ocrisia was actually effected in this way![41]

According to the second method by which single acts of religious
prostitution are effected, a representative of the deity exercises the
latter’s right of defloration. It is a form of religious _jus primæ
noctis_, which is given to the king, the priest, the father, and, above
all, to a casual stranger, before the girl becomes the property of her
husband or master. In cases in which the husband has effected
defloration, the deity may be satisfied by the woman later giving
herself once to his representative.

The best-known form of religious prostitution is the Mylittacult of the
Babylonians, the worship of that goddess who, according to Bachofen,
represents the uncontrolled life of Nature in its fullest creative
activity, unchecked by any man-made laws--the goddess whose free nature
is opposed to the constraining bonds of marriage. For this reason the
goddess, as representative of the unrestrained nature principle, demands
from every girl a free gift of herself to any man wishing to have
intercourse with her. This demand is made in the name of Mylitta and in
the temple devoted to her. The money paid by the man in return for his
sexual indulgence belongs to the goddess, and is added to the treasures
of the temple.[42]

Herodotus and Strabo give us additional accounts of this remarkable
service of Mylitta. Women of rank, as well as those of the lower
classes, must allow themselves to be possessed once by a stranger, and
were not permitted to return home until they had given their tribute to
the goddess. Moreover, the woman might not refuse herself to any
stranger, whilst the man, on the other hand, had a free choice. Thus in
this account we find all the characteristics of “prostitution” according
to our present ideas.

This custom was abolished by the Emperor Constantine, as Eusebius
informs us, in his biography of this Emperor. The accounts of Strabo and
of Quintus Curtius show us that it had persisted from the time of
Herodotus to the time of Constantine; in Cyprus, Phœnicia, Carthage,
Judea, Armenia, and Lokris, the Mylittacult was diffused.[43]

The true origin of this cult was a consecration to the deity, a tribute
to the goddess of voluptuousness. Secondarily only, other elements may
have entered into the practice, as, for instance, the later widely
diffused assumption of the uncleanness and poisonous properties of the
blood which was shed in the act of defloration. At the same time the
religious idea of a “sacrifice” may have become associated with the idea
of “self-surrender” to an utterly strange and unloved man, so that it is
possible that at the root of this peculiar custom there lay a kind of
masochism on the part of the woman, whilst we cannot fail to recognize
the existence of a sadistic basis in the demeanour of the betrothed man
or husband, surrendering the woman to a strange man; both of these
elements--sadism and masochism--having here a religious signification.

In Eastern Asia, and among many savage races, priests played the part of
representatives of the deity to whom the defloration of the girls and
the newly-married was assigned; for instance, in the Indian sect of the
“Mahārājas,” founded by Vallabha, in which “=immorality was elevated to
the level of a divine law=.”[44]

These “great kings” assumed the part of deities who had an unlimited
right of possession over the wives of the faithful--above all, the right
of defloration. They proclaimed as the most perfect mode of honouring
the god a complete surrender of the woman to the spiritual chief of the
sect, for purposes of carnal lust--in exact imitation of the
shepherdesses (“gopis”), the mistresses of the god Krishna. This took
place during the pastoral games “rasmandali” in the autumn.[45] In
addition, on account of his activity as deflorator, the priest received
a present in the name of the deity. Abel Rémusat reports in his
“Nouveaux Mélanges Asiatiques” (Paris, 1824, vol. i., p. 16 _et seq._),
following the account of a Chinese author of the thirteenth century, the
peculiar methods employed in Cambodia for the purpose of religious
defloration. Here the priests of Buddha or the priests of the Tao
religion were carried in sedan-chairs to the girls awaiting them. Each
girl had a candle with a mark on it. The “tshin-than” (= adjustment of
posture--that is, sexual intercourse) must be finished before the candle
had burnt down to this mark!

The medicine-men and wizards among the Caribs of Central and South
America, the “piaches” or “pajes,” had to effect the defloration of the
young girls;[46] whilst among other primitive peoples this right was
assigned to the chiefs.[47]

The talented and far-seeing Bachofen, one of the greatest of our
investigators into the history and psychology of civilization, in his
classical works upon “Matriarchy” and upon “The Legend of Tanaquil,” has
very cleverly pointed out that religious prostitution in general arises
from the primitive =opposition= to the individualization of love,
instinctively felt by primitive peoples. In fact, in the religious view
of sexual matters more value is placed upon the act than the person, the
individual. Hence arises the slight esteem--so strongly opposed to our
modern view--felt for physical and moral virginity in woman, which to us
(whether rightly or not we will not now discuss) appears the symbol of
feminine individuality. Waitz, Bachofen, Kulischer, Post, Ploss-Bartels,
Rottmann, and other ethnologists, give additional accounts of the
contempt, to us so remarkable, felt in primitive states for the virgin
woman. The tragi-comic position of our own “old maids” is closely
connected with this primeval sentiment.[48]

The facts we have just given regarding single acts of religious
prostitution will pave the way for the understanding of =permanent
temple prostitution= as a historical phenomenon.

Sexual self-surrender as a purely sensual act is associated with
religious feeling. Thus in some cases a woman would experience a
combination of ardent sensuality with intense religious feeling, would
devote herself wholly to the service of the god, and in his name would
permanently surrender her body; whilst in other cases the idea of a
divine harem--in Indian belief every god has a harem--would find its
earthly exemplar in temple prostitution, by means of which the deity
would enjoy a number of women through the intermediation of men; or,
finally, this custom would arise out of the primitive practice,
according to which sexual intercourse, regarded as a religious act,
=customarily= took place in a temple, or in some consecrated room of a
house. In support of this view, we may quote a significant utterance
from Herodotus (chapter lxiv. of the second book of his “History”), who
in ethnological matters had such accurate discrimination. He reports
that among the Egyptians intercourse was strictly forbidden in the
temples, and then says:

  “For people of all nations, except the Egyptians and the Hellenes, are
  accustomed to copulate in holy places, and proceed after intercourse
  unwashed into the holy places; and they are of opinion that men
  resemble animals, and every one sees beasts and birds copulating in
  the temples of the gods, and in the consecrated groves. Now, =if this
  were displeasing to the gods, the animals would not do it=. Men,
  therefore, do this, and give this reason for it.”

This custom arose, without doubt, from the need for a religious
sentiment, and from the wish to enter into direct communion with the
deity, by remaining in the temple during the sexual act. When later the
divine beings obtained their own consecrated women in the form of the
=temple-girls=, it was no longer necessary for a man to take his own
wife or some other woman into the temple, for now communion with the
deity could be obtained by means of intercourse with the temple-girls.
In the case of =feminine= deities a fourth cause or influence comes into
operation in the production of temple prostitution, inasmuch as the
courtesans, on account of their extreme beauty and their remarkable
intellectual powers, were often regarded as representatives of the
goddess. This explains how it happened that among the Greeks beautiful
hetairae served as models for Praxiteles and Apelles, when these
sculptors were making statues for the temple.

The sacred priests of Venus, the “kade-girls” of the Phœnicians, and the
“hierodules” of the Greeks, were the servants of Aphrodite, and dwelt
within the precincts of the temple. Their number was often very great.
Thus in Corinth more than 1,000 female hierodules prostituted themselves
in the precincts of the temple of Aphrodite Porne, and even within the
temple.[49]

India, where the primitive phenomena of the amatory life can best be
studied, is also the favourite seat of temple prostitution, since the
religious view of the sexual life is nowhere so prominent as in the
Indian beliefs.[50] The temple girls of India are known as
“nautch-girls,” or “nautch-women.” Warneck writes regarding them:

  “Every Hindu temple of any importance possesses an arsenal of
  =nautch-girls=--that is, dancing-girls--who, next to the sacrificial
  priests, are the most highly respected among the personnel of the
  temple. It is not long since these temple-girls (just like the
  hetairae of Ancient Greece) were among the only educated women in
  India. These =priestesses, betrothed to the gods= from early
  childhood, were under the professional obligation to prostitute
  themselves to every one without distinction of caste. This
  self-surrender is so far from being regarded as a disgrace that even
  the most =highly placed= families regarded it as an honour to devote
  their daughters to the service of the temple. In the Madras Presidency
  alone there are about 12,000 of these temple prostitutes.”[51]

Shortt gives further interesting details of these temple prostitutes,
who are also known as “thassee.”

Religious prostitution is to a certain extent still practised in
Southern Borneo; and in a newspaper published at Amsterdam--_The German
Weekly News of the Netherlands_--the following account of the practice
appears in the issue of July 30, 1907:

  “In the Dyak country there are to be found in nearly every _kampong_
  (village) individuals known as ‘balians’ and ‘basirs.’ The balians are
  prostitutes who also perform medical services. The basirs are men who
  dress in women’s clothing, and in other respects perform the same
  functions as the balians, but not all the basirs act in this way.
  Balians and basirs are also commonly employed to perform certain
  religious ceremonies, on festal occasions, at marriages, funerals,
  births, etc. According to the nature of the festivity, five to fifteen
  of them officiate. The president of the balians and basirs goes by the
  name of the ‘upu’; usually the oldest and most experienced is chosen
  for this office. The upu sits in the middle, with the others to right
  and left. At an important festival the upu receives from twenty to
  thirty gulden; the others one to fifteen gulden. The further away that
  a balian sits from the upu, the smaller is her honorarium; the
  honorarium is called ‘laluh.’ The principal balians and basirs are
  known as ‘bawimait maninjan sangjang’--that is, ‘holy women.’ At the
  present time the basirs no longer exercise the immoral portions of
  their duties, because the Government inflicts severe penalties if they
  do so; moreover, they are not allowed now to appear in public in
  women’s clothing.”

Religion shares with the sexual impulse the unceasing yearning, the
sentiment of everlastingness, the mystic absorption into the depths of
life, the longing for the coalescence of individualities in an eternally
blessed union, free from earthly fetters. Hence the longing for death
felt by lovers and by mystically enraptured pietists, which has been so
wonderfully described by Leopardi. “The yearning for death felt by
lovers is identical with the yearning for sexual union,” aptly remarks
H. Swoboda, and he very rightly points out that many a suicide ascribed
to “unfortunate love” is rather the result of a happy love.

Among primitive peoples, and in ancient times, =religio-erotic
festivals= first gave an opportunity for the manifestation of this
religio-sexual mysticism. In this the transition of religious ecstasy
into sexual perceptions is very clearly visible, and in the sexual
orgies in which these religious frenzies often found an appropriate
finale we see the crudest expression of the relationship between
religion and sexuality. In such cases sexual ardour appears to be
equivalent to a =prolongation= and an =increase= of the religious
ardour--fundamentally, radically coincident, as the natural earthly
discharge of an ecstatic tension directed to the sphere of the remote
and the metaphysical.

The fact that such sexual excesses are =throughout the world= found in
association with religion, that since the very earliest times they have
been connected with the =most various forms= of religion, proves once
more that the origin of this relationship is dependent on the very
nature of religion as such, and that it is =not in any way= due to the
individual historic character of any one belief. It is, moreover, quite
uncritical and altogether without justification for any modern writer to
endeavour to make Roman Catholicism responsible for such an association;
Roman Catholicism as such has as little to do with the matter as all
other beliefs. Religio-sexual phenomena belong to the everywhere
recurring =elementary ideas= of the human race (elementary ideas in the
sense of Bastian); and the only way of regarding such phenomena that can
be considered scientifically sound, is from the anthropological and
ethnological standpoint.

This sexual religious mysticism meets us everywhere--in the religious
festivals of antiquity, the festivals of Isis in Egypt, and the
festivals of imperial Rome, both alike accompanied by the wildest sexual
orgies; in the festivals of Baal Peor, among the Jews, in the Venus and
Adonis festivals of the Phœnicians, in Cyprus and Byblos, in the
Aphrodisian, the Dionysian, and the Eleusinian festivals of the
Hellenes; in the festival of Flora in Rome, in which prostitutes ran
about naked; in the Roman Bacchanalia; and in the festival of the _bona
dea_, the wild sexual licence of which is only too clearly presented to
our eyes in the celebrated account of Juvenal.

In India, the sect of Caitanya, founded in the sixteenth century,
celebrated the maddest religio-sexual orgies. Their ritual consisted
principally of long litanies and hymns, stuffed full with unbridled
eroticism, and followed by wild dances, all leading up to the sexual
culmination, in which “the love of God” (_bhakti_) was to be made as
clearly perceptible as possible.[52] Even worse were the Sakta sects
(the name is derived from _sakti_, force--that is, the sensuous
manifestation of the god Siva). They gave themselves up with ardent
sensuality to the service of the female emanations of Siva, all
distinctions of caste being ignored, and wild sensual promiscuity
prevailing. Divine service always preceded the act of sexual
intercourse.

Among the Kauchiluas, one of these Sakta sects, each of the women who
took part in these divine services threw a small ornament into a box
kept by the priests. After the termination of the religious festival,
each male member of the congregation took one of these articles out of
the box, whereupon the possessor of the article must give herself to him
in the subsequent unbridled sexual excesses, even if the two should
happen to be brother and sister.[53]

Ancient Central and South America were also familiar with wild outbreaks
of a sexual-religious character. In Guatemala, on the days of the great
sacrifices, there occurred sexual orgies of the worst kind, men having
intercourse promiscuously with mothers, sisters, daughters, children,
and concubines; and at the “Akhataymita festivals” of the ancient
Peruvians, the religious observances terminated in a race between
completely nude men and women, in which each man overtaking a woman
immediately had sexual intercourse with her.[54]

Sexual mysticism found its way also into Christianity. When the renowned
theologian Usener, in his work “Mythology,” writes in relation to these
matters, “the whole of paganism found its way into Christianity,” we
must point out that in our view what “corrupted” Christianity was not
“paganism,” but the =fundamental phenomena of primitive human nature=,
the primordial connexion between religion and sexuality, which by a
natural necessity manifested itself in Christianity not less than in
other religions.

=Thus down to the present day= we encounter the most peculiar
manifestations of sexual mysticism in the most diverse Christian sects,
and not merely in Roman Catholicism.

In the fourth century of our era, the Jewish-Christian sect of the
Sarabaïtes concluded their religious festivals with wild sexual orgies,
which are graphically described by Cassianus. This sect persisted into
the ninth century. The later history of the Christian sects is full of
this religio-sexual element. Religious and sexual ardour take one
another’s place, pass one into the other, mutually =increase= one
another. I need merely allude to certain points familiar in the history
of civilization, and investigated and described by many recent students:
the religio-erotic orgiastic festivals of the Nicolaitans, the Adamites,
the Valesians, the Carpocratians, the Epiphanians, the Cainites, and the
Manichæans. Dixon, in his “Spiritual Wives” (2 vols., London, 1868), has
described the sexual excesses of recent Protestant sects, such as the
“Mucker” of Königsberg, the “Erweckten” (“the awakened”), the Foxian
spiritualists of Hydesville, etc. Widely known also is the peculiar
association between sexuality and religion in Mormonism, polygamy being
among the Mormons a religious ordinance.

Not only do Roman Catholicism and Protestantism exhibit such phenomena,
but in the Greek Church also sexual mysticism gives rise to the most
remarkable offshoots. Leroy-Beaulieu gives an account of the Russian
sect of the “Skakuny,” or “Jumpers,” who at their nocturnal assemblies
throw themselves into a state of erotic religious ecstasy by hopping and
jumping, like the dancing Dervishes of Islam. When the frenzy reaches a
climax, a shameless, utterly promiscuous union of the sexes occurs, of
which incest is a common feature.[55]

Quite apart from these sectarian peculiarities, religio-sexual
perceptions play a definite part in the ideas of present-day, truly
pious Christians. The idea of a “unio mystica” between man and the Deity
manifests itself everywhere.[56]

Albrecht Dieterich, in his learned work, “A Mithraist Liturgy,”
contributes valuable material to the history of civilization concerning
these mystical unions. The oldest heathen cults were familiar with the
idea of love unions as a representation of the union of man with God;
and in the New Testament the ideas of the bridegroom and the marriage
feast play a leading part. Christ is the “bridegroom” of the Church, the
Church is His “bride.” Pious maidens and nuns are happy to call
themselves the brides of Christ. This ecstatic union has always as its
substratum a sexual imagination. Augustine says: “Like a bridegroom
Christ leaves His bridal chamber; in the mood of a bridegroom He
bestrides the field of the world.”

The literature, the theology, the visions, and the plastic art of the
middle ages abound in embellishments of the mystical marriage. St.
Catherine of Siena and St. Theresa were favourite objects of this form
of art. The baroque artist Bernini, in his representation of St.
Theresa, in the Church Santa Maria della Vittoria in Rome, has painted a
truly modern “alcove scene,” so that a mocking Frenchman, President de
Brosses, said, speaking of this picture, “Ah, if that is divine love, I
know all about it.”

On October 8, 1900, when Crescentia Höss, of Kaufbeuren, was canonized
in the Peterskirche, a picture was exhibited in which was depicted the
mystical union between the new saint and the Redeemer. To the picture
was attached a Latin inscription signifying, “Our Lord Jesus Christ
presents to the virgin Crescentia, in the presence of the most holy
Mother of God and of Crescentia’s guardian angel as groomsman, the
marriage ring, and weds her.” The novice about to become a nun appears
before the altar dressed as a bride, in order to wed herself eternally
to Christ; and in the life of the common people we find an even more
realistic view is taken of this mystical marriage. A celibate priesthood
appears to the peasant, notwithstanding all the respect that he has for
the clerical vocation, as something strange and incomprehensible; he
regards the “primiz,” the first mass of the newly ordained priest, as a
marriage which the most reverend priest celebrates with the Church, and
for this purpose the Church is represented by a young girl. This is at
the present day still a popular custom in Baden, Bavaria, and the Tyrol.
In this ceremony, which does not lack a poetic aspect--it is admirably
described by F. P. Piger in the _Zeitschrift des Vereins für
Volkskunde_, 1899--the peasants who are present make the coarsest and
most pointed jokes, and as soon as the celebration is finished, they
withdraw, in the company of the “holy” bride, to a public-house, where
“they need not be embarrassed by the presence of the reverend priest.”

The intimate association between sexuality and religion in these
mystical unions and marriages has been shown by Ludwig Feuerbach in his
treatise, “Ueber den Marienkultus” (“On Mariolatry”), Complete Works,
Leipzig, 1846, vol. i., pp. 181-199. A very interesting instance of this
is also afforded by the following religious poem, which appears in a
poetical devotional work, at one time very widely diffused among the
feminine population of France (“Les Perles de Saint François de Sales,
ou les plus belles Pensées du Bienheureux sur l’Amour de Dieu,” Paris,
1871):

   “Vive Jésus, vive sa force,
    Vive son agréable amorce!
    Vive Jésus, quand sa bonté
    Me reduit dans la nudité;
    Vive Jésus, quand il m’appelle:
    Ma sœur, ma colombe, ma belle!

    Vive Jésus en tous mes pas,
    Vivent ses amoureux appas!
    Vive Jésus, lorsque sa bouche
    D’un baiser amoureux me touche!

    Vive Jésus quand ses blandices
    Me comblent de chastes délices!
    Vive Jésus lorsque à mon aise
    Il me permet que je la baise!”

  [“Praise to Jesus, praise His power,
    Praise His sweet allurements!
    Praise to Jesus, when His goodness
    Reduces me to nakedness;
    Praise to Jesus when He says to me:
    ‘My sister, My dove, My beautiful one!’

   “Praise to Jesus in all my steps,
    Praise to His amorous charms!
    Praise to Jesus, when His mouth
    Touches mine in a loving kiss!

   “Praise to Jesus when His gentle caresses
    Overwhelm me with chaste joys!
    Praise to Jesus when at my leisure
    He allows me to kiss Him!”]

In addition to religious prostitution and to sexual mysticism, two other
religious manifestations show an intimate relationship with the sexual
life, are, indeed, in part of sexual origin--namely, =asceticism= and
the =belief in witchcraft=.

Neither of these is, as has often been maintained by superficial
writers, peculiar to the Christian faith. As Nietzsche says, Eros did
not poison Christianity alone; asceticism and the belief in witchcraft
are =common anthropological conceptions, met with throughout the history
of civilization=, and arising from the primitive ardour of religious
perceptions.

To what degree is the high estimation of asceticism--that is, the view
that earthly and eternal salvation are to be found in =complete sexual
abstinence=--associated with the religious sentiment? Religion is the
yearning after an ideal, a belief in a process of perfectibility. To
such a belief the sexual impulse and everything connected with it must
appear as the greatest possible hindrance to the realization of the
ideal, because nowhere else is the =disharmony= of existence so plainly
manifest as in the sexual life.

In the fifth chapter of his work on “The Nature of Man,” Metchnikoff has
collected all the numerous disharmonies of the reproductive organs and
the reproductive functions, in consequence of which the modern man,
become self-conscious, suffers so severely. Among these disharmonious
phenomena in social life, Metchnikoff enumerates, _inter alia_, the
troublesome, painful, and unæsthetic menstrual hæmorrhage in women,
which all primitive peoples regarded as something unclean and evil; the
pains of childbirth; the asynchronism between puberty and the general
maturity of the organism, the latter occurring much later than the
former, and thus giving rise to temporal inequalities of development in
different parts of the sexual functions, causing, for example,
masturbation actually before the development of spermatozoa; the long
interval that commonly elapses between the onset of sexual maturity and
the conclusion of marriage; the numerous disharmonious phenomena
occurring in connexion with the decline of reproductive activity at a
later stage of life, when marked specific excitability and sexual
sensibility often persist after the capacity for sexual intercourse has
been lost; and finally the disharmonies in sexual intercourse between
man and woman.

According to Metchnikoff, this disharmony of the sexual life, from the
earliest to the most advanced age, is the source of so many evils, that
almost all religions have harshly judged and severely condemned the
sexual functions, and have recommended abstinence from coitus as the
best means for the harmonious and ideal regulation of life.

In addition to this, we have to take into consideration the opposition
between spirit and matter, deeply realized already by primitive man. The
sexual, as the most intense and most sensuous expression of material
existence, was opposed to the spiritual, and was regarded as an unclean
element, which must be fought, overcome, and, when possible, utterly
uprooted, in favour of the spiritual life. In one of the most ancient of
mythologies the first recorded instance of the gratification of sexual
desire resulted in excluding man for ever from “Paradise”--in excluding
him, that is to say, from the highest kind of spiritual existence. The
principal psychological characteristic of asceticism is therefore to be
found, not only in the vow of poverty, but, in addition, and even more,
is it found in =sexual abstinence=, in the battle against the “flesh”
(“caro,” to the fathers of the early Church, always denoted the genital
organs).

What is, however, the inevitable consequence of this continual battle
with the sexual impulse? Weininger expressed the opinion (“Sex and
Character,” p. 469, second edition; Vienna, 1904): “The renunciation of
sexuality =kills= only the =physical= man, and kills him only in order,
for the first time, to ensure the complete existence of the spiritual
man”; but this is =entirely false=, and proceeds from an extremely
deficient knowledge of human nature. For the “renunciation of sexuality”
is, in truth, the most unsuitable way of securing a complete existence
for the spiritual man. Just as little will it annihilate the physical
man. For he who wishes to overcome and cast out the sexual impulse
(powerful in every normal man, and at times overwhelming in its
strength) =must keep the subject constantly before his eyes, for ever in
his thoughts=. Thus it came to pass that the ascetic was actually more
occupied with the subject of the sexual impulse than is the case with
the normal man. This was favoured all the more by the ascetic’s
voluntary =flight from the world=, by his continuous life in solitude--a
life favourable to the production of hallucinations and visions, and one
which becomes tolerable only by a sort of natural reaction in the form
of a luxuriance of imaginative sensuality. For

  “Nous naissons, nous vivons pour la société:
   A nous-mêmes livrés dans une solitude,
   Notre bonheur bientôt fait notre inquiétude.”

  (Boileau, Satire X.)

  [“We are born, we live for society:
    Given up to ourselves in solitude,
    Our happiness is speedily replaced by restlessness.”]

This “inquiétude,” this intensification of the nervous life in all
relations, was especially noticeable in the sexual sphere. Visions of a
sexual character, erotic temptations, mortifications of the flesh in the
form of self-flagellation, self-emasculation and mutilations of the
genital organs, are characteristic =ascetic= phenomena. On the other
hand, the excessive valuation and glorification of the pure spiritual
led not only to the view that matter was something in its nature sinful
and base, =but also led directly to sexual excesses=, for many ascetic
sects declared that what happened to the already sinful body was a
matter of indifference, that every contamination of the body was
permissible. Hence is to be explained the remarkable fact of the
occurrence of =natural and unnatural unchastity in numerous ascetic
sects=.

Sexual mortification and sexual excesses--these are the two poles
between which the life of the ascetic oscillates, so that we see in each
case a marked sexual intermixture. Asceticism is, therefore, often
merely the means by which sexual enjoyment is obtained in another form
and in a more intense degree.

=Asceticism is as old as human religion, and as widely diffused
throughout the entire world.= We find individual ascetics among many
savage peoples; ascetic sects, especially among the ancient and modern
civilized races, in Babylon, Syria, Phrygia, Judæa, even in
pre-Columbian Mexico, and most developed in India, in Islam, and in
Christianity.

The Indian samkhya-doctrine, demanding increased self-discipline,
“yoga,” which was based upon the opposition between spirit and matter,
led to the adoption of asceticism in Buddhism and in the religion of the
Jains, also to the foundation of ascetic sects, such as the “Acelakas,”
the “Ajivakas,” the “Suthrēs” or “Pure,” who, according to Hardy, “are
in their life a disgrace to their name.” Yogahood attained its highest
development among Sivaitic sects of the ninth to the sixteenth
centuries; these alternated between uncontrolled satisfaction of the
rudest sexual impulses and asceticism pushed to the point of
self-torture.

In Islam it was the sect of the Sufi in which the relation between
sexuality and asceticism was especially manifest; but before this
Christianity had developed asceticism into a formal system, and had
deduced its most extreme consequences. To the early Christians, only the
nutritive impulse appeared natural; the sexual impulse was debased
nature; physical and psychical emasculation were actually recommended in
the New Testament writings (_cf._ Matt. xix. 12). Already in the second
century of the Christian era numerous Christians voluntarily castrated
themselves, and in the fourth century the Council of Nicæa found it
necessary to deal with the prevalence of this ascetic abuse, and with
the predecessors of the modern “skopzen.”[57]

Numerous ascetics and saints withdrew into solitude in order to attain
salvation by castigation of the body. But it is very noteworthy that
they almost all =lived and moved exclusively in the sexual=, and that,
in the way already explained, they came to occupy themselves incessantly
with all the problems of the sexual life.

The writings of the saints are full of such references to the _vita
sexualis_, and are, therefore, a valuable source for the history of
ancient morals. Nothing was so interesting to these ascetics as the life
of prostitutes and the sexual excesses of the impious. Numerous legends
relate the attempts of the saints to induce prostitutes to abandon their
profession, and to turn to a holy life, and the work of Charles de
Bussy, “Les Courtisanes Saintes,” shows the result of these labours. St.
Vitalius visited the brothels every night, to give the women money in
order that they might not sin, and prayed for their conversion.

Thus, in the case of the ascetics, whose thoughts were continually
occupied with sexual matters, the sole result of their castigation,
self-torture, and emasculation, was to lead their sexual life ever wider
astray into morbid and perverse paths. The monstrous =sexual visions= of
the saints reflect in a typical manner the incredible violence of the
sexual perceptions of the ascetics. To use the words of Augustine, how
far were these unhappy beings from the “serene clearness of love,” how
near were they to the “obscurity of sensual lust!” These visions, these
“false pictures,” allured the “sleepers” to something to which, indeed,
in the awakening state they could not have been misled (Augustine,
“Confessions,” x. 30). The forms of beautiful naked women (with whom,
moreover, the ascetics often really lay in bed in order to test their
powers) appeared to them in dreams. Fetichistic and symbolic vision of
an erotic nature pestered them, and led to the most violent sensual
temptations, until in the sects of the Valesians, the Marcionites, and
the Gnostics they resulted in sexual excesses. Marcion, the founder of
the well-known sect named after him, preached continence, but maintained
that sexual excesses could not hinder salvation, since it was only the
soul that rose again after death! The Gnostics oscillated between
unconditional celibacy and indiscriminate sexual indulgence. As late as
the nineteenth century an ascetic mystic led the Protestant sect of
Königsberg pietists into the grossest sensual excesses.

From asceticism arose =monasticism= and the =cloistral life=, to which
the considerations above given fully apply. The undeniable unchastity
of the medieval cloisters, which found its most characteristic
expression in denoting brothels by the name of “abbeys,” and, above all,
in popular songs and in folk-tales, also shows us very clearly the
relations between religious asceticism and the _vita sexualis_.

The idea of asceticism has not lost its primitive force even at the
present day, and retains it for certain men not under the influence of
the Church. But the character and origin of this =modern asceticism= are
different. We understand it when we remind ourselves of the saying of
Otto Weininger, this typical adherent of “modern” asceticism, that the
man who has the worst opinion of woman is not the one who has least to
do with them, but rather the one who has had the greatest number of
_bonnes fortunes_ (“Sex and Character,” p. 315).

The ascetics of early Christianity first denied sexuality--for
example, by self-castration, or by flight into solitude--in order
subsequently to affirm it the more strongly. Our modern _fin-de-siècle_
ascetics, above all, the three most successful literary apostles of
asceticism--Schopenhauer, Tolstoi, and Weininger--at first affirmed
their sexuality most intensely, in order subsequently to deny it in the
most fundamental manner. They studied voluptuousness, not merely in the
ideal, but also in reality. For this reason, also, they have furnished
us with more valuable conclusions regarding its nature and its
significance in the life of individual men than we can obtain from the
visions of the early Christian ascetics. This is true above all of
Schopenhauer and Tolstoi.

Schopenhauer had first to endure in his own person the whole tragedy of
voluptuousness, to experience the elemental force of the sexual impulse,
the “enmity” of love (see his own account given to Challemel-Lacour),
before he proceeded to grasp the full significance of the ascetic idea.
His asceticism is intimately associated with his sensuality, and with
the consequences of its activity. I believe that I have myself recently
furnished a striking proof of this fact by the publication of a hitherto
unknown holograph manuscript of the philosopher,[58] by which it is
clearly established that he had suffered from syphilitic infection. In
this connexion we find the explanation of the close relationship which
Schopenhauer himself postulated between the “wonderful venereal disease”
and asceticism. From his own utterances regarding syphilis, and, above
all, from the fact that he himself had suffered from the disease, we are
able to grasp the significance that syphilis had in the conception of
his ascetic views, which were developed under the immediate influence of
his experiences, sorrows, and passions; whereas in old age, when the
elemental force of the sexual impulse, and the unhappy consequence of
yielding to it, no longer troubled him, there appeared in his thought a
distinctly happier colouring.

Tolstoi also recognizes without reserve how much he had been affected by
voluptuousness. “I know,” he says, “how lust hides everything, how it
annihilates everything, by which the heart and the reason are
nourished.” Lack of continence on the part of men is, in his view, the
cause of the stupidity of life. Tolstoi’s conception of asceticism is,
however, by no means identical with the early Christian, the Buddhistic,
and the Schopenhauerian asceticism. In the beautiful saying, “Only with
woman can one lose purity, only with her can one preserve it,” lies the
admission that =absolute= chastity is an unattainable ideal, and that
man can reach only a =relative asceticism=. We should hold fast to this
utterance in Tolstoi’s teaching, which is in no way systematically
developed, and should ignore his insane doctrine of the unchastity of
married life. Later, during our discussion of the so-called “problem of
continence,” we shall return to this idea of a relative continence, and
of the good that lies therein.

Weininger, whose views are unquestionably strongly pathological, recurs
wholly to the ideas of early Christian asceticism. According to him,
“coitus in every case contradicts the idea of humanity”! Sexuality
debases man, reproduction and fertility are “=nauseating=.”[59] Man is
not free, only because he has originated in an immoral manner! In woman
he denies again and again the idea of humanity. The renunciation, the
conquest of femininity, it is this that he demands. =Since all
femininity is immorality, woman must cease to be woman, and must become
man!=[60]

Georg Hirth has described Weininger’s book as “an unparalleled crime
against humanity.”[61] Since, however, Probst, in his psychiatric study
of Weininger, has brought forward evidence to show that in Weininger’s
book we have to do with the work of a lunatic, the author of this crime
cannot at any rate be held responsible. It is only to be regretted that
so many readers have been led astray by the presence of isolated
thoughtful passages in the book to take Weininger in earnest as a
“thinker,” and even in company with the bizarre August Strindberg to
believe that Weininger has solved “the most difficult of all problems”!

       *       *       *       *       *

Very significant and influential even down to the present day are the
relations between religion and sexual sentiments exhibited in the
=belief in witchcraft=.[62] This belief, extending backwards to the most
remote age, is the principal source of all misogyny and contempt for
women--of which fact we cannot too often remind our modern misogynists,
in order to make clear to them the utter stupidity, the primitiveness,
and the atavistic character of their views.

Here, again, we must first show the falsity of the view that the belief
in witches is a specifically Christian experience. To the diffusion of
this error the celebrated work of J. Michelet, “La Sorcière,” has
especially contributed, for in this book the witch is represented as a
Christian medieval discovery. But the Christian religion, as such, is as
little blameworthy for this belief as are all the other confessions of
faith. =The belief in witches, with its religio-sexual basis, is a
primitive general anthropological phenomenon=, a fixture, a part of
primitive human history arising from the primeval relations between
religious magic and the sexual life.

  “When we look deeply into the province of psychology,” says G. H. von
  Schubert, “we not only suspect, but recognize with great certainty,
  that there exists a secret combination between the activities of the
  animal carnal sexual impulse and the receptivity of human nature for
  magical manifestations.

  “We stand here in the depths of the abyss in which the lust of the
  flesh becomes inflamed to the lust of hell, and in which the flesh,
  with all its indwelling forces of sin and death, celebrated its
  greatest triumph over the spirit appointed by God to command the
  flesh.”[63]

The animism of primitive man, and of savage man at the present day, sees
in all frightful natural phenomena shaking his innermost being to its
foundation the manifestation and action of demons and sorcerers. The
rutting impulse also, which attracts primitive man to woman, appears to
him to be due to the influence of a demon, =and soon woman herself came
to seem to man something uncanny, something magical=. Thus, in its
origin the belief in witchcraft arises from the =sexual impulse=, and
=throughout its history sorcery in all its forms remained associated
with the sexual impulse=.

This sexual origin of the belief in witches and in magic has been
carefully described by the celebrated ethnologist K. Fr. Ph. von
Martius, on the basis of his observations amongst the indigens of
Central Brazil. “=All sorcery arises from rutting=,” said an old Indian
to him.

Magic propagates itself by means of sexual desire, and, according to
Martius, will predominate among primitive peoples as long as these
=remain unchaste=.[64] Secret arts, voluptuousness, and unnatural vice
are inseparable one from another. This is proved by the entire history
of human civilization and morals. Among the indigens of Brazil, the
“pajé” or “piache,” the sorcerer or medicine-man, plays the same part as
the medieval or Christian witch.

Sorcerers and witches are, above all, experienced in the sexual
province; popular belief always turns first to this subject. The witches
of ancient Rome resemble those of the middle ages in respect of their
evil practices in sexual relations. According to J. Frank, the word
“hexe” (witch) is derived from “hagat”--that is, “vagabond woman.” The
ascetic view of the middle ages, formulated principally by men, saw in
woman one who seduced man to sensual, sinful lust, the personification
of the Evil One, the “janua diaboli,” and, ultimately, a female demon
and a witch, whose very being is an impersonation of the obscene and the
sexual. The doctrines of Original Sin and of the Immaculate Conception
had unquestionably an important share in this conception of woman.

The idea of woman as a witch turned almost exclusively on the sexual,
and the witch was for the most part represented as a “=mistress of the
devil=” (_cf._ W. G. Soldan, “History of Witch-Trials,” pp. 147-159;
Stuttgart, 1843), in which sexual perversion plays the principal part,
since, instead of simple sexual intercourse, the most horrible unnatural
vice was assumed to occur.

Holzinger, in his valuable lecture on the “Natural History of Witches,”
characterized the spiritual and moral condition of the time, which
brought forth such an idea, in a few apt words:

  “Whilst in the fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth centuries,
  as those well acquainted with the state of morals during this period
  can all confirm, a most unbounded freedom was dominant in sexual
  relations, the State and the Church were desirous of compelling the
  people to keep better order by the use of actual force, and by
  religious compulsion. So forced a transformation in so vital a matter
  necessarily resulted in a reaction of the worst kind, and forced into
  secret channels the impulse which it had attempted to suppress. This
  reaction occurred, moreover, with an elemental force. There resulted
  widespread sexual violence and seduction, hesitating at nothing, often
  insanely daring, in which everywhere the devil was supposed to help;
  every one’s head was turned in this way, the uncontrolled lust of
  debauchees found vent in secret bacchanalian associations and orgies,
  wherein many, with or without masquerade, played the part of Satan;
  shameful deeds were perpetrated by excited women and by procuresses
  and prostitutes ready for any kind of immoral abomination; add to
  these sexual orgies the most widely diffused web of a completely
  developed theory of witchcraft, and the systematic strengthening by
  the clergy of the widely prevalent belief in the devil--all these
  things woven in a labyrinthine connexion, made it possible for
  thousands upon thousands to be murdered by a disordered justice and to
  be sacrificed to delusion.”

The study of the witch-trials of the middle ages and of recent
times--for it is well known that in the seventies of the nineteenth
century (!) such trials still occurred[65]--would without doubt afford
valuable contributions to the doctrine of psychopathia sexualis, and at
the same time would throw a remarkable light upon the origin of sexual
aberrations.

What a large amount of sexual abnormality arises even to-day from this
common, human, obscure, superstitious impulse dependent upon the
intermixture of religious mysticism and sexual desire, and which in the
medieval belief in witches attained such astonishing development!

As Michelet proved in his great work on “Sorcery,” it was =the religious
imagination straying into sexual by-paths=, which for the most part
animated the belief in witchcraft, and thus led to the most horrible
aberrations, principally of a sadistic nature.

Like superstition, so also the sexual-religious obsession of the middle
ages, still persists in many persons, =even at the present day=, and
gives rise to sexual anomalies.

Apart from asceticism and the belief in witchcraft, theological
literature offers numerous instances of the relationship between
religion and sexuality.

In an essay published six years ago,[66] I showed the important part
which sexual questions have played in the so-called =pastoral
medicine=--that is to say, in those theological writings in which the
individual facts and problems of medicine are studied from the
theological standpoint, and their relation to dogma is determined. We
find here theological casuistry carried to its extreme limits, in
relation to all possible problems of the _vita sexualis_. The
experiences of the confessional are employed in a remarkable manner, the
religious imagination wandering, in a peculiar combination of
scholasticism and sensuality, in the obscure fields of human aberration.

The =ostensible= inducement to the theological consideration of sexual
problems is in part offered by the statements of perverse individuals in
the confessional, and in part by public scandals. In both cases
casuistry endeavours, from the religious standpoint, to formulate
certain normal rules for the judgment of the various matters relating to
the sexual life. This would, however, have been impossible, had there
not existed an intimate connexion between sexuality and religion.

Only in this way is it possible to explain the origin of the gigantic
=literature of sexual casuistry= in theology, and especially in pastoral
medicine. A comprehension of these facts has led certain writers to
launch bitter invectives against the system of which the confessional
formed so essential a part. This is a narrow and prejudiced view, which
we mention only to condemn. There is, however, ample justification for
the representations of =physicians= and =anthropologists=, who are able
to observe matters in the great connexion sketched above, and who have
recognized the relations between religion and the sexual life to be
something common to all humanity, not the artificial products of any
particular spiritual tendency. It is precisely the frequent endeavours
of the Catholic Church to overcome the worst outgrowths in this
direction, which teach us, notwithstanding their failure to eradicate
sexual aberrations, that these relationships depend upon the very nature
of religion.

There is not a single sexual problem which has not been discussed in
the most subtle manner by the theological casuists,[67] so that their
writings offer us a most instructive picture of =imaginative activity=
in the sexual sphere.

The most detailed discussion, verging on the salacious, of the degree to
which sexual contact is permissible, gave rise to the name “theologiens
mammillaires,” because some of them--Benzi, for example, and
Rousselot--sanctioned “tatti mammillari” (mammillary palpation). This
doctrine was condemned by Pope Benedict XIV., which proves that the
Catholic Church as such has not invariably sanctioned these things.

In the “Golden Key” (“Llave de Oro”) of Antonio Maria Claret, the
Archbishop of Cuba, in Debreyne’s “Moechialogie,” in the writings on
moral theology of Liguori, Dens, and J. C. Saettler, in the
“Diaconales,” widely diffused in France, and in many similar works, all
possible sexual problems which have come before the confessional, or
possibly =might= come there, have been thoroughly discussed--even the
most improbable and impossible. Coitus interruptus, irrigatio vaginæ
post coitum, pollutions (nocturnal seminal emissions), bestiality,
necrophilia, figuræ Veneris (positions in which coitus is effected),
procuration, various kinds of caresses, conjugal onanism, abortion,
varieties of masturbation, pæderasty, intercourse with a statue (!),
psychical onanism, pædication, etc.--all have been subjected to a subtle
critical theological analysis. In a sense, these writings are really
valuable mines for the study of psychopathia sexualis. Later we shall
have frequently to touch on the religious etiology of the individual
sexual aberrations.

From the preceding discussion it appears quite clearly that the
relations between religion and the _vita sexualis_ are to be regarded as
general anthropological phenomena, and not as peculiarities arising by
chance, the accidental results of beliefs, time, or race. The modern
physician, jurist, and criminal anthropologist must therefore pay the
most careful attention to the religious factor in the normal and
abnormal sexual life of mankind, if he wishes to arrive at an
unprejudiced and undisturbed knowledge of sexual anomalies. Havelock
Ellis has also laid stress on the leading significance of religious
sexual perceptions. He proved that small oscillations of erotic feelings
accompany all religious perceptions, and that in some circumstances the
erotic feelings overwhelm the religious perceptions.[68] We still meet
with sexual excesses under the cloak of religion, as occurred recently
(1905) in Holland, and (1901) in England. In the English instance young
girls were initiated into the most horrible forms of unchastity in the
religious association founded by the American Horos and his wife, and
known by the name of “Theocratic Unity.”[69]

Friedrich Schlegel, as Rudolf von Gottschall remarks, proclaimed in his
“Lucinde” the new evangel of the future, in which voluptuousness--as
during the time of Astarte--is to form a part of religious ritual. The
reawakened tendency of our own day towards romantic modes of perception
would certainly seem to involve the danger of a renewal and
strengthening of religio-sexual ideas.

For as long as the feelings of love carry with them an inexpressible,
overwhelming force, like that of religious perceptions, the intimate
association between religion and sexuality will persist both in a good
and a bad sense. An elderly physician, who in his interesting book
detailed the experiences derived from forty years of practice,[70] made
very apposite remarks regarding this religious sexualism. According to
him, unbounded piety is “often no more than a sexual symptom,”
proceeding from =deprivation of love or satiety of love=, the latter
reminding us of the saying “Young whore, old devotee.” Moreover, this is
true alike of man and woman. Piety dependent upon deprivation of love
can often be cured by “castor, cold douches, or a well-arranged marriage
with a robust, energetic man,” who drives away for ever the “heavenly
bridegroom.”[71]

The religious perception is a completely =general= yearning, and the
same is the case with the associated sexual feelings. The boundless
everlasting impulsion which both contain does not admit of any
individualization. For this reason, the religio-sexual perceptions can
play only a subordinate part in the individual love of the future; they
constitute only the first step in the history of the idealization of the
sexual impulse, and of its spiritualization to form love.

In the romance “Scipio Cicala,” by Rehfues, the Neapolitan abbess calls
out “=I love love=,” after she has gone through the enumeration of all
the phases of passionate love towards God. The modern man, however, says
to the woman, and the woman says to the man, “=I love you=”; the general
religious love has capitulated to the individual love.

This is clearly the direction taken by “the way of the spirit” in love,
which we shall now pursue further.

  [33] _Cf_. F. von Andrian, “Some Results of Modern Ethnology,” in
  “Correspondenzblatt der deutschen Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
  Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte” (1894, No. 8, p. 71).

  [34] “Love,” in the sense above defined, is peculiar to mankind, and
  for this reason we must, as Ploss-Bartels also insists, admit its
  existence in human beings at the very lowest levels of civilization.
  There it is, indeed, no more than “a faintly glimmering, easily
  extinguished spark,” while among civilized peoples it has become “a
  bright, widely diffused flame.”

  [35] Regarding the connexion between sexuality and spiritual activity,
  see also Virey, “Recherches médico-philosophiques sur la Nature et les
  Facultés de l’Homme” (Paris, 1817, p. 39).

  [36] For the apt and convenient word _poietic_, in preference to
  _creative_ or _productive_, I have to thank Mr. H. G. Wells. See his
  most admirable “A Modern Utopia,” and on p. 265 _et seq._ his
  brilliant classification of “four main classes of mind--the Poietic,
  the Kinetic, the Dull, and the Base.”... “The Poietic or creative
  class of mental individuality embraces a wide range of types,” but, he
  goes on to say, the two principal varieties of the _poietic_ type are
  those classified as _artistic_ and _scientific_ natures respectively.
  It is the quality by which these two natures are distinguished from
  the kinetic and the dull to which Mr. Wells gives the name of
  “poietic,” and it is precisely this quality whose interconnexion with
  the sexual life is insisted on in the text by Dr. Bloch and by the
  authors from whom he quotes.--TRANSLATOR.

  [37] _Cf._ W. Griesinger, “Mental Disorders,” third edition
  (Brunswick, 1871, p. 7).

  [38] Rudolf Topp speaks of a “degeneration” of the “healthy natural
  reproductive impulse” into the “sexual impulse.” In the primeval
  period of human history, he maintains, man knew and gratified the
  reproductive impulse only; the sexual impulse developed gradually, and
  in a later stage of the evolutionary history of mankind, out of the
  reproductive impulse, and, in fact, is a degeneration (!) of the
  latter. In this period we may look for the first beginnings of
  functional impotence, on account of the too frequent exercise of the
  sexual function. _Cf._ R. Topp, “On the Therapeutic Use of Yohimbin
  ‘Riedel’ as an Aphrodisiac, with Especial Reference to Functional
  Impotence in the Male,” published in the _Allgemeine Medizinische
  Central-Zeitung_, 1906, No. 10.

  [39] From this fact we may draw the conclusion that the so-called
  _hospitable prostitution_ is only a variety of religious prostitution.

  [40] J. A. Dulaure, “Des Divinités génératrices,” etc. (Paris, 1885).

  [41] W. Schwartz, “Prehistoric Anthropological Studies,” p. 278
  (Berlin, 1884).

  [42] _Cf._ J. J. Bachofen, “The Legend of Tanaquil, an Investigation
  concerning Orientalism in Rome and Italy,” p. 43 (Heidelberg, 1870).

  [43] _Cf._ the details and more exact reports in my work,
  “Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. i., pp.
  84, 85.

  [44] Karsandas Mulji, “History of the Sect of Mahārājas or
  Vallabhāchārjas in Western India,” p. 161 (London, 1865).

  [45] _Cf._ E. Hardy, “History of Indian Religions,” pp. 124-126
  (Leipzig, 1898).

  [46] K. Fr. Ph. von Martius, “Contributions to the Ethnography and
  Philology of America,” vol. i., p. 113 (Leipzig, 1867).

  [47] Starke, “The Primitive Family,” p. 135 (Leipzig, 1888).

  [48] _Cf._ L. Tobler, “Old Maids in Belief and Custom among the German
  People” (_Zeitschrift für Völkerpsychologie_), by Lazarus and
  Steinthal, vol. xiv., pp. 64-90 (Berlin, 1882).

  [49] W. H. Roscher, “Nectar and Ambrosia,” pp. 80-89 (Leipzig, 1883).

  [50] _Cf._ Edward Sellon, “Annotations on the Sacred Writings of the
  Hindus,” p. 3 (London, 1865).

  [51] Ploss-Bartels, “Das Weib in der Natur- und Völkerkunde,” vol. i.,
  p. 580 (eighth edition, Leipzig, 1905).

  [52] E. Hardy, _op. cit._, p. 125.

  [53] Sellon, “Annotations,” etc., p. 30.

  [54] Ploss-Bartels, _op. cit._, p. 608.

  [55] _Cf._ H. Beck, “Count Tolstoi’s ‘Kreuzer Sonata,’” etc., p. 5
  (Leipzig, 1898).

  [56] _Cf._ “Mystical Marriages,” in the _Vossische Zeitung_, No. 370,
  August 9, 1904.

  [57] _Cf._ Adolf Harnack, “Medical Data from Ancient Ecclesiastical
  History” (Leipzig, 1892, pp. 27, 28, and 52).

  [58] Iwan Bloch, “Schopenhauer’s Illness in the Year 1823” (A
  Contribution to Pathography based upon an Unpublished Document). Paper
  read at the Berlin Society for the History of the Natural Sciences and
  Medicine on June 15, 1906. Printed in _Medizinische Klinik_, 1906,
  Nos. 25 and 26.

  [59] It is a remarkable fact that the hypersexual Marquis de Sade
  expressed this identical idea, in precise agreement with the asexual
  Weininger.

  [60] _Cf._ the chapter “Woman and Humanity,” in “Sex and Character,”
  pp. 453-472.

  [61] G. Hirth, “Ways to Love,” p. 219. _Cf._ also the pertinent remark
  of Grete Meisel-Hess, “Misogyny and Contempt for Women” (Vienna,
  1904).

  [62] _Cf._ also the exhaustive research, with regard to witch-mania
  and witchcraft, by Count von Hoensbroech, “The Papacy in its
  Socio-Civil Reality” (third edition, vol. i., pp. 380-599; Leipzig).

  [63] Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, “The Sins of Sorcery in their Old
  and New Form” (Erlangen, 1854, p. 25).

  [64] _Cf._ K. Fr. von Martius, “The Nature, the Diseases, the Doctors,
  and the Therapeutic Methods of the Primitive Inhabitants of Brazil”
  (Munich, 1843, pp. 111-113).

  [65] According to Holzinger, on August 20, 1877, at St. Jacobo in
  Mexico, five witches were burnt alive! Then “hundreds of angry pens
  were set in motion to declaim the horrible anachronism.” As late as
  1875, Friedrich Nippold, in a work published by Holtzendorff and
  Oncken--“Problems of the Day in Germany”--gives an account of the
  continued belief in witches at the present day.

  [66] Iwan Bloch, “Regarding the Idea of a History of Civilization in
  Relation to Medicine,” published in _Die Medizinische Woche_, 1900,
  No. 36.

  [67] The best-known of these are Augustine, Benzi, Bouvier,
  Cangiamila, Capellmann, Claret, Debreyne, Dens, Filliucius, Gury,
  Liguori, Moja, Molinos, Moullet, Pereira, Rodriguez, Rousselot, Sa,
  Thomas Sanchez, Samuel Schroeer, Skiers, Soto, Suarez, Tamburini,
  Thomas Aquinas, Vivaldi, Wigandt, Zenardi. Copious extracts from their
  writings are given by Count von Hoensbroech in the second volume of
  his work--“The Papacy in its Socio-Civil Reality” (Leipzig, 1907).

  [68] Havelock Ellis, “The Sexual Impulse and the Sentiment of Shame.”

  [69] We shall return later to the religio-sexual “Masses,” celebrated
  even at the present day in Paris and other large towns.

  [70] “Personal Experiences, or Forty Years from the life of a
  Well-known Physician” (Leipzig, 1854, three vols.). In addition,
  “Gleanings In and Out of Myself,” from the papers of the author of the
  “Personal Experiences,” etc. (Leipzig, 1856, four vols.).

  [71] “Gleanings In and Out of Myself,” vol. ii., pp. 37-45. Regarding
  the relations between religion and sexuality, many interesting details
  are found in the work of George Keben, “The Half-Christians and the
  Whole Devil: the Road to Hell of Superstition” (Gross-Lichterfelde,
  1905), especially in the chapter “The Brothel,” pp. 93-110.




