CHAPTER XVIII

MISOGYNY


  “_Thou priestess of the most flowery life, how is it possible that
  such things should draw near to thee--one of those pale phantoms, one
  of those general maxims, which philosophers and moralists have
  invented in their despair of the human race?_”--G. JUNG.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XVIII

  Non-identity of misogyny with homosexuality -- History of misogyny --
  Misogyny among the Greeks -- Christian misogyny the true source of the
  modern contempt for women -- Characteristics of modern misogyny -- De
  Sade and his modern disciples (Schopenhauer, Strindberg, Weininger) --
  Scientific misogyny (Möbius, Schurtz, B. Friedländer, E. von Mayer) --
  Distinctions between the individual varieties -- Counteracting
  tendencies -- Beginnings of a new amatory life of the sexes -- A
  common share in life -- Freedom _with_, not without, woman.


CHAPTER XVIII

Before proceeding to the consideration of homosexuality I propose to
give a brief account of contemporary misogyny, in order to avoid
confusing these two distinct phenomena under one head, and also to avoid
making the male homosexuals, who are often erroneously regarded as
“woman-haters,” responsible for the momentarily prevalent spiritual
epidemic of hatred of women. This would be a gross injustice, because,
in the first place, this movement has =in no way= proceeded from the
homosexual, but rather from heterosexual individuals, such as
Schopenhauer, Strindberg, etc.; and because, in the second place, the
homosexual as such are not misogynists at all, and it is only a minority
of them who shout in chorus to the misogynist tirades of Strindberg and
Weininger.

The misogynists form to-day a kind of “=fourth sex=,”[491] to belong to
which appears to be the fashion, or rather has =once more= become the
fashion, for misogyny is an old story. There have always been times in
which men have cried out: “Woman, what have I to do with you? I belong
to the century”;[492] times in which woman was renounced as a soulless
being, and the world of men became intoxicated with itself, and was
proud of its “splendid isolation.”

Of less importance is it that the Chinese since ancient times have
denied to woman a soul, and therewith a justification for
existence,[493] than that among the most highly developed civilized
races of antiquity such men as Hesiod, Simonides,[494] and, above all,
Euripides, were all fierce misogynists. In the “Ion,” the “Hippolytus,”
the “Hecuba,” and the “Cyclops” we find the most incisive attacks on
the female sex. The most celebrated passage is that in the “Hippolytus”
(verses 602-637, 650-655):

  “Wherefore, O Jove, beneath the solar beams
   That evil, woman, didst thou cause to dwell?
   For if it was thy will the human race
   Should multiply, this ought not by such means
   To be effected; better in thy fane
   Each votary, on presenting brass or steel,
   Or massive ingots of resplendent gold,
   Proportioned to his offering, might from thee
   Obtain a race of sons, and under roofs
   Which genuine freedom visits, unannoyed
   By women, live.”[495]

In this passage we have the entire quintessence of modern misogyny. But
Euripides betrays to us also the real motive of misogyny. In a fragment
of his we read “the =most invincible= of all things is a woman”! _Hinc
illæ lacrimæ!_ It is only the men who are not a =match= for woman, who
do not allow woman as a free personality to influence them, =who are so
little sure of themselves= that they are afraid of suffering at the
hands of woman damage, limitation, or even annihilation of their own
individuality. These only are the true misogynists.

It is indisputable that this Hellenic misogyny was closely connected
with the love of boys as a popular custom. To this we shall return when
we come to describe Greek pæderasty.

Among the Romans woman occupied a far higher position than among the
Greeks--a fact which the institution of the vestal virgins alone
suffices to prove. Among the Germans, also, woman was regarded as worthy
of all honour.

The =true source= of modern misogyny is Christianity--the Christian
doctrine of the fundamentally sinful, evil, devilish nature of woman. A
Strindberg, a Weininger, even a Benedikt Friedländer, notwithstanding
his hatred of priests--all are the last offshoots of a movement against
the being and the value of woman--a movement which has persisted
throughout the Christian period of the history of the world.

  “If I were asked,” says Finck,[496] “to name the most influential,
  refining element of modern civilization, I should answer: ‘Woman,
  beauty, love, and marriage’! If I were asked, however, to name the
  most inward and peculiar essence of the early middle ages, my answer
  would be: ‘Deadly hostility to everything feminine, to beauty, to
  love, and to marriage.’”


The history of medieval misogyny was described by J. Michelet in his
book “The Witch.” Since woman and the contact with woman were regarded
as radically evil, it followed that in theory and practice asceticism
was the ideal; celibacy was only the natural consequence of this hatred
of woman; so also were the later witch trials the natural consequence.
Therefore to this medieval misogyny, in contrast with modern misogyny,
which represents only a weak imitation, we cannot deny a certain
justification. The misogyny of the middle ages was earnestly meant; but
it has become to-day mere phrase-making, dilettante imitation, and
ostentation. In contrast with the utterances of the modern misogynist,
the coarse abuse of women by such a writer as Abraham a Santa Clara has
a refreshing and amusing character.[497]

Modern misogyny is certainly an inheritance of Christian doctrine, and a
tradition handed down from much earlier times, but still it has its own
characteristic peculiarities. Misogyny is, however, now much more an
affair of =satiety= or =disillusion= than of =belief= or =conviction=;
whereas in the days of medieval Christianity belief and conviction were
the effective causal factors of misogyny. In addition, among our
neo-misogynists we have the factor of the =spiritual pride= of a man
who, from the standpoint of academic theoretical culture (which to men
of this kind appears the highest summit of existence), looks down upon
women, whom he regards as mentally insignificant, while he sympathizes
with her “physiological weak-mindedness.” He smiles on her with pity,
and completely overlooks the profound life of emotion and feeling
characteristic of every true woman, which forms a counterpoise to any
amount of purely theoretical knowledge--quite apart from the fact that
women of intellectual cultivation are by no means rare.

If, in fact, we regard the =lives= of those who have reduced modern
misogyny to a system, we shall be able to detect the above-mentioned
causes in their personal experiences and impressions. The first
important modern advocate of misogyny, the Marquis de Sade, lived an
extremely unhappy married life, was deceived also in a love
relationship, and nourished his hatred of women by a dissolute life and
a consequent state of satiety.

And as regards Schopenhauer, who does not recall his unhappy relations
with his mother? For he who has really loved his =mother=, he who has
experienced the unutterable tenderness and self-sacrifice of maternal
love, can never become a genuine, thoroughgoing woman-hater. But the
mutual relationship of Schopenhauer and his mother was rather =hatred=
than love. Beyond question, also, his infection with syphilis, to which
I was the first to draw attention, played a part in his subsequent
hatred of women.

Strindberg, in his “Confessions of a Fool,” has himself offered us the
proof of the causal connexion between his misogyny and his personal
experiences and disillusions; and in Weininger’s book we can read only
too clearly that he had had no good fortune with women, or had had
disagreeable experiences in his relations with them.

De Sade, who, perhaps, was not unknown to Schopenhauer,[498] was the
first advocate of consistent misogyny on principle. It is an interesting
fact, to which I have alluded in an earlier work (“Recent Researches
regarding the Marquis de Sade,” p. 433), that de Sade’s and
Schopenhauer’s opinions on the physical characteristics of women are to
some extent =verbally= identical. While Schopenhauer, in his essay “On
Women” (“Works,” ed. Grisebach, vol. v., p. 654), speaks of the
“stunted, narrow-shouldered, wide-hipped and =short-legged= sex,” which
only a masculine intellect when =clouded by sexual desire= could
possibly call “beautiful,” we find in the “Juliette” (vol. iii., pp.
187, 188) of the Marquis de Sade the following very similar remarks on
the feminine body: “Take the clothes off one of these idols of yours! Is
it these two =short= and crooked legs which have =turned your head= like
this?” This physical hatefulness of women corresponds to the mental
hatefulness of which de Sade gives a similar repellent picture
(“Juliette,” vol iii., pp. 188, 189). In all his works we find the same
fanatical hatred of women. Sarmiento, in “Aline et Valcour” (vol. ii.,
p. 115), would like to annihilate all women, and calls that man happy
who has learned to renounce completely intercourse with this “debased,
false, and noxious sex.”

Quite in the spirit of de Sade, to whom the misogynists of the Second
Empire referred as an authority, Schopenhauer, in the previously quoted
essay “On Women,” Strindberg, in the “Confessions of a Fool,” and
Weininger, in “Sex and Character,” preached contempt for the feminine
nature;[499] and this seed has fallen upon fruitful soil in modern
youth. Every young blockhead inflates himself with his “masculine
pride,” and feels himself to be the “knight of the spirit” in relation
to the inferior sex; every disillusioned and satiated debauchee
cultivates (as a rule, indeed, transiently) the fashion of misogyny,
which strengthens his sentiment of self-esteem. If we wish to speak at
all of “physiological weak-mindedness,” let us apply the term to this
disagreeable type of men. As Georg Hirth truly remarks (“Ways to
Freedom,” p. 281), such masculine =arrogance= is merely a variety of
“mental defect.”

Unfortunately, this misogyny has intruded itself also into science. The
work of P. J. Möbius,[500] notwithstanding the esteem I feel for the
valuable services of the celebrated neurologist in other departments,
can only be termed an aberration, a _lapsus calami_.[501] But he does
not stand alone. The admirable work of Heinrich Schurtz, also, upon “Age
Classes and Associations of Men” (Berlin, 1902), is permeated by this
misogynist aura; not less so is the equally stimulating work, “The Vital
Laws of Civilization” (Halle, 1904), by Eduard von Mayer. This book, in
association with the equally thoughtful and compendious work “The
Renascence of Eros Uranios” (Berlin, 1904), by Benedikt Friedländer, and
in conjunction with the efforts of Adolf Brand, the editor of the
homosexual newspaper _Der Eigene_, and Edwin Bab (_cf._ this writer’s
“The Woman’s Movement and the Love of Friends”; Berlin, 1904), to found
a special homosexual group demanding the “=emancipation of men=,” have
been the principal causes of the belief that the male homosexuals are
the true “repudiators of woman,” and that from them has proceeded the
increasing diffusion of modern misogyny. I repeat that this connexion is
true only for the above-named group; that, on the contrary, genuine
misogyny has been taught us by the world’s typically heterosexual men,
such as Schopenhauer and Strindberg. Benedikt Friedländer and Eduard von
Mayer preached, above all, a “masculine civilization,” a deepening of
the spiritual relationships between men; whereas Strindberg and
Schopenhauer, and even Weininger, really leave us in uncertainty as to
what they imagine is to take woman’s place. All five agree in this, that
the “intercourse” of man with woman is to be limited as much as
possible; but only the two first-named openly and freely advocate
homosexual relationships, or at least a “physiological friendship” (B.
Friedländer), between men. Schopenhauer, Strindberg, and Weininger did
not venture to deduce these consequences. Yet this is the =necessary=
consequence of misogyny based on principle.

To the heterosexual men--and such men form an =enormous majority=--the
noble, ideal, asexual friendship of man for man appears in quite another
light from that in which it appears to the misogynist, to whom it is to
serve to =replace= sexual love, whereas for heterosexual men friendship
for other men is a valuable treasure =additional= to the love of woman.

Is there, then, any reason for this contempt and hatred for woman? Do
not the signs increase on all hands to show us that =new= relationships
are forming between the sexes, that a number of new points of contact of
the spiritual nature are making their appearance--in a word, that =an
entirely new, nobler, most promising amatory life= is developing? I will
not fall into the contrary error to misogyny and inscribe a dithyramb of
praise to feminine nature, as Wedde, Daumer, Quensel, Groddeck, and
others, have done; but I merely indicate the signs of the times when I
say =that woman also is awakening=! Woman is awakening to the entirely
new existence of a free personality, conscious of her rights and of her
duties. Woman, also, will have her share in the content and in the tasks
of life; she will not enslave us, as the misogynists clamour, for she
wishes to see =free men= by her side. What would become of woman if men
became slaves? How could slaves give love?

Life has to-day become a difficult task both for man and for woman. Man
and woman alike must endeavour to perform that task with confidence in
their respective powers; but each, also, must have confidence in the
powers of the other--a confidence which becomes =palpable= in the form
of love or friendship, so that those who feel it have their own powers
strengthened.

Not “Free =from= woman” is the watchword of the future, but “Free =with=
woman.”

  [491] V. Hoffmann, in a bad novel, “Das vierte Geschlecht” (Berlin,
  1902), gives this name to the non-homosexual misogynists.

  [492] Karl Gutzkow, “Säkularbilder,” vol. i., p. 55 (Frankfurt, 1846).

  [493] In the Shi-king we find the following characterization of woman:

  “Enough for her to avoid evil,
   For what can a woman do that is good?”

  Indian literature is also full of such ideas. _Cf._ H. Schurtz,
  “Altersklassen und Männerbunde” (Age Classes and Associations of Men),
  p. 52.

  [494] Simonides considered that women were derived from various
  animals. W. Schubert (“From the Berlin Collection of Papyri,”
  published in the _Vossische Zeitung_, No. 23, January 15, 1907)
  reproduces long fragments of a Greek anthology which collates praise
  and blame of woman in the original words of the poets.

  [495] I quote from “The Plays of Euripides in English,” in two
  volumes, vol. ii., p. 136 (Everyman’s Library, Dent,
  London).--TRANSLATOR.

  [496] H. T. Finck, “Romantic Love and Personal Beauty,” vol. i., pp.
  186, 187 (Breslau, 1894).

  [497] Equally amusing is the misogynist “Alphabet de l’Imperfection et
  Malice des Femmes,” by Jacques Olivier (Rouen, 1646), in which all the
  bad qualities of woman, observed down to the year 1646, are described
  with effective care and completeness.

  [498] We know that Schopenhauer was a lover of erotic writings; a
  fuller account of this matter will be found in Grisebach’s
  “Conversations and Soliloquies of Schopenhauer.”

  [499] That Nietzsche is wrongly accredited with misogyny is
  convincingly proved by Helene Stocker (“Nietzsches Frauenfeindschaft,”
  published in _Zukunft_, 1903; reprinted in “Love and Women,” pp.
  65-74; Minden, 1906).

  [500] P. J. Möbius, “The Physiological Weak-mindedness of Woman,”
  fourth edition (Halle, 1902). Näcke terms the recently deceased Möbius
  the “German Lombroso,” in order by this term to indicate, on the one
  hand, the man’s indubitable genius, and on the other hand the
  superficiality and purely hypothetical character of his scientific
  deductions.

  [501] The grounds for this opinion were given in the fifth chapter.




