CHAPTER XII

SEDUCTION, THE SENSUAL LIFE (GENUSSLEBEN), AND WILD LOVE (WILDE LIEBE)


  “_In the sensual life, imponderabilia play a leading part, and many an
  effort towards improvement, many a reform, has been shattered against
  them, simply because the would-be reformer has overlooked the finer
  threads which connect the human soul with the institutions and customs
  of the material world._”--WILLY HELLPACH.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XII

  Difference between free love and wild love -- The danger of wild love
  -- Forms the bridge to prostitution -- Its connexion with the sensual
  life and with seduction -- The peculiarities of modern epicureanism --
  Restless character of the sensual life -- The life of “amusement” --
  The erotic aim of this life -- Sexual excesses of the present day --
  Heedlessness of wild love -- Influence of large towns on the sensual
  life -- Nocturnal life -- Character of the pleasures of large towns --
  Increase of sexual tension -- Pursuit of pleasure among the common
  people -- The increasing number of young embezzlers -- Public
  seduction -- Professional seduction -- History of the art of love --
  Its gradual spiritualization -- Seducer types -- Don Juan and Casanova
  -- British Don-Juanism -- The domineering erotic, and the erotic
  genius -- Kierkegaarde, “Diary of a Seducer” -- Pseudo Don-Juanism --
  Printed guide-books to the sensual life for the modern man of pleasure
  -- Influence of the mode of life upon the sexual life -- Alcohol as
  the incorporation of evil in this respect -- Analysis of its influence
  on the _vita sexualis_ -- Its peculiar duplex influence -- Utilization
  of this influence by prostitutes and seducers -- Alcoholism and
  venereal diseases -- Absinthe in France -- Share of alcohol in
  producing offences against morality -- Encouragement of wild love by
  alcohol -- Connexion of illegitimate births with alcoholic excess --
  Increase of wild love at the present day -- “Intimacy” (“das
  Verhältnis”) -- Its gradual degeneration -- History of the origination
  of the “intimacy,” and psychological explanations thereof --
  Increasing similarity between the nature of the “intimacy” and the
  conditions of prostitution -- Causes -- Frequent changes of
  “intimates” -- The diffusion of venereal diseases by means of wild
  love -- Rôle of lies, mistrust, and hatred therein -- Produces
  disbelief in love -- Wild love and coercive marriage -- Causes of
  sexual corruption -- Need for the campaign against wild love and
  sexual libertinism -- Hellmann’s book on sexual libertinism --
  Attitude of the medical man towards “extra-conjugal” sexual
  intercourse -- Increasing aversion to wild love -- The increase in
  free ideal love unions -- Wild love as the transitional stage to
  prostitution.


CHAPTER XII

In the previous chapter we repeatedly drew attention to the fact that
free love is not identical with the sexual promiscuity indulged in at
the present day to such an alarming extent and with such disastrous
consequences--sexual promiscuity in the form of extra-conjugal sexual
intercourse, irregular in character, and dependent almost entirely upon
chance.

I am an ardent advocate of “free love,” by which I understand sexual
union based upon intimate love, personal harmony, and spiritual
affinity, entered on by the free resolve of both parties, involving the
assumption of all the duties entailed by such free unions, and with
satisfactory mutual assurances regarding health. But with corresponding
emphasis I must condemn, from the standpoint of the physician and from
that of public hygiene, and also on ethical grounds, the now so widely
diffused “extra-conjugal” sexual intercourse, for which, in order to
distinguish it from the entirely different extra-conjugal “free” love, I
suggest the term “=wild love=.”

This wild love is the true cancer of our society, for its chief
characteristic is that it constitutes =an enduring connexion and means
of transition= between hygienically and ethically unexceptionable sexual
intercourse and prostitution, and thus involves the unceasing risk of
transferring to the former =all the dangers= of the latter. In this
sense, wild love can really be regarded as a kind of =irradiation= of
the whole nature of prostitution into the entirety of sexual relations
in general. Thus, it remains a powerful hindrance to all ennoblement and
resanation of the amatory life, and it is an invincible source of the
moral and physical degeneration and the infective contamination of the
nation.

Wild love is intimately connected with the artificial sensual life of
our time, and with the manifold varieties of seduction[219] arising from
that life. Wild love, the sensual life, and seduction, form, as it were,
a triad, each member of which is the principal predisposing condition of
the others.

He who wishes to characterize in a few words the European civilization
of the present day may say that its nature consists in =epicureanism=,
mitigated by =toil= and the =struggle for life=; but this epicureanism
is of a very peculiar kind. It is no longer the unqualified sensual life
of the eighteenth century, in which sensual lusts and epicurean
refinements were to many the whole object of life, nor is it the
comfortable enjoyment of “the good old times”; it is a quite peculiar
=concentrated= enjoyment of the moment, =in the midst of the hard work
of life=. The _carpe diem_ of Horace has to-day become _carpe horam_!

The forced labour which the fierce struggle for existence at present
entails upon the majority of men leaves no more time for a simple
undisturbed enjoyment of existence, for the inward deep =experience= of
reality, and for a quiet joy therein. No, our sensual life of to-day
bears in it the sting of =pain=, because the will to live, which,
according to Schopenhauer, continually strives for an “=increase of
life=,” has now degenerated into a convulsive search for =the most
violent sensations possible=, into a wild hunt after the strongest
possible and most frequent enjoyments, because the time is lacking for a
peaceful, harmonious existence. Each man asks himself anxiously whether
he may not have “missed” this or that possibility of objective pleasure;
and forgets in doing so that the true happiness of life lies =within
himself=, and that the greatest possible sum of outward enjoyments
cannot procure him this happiness.

The signature of our time is “=amuse oneself=,” a phrase which conveys
the idea of all our modern superficial pleasures, and of our sensual and
spiritual sensations, which must chase one another in rapid succession
in order to enable the modern civilized man to feel that he “lives.”

For the majority of those living in great towns, amusement is equivalent
to a =continued succession of superficial sensual pleasures, as
preparatory stimuli for an equally fugitive and debasing sexual act=.

The frequently heard and favourite phrases “to go through with it,” “to
live one’s life,” “to sow one’s wild oats,” etc., have all the same
significance, in the sense of preparation for sexual indulgence by means
of such stimuli.

From beer-saloons and public-houses of all kinds, especially those at
which the attendants are women, from the cabarets and variety theatres,
the low-class music-halls and dancing-saloons, also, however, from
better-class balls, soirées, and luxurious dinners, the road is open to
the prostitute, or to the arms of a girl excited by similar sensual
stimuli to a similarly transitory sexual desire.

A great physician has said: “We eat three times too much.” I might add,
in amplification of this saying, Not only do we eat three times too
much, but we look for all other sensual pleasures in excess, and for
this reason =we love also three times too much=, or rather, we indulge
=too often= in sexual intercourse.

One of our most talented psychologists, Willy Hellpach, has described
these relationships with great insight:

  “To the enormous majority of our young men sexual indulgence is a
  matter of course, like their card-parties, their evenings at the club,
  their glass of beer; and of the few who live otherwise, a considerable
  proportion do so simply from timidity, or from poverty of spirit (they
  would like to, but they cannot screw their courage up). Another
  portion is honourably continent, but does not dare to make any display
  of this adhesion to principle, and rather pretends not to be
  distinguished in any way from the majority; and the very few young men
  who openly set their faces against the custom may be counted on the
  fingers of one hand. It is obvious that in this way the extra-conjugal
  sexual act loses the distinction of the unaccustomed; it is effected
  continually in a more heedless, light-hearted, frivolous
  manner--until, finally, the very idea of danger connected with
  indiscriminate sexual indulgence is forgotten; the preventive is
  thrown aside with an easy “Nothing has ever happened to me.” Indeed,
  many a man goes to his fate in the shape of infection with his eyes
  open, and with the most light-hearted confidence: if he is infected,
  there will be plenty of time before his marriage to be thoroughly
  cured.

  “This factor comes the more readily into play in proportion to the
  degree in which the whole arrangement of the sensual life culminates
  in the stimulation of erotic activities. Such a tendency is inevitably
  associated with the development of the modern large town; and there
  ensues an imitation of the sensual life of large towns in smaller
  towns, and even in country villages.[220]

  “Every large town provides the means for a much more extensive
  stimulation of the senses than country life; and the alternate
  stimulation and deadening of the senses, characteristic of town life,
  has in the very large towns of our time reached an unheard-of degree
  of intensity. The town is the typical habitat of that sensual and
  nervous condition of irritability which historically characterizes our
  own generation; the townsman is the typical representative of
  “nervousness” in its modern form. The verbal connexion between
  “senses” and “sensuality” represents an actual transition; and in
  ordinary parlance, by the “sensual” we understand the “erotic.” Where
  the senses are more strongly stimulated, there erotic desire grows,
  there it loses its periodical course in favour of a continuous
  wakefulness, or, at any rate, in favour of a light slumber, which the
  slightest stimulus will disturb. And the townsman is more easily
  impelled to the sexual act, not merely because the town offers him
  prostitutes, “intimates,” etc., in much greater numbers, but also
  because his over-stimulated nervous system impels him much more
  powerfully to search for these objects, and makes it much more
  difficult for him to safeguard himself against their allurements.

  “And town life is nocturnal life! The more so, the larger the town;
  and we see the extreme form of this in the great capitals of Europe.
  The consequences in regard to the opportunities for and incitations to
  sexual enjoyment are not lacking. First of all, nocturnal life gives
  rise to a summation of stimuli, to an incredible variety of nervous
  titillation, and this induces an increasing sensuality; and once the
  sensual life has become habitually nocturnal, now, by a vicious
  circle, all enjoyment is unavoidably fettered to the town. Natural
  recuperation has become a secondary consideration, and in place of the
  relief of tension, we have apparent restoration by means of variety.
  All, all, tends in favour of a sharpening of sensual stimuli, of
  arousing the wish for erotic pleasures. And the town is untiring,
  inexhaustible, in its discovery of means for the gratification of
  these instincts. Variety theatres, gin-palaces, low music-halls, and
  all the amusements of similar kind, are simply unthinkable without the
  sensual note; and even where they maintain themselves to be free from
  that note, it will be unconsciously sought by the audience, will be
  easily found, and if it were absent, its absence would be angrily
  resented. The same is true, more or less, of entertainments of a
  higher æsthetic rank. With very few exceptions, our theatres are
  compelled to take into consideration the instincts of the public, and
  the instincts of the population of our large towns are chiefly
  concerned with eroticism. Even where sexual questions are elevated
  into the sphere of the highest art, and by the artist himself the
  common is detested, the audience will, after their kind, merely
  extract erotic stimulation; and that the opera and the stage are
  sought by many merely on account of these accessory influences, is too
  well known to need proof--not to say a word regarding the pantomime
  and the ballet.

  “Perhaps the worst of all is yet to come. In his public dinners, his
  parties, his clubs, his balls, etc., the man of the upper classes, and
  also the man of the middle classes, does not find the
  much-to-be-desired ethical counterpoise to this characteristic sensual
  life of our young men; but rather finds the prolongation of it in a
  somewhat more masked and artificial form. From the outset, the
  relationship between the sexes is of so suggestive, so purposive a
  character, that this exercises a gentle, stimulating influence upon
  desire; and a man is thrown into a state of tension for which he often
  finds only one outlet, sexual gratification--which he must either buy
  or obtain by cunning--and thus he passes straightway from the
  influences of the public sensual life, to become the customer of the
  prostitute, the partner in the “intimacy,” the seducer in the
  nocturnal life of the great town. He then either runs the danger of
  infection with venereal diseases, or he occupies himself with their
  dissemination; for the man suffering from venereal disease is not
  merely a victim: he is commonly also a focus of infection, one who
  finds new victims in the shape of girls hitherto uninfected.

  “To this evil a remarkable trait in the sensual life of the simpler
  woman extends ready assistance--I mean that servility, that erotic
  obsequiousness which finds expression already in the gossip, and in
  the favourite reading of the lower classes, and which makes them feel
  to some extent flattered if they are treated as means of enjoyment by
  a man of good position. It is well known that the prostitute in her
  talk gladly makes her lover a baron; but, unfortunately, a similar
  tendency characterizes the feminine half of the lower classes
  throughout, and to our regret, this is more especially true of the
  German people. Our commercial-traveller nature, to which, according to
  Sombart, we owe a portion of our ascendancy in the markets of the
  world, finds its most regrettable and disastrous seamy side in the
  readiness with which the masses forget their pride and self-respect,
  when it is a question of snatching a pleasure. This characteristic
  has, in recent lustra, unfortunately become not better, but rather
  worse; the desire to look well at any cost, with which the simple girl
  so often makes herself laughable, inspires also her longing to ‘walk
  out’ with a distinguished admirer.”[221]

But not only does the simple girl of the people sacrifice her life and
health in this pursuit of pleasure; the young men also are not
behindhand in the pursuit, which they regard as “gentlemanlike,” of
enjoyment and of women. It is astonishing what an increase in recent
times there has been in the number of youthful embezzlers, learners and
clerks in merchants’ offices, whose offences have been committed simply
in order to provide funds for the gratification of their pothouse
pleasures. Among them one meets lads between the ages of fourteen and
eighteen years, a symptom of the earlier sexual maturity of the present
day. When, as usually happens, they are arrested after a few days, it
comes out in evidence that the embezzled money was squandered in the
society of prostitutes, but we learn that the tendency to such excess
had existed in the embezzler long before he actually committed a crime.
If the heads of businesses were to keep themselves better informed
regarding the mode of life of their employees, many a disillusion and
many a loss would be spared them.

Sexual seduction is at the present time effected less by individuals
than by the environment. =The sensual life as such=, the entire
stimulating sensual atmosphere of that life, plays to-day a rôle which
at an earlier time, when our social life and pleasures were less fully
developed, fell to the “seducer,” the _galant homme_ and Don Juan of
earlier days. Our young people are subjected rather to the general
influences of the pursuit of amusement, which fascinates all circles,
than to the allurements of the habitual seducer. =To-day, the victims
of public seduction, by means of the sensual life characteristic of our
time, are far more numerous= than those seduced by isolated individuals,
though such there have been, and will be, at all times.

Before I pass to the consideration of the individual influences of the
modern sensual life, those by which wild love is especially favoured,
and before I describe the general seduction of the present day, I
propose to touch upon the interesting question of “=professional
seduction=,” to consider Don-Juanism and the practice of the “_ars
amandi_.”

It is remarkable how strongly the history of the art of seduction
reflects the general tendency of the evolution of love from purely
physical impulses to spiritual love. This we learn simply from the study
of the numerous =text-books of the art of love=, the so-called “_ars
amandi_.”

Whereas in the earlier text-books of this subject, from Ovid’s “Ars
Amandi,”[222] widely celebrated in antiquity, to the “Practica Artis
Amandi,”[223] the “Morale Galante, ou l’Art de Bien Aimer,”[224] of the
seventeenth century, and Gentil Bernard’s “L’Art d’Aimer,”[225] of the
eighteenth century, the principal stress was laid upon all the possible
sensual stimuli, and upon the superficial gallantry associated with
this; in the modern text-books, in that of Manso[226] (still belonging
to the eighteenth century), but especially in the more recent works by
Stendhal,[227] Paul Bourget,[228] A. Silvestre,[229] Catulle
Mendés,[230] Robert Hessen,[231] and Hjalmar Kjölenson,[232] we find
much more stress laid on all the =spiritual= influences of the art of
love. In this way it is possible to follow in these works the whole
course of the enrichment of the spiritual and emotional life in
love.[233]

The same process of development can be recognized also in the figure of
Don Juan. His type has undergone gradual alteration, always becoming
more and more intellectual. The =purely sensual= Don Juan, as Lord
Chesterfield, for example, characterizes and embodies him, is to-day
quite out of date even among sensual men of the ordinary type; whereas
though Kierkegaard’s “Diary of a Seducer” describes an extreme type,
that of the purely reflective libertine, yet in this extreme, the author
has very rightly recognized the general tendency of evolution.

Recently, Oscar A. H. Schmitz has published an extremely original and
thoughtful study of “Don Juan, Casanova, and other Erotic Characters”
(Stuttgart, 1906), in which he distinguishes very sharply the seducer
type of a Casanova from the seducer-type of a Don Juan. Don Juan is a
deceitful, cunning seducer, to whom the =sense of possession= associated
with the attainment of his aim, the =danger=, the activity of his
=desires for power and dominance=, are the principal matters, but who is
in himself =unerotic=; whereas Casanova is pre-eminently the erotic,
also crafty and deceitful, not, however, for the gratification of his
need for power, but rather for the agreeable satisfaction of his need
for sensual love. Don Juan knows only “women”; for Casanova each one is
“the woman.” Don Juan is demoniacal, devilish he goes on to the complete
destruction of the women seduced by him, deliberately he ensures their
unhappiness; Casanova is human, cares always for the happiness of the
women he loves, and devotes to them a tender reflection. Don Juan
=despises= women, he is of the type of the misogynist, of the satanic
woman-hater; Casanova is the typical feminist, he possesses a profound
understanding of woman’s soul, is not disappointed by love, and needs
for his life’s happiness continuous contact with feminine natures. Don
Juan seduces by means of his own elemental nature, by the attractive
power of brutal wild force; Casanova does so by means of the sensual
atmosphere which surrounds him.

With an accurate psychological insight, Schmitz remarks:

  “It seems as if the love of one, or, where possible, of several, women
  inoculates the man, as it were, with a vital fluid, and gives his
  glance a fire which at times makes him irresistible. Men of pleasure
  declare that after the most fortunate nights, when, exhausted, they
  were returning home to sleep, on the way the most eager and meaning
  glances were cast upon them by the women whom they passed.”

This distinction between the two types of seducer, which Schmitz makes
in his original book, containing excellent observations on the
psychology of love, is indeed not new. Stendhal, in the chapter
“Werther and Don Juan” of his book, “Ueber die Liebe,” pp. 241-251
(German edition, Leipzig, 1903), points out the same types. “The genuine
Don Juans,” he says, “ultimately come to regard women as their enemies,
and find actual pleasure in their manifold unhappiness”; whereas
Werther, the equivalent of Casanova, regards all women as entrancing
beings, towards whom we are far too unjust. The love of Don Juan is “a
similar feeling to the love of the chase”; Werther’s love is gentle,
idealizes the reality, is full of tender and romantic impressions. Don
Juan is the conqueror; Werther is the erotic.

I myself also, in my work on “Sexual Life in England,” vol. ii., p. 159
(Berlin, 1903), have, earlier than Schmitz, clearly distinguished from
one another these two seducer types, in a passage in which I depict the
British Don Juan, in contrast to the French and Italian Don Juan.

The passage runs:

  “The principal characteristic of the British Don Juans, who are
  completely distinct from the libertines of the Latin and of the other
  Teutonic countries, is the =cold, brazen= quietude with which they
  indulge in the sensual pleasures of life; =love is much less to them
  an affair of passion than one of pride and of the gratification of
  their consciousness of power=. The French, the Italian Don Juan is
  driven by ardent sensuality from conquest to conquest. This is the
  =principal motive= of their actions and of their mode of life. The
  English Don Juan seduces on principle, for the sake of experiment; he
  pursues love as a sport. Sensuality plays a part only in the second
  degree, and in the midst of his sensual enjoyment the coldness of his
  heart is still painfully apparent.

  “This is the =rake=, the type of =Lovelace=, which Richardson, in his
  ‘Clarissa Harlowe,’ has described with incomparable mastery.”

Taine, also, in his “History of English Literature,” has described this
British Don-Juanism, which hates rather than loves.

Finally, we find these types also in Rosa Mayreder’s book, “Zur Kritik
der Weiblicheit” (“Critique of Femininity,” Leipzig, 1905), especially
in the chapter, “A Few Words on the Powerful Faust” (pp. 210-243). Her
type of the “=masterful erotic=” closely resembles the Don Juan type of
Schmitz, and my own British seducer type.

  “Erotic excitement,” says Rosa Mayreder, “gives rise in these men to
  the lust of dominion; to them the relationship with women signifies a
  grasping possession, an enjoyment of power, and they are unable to
  think of women except as subject and dependent. Only in so far as
  woman adapts herself to them as a means do they know her; as a
  personality, with individual aims, she does not exist for them.”

This masterful eroticism exists among men of quite low social position,
just as much as among men of high position.[234] Their diametrical
opposite is the love-perception of delicately sensitive, erotical,
highly differentiated men, whose highest type constitutes the “=erotic
genius=.” Rosa Mayreder characterizes this latter type in the following
terms:

  “The increasing differentiation of erotic perception brings with it a
  new faculty, which extinguishes the consciousness of superiority and
  transforms the need for contrast into the need for community, for
  reciprocity--the capacity for devotion. Thus comes to pass the most
  remarkable phenomenon in the masculine psyche, the great miracle,
  which effects a complete transformation of the primitive mode of
  perception, a transformation of the teleological sexual nature.

  “The erotic genius grasps the nature of the opposite sex with
  intuitive understanding, and is capable of assimilating it completely.
  The other sex is to him the primevally akin and primevally allied; his
  love-relationships are accompanied by ideas of enlargement,
  fulfilment, liberation of his own essential nature, or even by the
  idea of a mystical union. To him sexuality does not denote an
  annulment or limitation of personality, but rather an enlargement and
  enrichment by means of the individuals with which, in this way, his
  personality is associated.”

As an erotic genius of such a kind, Rosa Mayreder points to Richard
Wagner, as he manifests himself in his letters to Mathilde Wesendonk.

The sensibility and refinement of the modern woman, her emergence as a
personality, must continually repel the masterful type of
erotic--although doubtless that type will never be entirely eliminated.
I do not believe in a complete transformation of the teleological sexual
nature of man, which has always assigned to him the active aggressive
rôle. But it is true that the possibilities of existence for the
masterful erotic, the Don Juan type, have become limited. He must, as
Schmitz rightly insists, intellectualize himself if he wishes to
continue to exist. This psychological satanism of the modern Don Juan is
wonderfully described by Kierkegaard, in his “Diary of a Seducer.”[235]

The hero of this book learns best from the girls themselves how they can
be betrayed; he develops in them “spiritual eroticism,” in order then
suddenly to abandon them, but =they themselves= must loosen the tie.
Woman and love are not to him in themselves the principal need; what is
important to him is, as he says at the conclusion, that he has been
able to enrich himself with numerous erotic perceptions. The modern Don
Juan is, therefore, nothing more than a =cold psychological
experimenter=. It is in this way that, with prophetic insight, Choderlos
de Laclos has described him in the Vicomte de Valmont, the hero of his
“Liaisons Dangereuses.”

Yet another interesting Don Juan type of our time has to be considered,
one which indeed is not a genuine Don Juan, but a =pseudo= Don Juan, or
rather a pseudo Casanova; and this type makes its appearance also in the
female sex.

Like Rétif de la Bretonne, it is the man or woman seeking eternally for
the ideal, for true love; a type which only, in consequence of the
ever-repeated disillusions and errors, assumes a Don Juanesque
character. At the present day, we meet this type very often. It is only
the expression of the increasing difficulty of the proper love choice,
owing to the progressive differentiation of our time; and it is not
originated by the desire for sensual lust, but rather by the eternally
disillusioned yearning for genuine individual love.

But we must return after this excursion to the consideration of the
commonest type of public seduction by means of the sensual life of our
time. It is significant that this also possesses its literary guides and
course of instruction, in the form of the numerous printed =handbooks
for the world of pleasure=. Among these we may mention, “Guides du
Viveur,” “Guides de Plaisir,” “Führer durch das Nächtliche Berlin”
(“Guide to Berlin by Night”), “New London Guide to the Night Houses,”
“Die Geheimnisse der Berliner Passage” (“Secrets of the ‘Passage’ of
Berlin”), “Paris by Night,” “The Swell’s Night Guide through the
Metropolis,” “Bruxelles la Nuit, Physiologie des Établissements
Nocturnes de Bruxelles” (for Englishmen of pleasure, published under the
title of “Brussels by Gas-light”), “Paris and Brussels after Dark,” “The
Gentleman’s Night Guide,” “Hamburgs galante Häuser bei Nacht und Nebel”
(“Hamburg’s Fast Houses by Night and Cloud”), “Das Galante Berlin,”
“Naturgeschichte der galanten Frauen in Berlin” (“Natural History of the
Fast Women of Berlin”), “Paris Intime et Mystérieux,” “Guide des
Plaisirs Mondains et des Plaisirs Secrets à Paris.” All these have
appeared during the last thirty years, some of them in several editions.
For Vienna, Buda-Pesth, St. Petersburg, Rome, Milan, Barcelona, Madrid,
Marseilles, Rotterdam, and New York, there also exist such guides to all
open and secret enjoyments.

In order to give an idea of the contents of such a guide to the sensual
life, I need merely enumerate the chapter headings of a book published
in 1905, and, as the Paris bookseller from whom I obtained it informed
me, immediately confiscated, but =none the less= still openly sold in
the bookshops of the Boulevards and the Rue de Rivoli. It bears the
title, “=Pour s’Amuser=. Guide du Viveur à Paris, par Victor Leca”
(Paris, 1905). In his versified dedication, the compiler writes:

   “Nous connaissons la Capitale,
    Et nous l’aimons avec ferveur;
    Ma science expérimentale
    A fait ce ‘Guide du Viveur.’”

  [“We know the Capital,
    And we love it with fervour;
    My experimental science
    Has made this Guide for the Man about Town.”]

And he states in the preface that all the various pleasures of Paris,
for the eye, the ear, and the sense of taste, lead ultimately to--woman,
in complete agreement with the definition which I gave above of the
sensual life of our time. All these pleasures concur in leading to
sexual indulgence--that is the end, the climax of every “amusement,” the
true _punctum saliens_ of the life of pleasure of our large towns. Thus
Leca, in his comprehensive and elaborate guide for men of pleasure, lays
the principal stress on announcements regarding eroticism and on
opportunities for erotic adventures in the individual places of
pleasure. He enumerates these in series: the theatre, especially the
“théâtres très légers,” the “cafés-concerts,” the dancing-saloons, the
hippodromes, and circuses, the cabarets of Montmartre, the Quartier
Latin, the women’s cafés, the boulevards, the halls of the central
market, the brothels (with an exact indication of the streets, and with
the numbers of the houses!!), the houses of accommodation (_maisons de
rendezvous_), the likenesses of a few “ladies of pleasure,” the arcades,
the parks and public gardens, the popular festivals, the races,
drives, public bathing establishments, cemeteries, museums, and
exhibitions--all, always, in relation to the feminine element.

These handbooks of the art of enjoyment are existing proofs, from the
point of view of the history of civilization, of the fact =that the
sexual impulse is, in every possible way, influenced, increased,
elaborated, and complicated, by the civilization of the present day=.
Especially the life of great towns, where the essence of modern
civilization is found in its most concentrated form, is a sexual
stimulant in the highest degree, with its haste and hunting, its
“nocturnal life,”[236] with its multiplicity of enjoyments for all the
senses, with its gastronomic and alcoholic excesses--in short, with its
new device that after work comes =pleasure=, and not repose.

In my “Sexual Life in England” (vol. ii., p. 261 _et seq._) I have
described the momentous influence of the mode of life upon sexuality,
and have proved how both in the old England and in the new the excessive
consumption of meat and of alcoholic beverages has unnaturally
stimulated the sexual impulse, and has conducted it into devious paths.

But of Germany also we may say that, apart from the times of “meat
famine,” we eat =too much meat= and drink =too much alcohol=, the former
especially among the higher classes, the latter among all classes of
society.

The sexually stimulating influence of luxurious feeding, which, for
example, Gabriele d’Annunzio describes in the early part of his romance
“Lust,” and which Tolstoi, in the “Kreutzer Sonata,” describes as the
principal cause of incitation to lasciviousness, is indeed a well-known
fact of experience; and the =later= in the day these heavy meals are
consumed, the more dangerous are they in respect of their influence on
the sexual impulse. I am fully convinced that the good old German custom
of taking the principal meal of the day at noon =is greatly preferable=
to the so-called “English dinner,” when the principal meal is deferred
to four or six o’clock. Luxurious suppers, or even midnight dinners,
such as at the present day are quite customary, must be definitely
regarded as aphrodisiac.

A far more momentous rôle is played by =alcohol= in the modern sensual
life. A writer who is not himself a strict teetotaller may yet feel it
his duty to lay all possible stress on this fact. Indeed, from the
standpoint of medical experience and observation, I am prepared to term
alcohol the =evil genius= of the modern sexual life, because in a
malicious and underhand manner it delivers its victim to sexual
misleading and corruption, to venereal infection, and to all the
consequences of casual sexual intercourse.[237]

This is not the place for a detailed discussion of the drink question,
or for stating the reasons for my own opinion, that complete abstinence
is a Utopian idea, and that the =moderate= and careful use of alcohol,
in quantities suited to the particular individuality, and at =suitable=
times, does no harm worth mentioning. Though this be so, I cannot fail
to recognize the deeply tragic rôle which the customary abuse of alcohol
plays in the sexual corruption of our time. As to the connexion between
alcohol and the sexual life, I must therefore speak at greater
length.[238]

The influence of alcohol upon the sexual life and upon the psyche is a
very peculiar one. Beer or wine, taken in =very moderate= quantities,
unquestionably give rise, in addition to their general psychical
stimulating influence, to sexual excitement of greater or less degree.
This sexual excitement, if more alcohol is now taken, endures =longer=
than the psychical excitement, which soon gives place to psychical
paralysis, to a discontinuance of the inhibitory influences proceeding
from the brain. It is in this unequal influence exercised upon the
purely sensual-sexual and upon the psychical processes, that the
peculiar danger of alcoholic excesses appears to me to depend. The
sexual stimulation produced by the first draught of alcohol continues at
a time when the man has already lost all control over reason and will,
and thus he becomes an easy prey to sexual seduction.

It is only in this way that we can explain the momentous influence of
alcohol, for we know, generally speaking, it is not a means for the
increase of sexual power. On the contrary, it increases voluptuousness
and sexual desire, but almost always hinders erection and delays the
sexual orgasm.

=Thus, a man under the influence of alcohol requires a longer time for
the completion of the act of sexual intercourse than a sober man=, and
in this way the danger of venereal infection is notably increased, for
the contact with the infecting person is considerably longer. I have
inquired of many patients who were infected during intercourse with
prostitutes after alcoholic excess, and was almost always informed that
the act of intercourse, owing to the well-known relative impotence
produced by alcohol, was exceptionally long in duration, and this
naturally gave more opportunity for excessive contact, for mechanical
injuries dependent upon increased friction, etc., and thus brought about
infection.

In medical literature, numerous cases are reported in which two men have
completed intercourse with an infected prostitute, shortly after one
another, and, remarkable to relate, one only became infected, whilst the
other remained healthy. More exact inquiry would show without doubt in
many such cases that the uninfected man was sober, in comparison with
the infected man, who must have been under the influence of alcohol.

In the case of women, with regard to whom there can be no question of
any specific effect upon sexual “potency,” the influence of alcohol in
exciting libido, in association with its withdrawal of all psychical
inhibitions, makes itself all the more manifest. Thus, to woman, who,
speaking generally, is far more intolerant of the drug than man, very
moderate enjoyment of alcohol entails dangers.[239]

The seducer, the procuress, and the prostitute are all familiar with the
above-described peculiar influence of alcohol upon the libido sexualis
and upon the psyche, and it is precisely this discriminative duplex
influence which is utilized by them. Not only in the so-called
“Animierkneipen”--that is, the drinking-saloons with women
attendants--and in the brothels does alcohol subserve this purpose, but
the street-walkers also await their victims by preference outside the
doors of the great restaurants, or after festival dinners, and keep an
eye especially on drunken men, because in the case of these, in whom all
self-command has been lost, they have, in every respect, an easy
prey.[240]

A man under the influence of alcohol is as easily led and as devoid of
will-power as a child. He is not particular in his choice: he generally
fails to notice whether the prostitute who accosts him is young or old,
pretty or ugly, clean or dirty; he follows her blindly, and in most
cases with results disastrous to his pocket and to his health. The
following case illustrates very clearly this loss of will produced in a
man by indulgence in alcohol:

An officer of high rank, a married man, in general a man of solid
repute, left the officers’ casino after a banquet late at night, very
tipsy, to seek his house. Suddenly he felt an arm thrust into his; it
was a prostitute who had noticed his condition, and she had turned it to
her own advantage. Without reflection and without exercise of will, he
allowed her to lead him to her dwelling, and there, still in a quite
apathetic condition, had intercourse with her, without taking any
precautions whatever. It was not until afterwards that he saw, being
then somewhat sobered, that he was in the company of an elderly
prostitute of the lowest class. His dread of venereal infection was
justified a few days later by the appearance of a urethral discharge. In
great alarm he consulted me. Microscopic examination of the urethral
secretion, and the cure which ensued in a few days, showed me that he
was suffering from a simple urethral catarrh, and not from gonorrhœa.

Such cases as this, however, do not always end so fortunately. It is
notorious, and has been proved by the researches of leading physicians
and medical statisticians, that the majority of venereal infections take
place under the influence of alcohol.

For this reason, =the continued increase in the consumption of alcohol
leads to a further diffusion of venereal diseases=. While our ancestors
consumed alcoholic beverages to excess only on Sundays and festival
days, at the present time spirits are freely consumed on weekdays--above
all, during the evenings. Brandy and beer have become everyday
beverages, especially beer, whose consumption increases year by year, so
that in the year 1898 the beer drunk in Germany was valued at
£100,000,000! Strümpell showed that labourers earning three marks a day
are accustomed to spend eighty pfennige--that is, more than one-third of
their income--on beer; these are by no means notorious drinkers, but
steady fellows who only follow the general “custom.” The part played by
beer in Germany is played by absinthe in France; the well-known
“apéritif” to which prostitutes of Paris so often invite their male
clients is in most cases absinthe. Wine, as the experienced Fiaux says,
is merely an “ideal drink” in the dreams of the ordinary Parisian
prostitute.

We shall return in subsequent chapters of this work to the consideration
of alcohol in its relations to the sexual life in general, and to
abnormal sexual manifestations in particular. We shall also have
occasion to speak of the momentous rôle played by alcohol in the
causation of offences against morality. Baer goes so far as to assert
that alcohol is the cause in 77 per cent. of such offences.

Here we shall only once more insist upon the high degree to which the
excessive enjoyment of alcohol assists in seduction and favours wild
love--that is, sexual intercourse free from all choice and all
regulation. This is to be seen with especial clearness at popular
festivals and other occasions giving rise to alcoholic excesses; and the
effects are later shown by the resulting increase in the number of
illegitimate births.

Magnus Hirschfeld relates that when he was a student he spent one
Christmas Eve in the company of a professor of medicine in Breslau.
Among the guests were two of the maternity assistants, and first one,
then the other, was called away to attend confinements. An old physician
who was present thereupon remarked: “Yes, yes; these are the children of
the Emperor’s birthday.” Hirschfeld, who asked for an explanation of
this incomprehensible phrase, was told that on Christmas Night the lying
in hospitals were overcrowded, because then the illegitimate children
were born which had been procreated nine months earlier, on March 22,
the birthday of the old Emperor, celebrated as a popular holiday.

The increase in wild love, in sexual intercourse dependent upon the
inclination of the moment and upon chance, with a rapid succession of
different individuals--this increase, which is associated in the way
above described with the sensual life, is a characteristic of our own
time.

In addition to prostitution, which we shall treat in a separate chapter,
the so-called “=intimacy=” constitutes the true nucleus of wild love.
When those who support coercive marriage speak of free love, they do not
mean the free love, the higher individual love, which we have described
in the previous chapter, but they always refer to the latter-day
“intimacy,” which, in fact, does involve the most serious dangers, alike
from the physical and from the moral point of view; for, on the one
hand, the “intimacy” forms the principal intermediate agent in the wider
diffusion of venereal diseases, and, on the other hand, this new form
of sexual relationship has above all introduced the element of
hypocrisy, lying, and mistrust, which poisons love to-day, separates the
sexes continually more each from the other, and gives rise to that
tragic =sexual hate=, enmity of men on the part of women, and misogyny
on the part of men, which is also peculiarly characteristic of our own
time.

The gradual differentiation of the originally ideal intimacy, to the
wild love of the present day, has been admirably described and
psychologically elucidated by Hellpach in his short work on “Love and
Amatory Life in the Nineteenth Century.”

In this admirable characterization of the “intimacy,” the fact is first
established, that it is above all and through and through a product of
great towns, and consequently that it is closely connected with the
capitalistic evolution which compels thousands of young girls to earn
their own living, so that from them are especially recruited the great
human class of shop-girls, and all the allied varieties, so typical of
large towns. This is the soil in which the “intimacy” naturally
develops. [Hellpach writes first of conditions of a generation ago, and
then passes on thirty years to our own day.]

  “By day these girls were occupied. When the evening came, bringing
  with it the greatly desired closing of the shop, the prospect opened
  to them of going home to poor surroundings, often enough of taking
  part in painful family scenes, then going to bed, and the next morning
  early returning to business. This was their life, day in, day out.
  Here was no very pleasant calendar, especially when the way from the
  places of business to their home led through streets crowded with
  brilliantly lighted beer saloons, cafes, theatres, and concert-halls.
  And all this during the years of sexual blossoming, when the ardent
  sensual desire for the first time ran through all the nerves! Who can
  wonder that the longing became absolutely fiery, after all the work of
  the day, to enjoy a little share of all the glories of the great town
  which lay extended before their gaze? After the confinement of the
  shop, not to return straightway to the confinement of the family, but
  to learn to know a little about the freedom of pleasure--and this
  under the most entrancing form of a little love affair?

  “And the social conditions were such as to make it possible for this
  yearning to be fulfilled. Were there not thousands of young shopmen,
  hundreds of students, clerks, non-commissioned officers, who would
  rather walk about in the evening with a girl on their arm than alone?
  Prostitutes would be little suited for such companionship. Besides, it
  would not be always the young man’s intention to proceed to an
  extremity, to have a night of love following the evening of amusement;
  the young man simply was in the mood to walk about with the girl, to
  gossip, perhaps to embrace and kiss her a little.

  “Here was the beginning. The young man accosted a shop-girl,
  accompanied her a little way, made an appointment for the following
  evening; then he went a little further; he saw how pleased the little
  one was; the _tutoyer_ and the kiss followed. So it went on for a few
  evenings, and the young man felt that the happy girl was quite as
  eager as he himself was to take the last step; and when this was done,
  there was the “intimacy” complete. And in all respects it appeared
  preferable to prostitution; it was inexpensive, unassuming, very
  pleasant, and--involved no risk to health. Moreover, to both this
  amatory life did not seem a ‘necessary evil’ on the contrary, it was a
  glorious pleasure, and there were only two little shadows in the
  bright picture: the fear of having a child, and the thought of
  separation. Moreover, this cloud troubled the man only; girls then, as
  to-day, thought very little about matters so remote.

  “In the development of the ‘intimacy’ during the last thirty years,
  many details have undergone change, but the picture as a whole has
  been but little affected. The young shop-girl of to-day does not need
  a long courting; she enters her business already fully aware that she
  will soon be ‘intimate’ with some one. At first she will always prefer
  to choose a man of whom it is possible to assume that he may marry
  her. A young shopman, a non-commissioned officer, will, therefore, be
  most in demand. It is not till later, when resignation comes, and the
  only remaining wish is for amusement, that University students have
  the preference; they are jollier, more entertaining, and the girl is
  vain about their position. That has all remained just as it used to
  be; only thirty years ago there were many shop-girls who,
  notwithstanding all their desire, remained untouched. For the girl
  brought up in the atmosphere of the lower middle classes there was a
  certain ill-odour about free sexual intercourse. =This has completely
  passed away.= The girls of this stratum, who, with open eyes,
  withstand all allurements, might be counted on the fingers. At the
  present day, these ‘intimacies’ extend deeply into the middle classes
  of society.

  “As regards the men, there has certainly been one marked change. The
  illusion that sexual intercourse with an ‘intimate’ offered any
  guarantee against the danger of venereal disease has now long been
  dispelled. We are to-day confronted with the fact that the intimacy is
  the focus of venereal infection to a far greater extent[241] than is
  actual prostitution. In order to understand this, we must glance at
  the dissolution of the intimacy.

  “We have already pointed out that in the German ‘intimacy’ there has
  never occurred a thorough development of a life like that of the
  Parisian ‘grisette’; and there will be no change in this respect
  within a time which we can at present foresee. Even in Berlin there
  are not many dwellings in which the landlord would tolerate the visits
  of ladies of doubtful reputation on any account whatever. But even
  those who let quarters on easy terms, or, as the student calls them,
  ‘storm-free’ rooms, would never allow their lodger to entertain a
  woman day after day, and could not do so without running the risk of
  being suspected by the police of procurement. Thus, the only thing
  that unites the two parties in the intimacy is in almost all cases
  sexual intercourse. The characteristic of grisette-love, the prose of
  the life in common, day after day, is hardly ever experienced in the
  ‘intimacy.’ =In consequence of this, on the man’s side satiety very
  readily ensues.= New impressions enchain and stimulate him. He breaks
  off the intimacy, and this is not usually done with tenderness. The
  possibilities are numerous, but the only decent way, the open verbal
  communication of the fact, is probably the rarest. He breaks off the
  intimacy without a word, and as far as he is concerned the matter is
  at an end; he is richer by an agreeable experience, and after a while
  begins to look round once more.

  “The girl also. But for her, this dissolution of the intimacy is very
  often the first step upon a very steep downward path. At first there
  perhaps ensues a short period of bitterness, but the sexual impulse
  makes light of all other activities; a new intimacy begins. And now,
  gradually, the idea gains ground in her mind that a change in love is,
  after all, not such a bad thing. The second breach is borne with
  equanimity; =and very soon it is by no means rare for the girl to
  limit her love associations to a few days, and ultimately, as a matter
  of daily custom, to seek fresh gratification with a new associate=. It
  is not yet professional prostitution; psychologically also there is
  still a difference. There is still sensual perception at the root of
  her actions, and of such a strength, increasing owing to excess in
  sexual intercourse, that the personality of the partner in the sexual
  act becomes almost a matter of indifference. But now an economic
  difficulty commonly intervenes: discharge from her position, expulsion
  from her parents’ house, either or both being due to her dissipated
  life, with its heedlessness and the resulting dislike to hard
  work--and then the avalanche falls. Hunger drives her to do that for
  payment which hitherto she has done only for the gratification of her
  own desires. Prostitution has one victim the more.

  “But the whole period between the beginning of the second intimacy and
  her enrolment in the list of prostitutes by the police offers to all
  her lovers the greatest possible danger of venereal infection. =For
  the majority of girls actually become infected in their very first
  intimacy.= The explanation of this goes back to the time in which the
  intimacy first began to become fashionable, and in which the control
  of prostitutes with regard to their condition of health was even more
  defective, and the safeguarding against the danger of venereal
  infection was even less understood than at the present day. In the
  majority of cases the young men of the large towns were infected in
  their very first experience of love; for it was with prostitutes that
  they always sought their first sexual gratification, as is still
  customary at the present day. For the inexperienced youth this course
  is easier, making, as it does, fewer demands on his adroitness, and
  none at all on his seductive skill; whereas in the formation of an
  ‘intimacy’ these qualities are somewhat in demand. Later, when he had
  had enough of prostitution, he sought an ‘intimate,’ and since at that
  time the treatment of gonorrhœa was still extremely defective, he
  promptly infected his partner in the intimacy. =In this manner the
  girls engaged in intimacies, since they first became fashionable, have
  been systematically infected.=”

Next to =prostitution=, the =intimacy= is the great focus of sexual
infection; and wild love, from the psychological and ethical points of
view, involves the same danger as prostitution. The frequent changes,
the multiplicity of sexual intercourse in intimacies, allows no deeper
spiritual relationships to be formed; thus, the girls are debased to
become the simple objects of physical sensuality, and they are forced
more and more to depend on the financially stronger men; thus, they
rapidly become partial or complete prostitutes. To them now the sensual
life, the pursuit of pleasure, is the principal thing, not love.
Venereal infection is soon superadded, to deprave them more thoroughly.
Still worse is the corruption of the world of men, who transfer to the
intimacy the practices they have learned in their association with
prostitutes; but, above all, they come finally to seek and to desire the
rude sexual act solely for its own sake, without feeling the need for
any deeper spiritual association. Hence results the fugitive character
of these sexual relationships, the frequent changes on both sides, and
the end--=lies, mistrust, hatred=.

Belief in and hope for true love disappear for ever; there remains only
the cold, desolate, unspeakably embittered disillusionment, the
=distrust= of the other sex which is so characteristic of our time.
Never before were there so many woman-haters and man-haters on
principle. In the intercourse between the sexes, neither believes the
other any longer; and on both sides the “intimacy” is entered on without
any illusions, the sole aim of both parties being to satisfy in the
intensest possible way their desire for enjoyment and their sensual
lusts.

Prostitution can destroy no illusions, for its true character is
manifest at the first glance; but the modern intimacy has become the
grave of love, and has given rise to a new corruption of the sexual
life, which appears almost more dangerous than the old corruption
dependent on prostitution. It has, moreover, become a second, and not
less dangerous, focus of venereal infection, to the diffusion of which
it is extraordinarily favourable.

He, therefore, who wishes to take part in the fight against the moral
degeneration of our amatory life, and to assist in the campaign against
venereal diseases, =must attack and endeavour to suppress the modern
development of the life of “intimacy” just as energetically as he
attacks prostitution=.

The =wild love= of the present day, “extra-conjugal” sexual intercourse
(which, as I cannot too often repeat, has nothing whatever to do with
“free love”), and =coercive marriage=, are the true causes of sexual
corruption. They are intimately associated one with the other. The
social, economic, and spiritual civilization of the present day demands
free love, with which neither coercive marriage nor wild love is
compatible.

Neither for prostitution, nor for the wild extra-conjugal sexual
intercourse of our time, can any justification be found from the point
of view of medicine, racial hygiene, or sociology. In their nature both
lead to the same end: the death and destruction of all individual love,
of all the finer activities of love, by which the spiritual nature of
man is so greatly enriched; and they both give rise to a continuous
increase and rapid diffusion of venereal diseases.

The salvation of our people is not to be found in the “recommendation”
of extra-conjugal sexual intercourse for all those who are not in a
position to marry--and the number of these grows from day to day--but it
is to be found in the =reform of marriage=, in a =freer= configuration
of the amatory life, in connexion with which we can confidently trust
Ibsen’s saying in the “Lady from the Sea”:

  “We can’t get away from this--that a voluntary promise is to the full
  as binding as a marriage.”

There shall not and must not be “=sexual freedom=,”[242] but there must
be “freedom of love.”

When anyone asks me whether I should advise him to indulge in
“extra-conjugal sexual intercourse,” as a physician and a man of science
I am compelled to answer with a bald “No,” because I cannot undertake
the responsibility of the consequences of such advice.

Fortunately, alike in the world of women and in the world of men, there
manifests itself an increasing disapproval of wild love as it exhibits
itself in the modern “intimacies.” There are already numerous intimacies
which closely resemble free love, and in which all the conditions of
free love are fulfilled, in respect of duration, of a profound spiritual
relationship, a sense of sexual responsibility alike physical and
moral, and in the joyful acceptance of the consequences in respect of
offspring.

We must, however, continually keep up the fight against wild love as the
enduring associate of prostitution, to which it constitutes the bridge
or stage of transition. Therein lies its greatest danger. This we shall
recognize more clearly in the ensuing chapter, in which we turn to
consider the subject of =prostitution=.

  [219] In the titular heading to this chapter, throughout the chapter,
  and in most cases throughout the book, the German word _Verführung_
  has been translated as _seduction_. _Verführung_ means “leading
  astray,” and one of the commonest uses of the term is to denote
  _sexual_ leading astray--the _seduction_ of a woman by a man. But in
  some cases _Verführung_, like the English _seduction_, is used in its
  more primitive and wider signification. The context will suffice to
  show the sense in which the word is employed.--TRANSLATOR.

  [220] Thus, at the present day, in quite small country towns, we find
  variety theatres and low music-halls; and with these, prostitutes are
  commonly introduced into the town, so that the wild love, which was
  previously free from danger, now becomes a focus of venereal
  infection.

  [221] Willy Hellpach, “Our Sensual Life and Venereal Diseases,”
  published in the “Reports of the German Society for the Suppression of
  Venereal Diseases,” 1905, vol. iii., Nos. 5 and 6, pp. 103-105.

  [222] Of this work there recently appeared an excellent German
  translation, admirably modernized in blank verse by Karl Ettlinger,
  “Ovid’s Art of Love: a Modern Translation.” (An English translation of
  Ovid’s “Art of Love,” revised by Charles W. Ryle, was published in
  1907 by Sisley.--TRANSLATOR.)

  [223] Hilarii Drudonis, “Practica Artis Amandi” (Amsterdam, 1652).

  [224] Paris, 1659.

  [225] Paris, 1775.

  [226] J. F. C. Manso, “Die Kunst zu Lieben” (Berlin, 1794).

  [227] Henry Beyle (Stendhal), “On Love.”

  [228] Paul Bourget, “Physiologie de l’Amour Moderne.”

  [229] Armand Silvestre, “Le Petit Art d’Aimer” (Paris, 1897).

  [230] Catulle Mendés, “L’Art d’Aimer” (Paris).

  [231] Robert Hessen, “Das Glück in der Liebe: Eine technische Studie”
  (Stuttgart, 1899).

  [232] Hjalmar Kjölenson, “Die Erschliessung des Liebesglückes”
  (Leipzig, 1905).

  [233] An exhaustive study of the history and literature of the _ars
  amandi_, by the author of the present work, is in course of
  preparation, and will appear shortly.

  [234] _Cf._ regarding masterful erotics, also the exposition of Georg
  Hirth in “The Ways to Love,” p. 563.

  [235] S. Kierkegaard, “Entweder--Oder. Ein Lebensfragment,” pp.
  221-311. German translation by O. Gleib (Dresden and Leipzig, 1904).

  [236] “The sun,” says Grillparzer in his “Diary,” “is hostile to
  voluptuousness. But the artificial sun of our nocturnal illumination
  in our large town, has the opposite effect.”

  [237] The old proverb says: “From the two V’s, Vinum (wine) and Venus
  (woman), there arises a big W, Weh (woe or pain).”

  [238] _Cf._, in addition to the great works on the subject of alcohol,
  the special monograph by B. Laquer, “A Lecture on Alcohol and Sexual
  Hygiene,” published in the “Reports of the German Society for the
  Suppression of Venereal Diseases,” 1904, vol. ii., Nos. 3 and 4, pp.
  56-63; W. Hellpach, _op. cit._, pp. 100-102; Magnus Hirschfeld, “The
  Influence of Alcohol on the Sexual Life,” Berlin, 1905; Magnus
  Hirschfeld, “Alcohol and Family Life,” Berlin-Charlottenburg, 1906;
  Otto Lang, “Alcohol and Crime,” Basel; Oscar Rosenthal, “Alcohol and
  Prostitution,” Berlin, 1906; G. Rosenfeld, “Alcohol and the Sexual
  Life,” published in the _Journal for the Suppression of Venereal
  Diseases_, 1905, pp. 321-335.

  [239] It has been established by Bonhoeffer, Hoppe, A. H. Hübner, and
  others, that chronic alcoholism constitutes an important cause of
  prostitution in the case of the so-called “late prostitutes”--that is
  to say, in those women who do not commence a life of professional
  prostitution at puberty, but usually after the age of twenty-five
  years. _Cf._ Artur Hermann Hübner, “Prostitutes in Relation to
  Criminal Jurisdiction,” published in _Monatsschr. für
  Kriminalpsychologie_, edited by G. Aschaffenburg, 1907, p. 5.

  [240] At the great public dinner which, in 1890, the town of Berlin
  gave in the Rathaus to the members of the International Medical
  Congress, and at which 4,000 persons consumed 15,382 bottles of wine,
  22 hectolitres (484 gallons) of beer, and 300 bottles of brandy, there
  were witnessed in and outside the Rathaus the most disgusting scenes
  of drunkenness. “As the blowflies gather round a piece of carrion, so
  in the street in front of the Rathaus there had gathered a swarm of
  prostitutes, who found a rich booty among the drunken, staggering
  guests” (_cf._ Rosenfeld, _op. cit._, p. 325).--A striking example of
  the manner in which alcohol sometimes completely annihilates every
  æsthetic perception is reported by E. Kraepelin (“The Psychiatric
  Duties of the State,” p. 6; Jena, 1900): “A number of students were
  infected by a prostitute, who from early youth had been weak-minded,
  and who was suffering from both lupus of the nose and recent
  syphilis.”

  [241] It is not yet quite so bad as this. But the number of venereal
  infections that occur in consequence of wild love, and of free sexual
  intercourse in these relations of “intimacy,” is continually on the
  increase.

  [242] Sexual freedom--that is to say, the formal organization of
  sexual promiscuity--was demanded by a certain Dr. Roderich Hellmann in
  a book which has now become very rare, because it was confiscated
  immediately after publication. Its title was “Sexual Freedom: a
  Philosophic Attempt to Increase Human Happiness” (Berlin, 1878). The
  author demands that immediately after puberty “the sexual organs shall
  have the opportunity of a regulated activity,” and that it shall now
  be allowed to persons of both sexes “to indulge in sexual intercourse
  as much as they please,” of course, with the avoidance of injury to
  health and of pregnancy. This remarkable freak proceeds to demand that
  public lavatories shall be done away with, so that persons of both
  sexes shall relieve themselves freely in one another’s presence in the
  open street, and, with equal freedom, shall display their sexual
  organs to one another for the purpose of sexual allurement!!




