CHAPTER III

THE SECONDARY PHENOMENA OF HUMAN LOVE (REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS, SEXUAL
IMPULSE, SEXUAL ACT)


“_Sexual passion is a matter of universal experience; and speaking
broadly and generally, we may say it is a matter on which it is quite
desirable that every adult at some time or other should have actual
experience._”--EDWARD CARPENTER.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER III

  Origin and purpose of the reproductive organs -- Progressive
  differentiation of these organs -- Original identity of their
  rudiments in the two sexes -- Weininger’s theory of the intermixture
  of the sexual elements -- This theory anticipated by Heinse --
  Bisexuality -- The actual significance of bisexuality trifling --
  Phylogenetic explanation of the organs of sexual congress -- Bölsche’s
  three problems -- The “aperture-problem” -- Connexion between the
  genital aperture and the urinary passage -- Between the genital
  aperture and the anus -- Significance in relation to certain sexual
  aberrations -- The “member-problem” -- Earlier modes of fixation
  during coitus -- Sucking and biting -- The action of the limbs (the
  embrace) -- The penis -- Its various forms -- The penis-bone -- The
  free character of the human penis -- The descent of the testicles --
  The feminine rudiment of the penis -- Its original function rendered
  superfluous by the further evolution of the sexual orifice --
  Transformation into the clitoris and the labia minora -- The
  “libido-problem” -- Voluptuousness a phenomenon of distance-love --
  Questionable specificity of voluptuousness -- Theory of the “sexual
  sense” and of the “sexual cells” -- Relations of voluptuousness to
  tickling and to painful sensations -- A special variety of contact
  stimuli -- Localization to the genital organs -- The sexual impulse --
  Relative independence of the impulse from the reproductive glands --
  Genesis of sexual excitement -- Stage of prelibido (sexual tension) --
  Terminal libido (sexual gratification) -- Symptoms and early
  appearance of prelibido -- Causes of sexual tension -- Freud’s
  chemical theory of sexual tension -- The act of sexual intercourse --
  Roubaud’s description of coitus -- Demeanour of woman in coitus --
  Magendie on this subject -- Dr. Theopold’s observations --
  Physiological phenomena associated with coitus -- Sadistic and
  masochistic elements -- The normal position during sexual intercourse
  -- Figuræ Veneris -- Significance of the normal position in relation
  to civilization.


CHAPTER III

As the progressive evolution of the multicellular organism continued,
and there occurred an increasing differentiation of the individual
portions of the body, it became necessary that the very simple process
of reproduction of the unicellular organism (by simple cell-division or
by conjugation) should, in the multicellular organisms of the metazoa,
be ensured and facilitated by the development of new apparatus. This was
all the more necessary because, owing to the differentiation of the
other organs, the originally independent reproductive elements became
more and more dependent upon the parent organism, and lost their former
capacity for obtaining nourishment by means of their own activity. Hence
it became necessary that the period of time elapsing between the moment
when the reproductive cells were freed from the parent organism and the
moment in which they coalesced to form a new individual should be
shortened to a minimum. This purpose is subserved by apparatus which
renders possible the =secure= and =rapid= coalescence of the two
reproductive elements, having the form of special =excretory canals=
with contractile walls, through which the two sexual elements pass.
These are the “=copulatory organs=,” by means of which the distance
between the two loving individuals is abridged. According to the
exhaustive investigations of Ferdinand Simon, the perfection and
differentiation of these conducting canals proceeds _pari passu_ with
the higher development of the organism.

Simultaneously therewith proceeds the differentiation of the proper
internal reproductive organs, the rudiments of which are =identical= in
the two sexes. A portion of these primitively identical structures
undergoes further development in the male, another portion undergoes
further development in the female, whilst in both sexes rudiments of the
earlier condition are retained, and these bear witness to the primitive
state in which =both= reproductive glands were present in a single
individual (hermaphroditism). In this sense Weininger’s theory
applies--viz., that there is no absolutely male and no absolutely female
individual, that in every man there is something of woman, and in every
woman something of man, and that between the two various transitional
forms, sexual “intermediate stages,” exist. Therefore, according to this
view, every individual has in his composition so many fractions “man”
and so many fractions “woman,” and according to the preponderance of
one set of elements or the other, he must be assigned to one or the
other sex. This theory, which Weininger regards as his own discovery,
=is by no means new=, and already finds a place in Heinse’s
“Ardinghello,” where we read:

  “I find it therefore necessary to assume the existence in Nature of
  masculine and feminine elements. =That man is nearest perfection who
  is composed entirely of masculine elements, and that woman perhaps is
  nearest perfection who contains only so many feminine elements as to
  be able to remain woman; whilst that man is the worst who contains
  only so many masculine elements as to qualify for the title of man.=”

Magnus Hirschfeld, to whom this noteworthy passage in Heinse’s book
appears to be unknown, has recently, in his valuable monographs, “Sexual
Stages of Transition” (Leipzig, 1905) and “The Nature of Love” (Leipzig,
1906), thoroughly investigated these relations, and quotes, among
others, sayings of Darwin and Weismann, according to which the latent
presence of opposite sexual characters in every sexually differentiated
bion must be regarded as a normal arrangement. Unquestionably the widely
diffused phenomenon of “psychical hermaphroditism,” or “spiritual
bisexuality,” is connected with the physical facts just enumerated, and
provides us with the key for the understanding of the nature of
homosexuality. Both these states--the physical and the mental--may be
referred to primitive conditions of sexuality. They cannot play any
serious part in the future course of human evolution, of which the
progressive differentiation of the sexes is so marked a characteristic.
In contrast with this differentiation, these rudimentary sexual
conditions are practically devoid of significance. Suggestion, indeed,
the influence of momentary tendencies of the time and of transient
mental states, may temporarily deceive us. And when, for example,
Hirschfeld maintains that in the central nervous system of women the
more masculine, rational qualities, and in the central nervous system of
men the more feminine, emotional qualities, are respectively on the
increase, we must answer, in the first place, that this is not generally
true, and, in the second place, that, in so far as it is true, it is a
passing phenomenon, which has already provoked a powerful reaction in
the =opposite= direction.[13] The exuviæ of a dead condition cannot
again be vitalized.

The original purpose of the organs of sexual congress is, then, to
safeguard and to facilitate, in the more complicated conditions peculiar
to multicellular organisms, the conjugation of the two reproductive
cells. They do not exist, as Eduard von Hartmann assumes, as a mere lure
to voluptuousness, to induce man to continue the practice of sexual
congress, purely instinctive in his animal ancestors, but now endangered
by the development of the higher type of consciousness. For animals
without organs of sexual congress also experience a voluptuous sensation
at the instant of the sexual orgasm and of procreation.

The history of evolution alone solves the riddle of the origin of the
organs of sexual congress, and renders their purpose clear to us. In a
most ingenious manner, W. Bölsche distinguishes three problems in this
history of the genital organs: the “=aperture-problem=,” the
“=member-problem=,” and the “=libido-problem=.”

The first problem relates to the character and the position of the two
apertures from which the sexual products, the reproductive cells, issue;
the second relates to the exact mutual adaptation of the male and the
female reproductive apertures; the third relates to the impulse to the
intimate apposition of the genital apertures in consequence of a
powerful nervous stimulus.

The most remarkable fact that we encounter in our consideration of the
first problem--the “aperture-problem”--is the intimate association
between the sexual aperture and the excretory canal of the urinary
apparatus both in woman and in man--in the latter, indeed, the
association is more pronounced. There seems to be a sort of parsimony on
the part of Nature to combine so closely these two excretory tubes of
the urine and of the products of sexual activity. Phylogenetically,
indeed, the reproductive products originally passed with the urine
freely into the open, and it was there that their conjugation took
place. Among certain worms still existing at the present day we find
this “urine-love.” Later, the genital canal became separated from the
urinary canal, but the two tubes remained partly united at their
outlets, opening side by side at the same part of the body. In man,
indeed, the urethra still subserves the double purpose of the excretion
of urine and the emission of semen. In woman the two excretory apertures
are distinct, but they open in close proximity into the genital fissure
between the thighs.

The intimate connexion which thus obtains between the urinary and the
reproductive organs is not without significance for the understanding of
certain aberrations of the _libido sexualis_. The same is true of the
relations between the orifice of the genital passage and the similarly
adjacent aperture of the large intestine, the anus. “Anus,” or, better,
“cloaca love,” plays a part, indeed, in many fishes, amphibia, and
reptiles; in these the act of procreation and the excretion of urine and
fæces all take place by way of the cloaca. Among the mammals, at an
early stage of phylogenetic development the intestine became completely
separated from the sexual rudiment and the sexual excretory passages;
and it is only in the proximity of the respective orifices that we find
an indication of the primitive association. The act of pæderasty reminds
us of the same fact.

The “aperture-problem” itself leads us, in the course of progressive
development, to the “member-problem”--that is to say, to the problem of
the more accurate apposition of the two reproductive apertures. The
penis, by its introduction into the body of a member of the opposite
sex, acts as a means for the shortening of distance-love; it serves for
the fixation, for the clamping together, of the copulating pair, which
in earlier stages of animal life was effected by sucking and biting; for
example, in birds, who for the most part lack an actual penis, the cock
holds the hen firmly with his beak during intercourse, and the sucking
and biting which often occur in human beings in the sexual act persist
as a reminiscence of these relations. In various vertebrates other means
of fixation are employed: by the shape of fins, of arms, or of legs, a
close “embrace” is rendered possible; finally, the evolution of a
special member for sexual purposes closed the long series of means of
ensuring union. Originally no more than a peg or a spine, in man the
penis is first developed into the form of an absolutely free limb. Dogs,
beasts of prey, rodents, bats, and apes, have a strong bone in the
organ, the so-called “penis-bone.” In man this bone is lacking; the
penis has become entirely free. W. Bölsche writes:

  “In relation to the large, heavy, massive trunk and thighs, the
  sharply individualized, independent, mobile penis appears as a kind of
  spiritualized central point; as it were, a finger or a small third
  hand to the trunk, appearing to the eye to stand in rhythmical
  relation with the hands, right and left.”

In phylogenetic parallelism with the development of the penis, proceeds
(from the marsupials upwards) the _descensus testiculorum_, the descent
of the male reproductive glands, the testicles, until they attain their
final position in the scrotum, beneath the penis. Here also we can
recognize the principle of “limb-mobility,” mentally refined mobility.

In the clitoris woman also possesses a rudiment of a primitive penis.
By the apposition of the two limbs, a more complete and rapid
conjunction of the reciprocal sexual products must have been effected.
But the further development of the large sexual aperture of the female
checked the progressive development of this primitive penis, made it to
some extent superfluous, since now, by the adaptation of the male penis
to the female sexual aperture, a sufficient internal fixation in the act
of copulation was rendered possible. Thus the female penis came to
subserve other purposes: a portion of it formed the labia minora;
another portion, the upper, the clitoris, the name of which sufficiently
indicates the fact that, like the penis of the male, its function is
connected with the voluptuous sense.

This leads us to the third and last problem, the “libido-problem.” In
the human species voluptuous pleasure is almost completely divorced from
the process of “fusion-love,” the coalescence of spermatozoon and ovum,
and has for the most part become a phenomenon of “distance-love.” It
appears extremely doubtful if there is anything specific about the
voluptuous sensation--whether there is, in fact, a special “sexual
sense.” Magnus Hirschfeld assumes the existence of peculiar “sexual
cells,” of receptive areas for sexual stimuli, furnished with a sensory
substance endowed with a peculiar specific sensibility. He regards love
and the sexual impulse as “a molecular movement or force of a quite
specific quality, streaming through the nervous system,” and accompanied
by a quite peculiar sensation, or pleasure-tone, arising from a
condition of excitement of the sexual cells. But, as we have already
pointed out, the voluptuous sensation is merely a special case of
general cutaneous sensibility; it is very closely allied with the
cutaneous sensation of tickling; properly speaking, it is no more than
an =excessively powerful tickling=.[14] It has also intimate relations
with the sensation of pain.[15] The structure and position of the
nerve-terminal apparatus of the genital organs, by means of which
voluptuous pleasure is rendered possible, exhibit great similarity with
the touch corpuscles and sensory end-organs of other parts of the skin.
In the sexual orgasm the general cutaneous sensation increases to so
high a degree of intensity, becomes so powerful, that for an instant
=consciousness= is actually lost. The association of a momentary loss of
consciousness with the acme of sensation indicates the summit of sexual
pleasure--it is an abandonment, a dissolution, of individual
personality.

Voluptuous pleasure plays its part in the human species entirely in the
sphere of distance-love. Bölsche has very beautifully described its
significance in this relation:

  “All-embracing in its path towards the attainment of its final aim is
  the love-life also of the great cell societies, such as you yourself
  are, such as I myself am, such as your beloved is. These higher, more
  advanced individuals saw one another, approached one another, heard
  one another, perceived one another through a hundred external media;
  they became spiritually fused, and attained a condition of wonderful
  harmony--their principal body walls came at length into immediate
  contact--they pressed one another’s hands, they embraced one another,
  kissed one another--they drew ever closer and closer together; to a
  certain extent the body of one penetrated the body of the other. In
  all this, =their= love undertook the =whole= affair, undertook it a
  thousand times more effectually than the individual cells seeking
  conjunction could ever have done; undertook it for the sake of the
  reproductive cells hidden deep within their bodies. All the
  pleasurable and painful feelings of love undulated and surged for so
  long a time throughout the entire organism with intense force; these
  feelings agitated the entire superior, comprehensive, individual
  personality, searched its every depth with stormy emotions of desire,
  complaint, and exultation.

  “But at a precise instant this all came to a halt. The seminal cells
  were ejaculated; one of them conjugated with the ovum; the hidden
  inward life of a tiny separate organism began within the body of one
  of the over-individuals. The last separation was bridged, and the true
  cell-fusion took place. But when this happened, the immediate
  relationship with the love-life of the great individual man and woman
  was already completely severed. The bodily act of love was already
  long at an end; its increase to a climax and its fulfilment had long
  passed by.

  “The instant of supreme voluptuous pleasure, which in the case of
  unicellular beings naturally occurs at the moment of complete
  coalescence, must in the case of the multicellular organisms just as
  naturally be =transferred= to another stage, as it were, in the great
  path of love.

  “To an earlier stage.

  “To that stage of distance-love which is =nearest= to the true act of
  fusion of the reproductive elements. To the farthest point, that is to
  say, attained by the great containers of the genuine unicellular
  sexual elements (themselves capable of the act of ultimate
  coalescence)--the farthest point =attained= by the multicellular
  over-individuals.”

This farthest point is an =act of contact=.[16] We have already learnt
to regard the skin as a projection of the nervous system, and we have
come to understand the significance of the skin in the sphere of
sexuality. The other senses which have arisen from the skin must also be
taken into account in this matter. In the genital organs, this touch
stimulus assumes a quite peculiar character; it gives rise here to the
proper voluptuous sensation which is associated with the discharge of
the reproductive products. In man this association is most distinctly
manifest. The instant of most intense sexual pleasure coincides with
ejaculation, with the expulsion of the semen. The character of this
voluptuous sensation can hardly be defined; in part, it is like an
intense tickling sensation, but, on the other hand, it has an
unmistakable relationship to pain. Later, in another connexion, we shall
consider this interesting point at greater length. Not inaptly the
sexual act has also been compared with sneezing; the preliminary
tickling sensation, with the subsequent discharge of nervous tension, in
the form of a sneeze, have, in fact, a notable similarity with the
processes occurring in the sexual act.

The sexual act depends upon the occurrence of certain stimuli which are
connected with the complete development of the internal and external
genital organs and of the reproductive glands. The time when this
development occurs in man and woman is known as =puberty=. The sum of
these stimuli is known as the “=sexual impulse=.” Whereas in the lower
animals the sexual impulse is for the most part connected with the
activity of the reproductive glands, in the human species, in
association with the preponderating significance of the brain, it has
attained a relative independence of the reproductive glands; whilst the
mind has come to influence the sexual impulse very powerfully. Generally
speaking, sexual excitement is produced in three ways: first, by the
activity of the reproductive glands; secondly, by peripheral excitement
derived from the so-called “erogenic” areas; and thirdly, by central
psychical influences. S. Freud has recently studied the relations
between these three causes of sexual excitement, of the sexual impulse,
and has very properly distinguished two stages--the stage of
“=prelibido=” (sexual desire), and the stage of the proper sexual
“=libido=” (sexual gratification).

The stage of prelibido has distinctly the character of tension; the
stage of libido, the character of relief. The feeling of tension during
the prelibido finds expression mentally as well as physically by a
series of changes in the genital organs. The tension is further
increased by the stimulation of the various erogenic zones. If this
prelibido increases beyond a certain degree, the characteristic
potential energy of sexual tension is transformed into the relief-giving
kinetic energy of the terminal libido, during which the evacuation of
the reproductive products occurs.

Prelibido, which is especially characterized by engorgement, swelling,
and erection of the corpora cavernosa of the male and female
reproductive organs, occurring as a reflex from the spinal cord, may be
experienced long before puberty; it is much more independent of
processes occurring in the reproductive glands than is the terminal
libido, or sexual gratification, which in the male accompanies
ejaculation of the semen, and is associated with conditions attained
only at puberty.

The actual origin of the sexual tension which ultimately leads to
ejaculation is still obscure; it seems, at first sight, probable that in
the male this sensation is connected with the accumulation of semen in
the seminal vesicles. Pressure on the walls of these structures may be
supposed to stimulate the sexual centres in the spinal cord, and also
those in the brain; but this theory fails to take into account the
condition in the child, in woman, and in castrated males, in all of
whom, notwithstanding the absence of the accumulation of any
reproductive products, nevertheless a distinct state of sexual tension
may be observed. It is, indeed, an old experience that eunuchs may have
a very powerful sexual impulse. It is obvious, then, that the sexual
impulse must be, to a very great extent, independent of the reproductive
glands.

The nature of sexual tension is still entirely unknown. Freud assumes,
in view of the recently recognized significance of the thyroid glands in
relation to sexuality, that possibly some substance generally diffused
throughout the organism is produced by stimulation of the erogenic
zones, that the products of decomposition of this substance exercise a
specific stimulus on the reproductive organs, or on the associated
sexual centre in the spinal cord. For example, such a transformation of
a toxic, chemical stimulus into a special organ-stimulus is known to
occur in the case of certain foreign poisonous materials introduced into
the body. Freud considers that the probability of this chemical theory
of sexual excitement is increased by the fact that the neuroses
referable to disturbances of the sexual life possess a great clinical
similarity to the phenomena of intoxication induced by the habitual
employment of aphrodisiac poisons (certain alkaloids).

The relief of sexual tension occurs in the natural way in the =sexual
act=, in the completion of normal intercourse between man and woman.
Notwithstanding the numerous observations of leading natural
philosophers and physicians concerning the act of sexual congress, among
which I need only refer to those of Magendie, Johannes Müller, Marshall
Hall, Kobelt, Busch, Deslandes, Roubaud, Landois, Theopold, Burdach, and
many others, we possess, for reasons it is easy to understand, no really
exact investigations regarding the different phenomena occurring during
the sexual act. More particularly, the demeanour of the woman during
this act is a matter which remains extremely obscure.

The French physician Roubaud has given us the most vivid description of
sexual intercourse:

  “As soon as the penis enters the vaginal vestibule, it first of all
  pushes against the glans clitoridis, which is situated at the entrance
  of the genital canal, and owing to its length and to the way in which
  it is bent, can give way and bend further before the penis. After this
  preliminary stimulation of the two chief centres of sexual
  sensibility, the glans penis glides over the inner surfaces of the two
  vaginal bulbs; the collum and the body of the penis are then grasped
  between the projecting surfaces of the vaginal bulbs, but the glans
  penis itself, which has passed further onward, is in contact with the
  fine and delicate surface of the vaginal mucous membrane, which
  membrane itself, owing to the presence of erectile tissue between the
  layers, is now in an elastic, resilient condition. This elasticity,
  which enables the vagina to adapt itself to the size of the penis,
  increases at once the turgescence and the sensibility of the clitoris,
  inasmuch as the blood that is driven out of the vessels of the vaginal
  wall passes thence to those of the vaginal bulbs and the clitoris. On
  the other hand, the turgescence and the sensitiveness of the glans
  penis itself are heightened by compression of that organ, in
  consequence of the ever-increasing fulness of the vessels of the
  vaginal mucous membrane and the two vaginal bulbs.

  “At the same time, the clitoris is pressed downwards by the anterior
  portion of the compressor muscle, so that it is brought into contact
  with the dorsal surface of the glans and of the body of the penis. In
  this way a reciprocal friction between these two organs takes place,
  repeated at each copulatory movement made by the two parties to the
  act, until at length the voluptuous sensation rises to its highest
  intensity, and culminates in the sexual orgasm, marked in the male by
  the ejaculation of the seminal fluid, and in the female by the
  aspiration of that fluid into the gaping external orifice of the
  cervical canal.

  “When we take into consideration the influence which temperament,
  constitution, and a number of other special and general circumstances
  are capable of exercising on the intensity of sexual sensation, it may
  well be doubted if the problem regarding the differences in voluptuous
  sensation between the male and the female is anywhere near solution;
  indeed, we may go further, and feel convinced that this problem, in
  view of all the difficulties that surround it, is really insoluble. So
  true is this, that it is a difficult matter to give a picture at once
  accurate and complete of the phenomena attending the normal act of
  copulation. Whilst in one individual the sense of sexual pleasure
  amounts to no more than a barely perceptible titillation, in another
  that sense reaches the acme of both mental and physical exaltation.

  “Between these two extremes we meet with innumerable states of
  transition. In cases of intense exaltation various pathological
  symptoms make themselves manifest, such as quickening of the general
  circulation and violent pulsation of the arteries; the venous blood,
  being retained in the larger vessels by general muscular contractions,
  leads to an increased warmth of the body; and, further, this venous
  stagnation, which is still more marked in the brain in consequence of
  the contraction of the cervical muscles and the backward flexion of
  the neck, may cause cerebral congestion, during which consciousness
  and all mental manifestations are momentarily in abeyance. The eyes,
  reddened by injection of the conjunctiva, become fixed, and the
  expression becomes vacant; the lids close convulsively, to exclude the
  light. In some the breathing becomes panting and labouring; but in
  others it is temporarily suspended, in consequence of laryngeal spasm,
  and the air, after being pent up for a time in the lungs, is finally
  forcibly expelled, accompanied by the utterance of incoherent and
  incomprehensible words.

  “The impulses proceeding from the congested nerve centres are
  confused. There is an indescribable disorder both of motion and of
  sensation; the extremities are affected with convulsive twitchings,
  and may be either moved in various directions or extended straight and
  stiff; the jaws are pressed together so that the teeth grind against
  each other; and certain individuals are affected by erotic delirium to
  such an extent that they will seize the unguarded shoulder, for
  instance, of their partner in the sexual act, and bite it till the
  blood flows.

  “This delirious frenzy is usually of short duration, but sufficiently
  long to exhaust the forces of the organism, especially in the male, in
  whom the condition of hyperexcitability is terminated by a more or
  less abundant loss of semen.

  “A period of exhaustion follows, which is the more intense in
  proportion to the intensity of the preceding excitement. The sudden
  fatigue, the general sense of weakness, and the inclination to sleep,
  which habitually affect the male after the act of intercourse, are in
  part to be ascribed to the loss of semen; for in the female, however
  energetic the part she may have played in the sexual act, a mere
  transient fatigue is observed, much less in degree than that which
  affects the male, and permitting far sooner of a repetition of the
  act. ‘_Triste est omne animal post coitum, præter mulierem
  gallumque_,’ wrote Galen, and the axiom is essentially true--at any
  rate, so far as the human species is concerned.”

Kobelt, in his celebrated work on the human organs of sexual pleasure
(Freiburg, 1884, p. 55 _et seq._), gave a similar description of
copulation. In the majority of descriptions of coitus but little
attention is usually paid to the demeanour of the woman. Magendie long
ago drew attention to the fact that there was much obscurity about this
matter, and insisted that, in comparison with the male, the female
exhibited extremely marked differences, in respect to her active
participation in copulation and to the intensity of her voluptuous
sensations.

  “Very many women,” says this distinguished physiologist, “experience a
  sexual orgasm accompanied by very intense voluptuous sensations;
  others, on the contrary, appear entirely devoid of sensation; and
  some, again, have only a disagreeable and painful sensation. Many
  women excrete, at this moment of most intense sexual pleasure, a large
  quantity of mucus, but the majority do not exhibit this phenomenon. In
  reference to all these phenomena, =there are perhaps no two women who
  are precisely similar=.”

The demeanour of the woman _in coitu_ has been especially studied by
gynæcologists, such as Busch, Theopold, and recently Otto Adler. Little
known are the observations of Dr. Theopold, based upon his own
experience, and published in 1873. He energetically denies the view that
the woman is always passive in coitus, and also that the female
reproductive organs are inactive during intercourse. During erotic
excitement in woman the heart beats more frequently, the arteries of the
labia pulsate powerfully, the genital organs are turgid and are hotter
to the touch. As the most intense libido approaches, the uterus
undergoes erection; its base touches the anterior abdominal wall; the
Fallopian tubes can be distinctly felt through the abdominal wall, when
these are thin, as hard, curved strings. The vagina, especially the
upper part of the passage, undergoes rhythmical contraction and
dilation, and complete gratification terminates the act.

As long as the muscle guarding the vaginal outlet (constrictor
cunni--bulbo-cavernosus muscle) is intact, the woman is able, by tightly
grasping the root of the penis, to expedite the ejaculation of semen, or
to increase the stimulation of the male until ejaculation occurs.

These powerful contractions of the vagina, alternating rhythmically with
the dilatations occurring during the orgasm, grip the glans penis
tightly, and induce a coaptation of the male urethral orifice with the
os uteri externum, and the enlargement of the latter orifice facilitates
the entrance of the semen. According to O. Adler, sexual excitement of
the woman during sexual intercourse begins with very powerful congestion
of the entire reproductive apparatus, including even the fimbriæ
surrounding the abdominal orifice of the Fallopian tubes; this
congestion gives rise to an erection of these parts, and especially of
the clitoris, the labia minora, and the vaginal wall. At the same time,
the glands of the vaginal mucous membrane and of the vaginal inlet begin
to secrete, as is manifest by the moistness of the external genital
organs. There now begin gentle rhythmical contractions of the vagina and
of the pelvic muscles, and during the orgasm these increase, to become
spasmodic contractions, whereby an increased secretion is extruded, and
more especially is there an evacuation of uterine mucus.

It is very important to note the various physiological accompaniments of
coitus, since they assist us to understand the mode of origin and the
biological root of many sexual perversions. Already in normal sexual
intercourse sadistic and masochistic phenomena may be observed. The
biting and crying out mentioned by Roubaud as occurring in the
voluptuous ecstasy are, indeed, of very frequent occurrence. Rudolf
Bergh, the celebrated Danish dermatologist and physician, of the
Copenhagen Hospital for Women suffering from Venereal Diseases, alludes
regularly in his annual reports to the consequences of “erotic bites.”
Amongst the Southern Slavs, the custom of “biting one another” is very
general (Krauss). The intense dark red coloration of the face and of the
reproductive organs and their environment is also a physiological
accompaniment of sexual excitement, and this coloration is more marked
in consequence of the associated turgescence of the male and female
genital organs; it leads, moreover, to associations of feeling in which
the =blood= plays a dominant part. Hence we deduce the biological and
ethnological significance of the colour red in the sphere of sexuality.
The nature of the sadist “to see red” during sexual intercourse is,
therefore, firmly founded upon a physiological basis, and merely
exhibits an increase of a normal phenomenon.[17] The crying and cursing
in which many individuals find sexual gratification has also a
physiological representative in the inarticulate noises and cries
frequently expressed in normal intercourse. It is remarkable that an
Indian writer on erotics--Vātsyāyana--deduces this verbal sadism from
the various noises which are commonly made in normal intercourse.
Similarly, in both parties to the sexual act the presence of masochistic
elements can be detected: witness the patience with which pain is borne
when it has a voluptuous tinge.[18]

Passing to the consideration of the =posture= adopted during
intercourse, we find in civilized man, who in this respect is far
removed from animals, the normal position during coitus is front to
front, the woman lying on her back with her lower extremities widely
separated, and the knee and hip joints semiflexed; the man lies on her,
with his thighs between hers, supporting himself on hands or elbows--or
often the two unite their lips in a kiss.

Of all other numerous positions during coitus, or _figuræ Veneris_, some
of which, according to Sheikh Nefzawi, are possible only “in words and
thoughts,” the postures that demand consideration on hygienic grounds
are, lateral decubitus of the woman, dorsal decubitus of the man, and
coitus _a posteriori_ (for example, when man and woman are extremely
obese); but this subject belongs rather to the chapter on sexual
hygiene.

Ploss-Bartels has proved that the position described above as normal was
usual already in ancient times and amongst the most diverse peoples. The
adoption of this position in coitus undoubtedly ensued in the human race
upon the evolution of the upright posture. It is the natural,
instinctive position of civilized man, who in this respect also
manifests an advance on the lower animals.

  [13] Apart from Strindberg and Weininger, who advocate, for the
  salvation of the future and as ideals of development, the most
  pronounced and one-sided development of the masculine type, I need
  refer only to “The Physiological Weakmindedness of Woman” by Möbius,
  and to such writings as B. Friedländer’s “Renaissance des Eros
  Uranios” (Berlin, 1904), and to Eduard von Mayer’s “The Vital Laws of
  Civilization” (Halle, 1904), as characteristic symptoms of such a
  reaction.

  [14] ITCHING, TICKLING, AND SEXUAL SENSIBILITY.--On September 2, 1890,
  Dr. Bronson, Professor of Dermatology in the New York Polyclinic, read
  before the American Dermatological Association a paper on “The
  Sensation of Itching” (printed in the _New York Medical Record_ of
  October 18, 1890, and republished by the New Sydenham Society in 1893
  in a volume entitled “Selected Monographs on Dermatology”). In this
  paper the author deals at some length with the relations between
  itching and the voluptuous, or, as he calls it, the “aphrodisiac,”
  sense. He also denies the specific character of sexual sensations, and
  states that the aphrodisiac sense “is but a higher development of the
  primitive sense of contact. It has a special organ or instrument--the
  penis in the male, the clitoris in the female. Moreover, it is
  distributed over the entire cutaneous surface” (New Sydenham Society,
  _op. cit._, p. 314). In this connexion, and more particularly apropos
  of Dr. Bloch’s statement on the previous page that “the function of
  the clitoris is expressed by its name” (German, _Kitzler_), it is
  interesting to note that in German the word _Kitzel_ variously
  denotes--(1) _tickling_, (2) _itching_, (3) _sexual desire_, (4)
  _sexual gratification_. The more commonly employed German term for
  itching, _Jucken_, does not possess any secondary sexual
  signification; but, as Dr. Bronson points out (_op. cit._, p. 312),
  “both the English words _itch_ and _itching_, and the Latin _prurio_
  and _pruritus_, in their secondary significations, convey the idea of
  a longing, teasing desire, while _pruritus_ was commonly used by the
  Latins as a synonym for lasciviousness.” The same idea is, of course,
  conveyed by the English derivations, _pruriency_ and _prurient_. Thus,
  we see that the familiar terminology of these three tongues (and
  doubtless of many others) refuses to countenance Hirschfeld’s view
  regarding the specific character of sexual sensibility.--TRANSLATOR.

  [15] In his profound essay, containing a number of new points of view,
  “Concerning the Emotions” (_Monatsschrift für Psychiatrie und
  Neurologie_, 1906, vol. xix., Heft 3 and 4), Dr. Edmund Forster has
  ably discussed these primitive relations between voluptuous sensation
  and pain. According to him, the sexual tension, which commences at the
  time of puberty, is an increased stimulus of the sensory nerves of the
  genital organs. The positive sensation-tone of libido accompanying
  ejaculation represents the relief of the painful, disturbing sensation
  of sexual tension, and for this reason it has a pleasurable tone.

  [16] Carpenter perceives in this “sense of contact” the essence of all
  sexual love.

  [17] For this reason many ingenious prostitutes wear a red
  chemise.--_Cf._ P. Näcke, “Un Cas de Fetichisme de Souliers,” etc. (“A
  Case of Shoe Fetichism”), in _Bulletin de la Société de Médecine
  Mentale de Belgique_, 1894.

  [18] Thus it appears that sadism and masochism are not manifestations
  of “genital atavism” in the sense of Mantegazza and Lombroso, but are
  rather due to the gradual and pathological increase of physiological
  phenomena still manifest at the present day.




