CHAPTER VIII

THE WAY OF THE SPIRIT IN LOVE--THE INDIVIDUALIZATION OF LOVE


“_Above all, we must avoid the widely diffused error of regarding love
as a simple and single feeling. The exact opposite is the truth--love
consists of an entire group, and, indeed, of an extremely complex,
incessantly varying, group of feelings._”--H. T. FINCK.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER VIII

  The individualization of love a product of recent times -- Finck’s
  “romantic” love too narrow a conception -- Rôle of the idealization of
  the senses -- First beginnings of individual love -- The Platonism of
  the Greeks and of the Renascence -- Distinction between the plastic
  and the romantic -- The love of the minnesinger -- The connexion
  between the nature-sense and love -- The secret elements in love --
  Love and gallantry -- The slavery of love -- The imaginative element
  in love -- Predominance of tender feelings in the days of chivalry --
  The development of the conventional in the relationships of love --
  True and false gallantry -- Love as presented by Shakespeare --
  Conventional life of pleasure in the days of Louis XIV. and XV. -- The
  belief in woman (“Manon Lescaut”) -- Rousseau’s “Julie” and Goethe’s
  “Werther” -- The nature-sense and sentimentality in love -- Difference
  between “The New Héloïse” and “Werther” -- The first beginnings of
  Weltschmerz -- Its physiological connexion with the vital feelings of
  puberty -- The vital energy in the Weltschmerz of Goethe and Heine --
  The modern Weltschmerz -- Nietzsche’s connexion with this matter --
  The love of the romantic period -- A mirroring of the past -- Dreams
  and emotions -- Moonshine reverie -- Conflict with conventional
  Philistine morality -- Friedrich Schlegel’s “Lucinde” -- Apotheosis of
  individual love -- Individual love in relation to genius -- Rôle of
  the emotional in romantic love -- Love mysticism -- The modern
  renascence of romanticism -- The Dionysiac element in modern romantic
  love -- Difference between romantic and classical love -- Theodor
  Mundt on this subject -- Goethe’s “Tasso” -- Gretchen and Helena in
  “Faust” -- Heine’s “Ardinghello,” a combination of romantic and
  classical love -- The prototype of “young Germany” -- Discussion of
  all modern love problems in young German literature -- Gutzkow’s
  overwhelming importance -- Among writers of the nineteenth century,
  Gutzkow’s knowledge of women is the most profound -- His
  characteristic girls and women -- Brings for the first time the
  problem of love upon the stage -- The problem of personality in
  Gutzkow’s writings -- The young German poetry of the flesh --
  Self-analysis and reflection in love -- French precursors --
  Replacement of the medieval “sin” by self-reflection -- Gutzkow’s
  “Wally” and “Seraphine” -- The love of the emancipated woman --
  Kierkegaard’s and Grillparzer’s diaries -- “Free love” and “free
  marriage” in modern literature -- Influence of the Second Empire --
  The satanic and artistic elements in love -- Pessimism. -- Grisebach’s
  “New Tanhäuser” -- The affirmation of life in this work -- A glance at
  the present day.


CHAPTER VIII

The individualization of love is principally a product of recent times.
A talented author, H. T. Finck, has dealt with this fact in a
comprehensive work in two volumes.[134] This individual love, containing
the spiritual elements of all the successive epochs of civilization, he
denotes by the term “romantic” love, whereas we ourselves generally
understand by that term a special variety of the more comprehensive
individual love.

Every one who is interested in the numerous “overtones” of individual
love will find in Finck’s book a rich, though not very well arranged,
supply of material.

Independently of Finck, I shall endeavour in this chapter to describe
very briefly the most =important= elements and the developmental phases
of modern love.

First, however, let us consider the “=idealization of the senses=,” this
expression being used by Georg Hirth to denote the capacity of the
senses for self-government; for independent feelings of pleasure and
pain; for the development of peculiar imaginations, ideas, and talents;
and for the utilization at will of other sensory areas and foci of
impulse--indeed, of the entire individual--for the purposes of purely
sensual self-command. The lower senses, among which Hirth also reckons
the sexual impulse, can only be idealized in consequence of the
centripetal spontaneous activity of the higher senses.[135]

This artistic idealization of the senses and impulses also plays an
important part in the process of the individualization and
spiritualization of love. The sexual impulse becomes “the source of rich
joys and imaginative tragedy” by means of the “veil of imagination,” the
“heaping up of emotions,” and the “helmet of reason” (Hirth). The libido
sexualis also takes part in the idealization of all the human senses and
impulses. This is the indispensable preliminary and foundation of the
transformation of the sexual impulse into love.

The first important enrichment of the sexual inclinations by means of a
higher spiritual, individual element, which continues to-day to form a
constituent of modern love, is, I consider, the =Platonism= of Greek
antiquity and of the Italian renascence. It is a metaphysic of love
resting upon the individual, æsthetic contemplation of the beloved
personality.[136] For that is the true sense of “Platonic love.” It
ennobles physical love to the heavenly Eros, which is nothing else than
the idea of =beauty= in the highest sense of the word. Kuno Fischer, in
his first published writing, “Diotima” (Pforzheim, 1849), has erected a
beautiful monument in honour of this Platonic love. And did not the
immortal Darwin restate the thought of Plato, when he described beauty
as the testimony of love? In Platonism, at any rate, is to be found the
first intimation of a =higher= individual significance of love. In
Dante’s Beatrice, in Petrarch’s Platonic lyrics, this idea is
reillumined after the long night of the middle ages, to shine forth
still more clearly at the time of the renascence in the new Platonism
and in the cult of the beautiful, thus attaining a much more powerful
individual colouring than it had among the Greeks.

In the sphere of love, as elsewhere, the plastic genius of the Greeks
manifested itself in the form of peaceful æsthetic contemplation;
romantic individualism, on the other hand, was foreign to the Greek
mind. The latter is a modern sentiment. Jean Paul, in his “Vorschule der
Aesthetik” (Hamburg, 1804, vol. i., p. 139), has aptly characterized the
difference between antique and modern sensibility in the words: “The
plastic sun (of the ancients) illuminates universally, like waking; the
romantic moon (of the moderns) gleams fitfully, like dreams.”

These first traces of =romantic-individual= love may be detected already
in Christian medievalism, among the troubadours and the minnesinger. The
heartfelt song, “Thou art mine, I am thine,” gives the clearest
expression to the individual, purely personal nature of the
love-relations between man and woman, and discloses also the “romantic”
sentiment, as in “Thou art locked within my heart; lost is the key: now
must thou stay there for ever,” and discloses the intimate association
peculiar to romanticism between the nature-sense and the feeling of
love. It is the beloved who first fills for us the joy of summer; her
love is like the rose. An enormous range is thus opened to the
subjectivity of this sentiment. The romanticism of the =secret= element
in love is first perceived at this time, and finds perception in the
words:

  “No fire, no coal, can burn so hot
   As secret love, of which no one knows anything.”[137]

The age of chivalry now arrives, the epoch of =minne=[138] (=love=) and
=gallantry=. What a new and remarkable change in the spiritual
physiognomy of love! This also has left deep traces in the love of
modern civilized man; this period represents an important stage in the
developmental history of individual eroticism.

In the middle ages the honour of the knight and the love of woman, “the
most beautiful radiance coming down to us from the life of this
wonderful period,” as Wienberg says, belong together. Since that time
man’s honour has been associated in a peculiar manner with woman’s love.

Boldly but aptly the far-sighted Herder has described the knightly minne
(love) as a reflex of the Gothic. The same immeasurability of the
imagination, the same indescribable sentiment, constructed the huge
cathedral, and disclosed the unrivalled worth and beauty of the
beloved--created minne and its outward expression, gallantry.

In deifying supplication, the knightly spirit elevated the beautiful sex
to the heavens, =raised woman far above man=, and placed man far beneath
woman. The knight sacrificed himself for the mistress of his heart,
subjected himself to her judgment before the _cours d’amour_ (courts of
love), and in the lists. He became the =slave= of love and of the
beloved woman; he wore her fetters, he obeyed her slightest nod, he
endured chastisement and pain for her sake. But was this all reality?
Was it not rather pure imagination? There was, indeed, as Johannes
Scherr says, a worm at the heart of all this romanticism. The ideal
deification of woman did not affect a corresponding elevation in her
true social position; minne was but too often a mere “pose,” and was
often associated with unbridled sexual licence in relation to women of
lower degrees.

The domination of the imaginative element characterized the aberrations
of minne, debasing itself for the honour of the beloved. The masochistic
element concealed in all love was here for the first time elevated into
a system. We shall return to this subject in the chapter on “Masochism.”

And yet there is another side to the matter, and by the spirit of
chivalry there was aroused a nobler view of woman’s nature.

  “The cause and the secret of this dominance (of women) is this, that
  woman, with her complete, noble womanliness, entered wholly and fully
  into life; that she controlled a kingdom which was hers by right, the
  world of feeling and emotion, but controlled this kingdom and no more.
  As mistress of feeling, as guardian of feeling, she brought poetry
  into life; and into art she brought that lofty impetus, the
  above-described fanciful ideal or feminine tendency, which, when
  observed and perceived, reacts on the emotional mood of the
  observer.”[139]

To this time also belongs the development of the =conventional= in the
amatory relations of the sexes, which came to be governed by definite
rules; since that time, for example, it has been regarded as improper
and scandalous for an unmarried woman to remain for any considerable
time alone with a man, a view which has persisted to the present day.
The social intercourse of the sexes was based upon “=gallantry=” or
“courtesy,” upon a refined behaviour towards “ladies,” regulated by the
laws of beauty, propriety, and social tact. In the sequel there
developed out of this that exaggerated modern gallantry, characterized
by little real delicacy of feeling, because it exhibits an undertone of
contempt which makes woman feel only too clearly that she is the
representative of a “weaker,” inferior sex, and is in no way the
possessor of any proper individual, personal value. Intelligent, eminent
women have always protested against this modern gallantry. Mantegazza,
in his “Physiology of Woman,” p. 442 (Jena, 1893), ably describes the
hypocrisy underlying this evil form of gallantry.

The first intimation of modern individual love is to be found in
Shakespeare, to whom love was in general, indeed, only a “superhuman”
passion, something lying beyond good and evil, which seized hold of man
against his will; but none the less he embodies in his work the romantic
ideal life of his time in feminine characters possessing the fullest
individuality--as, for example, Ophelia, Miranda, Juliet, Desdemona,
Virginia, Imogen, and Cordelia, whilst in Cleopatra he has described the
daimonic-bacchantic traits of the love of woman. In Juliet, who sees in
“true love acted simple modesty,” we observe the passionate emotion of
the primordial natural impulse, and the first awakening of woman as a
personality.

False gallantry, in association with conventional propriety, both of
which were developed to the fullest degree at the Courts of Louis XIV.
and Louis XV., subordinated love to rules, and was very well compatible
with the most frivolous and epicurean sensual life. And this occurred at
the expense of deeply-felt natural sentiment, the place of which was
taken by mere flirtation and coquetry. Here, also, the contempt of woman
clearly shows itself. Especially in regard to this period, the opinion
has been maintained that the modern Frenchman has never suspected,
understood, recognized the divine in woman’s nature. Still, the general
truth of this assertion is belied by the amatory life of the celebrated
heroines of the salons, such as Du Deffand, Lespinasse, Du Chatelet,
Quinault, and above all of the celebrated Ninon de l’Enclos[140]; and
the Abbé Prévost, in his immortal “Manon Lescaut,” proved that even in
that period the indestructible belief in woman persisted, at least as an
ideal.

It was, in fact, in France that the higher individual love underwent a
new spiritual enrichment; Rousseau’s “Julie” appeared on the horizon of
Love’s heaven. And in the background was disclosed the German “Werther,”
a book strangely influenced by that of Rousseau. The =nature-sense= on
the one hand, =sentimentality= on the other, are the new elements in the
love of the period of Héloïse and Werther.

In Rousseau’s “New Héloïse,” passionate love and a complete
self-surrender were described without the artificiality, and also
without the coquetry and wantonness, of which the literature of the time
was full. =It was love in a grander style= than people were then
accustomed to see. For this reason, the book constituted a turning-point
in literature. That love is an earnest thing, that it can become “la
grande affaire de notre vie,” has perhaps never been more deeply and
thoroughly depicted than in the character of “Julie.” In maintaining the
essential purity of the love relationship, when the voice of Nature is
really expressed therein, Rousseau speaks of the principal theme of his
own life.

  “Is not true love,” asks Julie, “the chastest of all bonds?... Is not
  love in itself the purest as well as the most magnificent impulse of
  our nature? Does it not despise low and crawling souls, in order to
  inspire only grand and strong souls? And does it not ennoble all
  feeling, does it not double our being and elevate us above ourselves?
  In contrast to social inequalities, the love relationship points to a
  higher law, before which all are equal.”[141]

The love of Rousseau is, in fact, not social; it is not a product of
civilization, but it is a creation of nature; it is one with nature. The
nature-sense and the love-sense are here most intimately associated. And
he observes both, nature and love, =with feeling=. The _sensibilité de
l’âme_ finds in nature and in love objects of the most glorious delight,
of the sweetest pain, of the most burning tears.

  “Out of the perceptions of mingled pain and ecstasy which the vision
  of nature, of beauty, or of a fine action, induced in him, he wove the
  web of sensibility with which he enveloped the creatures of his
  imagination. Incessantly thrust back into himself, his heart bleeding
  from wounded friendship or from unrequited love, self-tormentingly
  dissecting his own wishes and illusions, his own faculties and
  impossibilities, he became one of the first heralds of the
  Weltschmerz, of the woes of Werther and René, to which Byron and Heine
  had only to add self-mockery.”[142]

The sentimentality of the eighteenth century took its rise in England,
as I have explained at some length in my pseudonymous work, “The Sexual
Life in England,” vol. ii., pp. 95-107 (Berlin, 1903). In that country
it found its most characteristic expression in the romances of
Richardson and Sterne, and in landscape-gardening; but it was by
Rousseau and Goethe that for the first time it was really brought into
contact with the realities of life.

For the history of Julie, the history of Werther--this was the history
of all happily or unhappily loving youths and maidens of that day; each
maiden had her Saint Preux, each youth his Lotte.

The profound influence exercised by Rousseau, especially on women, has
been described by H. Buffenoir in a very careful study.[143] The
significance which “Werther” had for the emotional life of the time has
been explained with the most cultivated understanding by Erich Schmidt
in a well-known monograph.[144]

He shows that the nature-sense and sentimentality are much more deeply
felt in Goethe’s “Werther” than in Rousseau’s “Nouvelle Héloïse.”
Goethe himself says in “Wahrheit und Dichtung,” speaking of this
poetical, rational, intimate, and loving absorption into nature:

  “I endeavoured to separate myself inwardly from everything foreign to
  me, to regard the outward world lovingly, and to allow all beings,
  from the human onwards, to influence me, each in its kind, as deeply
  as was possible. Thus arose a wonderful alliance with the individual
  objects of nature, and an inward harmony, a harmony with the whole; so
  that every change, whether of places and of regions, or of days and
  seasons, or of any possible kind, moved me to my inmost soul. The
  painter’s view became associated with that of the poet; the beautiful
  country landscape through which the friendly river was wandering,
  increased my inclination to solitude, and favoured my quiet attitude
  of contemplation extending itself in every direction.”

Werther’s feeling for nature is intimately related to his love passion.
The two harmonize, and each exercises a reciprocal influence upon the
other. Nature is to Werther a second beloved. The youth of nature, the
spring of nature, are also the youth and the spring of his love.

In the peculiar association of love with the nature-sense and
sentimentality, which is so characteristic of the time of Julie and
Werther, are to be found the first beginnings of the “=Weltschmerz=,”
with its erotically significant “ecstasy of sorrow.” The following words
in Goethe’s “Stella” appear to me to bind Weltschmerz and eroticism in
an extremely distinct relationship. Stella says of men:

  “They make us at once happy and miserable! They fill our heart with
  feelings of bliss! What new, unknown feelings and hopes fill our
  souls, when their stormful passion invades our nerves! How often has
  everything in me trembled and throbbed, =when, in uncontrollable
  tears, he has washed away the sorrows of a world on my breast=! I
  begged him, for God’s sake, to spare himself!--to spare me!--in
  vain!--=into my inmost marrow he fanned the flames which were
  devouring himself=. And thus the girl, from head to foot, became all
  heart, all sentiment.”

Here we find clearly described the erotic element in mental pain; and we
observe the remarkable =increase= of passion by means of sorrow, tears,
and a profound perception of the evil of the world. This Weltschmerz
fans the flames of eroticism, increases love, and ultimately gives rise
to a peculiar sense of power; it is, indeed, most frequently in the
first bloom of love, in the years of puberty, that its relations with
sexuality are most distinctly manifested. The celebrated alienist Mendel
has described this almost physiological Weltschmerz of the age of
puberty as “hypo-melancholia.” An indefinite, passionate longing, which
seeks relief in tears, a by no means negligible inclination to
suicide--of which Werther is the classical exemplar--characterizes this
condition, which is connected with the complete revolutionizing of the
spiritual and emotional life by means of the sexual. The Weltschmerz of
youth is a latent sexual sense of power.

How the nature-sense and love combine to constitute a perception of
Weltschmerz has been most beautifully expressed by Byron and Heine in
their poetry. With quite exceptional clearness, Heine also describes it
in a letter to Friedrich Merckel (written at Nordeney on August 7,
1826), in which he described a nightly recurring scene with a beautiful
woman on the seashore:

  “The sea no longer appeared so romantic as before--and yet on its
  strand I had lived through the =sweetest= and most mystically dear
  experience of my life which could ever inspire a poet. The moon seemed
  to wish to show me that in this world happiness yet remained for me.
  We did not speak--it was only a long, profound glance, the moonlight
  supplied the music--as we walked to and fro, I took her hand in mine,
  I felt the secret pressure--my soul trembled and glowed--=afterwards I
  wept=.”

How different were these tears from the floods of tears in Miller’s
“Siegwart,” and in other similar productions of the Werther epoch,
which, with their weakly sentimentality, their emotionally happy
“sensibility,” had nothing whatever in common with the much more natural
Weltschmerz of Goethe and Heine--more natural because based on a
physiological foundation.

In modern love also, the Weltschmerz continues to live. The only
difference is that by means of the pessimistic philosophy it has to some
extent obtained a logical foundation. And Nietzsche has shown us the
=force= which lies hidden in this ecstasy of sorrow. Precisely on
account of the pains of the world, he affirms joyfully life and love.
Anyone who wishes to write the history of Weltschmerz, from a
psychological point of view so profoundly interesting, must not overlook
Nietzsche as a most important turning-point in that history.

The passion inspired by genius, the excess of vital energy in the “Sturm
und Drang” epoch of German literature, was admirably consistent with
that genuine, primitive Weltschmerz. Rousseau’s more indeterminate
sensibility had, on the other hand, a more powerful influence upon the
mode of feeling of =romanticism=, and this movement appears more closely
related to him than to Goethe.

=Romantic love= combines the elements of feeling of the previous epochs
in an increased subjectivism. Not nature alone, but history also,
folk-tales, legends, poetry, and the wonderful secrets of the primeval
age--all these are reflected in romantic love, and awaken singular
dreams and emotions. The “mondbeglänzte Zaubernacht” (“moon-illumined
magic night”) is much more than a mere feeling of nature; it is the
recognition of a connexion with the past and with its secret, sweet,
half-forgotten stories. Fonqué’s “Undine” is the classical type of all
this. Romantic love delights in this wonder-mood of the heart; reality
becomes, as it were, a dream. The obscure, the problematical--these
attract the romanticist. It is for this reason that he loves the night
and the night-mood of nature, rather than the clear daylight. =Moonshine
reverie= is a characteristic trait of romantic love. Everything flows
away into the indeterminate, the cloudy, the boundless. This love knows
no limitation or narrowing, no fetters. It is the sworn enemy of the
conventional, narrow-hearted, philistine morality, and of all
limitations of personality. In Friedrich Schlegel’s “Lucinde” this most
celebrated monument of romantic love, the campaign against philistinism,
as the greatest enemy of a free, noble amatory life, is most
energetically carried on. It is utterly untrue to describe “Lucinde” as
a romance in which there is a cult of suggestive nudity--as the poetry
of the flesh. It certainly preaches the free natural conception and
perception of the nude and the sexual, and is a glorious protest against
the artificial and hypocritical separation of body and soul in love;
but, on the other side, it unlocks in love the entire kingdom of the
emotional and spiritual life, and discloses its significance for the
individual man as a free personality.

More than Rousseau’s “Julie” and Goethe’s “Werther” is Friedrich
Schlegel’s “Lucinde” the apotheosis of individual love. Romantic love is
the mirror of personality; it is changeable, filled with the highest
spiritual content, and, above all, like personality, is capable of
development. In a masterly manner Schlegel has represented the intimate
connexion between true love and all vital energy. The relations of love
to genius have never before been so admirably described.

  “Here,” says Karl Gutzkow, “there is no question of artificiality; we
  have to do rather with the yearning of a youth who loves, who sees the
  one and only beloved in many different forms, in the metamorphoses of
  his own ego, which yearns to reconcile egoism and love.”

Schleiermacher, in his “Confidential Letters regarding Lucinde,” Gutzkow
in his preface to the new edition of this work, and recently H.
Meyer-Benfey,[145] have supplied us with conclusions regarding the true
significance of “Lucinde,” conclusions in harmony with our own view.

We must allude here to a new element in romantic love, which since that
time has played an important part in modern eroticism. It is _l’art pour
l’art_ of love, the revelling in pure moods and emotions as the means of
enjoyment. The emotional frequently grows luxuriantly and chokes the
natural feeling of love. Jean Paul, for example,

  “regards eroticism purely as a method of cultivation. Human beings are
  not to be actually loved, but are to be used to strike sparks from, by
  which one’s own inward life may be illuminated.... He is the exemplar
  of that artist-love which, vampire-like, drinks the souls of those who
  become its prey. This love sees in the hearts offered to it only the
  stuff for pictures; and in their warm blood it finds only an
  intoxicating, stimulating drink.”[146]

This unqualified search for personal emotional experiences in love,
without regard to the love-partner, is especially represented in Jean
Paul’s “Titan.”

Wackenroder, in his “Phantasien über die Kunst” (“Imaginative Studies
concerning Art”), has already warned us of the dangers of this purely
erotic-emotional love. Karl Joel has recently described very vividly how
the romanticists ultimately reduced all vital relationships to the
emotions of love.[147] This attempt must lead finally to mysticism, the
poetical representative of which is Novalis.

It is very interesting to find that all the diverse elements of romantic
love may also be detected in the latter-day renascence of romanticism.
In his admirable book on “Nietzsche and Romanticism,” Karl Joel has
clearly shown the existence of this romantic element in modern love,
and, above all, has insisted upon the intimate connexion which the
philosophy of Nietzsche has with the joy in battle and the vital energy
of the romanticists. Both are apostles of the Dionysiac, not of the
Apollinian.[148]

This also is the difference by which “romantic” love is distinguished
from “=classical=” love--a difference and a distinction which I find
indicated for the first time in Theodor Mundt’s romance “Madelon oder
die Romantiker in Paris” (Leipzig, 1832).

The relevant passage (pp. 9-12) runs as follows:

  “I am therefore of opinion that there can be a romantic and a
  classical poetry; there are also romantic and classical love; and it
  is only by means of this twofold nature that it is possible to
  discover and understand this contrast in poetry....

  “This wild and yet so sweet disturbance of the heart, in which love
  subsists, this rejoicing and revelry of the aroused imagination which,
  originated by the charm of the beloved, lead to an intoxication with
  all the sensual dreams of a delightful, ethereal happiness; and as in
  the flower-bud in which a burning ray of sunshine has suddenly
  awakened the impulse to bloom, give rise to the desire and longing of
  sensual impulsion--all these tears and sighs of the lovers, pains and
  joys, this love-happiness and love-misery at the same time, this
  star-flaming night-side of passion, to which after a vagrant drunken
  frenzy, an ice-cold, unwelcome morning follows--all this, my friend,
  is romantic love....

  “And shall I now describe also =classical= love?... Believe me, there
  are faces which at the very first glance seem to us so trustworthy and
  so near akin, they draw us to them, as if we had spent years with them
  in sympathy, asking for love and receiving love. By the sight of this
  girl’s face there was induced in me so suddenly a sense of peace, such
  as never before in my life had I experienced; and this gentle feeling
  which drew me towards her, I may call true love and true happiness. In
  her loving eyes there glowed no seductive fire, no repellent pride
  like that of our romantic Madelon; in the simple beautiful German
  girl, all is clear and true; out of her gentle features speaks her
  gentle soul; and all for which I have longed in passionate, aberrant
  hours of my life--a definite, unalloyed happiness in existence--seemed
  to me, as I saw her for the very first time, to shine on me out of her
  blue true eyes. My friend, is not that classical love?”

It is the Apollinian-Platonic element of modern love which Theodor Mundt
here describes as “classical” love, and certainly he wrongly places it
before romantic love, which is the expression of modern subjectivism and
individualism. Such classical love found in Goethe’s “Tasso” its most
complete representation. Here love was conceived as “possession, which
should give =peace=”; the beloved being influences after the manner of
an already understood picture. As Kuno Fischer remarks, in the world of
Goethe’s “Tasso” the Platonic Eros is the fashion. Love is here the
pure, quiet contemplation of beauty in and with the beloved.

Gretchen and Helena in “Faust” embody very clearly the contrast
between romantic and classical love. We find these contrasts united
in Wilhelm Heinse’s celebrated “Ardinghello,” a romance which even
to us at the present day seems so modern. In this work we find the
Dionysiac-Faustian impulse of the loving individual, and the
Apollinian-artistic contemplation of the loved one, described with equal
mastery.

In regard to love, Heinse was the prototype of “=Young Germany=.” And we
are young Germany.

For all the problems of amatory life which to-day occupy our minds have
already been made topics of public discussion by the authors of young
Germany. In young German love-philosophy, the “Knights of the Spirit” as
well as the “Knights of the Flesh,” come to their full rights. Only the
ignorant can regard the so-called “emancipation of the flesh,” the
apotheosis of lascivious sensuality, as the sole characteristic of the
efforts and battles of our own time. No, he who wishes to understand
modern love, in all its =spiritual= manifestations and relationship, let
him read the writings of young Germany, especially the works of Laube,
Gutzkow, Mundt; and also those of Heine, who has a more intimate
relationship to young Germany than he has to romanticism.

More especially Gutzkow,[149] who appears to me the greatest and most
comprehensive spirit of the young German literature--indeed, of the more
recent German literature in general--overlooks no single riddle and
problem of modern eroticism. Of all the writers of the nineteenth
century, he has the profoundest knowledge of women. How stimulating are
his girl characters; how true, notwithstanding their manifoldness!
Wally, riding proudly upon a white palfrey, outwardly an image of
beauty, but, like so many modern emancipated women, inwardly tormented
by the demon of doubt; Seraphine the dreamer, uncertain about herself
and her love, of whom the poet himself later admitted that her character
was based on reality; Idaline,[150] full of majesty, the ideal “bride of
the waves,” a typical figure of conventional high life, who yet in
sudden revolution against this conventionalism gives her whole being to
a chance love, a love of the moment,[151] which alienates her from her
betrothed and later husband, and drives her to death; then, again, all
the brilliant feminine characters in the great romances, “Die Ritter vom
Geiste,” Melanie, Helene, Selma, Pauline, Olga--all are characters
bearing the stamp of reality in their spiritual and emotional life, so
various and yet so true, and, above all, in their manifold,
differentiated relationships to men, genuinely =modern= women.

Gutzkow was also the first to bring upon the stage the modern woman and
the problems of modern love, long before the French dramatists and
before Ibsen.

As Karl Frenzel pointed out as early as 1864, Gutzkow made the stage the
battlefield of modern ideas. The inward contrasts of love, the
psychological problem of the heart--he first ventured to deal with these
in the dramatic form.

  “We all of us felt the wounds which ‘the world’ inflicted on Werner;
  we all wandered from the quiet violet, Agathe, to the brilliant rose,
  Sidonie; as in Ottfried, so in ourselves, the love of the heart
  battled with the love of the spirit. Who would admit himself to be so
  miserably poor as never to have revelled, lived, and suffered, in the
  play of these feelings? What wife has not, at least in imagination,
  hesitated for a moment, like Ella Rose, between the lover and the
  husband? Such figures as these bear in themselves the essence of
  truth, and do not lose their lofty value because, perhaps, their
  garments are not draped with sufficient harmony. They touch us,
  because we recognize in them our own flesh and blood; and they fulfil,
  in so far as the form of the society drama allows, Shakespeare’s canon
  of dramatic art--they hold the mirror up to nature.”

In his tragedies, “Werner,” “Ottfried,” “Ella Rose,” Gutzkow presents in
a masterly manner the inner life of the time; we see in them the pulsing
wing-beats of the souls, which in pain, as it must be in these days,
soar upwards in the effort to attain beauty and freedom.[152]

Of all the young German authors, Gutzkow has best grasped the problem of
problems in love--the problem of =personality=. In the painful question
asked of Helene d’Azimont, in “Die Ritter vom Geiste”--

  “Is it, then, thy innermost need,
   To be everything to others, =nothing to thyself=?
   Nothing to woman’s highest glory, love,
   Nothing, Helene, to the pang of renunciation?”

--this inalienable right to the safeguarding and development of the
individual personality, notwithstanding all the self-sacrifice of
passionate love, is most forcibly maintained. This is, indeed, the true
nucleus of all higher individual love between man and woman.

Gutzkow has been accused, by those who had in mind only the purely
symbolic nudity scene in “Wally,” of preaching the “emancipation of the
flesh”; the same accusation has been levelled against other young German
authors, such as Lambe (in “Jungen Europa”), Theodor Mundt (in the
“Madonna”), Wienbarg (in the “Aesthetische Feldzüge”), Heine (in the
“Neue Gedichte”). The charge is unjust. It is only the =poetry= of the
flesh which they wish to bring to its rights. Notwithstanding his
enthusiastic hymn of praise to Casanova, Theodor Mundt declares in his
“Madonna” that the separation of flesh and spirit is the “inexpiable
suicide of the human consciousness.”

Much more important, the true characteristic of all the authors of young
Germany, appear to me the parts which =self-analysis= and =reflection=
here for the first time play in love, visible beneath the influence of
the offshoots of French romanticism, in which, however, we also
encounter the same phenomenon, as in George Sand’s “Lelia,” in Alfred de
Musset’s “Confession d’un Enfant du Siècle,” in Balzac’s “Femme de
Trente Ans”--in which last romance we find the following passage:

  “Love assumes the colouring of every century. Now, in the year 1822,
  it is doctrinaire. Instead of, as formerly, proving it by deeds, it is
  argued, it is discussed, it is brought upon the tribune in a speech.”

=Just as in the middle ages the idea of “sin” was the disturbing
principle of love, so for the modern civilized man, since the days of
young Germany, this cold self-reflection, this critical analysis of
one’s peculiar passionate perceptions and feelings, is the modern
disturbing principle.= This is the worm which gnaws unceasingly at the
root of our love, and destroys its most beautiful blossoms. Gutzkow’s
“Wally the Doubter” and “Seraphine” are the classical literary documents
for this destructive ascendancy of pure thought in love. Very noteworthy
is it that in both these romances it is =woman= who destroys life and
love by reflection, whilst from earliest days this danger has always
lain in the path of man. It is the fate of the modern woman, of
individual personalities, which is here depicted; this fate makes its
appearance from the moment when woman comes to take a share in the
spiritual life of man. The cold dialectic of Seraphine, who, as Gutzkow
makes one of her lovers say, reverses the natural order of man and
woman, is a necessary product of the love of woman ripening in the
direction of a free personality--happily, however, it is only a
=transient= phenomenon. The fully developed personality will return to
the primitiveness of feeling, and will no longer endure within herself
any kind of division or laceration. The corresponding phenomena in man
have been described by Kierkegaard and Grillparzer in their diaries,
which are classical documents of “reflection-love.”

The love of the present day contains within itself, and nourishes itself
upon, all the above-described spiritual elements of the past. More
especially at the present day is the question of the so-called =free
love= or =free marriage=, disregardant of the legally binding forms of
civil and ecclesiastical marriage, representative of all the heartfelt
needs of highly civilized mankind, hitherto held back, oppressed, and
fettered by the materialism of the time, and still more by its
conventionalism still active beneath its covering of outlived forms. The
problem of free love was first formulated in “Lucinde,” but found in the
young German literature, especially in the writings of Laube, Mundt, and
Dingelstedt, its theoretical foundation; and in the Bohemian life of the
Second Empire free love obtained its practical realization, although the
purely =idyllic= character of this Bohemian life, and its limitation to
the circle of the _dolce far niente_ students and artists, in truth
makes it differ widely from the most intensely personal free love,
=taking its part fully in the struggle for life=, as it presents itself
in the ideal form to modern humanity.

The Second French Empire, whose significance for the spiritual
tendencies of our time was a very great one, allowed two elements of
love, to which we have earlier alluded, to appear with marked
predominance--elements still influential at the present day: the
=satanic-diabolic= element of eroticism, which found its most incisive
expression in the works of Barbey d’Aurevilly (strongly influenced by
the writings of de Sade), of Baudelaire, and more particularly of the
great Félicien Rops; and the purely artistic element, as it appears in
the works of the authors just mentioned, but more especially in the
writings of Théophile Gautier. This “Young France” (to use the name of a
novel of Gautier’s) has influenced the amatory life and the amatory
theory of the present day almost as strongly as young Germany.

At the same time, in the sixties of the nineteenth century
Schopenhauer’s philosophy was dominant in Germany, and his metaphysic
of love, which considered the individual not at all, but the species as
all in all--this =pessimistic= conception of all love found its poetic
expression in Edward Grisebach’s “New Tanhäuser,” published in 1869.
Here, also, it would be a grave error to condemn these erotic poems of
the day, on account of their glowing sensuality, as mere glorifications
of carnal lust. The poet himself was the new Tanhäuser. He wished, as he
often told me, to find expression in these poems for the life-denying as
well as for the life-affirming forces. He sang the pleasure and the
pain, the hopes and the disappointments of modern love. For him love is
indeed the rose =with= the thorns. For this reason the motto of the poem
is a saying of Meister Eckart: “The voluptuousness of the creature is
intermingled with bitterness;” and this is the theme of the poets,
though expressed in numerous variations: “There is no pleasure without
regret.”

But for this reason Grisebach--and in this respect he resembles
Nietzsche--wished none the less joyfully to affirm this life, filled as
it is with pain, and in all its activity bringing with it regrets. In
this sense he is no exclusive pessimist, but an apostle of =activity=,
like the men of young Germany, in whose footsteps, and especially in
those of Heine, he follows. The beautiful saying of Laube, in his
“Liebesbriefen” (Leipzig, 1835, p. 29), “He who has never been shaken to
the depths by any profound sorrow is also ignorant of all deep
rejoicing, he knows no single verse of that enthusiasm which woos the
denied heaven, he experiences no sort of religion, he is capable of no
sacrifice, of no greatness,” is suited also to the “new Tanhäuser,”
which so powerfully influenced German youth during the seventies and
eighties of the nineteenth century.

He who wishes to understand how the various love-problems are
represented in the literature of the present, strongly influenced as it
is by the problem-poems of Ibsen, by Zola’s naturalism, and by the
French symbolism[153] dependent on him, will find it described later in
a special chapter devoted to love in the literature of to-day.

In the following chapter we have to consider one additional influence
which is especially apparent in the love and eroticism of the present
day, and possesses great importance for the individualization of love.
This is the artistic element in modern love.

  [134] H. T. Finck, “Romantic Love and Personal Beauty.”

  [135] _Cf._ G. Hirth, “Ways to Freedom,” pp. 468-472 (Munich, 1903).

  [136] G. Saint-Yves (“La Littérature Amoureuse,” Paris, 1887, p. 25)
  also sees in the æsthetic contemplation of the beloved person the
  fundamental root of individual love. It has gradually developed out of
  the ordinary æsthetic contemplation of nature. An interesting proof of
  this connexion is the Song of Solomon, in which the æsthetic stimuli
  of the beloved one are compared with every possible animate and
  inanimate natural object.

  [137] _Cf._ regarding the numerous variations of this ancient couplet,
  the interesting account given by Arthur Kopp, “Old Proverbs and
  Popular Rhymes for Loving Hearts,” published in the _Zeitschrift des
  Vereins für Volkskunde_, Heft i., pp. 8, 9 (Berlin, 1902).

  [138] _Minne_ is an old German word (now obsolete) for _love_, “the
  love of fair women.” The _minnesinger_ were love-singers who sang
  their own compositions to the accompaniment of the music of harp or
  viol--in fact, they were lyric poets. The most flourishing years of
  this art were from about 1170 to 1250; thus the minnesinger were
  contemporary with and closely akin to the Provençal troubadours. But
  the German development was essentially native, and the minnesinger’s
  treatment of love was characterized by a more ideal note than was
  usually attained by the troubadours. A good, though brief, account
  (with a list of authorities) is given of the minnesinger in
  “Chambers’s Encyclopædia.”--TRANSLATOR.

  [139] Jacob Falke, “The Society of Knighthood in the Epoch of the Cult
  of Women,” p. 49.

  [140] In her letters (“Letters of Ninon de l’Enclos,” with ten
  etchings by Karl Walser, Berlin, 1906), the deep spiritual
  relationships of love found a classical representation.

  [141] _Cf._ Harald Höffding, “Rousseau and his Philosophy,” pp. 86, 89
  (Stuttgart, 1897).

  [142] Emil Du Bois-Reymond, “Frederick II. and Jean Jacques Rousseau.”

  [143] H. Buffenoir, “Jean Jacques Rousseau and Women” (Paris, 1891).

  [144] Erich Schmidt, “Richardson, Rousseau, and Goethe” (Jena, 1875).

  [145] H. Meyer-Benfey, “Lucinde,” published in
  _Mutterschutz--Zeitschrift zur Reform der sexuellen Ethik_, 1906, No.
  5, pp. 173-192. Edited by Dr. Helene Stöcker.

  [146] Felix Poppenberg, “Jean Paul Friedrich Richter’s Liebe und
  Ehestand,” in “Bibelots,” p. 214 (Leipzig, 1904).

  [147] Carl Joel, “Nietzsche und die Romantik,” pp. 13-16 (Jena and
  Leipzig, 1905).

  [148] _Cf._ also Helene Stöcker, “Nietzsche und die Romantik,” in
  _Kölnische Zeitung_, No. 1127, October 29, 1905.

  [149] At the present time but few of my living contemporaries share
  this opinion of Gutzkow, which I myself base upon the careful reading
  of all his works. I may quote, however, with satisfaction the prophecy
  of the deceased dramatist Theodor Wehl. He writes of Gutzkow: “As a
  literary phenomenon he will grow with time. After long, long years,
  out of the literature of our time two characteristic heads will
  emerge--one laughing, and one glancing round him earnestly and
  sorrowfully: the head of Heinrich Heine, and the head of Karl Gutzkow”
  (F. Wehl, “Zeit und Menschen,” “Tagebuch Aufzeichnungen aus den Jahren
  von 1863 bis 1884,” vol. i., p. 297 (Altona, 1889)).

  [150] Karl Gutzkow, “Reminiscences of my Life,” p. 18 (Berlin, 1875).

  [151] “The time of love is not age, it is not youth: the time of love
  is the moment,” says Beate, one of Gutzkow’s characters, at the end of
  the tragedy “Ein Weisser Blatt.”

  [152] K. Frenzel, “Karl Gutzkow,” published in “Büsten und Bilder,”
  pp. 177 and 178 (Hanover, 1864).

  [153] Heinrich Stümcke refers to this connexion between naturalism and
  symbolism in a very thoughtful essay (“Zwischen den Garben,” p. 156;
  Leipzig, 1899).




