CHAPTER XXVIII

SEXUAL HYGIENE


  “_Man scans with scrupulous care the character and pedigree of his
  horse, cattle, and dogs, before he matches them; but when he comes to
  his own marriage, he rarely, or never, takes such care. Yet he might
  by selection do something, not only for the bodily constitution and
  frame of his offspring, but for their intellectual and moral
  qualities._”--CHARLES DARWIN.


CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXVIII

  Sexual hygiene as social hygiene -- Its foundation by Darwin -- Recent
  works -- “Reproductive hygiene” -- Degeneration and regeneration
  (hereditary taint and hereditary enfranchisement) -- Possibility of
  the disappearance of morbid tendencies -- “Eugenics” (Galton) --
  Love’s choice and sexual selection -- Principles -- Darwin’s
  prescriptions regarding sexual selection -- Prohibition of marriage --
  Inheritance of morbid tendencies and morbid constitutions -- Danger of
  alcoholism for the offspring -- Families of drinkers -- Direct
  influence of alcohol upon the germ-plasm -- Observations on this
  subject -- Syphilis as a cause of racial degeneration -- Syphilis and
  the duration of life -- Degenerative effects of tuberculosis -- Direct
  infection -- Inheritance of the tubercular habit of body -- Mental
  disorders, diatheses, and malignant tumours -- Nervous disorders --
  Inheritable atrophy of the female mammary glands -- Recent works on
  this subject -- Effect of excessive youth or excessive age of the
  married pair -- Influence of blood-relationship -- Significance of
  breeding in-and-in in relation to the evolution of the race -- The
  dangers of too close blood-relationship -- Importance of spiritual
  qualities in relation to love’s choice -- The breeding of talent --
  Importance of this in relation to the woman’s question -- In relation
  to the improvement of the race -- Greater resisting powers possessed
  by women towards degenerative influences -- A quotation from Carl Vogt
  -- Unfavourable influence of coercive marriage morality and of
  mammonism -- Importance of racial hygiene and of the sexual sense of
  responsibility.


CHAPTER XXVIII

Sexual hygiene in individual relationships has already been discussed in
previous chapters, and more especially in those upon the prophylaxis and
suppression of venereal diseases, upon the question of sexual
abstinence, upon sexual education, and upon the use of methods for the
prevention of pregnancy. Here we merely propose to deal shortly with the
=social= relationships of the hygiene of the sexual life. After Darwin,
more particularly in his work on the “Descent of Man,” had published
fundamental observations regarding the social importance of sexual
hygiene, other writers, influenced by recent anthropological and
ethnological research, occupied themselves with these problems, more
especially Hegar,[741] A. Ploetz,[742] and R. Kossmann;[743] the
subjects considered by these writers have been aptly comprised under the
name “=reproductive hygiene=,” which constitutes a part of general
racial biology.

Unfortunately, racial biology, as Max Gruber[744] justly remarks, has
formed exaggerated estimates of the ideas of “degeneration” and
“hereditary taint”; and, on the other hand, the complementary ideas of
“regeneration” and “hereditary enfranchisement” have been unduly
neglected. And yet it is certain that these latter influences are
continually in active operation in the direction of the resanation and
invigoration of the race: that the introduction of =new and healthy
blood= is competent to bring about reanimation and regeneration, even in
degenerate families. Gruber says with justice (“Hygiene of the Sexual
Life,” p. 55, 1905):

  “Completely normal, and entirely free from hereditary taint, no single
  human being can be; and, on the other hand, experience teaches us,
  that just as morbid tendencies make their appearance in certain
  families, so also =they may disappear= from these families. Many of
  these tendencies can be rendered ineffective by a suitably chosen mode
  of life for the individual; and by means of repeated crossing with
  stems which are free from these particular taints, the morbid tendency
  can be led to disappear, unless the degenerative impulse is too
  powerful.”

The recognition of this fact does not in the least diminish the great
importance of purposive choice in love and marriage; nor does it
diminish the sense of sexual responsibility in relation to the great
fact of =heredity=. But the recognition of the fortunate fact of
hereditary enfranchisement supports, on the other hand, all our
endeavours in the direction of rational “eugenics” (Galton),[745] in
accordance with which we must, as Nietzsche says, not merely reproduce,
but produce in an upward direction (“_nicht bloss fort-, sondern auch
=hinaufpflanzen= sollen_”).

The central problem of reproductive hygiene is that of =love’s choice=,
of sexual selection. It is a most difficult task, one which is rarely
fulfilled to the utmost, for the right man to find the right woman, so
that their individualities may in every respect correspond to and
complement one another. In most cases it is necessary to be contented
with relative harmony, and with sufficient =health= on both sides. The
laws of a refined, differentiated marriage choice have not yet been
discovered. Havelock Ellis[746] has instituted exhaustive researches on
this subject, without, however, attaining any positive result. He was
only able to establish the general proposition, that in love’s choice
=identity of race= and of =individual= characters (homogamy), and at the
same time =unlikeness in the secondary sexual= characters (heterogamy),
are to be preferred. In other respects, however, very various and
complicated influences are determinative in sexual selection. Havelock
Ellis also detected a natural disinclination towards love between
blood-relatives, which, however, he regards as merely due to the
customary life in close association from childhood onwards.

Darwin propounded the principle for sexual selection, that both sexes
should avoid marriage when in any pronounced degree they were defective,
either physically or mentally. Upon this idea rests the old and widely
diffused custom of killing or exposure of sickly children, as well as
the more recent prohibitions of marriage in certain States of the
American Union--for example, Michigan, in which the marriage (also
sexual union for procreative purposes?) is forbidden on the part of
those mentally diseased and of those who are infected with tubercle or
syphilis.[747]

The most important fundamental principle, however, of rational
reproductive hygiene is, without doubt, that only =healthy= individuals
should pair, or, at any rate, those only whose abnormalities or
diseases, if any, would not injure their offspring, physically or
mentally. Not in disease itself, but in the =inheritance= of disease,
lies the great danger for the deterioration of the family and the race.
It is for this reason that the study of the inheritance of morbid
predispositions and morbid constitutions is of such enormous importance
in racial biology.

With regard to illnesses to which attention must especially be paid in
connexion with sexual selection, we have here, in the first place, to
consider the “three scourges” of humanity: =alcoholism=, =syphilis=, and
=tuberculosis=.

Apart from the fact that alcoholism leads in the drinker himself to
nervous weakness, to mental disturbances of all kinds (delirium tremens,
imbecility, mania, peripheral neuritis, etc.), it also exercises a very
serious influence upon the offspring, who are, unfortunately, in many
cases very numerous,[748] as the study of “drinker families” shows
(_cf._ Jörger, “The Family Zero,” published in the _Archives for Racial
Biology_, 1905, vol. ii., pp. 494-559). Only a very small fraction of
the offspring of such families are physically and mentally normal (about
7 to 17 %); the majority display a =rapidly progressive degeneration=,
which manifests itself physically more especially by the tendency to
tuberculosis and epilepsy, and mentally by the tendency to drunkenness,
crime, and imbecility. Alcohol is a direct poison to the germ cells, so
much so that, according to the degree of drunkenness, it is almost
possible to estimate beforehand the degree of hereditary taint.
Moreover, an =otherwise healthy= father, in a single severe acute
alcoholic intoxication, may procreate a child either quite incompetent
to live, or weakly, or completely degenerate. On the other hand, it has
been observed that a person given to chronic alcoholism is competent,
during a temporary =diminution= in his consumption of alcohol, to
procreate a comparatively vigorous child. From this it follows that
marriage, or sexual union in general for reproductive purposes, with a
man or woman addicted to alcohol, and no less the act of procreation in
a state of intoxication, are absolutely to be condemned.

The danger of alcoholism to the offspring is illustrated by the
experience that about one-eighth of the surviving children of drunken
parents become affected with epilepsy, and that more than one-half of
idiotic children are born of drunken parents (Kraepelin, “The
Psychiatric Duties of the State,” p. 3; Jena, 1900).

In an earlier chapter (pp. 361-363) attention was drawn to the fact that
syphilis rivals alcohol in its potency as a cause of racial
degeneration.[749] Thanks to the researches of Alfred Fournier and of
Tarnowsky, the sinister influence of syphilis in this respect is now
widely recognized. E. Heddaeus rightly[750] asserts that since at the
present day the whole world is contaminated with congenital or acquired
syphilis, the eradication of syphilis is the most important task of
reproductive hygiene. The previously mentioned etiological and
prophylactic-therapeutic researches, among which may be included the
quite recent discovery of syphilitic antibodies in the system of those
who have formerly suffered from syphilis,[751] open to us a prospect of
the realization of this magnificent idea. The weakening and degeneration
of the individual by acquired and inherited syphilis, is also shown by
the recent researches into the influence of syphilis upon the duration
of life, among which I may mention the works of A. Blaschko[752] and
Hans Tilesius.[753] Regarding the disastrous influence of syphilis
continued into the second and third generations, see the monograph of B.
Tarnowsky, “La Famille Syphilitique et sa Descendence” [Clermont (Oise),
1904]. (See note ^{325} to p. 363.)

The third disease leading to degeneration is tuberculosis, which may be
inherited either by direct infection of the germ, or (more frequently)
by the transmission of a predisposition to the offspring. This simple
predisposition, recognized by the so-called “tubercular physique” (long,
thin individuals, with a flattened chest, poorly developed muscles, and
a pale countenance), does not offer any absolute ground for prohibiting
reproductive activity, since the health of the other party to the
marriage may diminish or entirely remove the danger of inheritance. But,
on the other hand, manifest tuberculosis or scrofula is a
contra-indication to marriage.

The same is true of actual =mental disorders=, of severe diatheses, such
as gout, obesity, or diabetes; and of cancer and other malignant
tumours; whereas the bulk of “nervous” affections and other bodily
diseases only exclude marriage in certain special circumstances.[754]

Very unfavourable to the offspring is the atrophy of the female breasts,
and the consequent incapacity for lactation, a matter to which
Mensinga,[755] G. von Bunge,[756] G. Hirth,[757] Emil Abderhalden,[758]
A. Hegar,[759] and others, have referred, and which exercises a very
unfavourable influence upon the offspring, since natural lactation
cannot be adequately replaced by artificial feeding. According to Bunge,
alcoholism, tuberculosis, syphilis, and mental disorders of the ancestry
are the principal causes of atrophy of the mammary glands. Whether
atrophy of the mammary glands is really on the increase, and whether it
is hereditary, are matters demanding, as Abderhalden insists, more
careful critical investigation.

Marriage at an age =too youthful= (below twenty on the part of the
woman, below twenty-four on the part of the man) and at =too advanced=
an age (above forty on the part of the woman, above fifty on the part of
the man) is also disadvantageous to the offspring, as manifested by
higher mortality of the infants, by the more frequent occurrence of
malformations, idiotcy, rickets, etc. Equally disadvantageous is =too
close relationship by blood=,[760] since in this way any unfavourable
tendencies are greatly strengthened. Upon a certain degree of
inbreeding, or, rather, upon an approximation to inbreeding, depends the
formation of every race. The “racial problem” in this sense is a kind of
exaltation of the inbreeding principle, for the very idea of =race=
implies a more or less close relationship between all the members of a
definite stock. Thus the entire absence of fresh blood does not
necessarily give rise to any degeneration; but it is certain that
=long-continued close in-and-in breeding= on the part of near
blood-relatives in the same family results in a =progressive tendency to
degeneration=, because, among those who unite in marriage, the same
morbid tendencies are present, and accumulate in consequence of the
inbreeding. This is shown very clearly by some statistics collected by
Morris (published by Gruber, _op. cit._, p. 32). Marriage between uncle
and niece, or between aunt and nephew, and the, unfortunately, far too
frequent marriages between first cousins, are therefore to be condemned.

The greatest value is to be placed, in love’s choice, upon
=intellectual= qualities. Intelligent persons, and those full of
character, are to be preferred. Precisely in relation to the breeding of
talents, Nietzsche recommended (“Posthumous Works,” vol. xii., p. 188;
Leipzig, 1901) polygamy for men or women of predominant intellectual
capacity, so that they might have the opportunity of reproducing their
kind in intercourse with several persons of the opposite sex, and in
this way, since the later children of the same women are not so powerful
nor of such striking capacity as the first-born, they might have the
possibility of being the parents of several talented and distinguished
individuals. In relation to the woman’s question, the breeding of women
well endowed with talent is a matter of especial interest. Charles
Darwin[761] writes:

  “In order that woman should reach the same standard as man, she ought,
  when nearly adult, to be trained to energy and perseverance, and to
  have her reason and imagination exercised to the highest point; then
  she would probably transmit these qualities chiefly to her adult
  daughters. All women, however, could not be thus raised, unless
  during many generations those who excelled in the above robust virtues
  were married, and produced offspring in larger numbers than other
  women.”

In a valuable work W. Schallmayer[762] has recently discussed the great
importance of the offspring of talented persons in the improvement of
the race, and has considered the details of psychical inheritance.

As in the entire animal world, so also in the human race, the feminine
nature has a more conservative character, one more disinclined to
variations, whether favourable or unfavourable, as contrasted with the
more variable nature of the male, which is also more prone to submit to
degenerative influences. For this reason, in declining races, we meet
many more women free from degeneration than men. Carl Vogt, in a passage
which appears to be very little known, writes on this subject in the
following terms:[763]

  “It is the women, my friend, who maintain the race, who for the
  longest time safeguard the type of the people in body and spirit, and
  for this reason they form the mirror at once of the future and of the
  past which are allotted to that people. You will no doubt have noticed
  how, in many races, there exists a disharmony between men and women,
  so that in one race the male and in another the female stands behind
  the other in physical beauty and in mental development. This
  relationship between the two sexes is precisely that from which we are
  able to learn the past and the future of the nation. Good and bad,
  advance and retrogression, are first undertaken by the man, and by him
  passed to the woman, whose conservative nature much more gradually
  yields to strange influences. But since the stages of mental culture
  through which a race passes are not only reflected in its bodily
  development, but actually depend upon this development, it is easy to
  understand that in a nature which is striving upwards, which we see in
  the process of advance towards better things, the men possess the
  advantage in the matter of beauty and of intellectual capacity;
  whereas when the race is a declining one, the advantages in these
  respects will lie with woman. If you find a race in which the women
  are beautiful, but as a rule the men are ugly and badly formed, you
  can with certainty conclude that this race has long since passed its
  culminating point in development, and has long been undergoing a
  process of decline.”

For racial biology it is at least equally important, if not even more
important, that healthy, vigorous, and talented men should reproduce
their kind, rather than that in love’s choice the corresponding
qualities in women should be regarded as determinative. Racial biology,
if it really wishes to obtain success in the breeding of humanity, is
compelled to demand the abolition of the present evil coercive marriage
morality, and, according to the suggestions of Nietzsche, von Ehrenfels,
and others, will not hesitate, =in certain cases=, to regard polygamy as
desirable, if only from this standpoint--that coercive marriage is the
sole cause of the domination of “mammonism” in the sexual life, to the
deleterious influence of which we have before alluded.[764]

Mammonism is dangerous if for this alone, because it involves =the
annihilation of the sense of sexual responsibility=, and in consequence
of this, natural love is rejected on one side, and all considerations of
a racial hygienic nature are cast away on the other. The lack of both is
the cause of degeneration.

  [741] A. Hegar, “The Sexual Impulse” (Stuttgart, 1894).

  [742] A. Ploetz, “Outlines of Racial Hygiene” (Berlin, 1895).

  [743] R. Kossmann, “Breeding--Politics” (Schmargendorf--Berlin, 1905).

  [744] Max Gruber, “Does Hygiene lead to Racial Degeneration?”
  published in the _Münchener Medizinische Wochenschrift_, October 6 and
  13, 1903.

  [745] Francis Galton, “Eugenics: its Definition, Scope, and Aims”
  (Sociological Society Papers, vols. i. and ii.), 1905; comments on
  this work by A. Ploetz, published in the _Archives for Racial and
  Social Biology_, 1905, vol. ii., pp. 812-829; also W. Schallmayer,
  “Marriage, Inheritance, and the Ethics of Reproduction,” published in
  “The Book of the Child,” edited by Adele Schreiber, vol. i., pp. ix-xx
  (Leipzig and Berlin, 1907); Alfred Grotjahn, “Social Hygiene and the
  Problem of Degeneration” (Jena, 1904).

  [746] Havelock Ellis, “Studies in the Psychology of Sex,” vol. iv.:
  “Selection in Man.”

  [747] Regarding marriage prohibitions, cf. P. Näcke, “Marriage
  Prohibitions,” published in the _Archives for Criminal Anthropology_,
  1906, vol. xxii.; M. Marcuse, “Legislative Marriage Prohibitions for
  Persons who are Diseased or Deficient Mentally or Physically,”
  published in _Sociale Medizin und Hygiene_, 1907, Nos. 2 and 3. It is
  said that in Dakota medical examination of those who wish to marry is
  legally prescribed (_Archives for Criminal Anthropology_, 1903, vol.
  xi., pp. 266, 267).

  [748] See especially the excellent treatise of A. Leppmann,
  “Alcoholism, Morphinism, and Marriage,” published in Senator-Kaminer,
  “Health and Disease in Relation to Marriage and the Married State,” p.
  1057 _et seq._ (London, Rebman Limited, 1906). See also, regarding
  alcohol as a “Racial Destroyer,” the fundamental study by Alfred
  Ploetz, “The Significance of Alcohol in Relation to the Life and
  Development of the Race,” published in the _Archives for Racial and
  Social Biology_, 1904, vol. i., pp. 229-253. [English readers should
  consult the works of Archdall Reid, “The Present Evolution of Man,”
  “Alcoholism, a Study in Heredity,” and “The Principles of
  Heredity.”--TRANSLATOR.]

  [749] See also R. Ledermann, “Syphilis and Marriage,” published in
  Senator-Kaminer, “Health and Disease in Relation to Marriage and the
  Married State,” p. 561 (London, Rebman Limited); Alfred Fournier,
  “Syphilis and Marriage.”

  [750] E. Heddaeus, “The Breeding of Healthy Human Beings,” published
  in the _Allgemeine Medizinische Zentral-Zeitung_, 1901, No. 6.

  [751] A. Wassermann and F. Plaut, “The Occurrence of Syphilitic
  Antibodies in the Cerebrospinal Fluid of General Paralytics,”
  published in the _Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift_, 1906, No. 44.

  [752] A. Blaschko, “The Influence of Syphilis upon the Duration of
  Life,” published in the “Transactions of the Fourth International
  Congress of Medical Examiners in Life Insurance,” pp. 95-149 (Berlin,
  1906).

  [753] Hans Tilesius, “Syphilis in Relation to Life Insurance,” _op.
  cit._, pp. 201-213.

  [754] In the great work of Senator-Kaminer (“Health and Disease in
  Relation to Marriage and the Married State,” London, Rebman Limited,
  1906) we find a detailed account of the circumstances and
  possibilities which have here to be considered.

  [755] Mensinga, “Incapacity for Lactation, and its Cure” (Berlin and
  Neuwied, 1888).

  [756] G. von Bunge, “The Increasing Incapacity of Women to Suckle
  their Children” (Munich, 1903).

  [757] G. Hirth, “The Maternal Breast: its Indispensability and its
  Education for the Restoration of its Primitive Forces,” published in
  “Ways to Love,” pp. 1-57.

  [758] Emil Abderhalden, “The Question of the Incapacity of Mothers to
  Suckle their Children,” published in _Medizinische Klinik_, 1906, No.
  45.

  [759] A. Hegar, “Atrophy of the Mammary Glands and the Incapacity for
  Lactation,” published in the _Archives for Racial and Social Hygiene_,
  1905, vol. ii., pp. 830-844.

  [760] _Cf._ F. Kraus, “Blood-Relationship in Marriage and its
  Consequences to the Offspring,” published in Senator-Kaminer, “Health
  and Disease in Relation to Marriage and the Married State,” p. 79
  (London, Rebman Limited, 1906).

  [761] Charles Darwin, “The Descent of Man,” vol. ii., pp. 354, 355
  (London, 1898).

  [762] W. Schallmayer, “The Sociological Importance of the Offspring of
  Talented Persons, and Psychical Inheritance,” published in the
  _Archives of Racial and Social Biology_, 1905, vol. ii., pp. 36-75.
  _Cf._ also S. R. Steinmetz, “The Offspring of Talented Persons,”
  published in the _Zeitschrift für Sozialwissenschaft_, 1904, No. 1.

  [763] Carl Vogt, “The Ocean and the Mediterranean: Letters of Travel,”
  vol. ii., pp. 203, 204 (Frankfurt-on-the-Main, 1848).

  [764] Alexander von Humboldt (“Journey in Tropical Regions,” vol. ii.,
  p. 17) remarks that in Europe a greatly deformed or hideous girl, if
  only she possesses property, can marry, and that the children
  frequently inherit the malformations of the mother; whereas among
  savage races there exists a natural disinclination to such
  marriages--a disinclination which money is not able to overcome.




