CHAPTER XXII

SEXUAL FETICHISM


  “_With respect to the evolution of physiological love, it is probable
  that its germ is always to be sought and to be found in an individual
  fetichistic charm which a person of one sex exercises upon a person of
  the other sex._”--R. VON KRAFFT-EBING.

CONTENTS OF CHAPTER XXII

  Physiological foundation of sexual fetichism -- Definition -- “Partial
  attraction” -- Theory of fetichism -- Psychological process by which
  it originates -- Idealization and accentuation in love -- The ideal
  isolation of certain parts -- “Lesser” and “greater” fetichism -- The
  most frequent forms of sexual fetichism -- Racial fetichism --
  Peculiar inclinations towards exotic individuals -- Hair fetichism --
  Various forms of this -- The “plait-cutters” -- Trial of a
  plait-cutter -- Hair fetichism in women -- Baldness fetichism --
  Fetichism for other parts of the body -- Breast fetichism -- Genital
  fetichism -- The phallus cult -- Cunnilinctus and fellatio -- A case
  of genital fetichism -- A hermaphrodite fetichist -- Hand fetichism --
  Buttock fetichism -- Smell fetichism -- Red hair and the odour of the
  body -- A passage from d Annunzio’s “Lust” -- Axillary-odour fetichism
  -- The odour of the entire body as a fetich -- Influence of specific
  genital odours -- Skatological fetiches -- “Skatology” in folk-lore --
  The “muse latrinal” -- The “renifleurs” and “épongeurs” -- Sexual
  perfumes -- Influence of flowers and scents -- Sexual taste fetichism
  -- Priapistic means of enjoyment -- Examples -- Fetichism for
  horsewomen -- For bodily defects -- For old men -- Voice fetichism --
  Object fetichism -- Shoe fetichism, or “retifism” -- Explanation of
  these -- Peculiarities of shoe fetichism -- Corset, stocking, and
  handkerchief fetichism -- Fabric and costume fetichism.


CHAPTER XXII

Like algolagnia, =sexual fetichism= rests upon a physiological basis,
and is merely a more or less abnormal increase of fetichistic ideas and
perceptions, which are rooted in the very nature of the sexual
attraction.

By fetichism (derived from the Portuguese _feitico_ Italian
_fetisso_--magic, charm) we understand the limitation of love, its
transference from the entire personality to a =portion= of this
personality, or, it may be, to some =lifeless= physical object =related=
to the personality.[627] This fascinating “portion” of the beloved
personality, or the “object” associated with this personality, is the
sexual “fetich.” Within physiological limits, the part concerned
exercises a particular attraction, and is especially exciting, but in
the ideas of the lover it remains associated with the entire personality
to which it belongs. Fetichism first becomes abnormal, or pathological,
when the partial representation becomes completely divorced from the
general representation of the personality, so that, for example, a plait
of hair or a pocket-handkerchief is loved alone and by itself,
disconnected from the person to whom it belongs.

The development of love can always be referred to fetichistic ideas, for
when we examine critically the first general impression which the
beloved makes upon the lover, we always find that there are certain
=parts= or =functions= which have made the =greatest= impression, and
have exercised a greater erotic influence than other portions. To the
former of these, therefore, the imagination and the sensibility more
especially =cleave=. In my “Contributions to the Etiology of
Psychopathia Sexualis” (vol. ii., p. 311), I defined sexual fetiches as
peculiar =symbols= of the =essence= of the beloved personality, with
which the idea of the entire type is most readily associated. M.
Hirschfeld later enunciated the same views.

As sexual fetiches we may have: (1) =Portions of the body=; (2)
=functions and emanations of the body=; and (3) =objects which have any
kind of relation to the body=.

Under (1) we may enumerate the hand, the foot, the nose, the ears, the
eyes, the hair of the head, the hair of the beard, the throat and the
back of the neck, the breasts, the hips, the genital organs, the
buttocks, the calves. All these parts may constitute sexual fetiches.

The same is true of all the influences enumerated under (2)--viz., gait,
movement, voice, glance, odour, complexion.

Under (3) we may enumerate the clothing as a =whole= (as costume) and in
its individual parts, upper-clothing and underclothing, hat, eyeglasses,
way of dressing the hair, necktie, bodice, corset, chemise, petticoat,
stockings, shoes or boots, apron, handkerchief, clothing materials (fur,
satin, silk), the colour of clothing (mourning, parti-coloured blouses,
white clothing, uniform), fashion (_cul de Paris_, _décolleté_ and
_retroussé_, _tricot_); indeed, clothing fetichism goes so far that a
particular shape of the heel of the shoe, a particular mode of
ornamentation of some particular part of the clothing, and, finally, any
striking part of the clothing, may become a sexual fetich.

This fetichistic influence is further increased by a peculiar
characteristic of human love. This is its tendency towards
=idealization=, =beautification=, and =enlargement= of those parts which
especially affect the senses. This beautification and idealization
extends from the body to the clothing, and to articles in general, used
by the beloved person, but normally remains associated with the entire
personality. It is first by means of the enlargement and accentuation of
a distinct part that this becomes separated from the general idea, and
thus its removal and conversion into a “fetich” is prepared for. In the
chapter on clothing we drew attention to this general anthropological
phenomenon of the enlargement and accentuation of many parts by means of
such measures as painting, articles of clothing, exposure, way of doing
the hair, etc.

Inasmuch as now, by the ideal and actual accentuation of the part under
consideration, it is projected as a more independent structure, and
separates itself from the personality as a whole, it is involuntarily
=isolated= in idea by the fetichist, and becomes =generalized= to
constitute an independent stimulus, which may now, temporarily or
permanently, completely take the place of the personality as a whole.

This physiological process embraces both the “lesser” and the “greater”
fetichism of Binet.

The lesser fetichism consists in this: that the lover, without going so
far as to lose sight completely of the entire person of his beloved,
still directs his attention to =individual= special charms, or is in
general first attracted to the beloved woman by means of =quite
distinct qualities=, such as the shape and smallness of the hand, the
colour and sparkling of the eyes, the abundance and softness of the
hair, the complexion, a distinct odour, a melodious voice, etc. In the
“lesser” fetichism the partial representation plays, indeed, a very
prominent part in the general picture, but does not entirely obliterate
this picture.

In the “greater” fetichism, on the other hand, a particular portion, or
function, or quality, or an article of clothing, or an object of
customary use belonging to the beloved person, is isolated from this
latter, and in a sense becomes transformed into the latter, and assumes
wholly and completely the character of a being capable by itself of
exercising a sexually exciting influence. This is genuine sexual
fetichism.

Binet and von Schrenck-Notzing have referred the genesis of fetichism,
as a rule, to some =chance occurrence= during childhood--to a
fetichistic impression which chanced to coincide with sexual excitement,
and thus obtained a permanently sexual coloration. The time of puberty
and the first sexual relationships are especially dangerous for the
formation of such associations of ideas. Von Schrenck-Notzing rightly
draws attention to the fact that this perverse associative connexion, as
a reaction to powerful external impressions, does not occur only, as
Binet assumes, in predisposed individuals, but is also =quite peculiarly
characteristic of the childish mental life at the time when the brain is
undergoing growth, as well as of the less-developed intellectual powers
of savage races=, among whom at the present time, in quite other
provinces than the sexual, fetichism is cultivated in the most excessive
manner; thus, fetichism is often manifested by persons with perfectly
normal brains. Such chance occurrences for the origination of sexual
fetichism occur in games, in reading, in solitary and mutual
masturbation. Nearly always, in connexion with the genesis of fetichism,
we can prove that there has been some such actual predisposing cause.

In numerous cases of the “greater” fetichism, especially in the category
of the hair fetichists (“plait-cutters”), shoe fetichists, and
handkerchief fetichists, there is also associated a more or less severe
psychopathic constitution, on the foundation of which the fetichistic
impulse has developed as a kind of “=coercive idea=” (obsession). These
are the cases which have the greatest forensic importance, and which
gain publicity.

We shall now proceed to give a brief account of the most important forms
of sexual fetichism, and those most frequently encountered.

First of all, =parts=, =functions=, and =qualities= of the body may
constitute sexual fetiches; the possibilities in this respect, extending
from head to foot, have been enumerated above. Moreover, odd as it may
sound, the =entire human being= may also become a sexual fetich, not as
a whole personality--that would be normal love--but as a =national= or
=racial= individual. In such a case we have the so-called “=racial
fetichism=.” The European newspapers are full of interesting reports of
the peculiar attractive force exercised by exotic individuals, female or
male, such as negroes, Arabs, Abyssinians, Moors, Indians, Japanese,
etc., upon European men and women respectively. Whenever members of such
races come to stay in any European capital, we hear of remarkable love
affairs between white girls and these strangers, of romantic abductions,
and other mad adventures. The novelty, peculiarity, piquancy of the
strange races has the effect of a fetich. The size, the figure, the
physiognomy, tint of skin, smell, tattooing, adornment, costume, speech,
dance, and song, of these savage men exercise a fascinating influence.
White men have from very early times had a peculiar weakness for negroes
and for mulatto women and girls. As early as the eighteenth century
there existed in Paris negro brothels; and somewhat later, after
Napoleon’s Egyptian expedition, negroes and negresses came in large
numbers to Paris, and were utilized for the gratification of the lusts
of both sexes.

Notwithstanding the deeply-rooted racial hatred, even in America racial
fetichism gives rise to numerous connexions of this kind. The “coloured
girl” exercises a powerful attractive force upon the American man; and
even the proud American woman manifests, with an especial frequency in
Chicago, a certain preference for the male negro.[628] But much greater
is the alluring force exercised by the white upon the negro. More
especially among civilized negroes does the white woman play the part of
a fetich. This is the explanation of the frequent rape, or attempted
rape, of white girls on the part of negroes--one of the principal causes
of the Southern lynchings.

Among the parts of the body which act as fetiches, we have especially to
mention the hair of woman’s head. “=Hair fetichism=” is widely diffused,
both in the physiological “lesser” form and in the pathological
“greater” form. The abundance and the colour of the hair have an equal
influence in normal love also as a “fetich.” Hair, “of sweetest flesh,
the tenderest, Sweetest growth,” as Eduard Grisebach terms it in his
“Neue Tanhäuser,” has a profound sexual significance; with primitive
man, also, it probably played the same rôle of a sexually stimulating
“veil” which was later played by tattooing and clothing. The hair of the
head, and special modes of arranging that hair, play an important part
in sexual selection among the savage races. The odour of the hair also
has a sexually stimulating influence, and remains persistent in the
imagination. The softness also of the hair, the waving, curling movement
of woman’s loosened hair, and the rustling of the hair, excite the
imagination. But most important of all is the colour of the hair; and in
this respect =blonde= or reddish-blonde hair unquestionably takes the
first rank as a sexual fetich. Blonde hair exercised such an influence
in the days of the Roman Empire. The demi-monde of all times has
utilized this form of hair fetichism, felt by men, for its own purposes,
either by dyeing the hair a fair colour, or by the wearing of
fair-haired wigs. There exist, also, fetichistic impulses towards brown,
black, and red hair respectively. Jon Lehmann tells (_Breslauer
Zeitung_, August 24, 1906) of a great libertine who was happy with any
or all pretty girls, as long as they had not red hair and were not the
daughters of clergymen. Innumerable times had he made this assertion.
Many years later Lehmann found him as the happy husband of--a red-haired
clergyman’s daughter! “C’est l’amour qui a fait cela,” he answered
laconically to the astonished question why he had been so unfaithful to
the principles of his youth.

Hair fetichism manifests itself in various ways. Many people are,
properly speaking, rather smell fetichists than hair fetichists; they
content themselves simply with smelling the hair, and this constitutes
their only, or their principal, sexual gratification. Other hair
fetichists obtain sexual enjoyment by looking at the hair, or by passing
the fingers through it. The following case, reported by Archenholtz
(“England and Italy,” vol. i., p. 448; Leipzig, 1785), is typical:

  “I was acquainted with an Englishman who was an honourable man; but he
  had a very peculiar taste, which, as he frequently assured me, was
  deeply rooted in his soul. His greatest pleasure, which alone could
  intoxicate his senses, was to comb the hair of a beautiful woman. He
  kept a very handsome mistress for this purpose only. =Love and woman
  did not, in the ordinary sense, come under consideration; he had
  nothing to do except with her hair.= In the hours that suited him, she
  must take down her hair and let him pass his hands through it. This
  operation produced in him the most intense degree of physical
  voluptuousness.”

The most remarkable class of hair-fetichists are the so-called
“=plait-cutters=.” The transition to this morbid state depends upon the
custom, widely diffused in earlier times, of cutting off and preserving
locks of hair as erotic fetiches. This sexual reliquary cult flourished
especially in the eighteenth century, during the period of “sentiment.”
Friedrich S. Krauss reports (“Anthropophyteia,” vol. i., p. 163) that
among the Southern Slavs young men and women gave one another tufts of
pubic hair as sexual fetiches. The “wig-collectors” also belong to the
category of harmless hair fetichists. More serious are the genuine
“plait-cutters”--persons who are accustomed to cut plaits of hair from
the heads of girls, who are happy in the possession of these plaits, and
who obtain sexual gratification simply by looking at and touching them.
These plait-cutters are almost unquestionably pathological individuals,
who act under the influence of coercive impulses. Recently, in Berlin,
two such cases attracted public attention. The judicial proceedings
connected with the former of these cases elicited such interesting
details regarding the development, psychology, and activity of plait
fetichism that it is worth preserving, and is therefore given here at
length, quoted from a report in the _Berliner Tageblatt_, No. 118, of
March 6, 1906.

  PERVERSITIES BEFORE THE LAW COURTS.

  The plait-cutter whose arrest attracted so much attention appeared
  yesterday in the Assessor’s Court, under the presidency of the
  judicial assessor Förster. The accused, Robert S., was a student of
  the Technical High School at Charlottenburg. The accused was
  prosecuted and defended by counsel. He was born at Valparaiso in the
  year 1883. The accusation was that, between the months of November and
  January last, he had, in sixteen cases, in the public streets, cut
  plaits of hair from the heads of young girls, taking also the ribbons
  with which their hair was tied; this charge was one of theft. In
  twelve cases also he was accused of bodily maltreatment and actual
  injury. Two medical experts were present to advise the court. During
  the inquiry the public was excluded from the court, but the
  representatives of the Press were admitted.

  The accused replied to the inquiries of the President, that he had
  come to Germany in the year 1888, and that he had been at school in
  Thorn, Bergedorf, and Hamburg. In Hamburg he had passed his final
  examination, and had received a good report on leaving. He had always
  had a special fondness for mathematics; he had studied for one term at
  Munich. He had always worked very hard. He admitted that in sixteen
  cases he had cut plaits of hair from the heads of girls in the streets
  of Berlin. In his rooms =thirty-one plaits= had been
  found.--_President_: Had you such tendencies in earlier
  years?--_Accused_: Yes; at the age of sixteen years I secretly, one
  evening, cut some hair from the head of my sister, thirteen years of
  age, and kept it. I have always had a desire for beautiful long hair;
  finally, this desire became so strong that I was unable to resist it
  any longer. The first time that I cut some hair from the head of a
  girl was the day of the entrance of the Crown Princess. I do not know
  why I suddenly was unable to resist the impulse. It became more
  powerful after I returned from a journey to South America, which I
  made as a voluntary machinist. The voyage lasted five months. I had
  worked very hard while on board. During the whole voyage I was in a
  gloomy mood, and when I returned the impulse became continually
  greater.--_President_: In what way did the impulse affect
  you?--_Accused_: I frequently ran after little girls without being
  able to gratify the desire to possess their hair. Then I succeeded,
  amid the crowd at the entrance festivities Unter den Linden, to cut
  some loose hair from the head of a girl with a pair of scissors,
  without the girl becoming aware of it.--_President_: What did you do
  with the hair?--_Accused_: Nothing at all.--_President_: What did you
  think about while you where doing it?--_Accused_: Nothing. I simply
  put the hair into my pocket.--_President_: And afterwards?--_Accused_:
  Several times Unter den Linden I cut loose hair from girls’
  heads.--_President_: When did you begin to cut off entire
  plaits?--_Accused_: In November, at the entrance of the King of Spain.
  Then, in the “Opernplatz,” I cut a plait from the head of a child; the
  girl did not notice it, and I remained quiet. The plait was fastened
  with ribbon.--_President_: What did you do with the plait?--_Accused_:
  I took it home, combed it, and put it in a box on my writing-table, on
  which was the inscription “Mementoes.” I afterwards frequently =took
  the hair out and kissed it=. Often I laid it on my pillow and rested
  my head on it.--_President_: Were you not fully aware that you were
  doing something wrong, and that you were interfering profoundly with
  the rights of another individual?--_Accused_: I did not think about
  it.--_President_: If the proceedings were now to come to an end, and
  if you were discharged, would you do the same thing again?--_Accused_:
  I do not think that I should do it again, now that I have experienced
  what the consequences are.--_President_: Can you give security that in
  the future your will will be stronger than the impulse?--_Accused_: I
  cannot give any guarantee.--_President_: Have you never read in the
  papers that the citizens of Berlin were very much agitated by this
  cutting off of girls’ hair?--_Accused_: I have read nothing of the
  kind.--_President_: When were you arrested?--_Accused_: On January 27.
  From a girl whose hair was plaited in two plaits I cut one plait; when
  she came near me again, I wanted to cut off the other plait, and then
  I was arrested.--_President_: Is it true that you put a ribbon round
  each plait of hair, and marked it with the date you had cut it
  off?--_Accused_: To some extent I did so.--_President_: Have you ever
  had sexual relations with woman?--_Accused_: No, never. I have only
  had a strong impulse to gain possession of beautiful long
  hair.--_President_: Would not long beautiful men’s hair have satisfied
  you as well?--_Accused_: Yes.--_Counsel for the Defence_: Did you not
  have this morbid impulse in quite early youth? You told me that you
  remembered the hair of many girls from the time that you were at
  school in Thorn. At that time you were eight years old. You said to
  me that you had thought no more about the persons to whom the hair
  belonged, but only, and all the more, about their hair.--_Accused_:
  That is correct. It is indifferent to me whether the person to whom
  the hair belonged is young and beautiful or old and ugly: my only
  interest is in the hair.--_President_: Have you the same interest in
  white hair?--_Accused_: My attraction is only to fair hair.--In reply
  to a further question on the part of the President, the accused
  declared that he had been a very active member of the academic
  gymnastic club, and that he belonged to a students’ purity
  alliance.--_Counsel for the Defence_: The accused has stated that,
  while he is at work, it often happens that suddenly plaits of hair
  seem to appear before his eyes. He often has reveries in which it
  seems to him that in all countries women and girls with beautiful hair
  are at his disposal, and that he is able to rob them of their hair.
  Among his colleagues the accused has always felt himself to be thrust
  into the background. He had the feeling that he was =destined for
  great things=, and that his comrades would not recognize this. The
  accused, whose father is dead, had received assistance for his
  studies; his brother is an officer at sea; one of his sisters is
  mentally disordered.--Of the witnesses who had been summoned to
  attend, three only were examined. Captain von W., whose daughter, when
  walking in the Leipzigerstrasse, had been robbed of part of her hair
  by the accused, gave evidence that the affair had had very
  disagreeable consequences to his daughter. Since that time the child
  had suffered from a terrible feeling of anxiety; she had experienced a
  nervous shock, and frequently cried out anxiously in the middle of the
  night, because she was dreaming of the plait-cutter.--The next
  witness, Frau Gall, an old acquaintance of the family of the accused,
  described his character as exceptionally good. All who knew him had
  been astonished to hear of his actions; no one who knew him had ever
  observed this passion for hair. Recently he had obviously been
  overstrained mentally, and very distrait; generally speaking, he was
  not high-spirited and happy, like other young fellows. According to
  further evidence given by this witness, regarding the family history,
  it appeared that the accused was affected with congenital
  taint.--Undergraduate Schmeding, President of “the Alliance for the
  Maintenance of Chastity,” had become intimately acquainted with the
  accused, in consequence of their holding similar views. He described
  him as having a good character, but as dreamy, melancholy, and
  reserved, and unfamiliar with harmless cheerfulness and joy.--Dr.
  Hoffmann, one of the medical advisers to the court, said: We have in
  this case to do with a peculiar mode of activity of the sexual
  impulse. Although such an impulse does not completely abrogate
  responsibility, still, in this case, normal responsibility is greatly
  limited from early youth onwards. The accused has an imaginative
  belief that he is not sufficiently esteemed; he believes that he could
  make himself invisible; he believes that he could build a great
  castle, and furnish the rooms of this castle with innumerable plaits
  of hair. Moreover, he is =hereditarily tainted with insanity=, and
  bodily examination shows that he has =numerous stigmata of
  degeneration=. § 51 of the Criminal Code should apply to this case.
  Since the accused can hardly be supposed to have the power of
  controlling his impulse, it would appear necessary that he should be
  treated in a lunatic asylum.--Dr. Leppmann, the other medical adviser,
  said: The case before us is one of extreme rarity. The accused
  suffers from severe congenital taint, and exhibits a number of
  stigmata of degeneration. At the time his offences were committed the
  accused was certainly emotionally disturbed, and at the present time
  is still ill. Von Krafft-Ebing reports only a few such cases, and the
  same is true of Dr. Moll. The accused was incapable of free voluntary
  determination; he is still unhealthy, and must be treated as a sick
  man.--_Counsel for the Prosecution_: If the accused had been in
  possession of normal mental health, it would have been necessary to
  punish him with exceptional severity, for such offences as his
  profoundly endangered public security; it would not be right for any
  gaps to exist in our Criminal Code which made the punishment of such
  an offence impossible. We may dispute in detail under which paragraph
  the offence comes, but there can be no question but that it is a
  punishable offence. The medical experts had, however, shown that the
  accused was not fully sane, and he must be dealt with from this
  standpoint.

  The President summed up as follows: The public sense of justice
  naturally demands severe punishment for such an offence. The accused,
  however, is not criminally responsible. In view of the evidence given
  by the medical experts, the accused must be discharged, on the
  understanding that his family will immediately take steps to have him
  confined in an asylum. It was possible that this decision would not
  satisfy every one, but in view of the evidence before the court, no
  other course was possible.

This case appears to have had a suggestive influence, for shortly
afterwards a cashier, Alfred L., was arrested, who had cut plaits of
hair from the heads of two young girls. In his home were found, in
addition, seventeen plaits of hair, which he had =bought=, among these
the queue of a Chinese! Already when a schoolboy L. had been affected
with this morbid impulse.

There exist also homosexual or pseudo-homosexual hair fetichists,
especially among women, to whom the hair of another woman’s head becomes
a fetich. Remarkable is the following passage in Gabriele d’Annunzio’s
romance “Lust” (pp. 210-212; Berlin, 1902):

  “‘Do you remember,’ asked Donna Francesca (of her friend Donna Maria),
  ‘at school, how we all wished to comb your hair? how we used to fight
  about it every day? Imagine, Andreas, that blood used actually to
  flow! Ah, I shall never forget the scenes between Carlotta Fiordelise
  and Gabriella Vanni. It was maniacal! To comb the hair of Maria
  Bandinelli was the one ardent desire of all the girls, great and small
  alike. The infection spread through the whole school. There followed
  prohibitions, warnings, severe punishment; we were even threatened
  with having our own hair cut off. Do you remember, Maria? All our
  heads were bewitched by the black snake which hung from your head to
  your heels. What passionate tears every evening! And when Gabriella
  Vanni, from jealousy, made that treacherous cut with a pair of
  scissors! Gabriella had really lost her wits. Do you remember?...’”

  “Andreas remarked that none of his lady friends had had such a growth
  of hair, so thick, so dark a forest, in which she could conceal
  herself. The history of all these young girls, in love with a plait of
  hair, filled with passion and jealousy, who burned to lay comb and
  hands upon this living treasure, seemed to him a most stimulating and
  poetic episode of cloistral life.”

There exists also a negative hair fetichism. Hirschfeld reports the case
of a prostitute who was a well-developed fetichist for baldness. Among
many races, removal of the hair is a means of sexual stimulation.

Nose, lips, mouth (_cf._ Belot’s novel, “La Bouche de Madame X.”), and
ears, can all become the objects of sexual fetichism, though in most
cases only of the lesser fetichism; the eyes also, which as fetichistic
charms play an important part, and are effective especially through
their colour. It is uncertain if, in this relationship, clear blue eyes
or sparkling black eyes have the greater importance. The female breast
is a natural physiological fetich for the male sex. But over and above
this there exists a remarkable variety of breast fetichists, who employ
the isolated breast, separated from the body, for the binding of books.
According to Witkowski (“Tetoniana,” p. 35; Paris, 1898), certain
bibliomaniacs and erotomaniacs have books bound with women’s skin taken
from the region of the breast, so that the nipple forms a characteristic
swelling on the cover! A further account of these human skin fetichists
is given by Dr. Picard in the _Gazette Médicale de Paris_, July 19,
1906.

Von Krafft-Ebing contests the existence of a special “=genital
fetichism=”; but the universal diffusion of the phallus-cult contradicts
his opinion; the phallus-cult is unquestionably connected with
fetichistic ideas, which are embodied in the symbols of the lingam and
the yoni. According to Weininger,[629] woman, speaking generally, is
=only= a phallus fetichist; man exists for her only as a sexual organ.

  “I think people have been unwilling to see--or they have been
  unwilling to say; they have hardly formed accurate idea for
  themselves--what the copulatory organ of a man is for a woman, as
  wife, even as virgin; what it psychologically signifies; how it
  dominates to the uttermost the entire life of woman, although she
  herself may be completely unconscious of the fact. I do not mean at
  all that woman regards the male penis as beautiful, or even pretty.
  She regards it as man regards the Gorgon’s head, as the bird regards
  the snake--it exercises upon her a hypnotizing, magical, fascinating
  influence.”

Goethe lays stress on the beauty which the male penis has in woman’s
eyes, when, in the paralipomena to the first part of “Faust” (Weimar
edition, vol. xiv., p. 307), he makes Satan say in his address to women:

  “Für euch sind zwei Dinge
   Von köstlichem Glanz,
   Das leuchtende Gold
   Und ein glänzender....”

Georg Hirth also (“Ways to Love,” pp. 566, 567) speaks of an instinctive
belief on the part of woman in the “beauty and the paradisaical force of
the phallus,” and he regrets “the unnatural depreciation and mendacious
concealment of this portion of the male body” by the conventional
morality discovered by the world of men.

The wide diffusion of the genital fetichistic tendencies in man and
woman is clearly manifested by the extremely frequent occurrence of
isolated adoration of the genital organs in the practices of
cunnilinctus and fellatio, which in numerous individuals completely
replace normal coitus.

  Very rare is a case, which came under my own observation, of isolated
  penis-foreskin fetichism in a heterosexual man. He is thirty years of
  age, and a student of natural science, in whom at the age of four
  years the first manifestation of sexual excitement occurred; later,
  towards the age of puberty, sexual excitement became always associated
  with the mental representation of a male penis, and more especially of
  the foreskin of that organ, whilst he felt antipathy to the idea of
  actual sexual intercourse with men, and felt attracted to women.
  Still, from time to time the imaginative representation of the membrum
  virile takes possession of his mind as a sort of coercive idea, and
  when this happens the patient masturbates, at the same time often
  making sketches of a penis.

A singular case of exclusively genital fetichism is reported by P.
Garnier (“Les Fetichistes,” pp. 170-174; Paris, 1896).

  This case was that of a man, forty-eight years of age, who in normal
  sexual intercourse was almost completely impotent, and who could
  obtain sexual gratification only by the =observation of the genital
  organs of human beings and animals=, and who, as in the case just
  mentioned, was sexually excited by making sketches of genital organs.
  This person exhibited obvious symptoms of nervous disorder.

We might regard it as hardly possible that cases should exist in
which the fetichism related to genital organs of a dubious
character--“hermaphrodite fetichism”; and yet a veritable case of such
hermaphrodite fetichism has come under my own observation.

  The case is that of an officer, who is always searching for
  hermaphroditic formations of the genital organs. He is pretty well
  known in this respect among the prostitutes of Berlin, who make use of
  his inclination for their own advantage, by a demonstration to him of
  reputed hermaphrodites. He has had the good fortune to discover
  several real hermaphrodites; but notwithstanding all his endeavours,
  his affection has never been returned.

The hand, especially a woman’s hand, is not simply an object for
cheiromancy, but is also the occasion of a sexual fetichism by which the
hand is spiritualized. The beautiful, finely-formed hand is a powerful
love-charm. Binet reports the case of a young man in whom sexual
excitement was exclusively produced by a woman’s hand, and he was always
on the look-out for opportunities of touching the beautiful hands of
women. Isolated foot fetichism is rarer; it is generally associated with
the very common shoe fetichism (_vide infra_). The buttocks, the
kallipygian charms of women, have always been a sexual fetich for men.
Among flagellants this may become isolated as a fetich, and completely
divorced from the personality as a whole. For such individuals, in
sexual relationships, only the posteriora exist.

Among the bodily functions which are capable of acting as fetiches, the
=smell=, the emanation of the body, unquestionably takes the first
place. Smell fetichism is a very frequent phenomenon. Regarding the
intimate relationships between the sense of smell and the _vita
sexualis_, and regarding the existence of certain specific sexual
odours, I have already recorded the most important facts in the first
chapter of the present work (pp. 15-18). As sexual odours, the emanation
from the hair of the head, the emanation from the armpits, the smell of
the genital region, and the general emanation from the skin, come under
consideration.[630]

The fetichism for red hair is frequently no more than an apparent hair
fetichism; much more often it is really a smell fetichism, because since
early times red-haired individuals have been supposed to emit an
emanation having a powerful sexually exciting influence. In the Romance
countries, France and Italy, this belief is universally diffused. I
quote another passage from d’ Annunzio’s “Lust” (p. 66):

  “‘Have you noticed the armpits of Madame Chlysoloras?’ The Duke of
  Beffi indicated the dancer, upon whose alabaster forehead a firebrand
  of red hair was shining, like that which we see in the priestesses of
  Alma Tadema. Her bodice was fastened on the shoulders by very narrow
  straps, and in the armpits one could see two luxuriant tufts of red
  hair.

  “Bomminaco begins to speak at large regarding the peculiar odour which
  is diffused by red-haired women.”

Binet tells of a student of medicine who one day, when sitting on a
bench reading, suddenly had an erection of the penis, and on looking
round he saw sitting on the same bench a red-haired woman, whom he had
not before consciously observed, from whom a powerful odour emanated.

The =odour of the armpits= also appears in France to find fetichistic
lovers. The French cocotte commonly assumes during coitus a position in
which the man has his nose in one of her armpits, and sometimes
spontaneously offers this position. At the unrestrained dances in the
Parisian winter season, more especially at the very free _bal des quat’z
arts_, held in the spring, we frequently see the men sniffing at the
armpits of the girls.

It is unquestionable that the odour of the body at large may in certain
circumstances act as a sexual fetich. Many peculiar love relationships
prove this fact. From very early times among the common people the odour
of sweat has been regarded as a powerful aphrodisiac. I may allude to
the case, reported by von Krafft-Ebing, of King Henry III., who dried
his face with the chemise of Maria of Cleves, dripping with sweat, and
thereby was inspired with a passionate love for her. I may refer also to
the case of a peasant who, when dancing, was accustomed to dry the face
of his partner with his handkerchief, which he had carried in his own
armpit, and thus produced in her voluptuous excitement. An Indian king,
when choosing his beloved, did so simply by smelling the clothing
moistened by their perspiration, and selected the woman whose clothing
was most agreeable to his sense of smell.[631] Oscar A. H. Schmitz
informed me that an English traveller in India related to him that in
India lovers sometimes changed underclothing. Each wears the shirt
impregnated with the perspiration of the other. The love of Princess
Chimay for the gipsy Rigó is stated to have been a typical “smell-love”
of this kind. It is said that the odour of negresses and mulattresses
has an especially powerful exciting influence upon Frenchmen, of which
the poet Baudelaire is mentioned as an example; this writer declared
that smell was the third and highest degree of voluptuousness. Recently
Peter Altenberg, in “Prodromos,” has described the sexual importance of
the odour of the body at large. Such typical smell fetichists,
luxuriating in the general emanation of the feminine body, are mentioned
by Macé, the chief of the Parisian police. He describes very vividly
how, in the larger shops, such men move about among the feminine
customers, in order to intoxicate themselves with the odours proceeding
from them.

In opposition to these general bodily odours, the specific genital
odours play in the human species a subordinate part; they are for the
most part perceived as unpleasant. Falck[632] is of opinion that this
antipathy only becomes apparent after sexual intercourse, whilst before
such intercourse the odour of the genital organs has a slight erotic
stimulating influence. Many cases of cunnilinctus and fellatio are
certainly referable to olfactory impressions. The following case is
plainly indicative of the sexual influence of genital odours:

  An Italian woman loved, after sexual intercourse, to retain on her
  hands the odour of the genital secretions, and on such occasions,
  although usually a scrupulously clean person, she avoided washing her
  hands. She was especially fond of mingling this odour with that of
  cigarette smoke. She was entirely free from stigmata of degeneration;
  on the contrary, she was an extremely robust, well-developed person.

One of the most remarkable and monstrous phenomena in the domain of
sexual perversities is that by which the =processes and products of the
ultimate stages of metabolism= become associated with libido sexualis,
become true sexual fetiches, and can more especially give rise to a
formal speciality of smell fetichism. The position of the orifices of
the alimentary canal and of the urinary apparatus in the =immediate
neighbourhood= of the genital organs gives rise to a certain associative
conjunction between the functions of these parts, and this association
is rendered more intimate by various circumstances (_cf._ my
“Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. ii., pp.
224, 225). In addition, the idealizing influence of libido sexualis
plays a part here; the identification of the desired individual with the
lover’s own ego leads the disagreeable and disgusting character of those
processes and parts to disappear, and ultimately brings about a
comparison between the real æsthetic charm of the beloved person and the
coarsely material processes in question, which takes the form of a
sensually stimulating contrast. There is not in this case any quite
unusual association of ideas on the part of a completely degenerate
individual; we have rather to do with a =general anthropological and
ethnological phenomenon=. I was myself the first to give an elaborate
proof of this fact (“Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia
Sexualis,” vol. ii., pp. 223-240); and I illuminated more especially the
remarkable rôle of the so-called “=skatology=”--that is, the sexual
influence of the ultimate products of human metabolism, and of the
processes associated therewith--in =folk-lore=, in =mythology=, in
=superstition=, and in the =literature of all nations and times=. In
this way do we first arrive at an understanding of the possibility of an
erotic influence exercised by defæcation and micturition, which is so
often observed at the present day; above all, in the so-called “=muse
latrinale=”--in the widely diffused practice of scribbling obscene
inscriptions on the walls of public lavatories[633]--which finds
expression also in sexual “=copralagnia and urolagnia=.”

Compare, in this connexion, S. Soukhanoff, “Contribution à l’Étude des
Perversions Sexuelles,” published in _Annales Médico-Psycologiques_,
January and February, 1901--a case of urolagnia and copralagnia in a
habitual masturbator, twenty-seven years of age. A remarkable case of
sexual excitement produced by the odour of newly made hay, in a lawyer,
twenty-five years of age, is reported by Amrain (“Anthropophyteia,” vol.
iv., p. 237). This person took off all his clothes, and rolled as if
intoxicated in the hay, until ejaculation occurred. He called his
impulse a “vis major.”

It is clear that masochistic and sadistic elements play an important
part in many cases of urolagnia and copralagnia. But there are pure
forms of smell fetichism in this category, as we see in the case of
those persons who become sexually excited in consequence of the smell of
the urine and fæces of the beloved person; or, speaking generally, by
the smell of those excrements, the person from whom they are derived
being a matter of indifference. These are the _renifleurs_ and
_épongeurs_ of the French observers, who haunt public lavatories in
order to obtain sexual excitement from the smell of the excrements of
persons of the opposite sex. There even exist individuals who have the
acts of defæcation and micturition performed by others on to their own
bodies; in this case the masochistic element is associated with the
element of smell fetichism.

A greater rôle than that of the natural sexual odours is at the present
day played by =artificial perfumes=, which, as a fact, are frequently
employed as sexual fetiches. Their origin, and the cause of their use,
has been already explained (p. 17). From early times prostitution and
the demi-monde have made the most extensive use of these artificial
scents for the sexual allurement of men. Men are, in general, more
sensitive to sexual stimulation by means of perfumes than women are.
These perfumes are partly derived from plants; in fact, the simple odour
of certain flowers produces sexual excitement--a fact well known to many
peasant girls.[634] Other sexually stimulating scents are derived from
the animal kingdom, such as musk, civet, and ambergris. A French firm of
perfumers advertises a perfume--“charme secret”--the local employment of
which is clearly suggested in the advertisement. But in most cases only
a portion of the clothing or underclothing is perfumed. There exist
typical perfume fetichists, who can, as a rule, be sexually excited only
by means of some definite perfume, in the absence of which they are
impotent.

In comparison with smell, =taste= plays a very minor part. Still, a
primevally old popular custom, the use of “priapistic flavouring
agents,” rests upon fetichistic ideas of this kind. Cunnilinctus and
fellatio are perhaps also committed with the desire to taste the genital
organs; just as the same must be the case with those not very rare
practices in which flavouring agents or beverages are brought into
contact with the genital organs, are impregnated, as it were, with their
essence, and then swallowed. To this belongs also the following original
case:

  A man obtains sexual gratification only in this way: by introducing a
  cigar, small end first, into the female genital passage, leaving it
  there a long time, and then smoking it, with the end thus impregnated
  in his mouth.

There exist many other forms of fetichism. It is impossible to enumerate
all these varieties. I shall, for example, refer only to the not
uncommon fetichism of women for athletes and acrobats, or for singers
and actors; and to that of men for dancers, and especially for
horsewomen, whose appearance has quite a fascinating influence on many
men, more particularly when they are actually on horseback.

Analogous to the previously described hermaphrodite fetichism is
fetichism for other bodily defects, as for obese, lame, and hunchbacked
persons.

  Von Krafft-Ebing reported the case of a man who loved only girls with
  a limp, which I can parallel by an observation of my own. A merchant,
  thirty-two years of age (with slight stigmata of
  degeneration--Darwinian pointed ears, slight asymmetry of the
  skull--but in other respects with a very powerful build of body, and
  having performed his year’s service in the cavalry), who since ten
  years of age has been addicted to excessive masturbation, =is potent
  only in intercourse with a girl who limps=. He cannot state when this
  perversion first manifested itself in him. In any case, it has
  developed into a typical fetichism.

To this category belong, also, the abnormal love towards =elderly=
individuals, heterosexual “gerontophilia,” and the fetichistic influence
of certain peculiarities of character. Thus, it is an old experience
that a Don Juanesque, bold, and self-assertive appearance on the part of
men, and even depravity and sexual lawlessness, exercise a fascinating
influence upon many women. This is, as it were, homologous to the
previously described influence of prostitutes and fast women upon men.

A peculiar fetich is constituted also by the human =voice=. A
sympathetic voice has often been the cause of a violent love passion.
Singers, both men and women, know something of this powerful fetichistic
charm of the voice.

Finally, sexual fetichism can extend to objects in relationship with the
beloved person, or with any human individual (“=object fetichism=”), and
this is very readily accounted for by the =personification= and
=spiritualization= of these objects of human use, and especially of
clothing, which appears to be a =part of the personality= itself, and so
quite naturally becomes a sexual fetich. (See the detailed description
given on p. 140 _et seq._)

Among the various forms of clothing fetichism, by far the commonest is
=shoe fetichism=, or “=retifism=.” After the Marquis de Sade, who in his
writings described the most important sexual perversions, active
algolagnia has been termed “sadism”; and after Sacher-Masoch, passive
algolagnia has been termed “masochism.” I consider, therefore, that with
the same and even greater justification, as I have already suggested in
my work on Rétif de la Bretonne,[635] foot and shoe fetichism may be
denoted by the term “retifism,” for it is this sexual perversion which
manifests itself most markedly in Rétif’s life (1734-1806), and in him,
also, this perversion found its first literary interpreter and apostle,
in exactly the same manner as sadism was made known in wider circles by
de Sade and masochism by Sacher-Masoch. Rétif first described typical
foot fetichism and shoe fetichism, and also wrote the first history of
this subject. In him this tendency appeared at the early age of ten
years, as he relates (vol. i., pp. 90-93) in his celebrated
autobiography--a work greatly admired by Goethe, Schiller, Wieland, and
other heroes of our classical literature. In this place, also, he gives
a very good explanation of the genesis of foot fetichism and shoe
fetichism:

  “This fondness for beautiful feet, =which in me is so strong that it
  unfailingly arouses my most powerful lust, and leads me to ignore any
  ugliness in other respects=--does it arise from any physical or
  emotional predisposition? In all those who have this peculiarity it is
  very strong. Is it connected with any preference for an easy gait, for
  a gracious, voluptuous, dancing movement? The peculiar attraction
  which the foot-covering exercises is only the reflex of the preference
  for beautiful feet, which stimulate even an animal. =Thus a man comes
  to prize the covering almost as much as the thing itself.= The passion
  which, since childhood, I have felt for such beautiful foot-coverings
  was an acquired inclination, which, however, rested on a natural
  preference. But the love for a small foot has a physical basis, which
  finds expression in the Latin proverb, ‘Parvus pes, barathrum
  grande.’”

Rétif was a typical shoe fetichist. He trembled with desire on viewing a
woman’s shoe; he blushed when he saw it, as if it were the girl herself.
As a true fetichist, he =collected= the slippers and shoes of his
mistresses; he kissed them, and smelled them, and sometimes masturbated
into them. Especially fascinating to him were the =high heels= of
women’s shoes, a sight of which sufficed to produce in him intense
sexual excitement.

Shoe-fetichism existed in ancient times, and long ago it was assumed
that there was a relationship between the foot and the _vita sexualis_.
References to this matter will be found in my earlier work,
“Contributions to the Etiology of Psychopathia Sexualis,” vol. ii., pp.
323-325. In modern shoe-fetichism masochistic ideas (ideas of being
trodden on, of placing the beloved’s foot on the back of the neck) or
sadistic ideas (ideas of treading upon the beloved’s feet, etc.) played
a part; also there were associated sensations of smell proceeding from
the leather; the colour of the shoes is likewise of importance. The
“foot-wooers”--thus are the shoe fetichists named in the speech of
prostitutes--have the most varied inclinations in respect of different
shapes and fashions of shoes. One loves ladies’ boots, another
riding-boots, a third dancing-shoes, a fourth slippers, a fifth actually
loves coarse wooden peasants’ shoes. Also, in respect of ornamentation,
colour, heels, etc., fancies vary. In one case known to me, a clergyman
was purely a heel fetichist. Hirschfeld records (“The Nature of Love,”
p. 148) the case of a man who was sexually excited only by means of the
ankle-wrinkles in boots; also the case of a woman who was fascinated by
the dusty boots of men, etc.[636]

Of other articles of clothing, the =corset=, =petticoat=, =chemise=,
=apron=, and, more especially, =stockings= and =handkerchiefs=, form
objects of sexual fetichism. Félicien Rops appears to have been at once
a corset fetichist and a stocking fetichist, for he frequently draws
feminine figures naked, except in respect of their wearing corset and
stockings. There are many men who are able to complete intercourse with
a woman only when she keeps on her stockings or shoes. Others are
excited only by the articles of clothing; for instance, they represent
in imagination corset shops, in order, by looking at the corsets, to
produce orgasm and ejaculation; or they collect or steal[637] feminine
underclothing, especially handkerchiefs, in order to obtain sexual
excitement from smelling or looking at these, or to masturbate with
them. Finally, there exist fetichists for particular materials, such as
fur (loved especially by masochists), satin, silk, or even entire
costumes, such as a woman’s riding-dress, tights, mourning, etc. D’Estoc
describes, under the name “la course des araignées” (“the spider race”),
the appearance of twenty women in a brothel, who were clothed only in
long black gloves reaching to the shoulders and long black stockings. In
the Berlin newspapers there recently appeared an account of the
fetichism of a prince for long “gants de suède” on slender women’s arms.
Unique in its kind would appear to be the case of the spectacle
fetichist, of which Hirschfeld gives an account (_op. cit._, pp. 145,
146).

  [627] M. Hirschfeld has therefore suggested the apt name “partial
  attraction” for fetichism; unfortunately, no adjective can be formed
  from this term, so that for practical purposes the foreign word is
  more applicable.

  [628] _Cf._ Felix Baumann, “From Darkest America,” pp. 10, 41.

  [629] “Sex and Character,” pp. 340, 341.

  [630] In the second volume of “Anthropophyteia” (1905, pp. 445-447),
  under the title, “The Sense of Smell in Relation to the Vita
  Sexualis,” I have published a contribution to this interesting theme.
  I addressed questions regarding the matter to various authorities; and
  among the answers I obtained, I must mention more especially those of
  Dr. Th. Petermann and Oscar A. H. Schmitz, to whom I owe valuable
  accounts and observations, which are in part utilized in the present
  chapter.

  [631] Witmalett, “Man and Woman in Conjugal Union,” p. 48 (Leipzig and
  Stuttgart); J. P. Frank, “System of a Complete Medicinal Polity,” vol.
  ii., pp. 78, 79 (Frankenthal, 1791).

  [632] N. D. Falck, “Treatise on Venereal Diseases.”

  [633] Martial alludes (“Epigrams,” xii. 61, verses 7-10) to the
  obscene “carmina quæ legunt cacantes.”

  [634] Many women are sexually excited by the flowers of the garden
  chestnut-tree, the smell of which resembles that of the semen of the
  male. A correspondent has communicated to me several observations of
  this nature from the Taunus district. G. d’Anunzio (“Lust,” p. 10)
  also describes the awakening of libido sexualis in woman by the
  smelling of a bouquet of flowers.

  [635] Eugen Dühren (Iwan Bloch), “Rétif de la Bretonne: the Man, the
  Author, and the Reformer” (Berlin, 1906).

  [636] _Cf._, regarding shoe fetichism, also the work of P. Näcke, “Un
  Cas de Fétichisme de Souliers, etc.,” published in the _Bulletin de la
  Société de Médicine Mentale de Belgique_, 1894.

  [637] The Berlin newspapers, a few years ago, were full of accounts of
  such a thief, who stole underclothing (_cf._ _Berliner Tageblatt_, No.
  465, September 13, 1903). He was the terror of all housewives in the
  western suburbs of Berlin. Ultimately he was caught, and proved to be
  a workman, K. W. by name. In his house the police found a varied
  assortment of underclothing.




