Chapter XX. A canticle to Jane.



There are many donkeys owned in these nooks among the hills, and some
of the thriftier families keep donkey-chairs (or 'cheers,' as they call
them) to let to the casual summer visitor. This vehicle is a regular
Bath chair, into which the donkey is harnessed. Some of them have a tiny
driver's seat, where a small lad sits beating and berating the donkey
for the incumbent, generally a decrepit dowager from London. Other
chairs are minus this absurd coachman's perch, and in this sort I take
my daily drives. I hire the miniature chariot from an old woman who
dwells at the top of Gorse Hill, and who charges one and fourpence the
hour, It is a little more when she fetches the donkey to the door, or
when the weather is wet or the day is very warm, or there is an unusual
breeze blowing, or I wish to go round the hills; but under ordinary
circumstances, which may at any time occur, but which never do, one and
four the hour. It is only a shilling, if you have the boy to drive
you; but, of course, if you drive yourself, you throw the boy out of
employment, and have to pay extra.

It was in this fashion and on these elastic terms that I first met you,
Jane, and this chapter shall be sacred to you! Jane the long-eared, Jane
the iron-jawed, Jane the stubborn, Jane donkeyer than other donkeys,--in
a word, MULIER! It may be that Jane has made her bow to the public
before this. If she has ever come into close relation with man or woman
possessed of the instinct of self-expression, then this is certainly not
her first appearance in print, for no human being could know Jane and
fail to mention her.

Pause, Jane,--this you will do gladly, I am sure, since pausing is
the one accomplishment to which you lend yourself with special
energy,--pause, Jane, while I sing a canticle to your character. Jane
is a tiny--person, I was about to say, for she has so strong an
individuality that I can scarcely think of her as less than human--Jane
is a tiny, solemn creature, looking all docility and decorum, with long
hair of a subdued tan colour, very much worn off in patches, I fear, by
the offending toe of man.

I am a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals,
and I hope that I am as tender-hearted as most women; nevertheless, I
can understand how a man of weak principle and violent temper, or a man
possessed of a desire to get to a particular spot not favoured by Jane,
or by a wish to reach any spot by a certain hour,--I can understand how
such a man, carried away by helpless wrath, might possibly ruffle Jane's
sad-coloured hair with the toe of his boot.

Jane is small, yet mighty. She is multum in parvo; she is the rock of
Gibraltar in animate form; she is cosmic obstinacy on four legs. When
following out the devices and desires of her own heart, or resisting
the devices and desires of yours, she can put a pressure of five hundred
tons on the bit. She is further fortified by the possession of legs
which have iron rods concealed in them, these iron rods terminating
in stout grip-hooks, with which she takes hold on mother earth with an
expression that seems to say,--

     'This rock shall fly
      From its firm base as soon as I.'

When I start out in the afternoon, Mrs. Bobby frequently asks me where I
am going. I always answer that I have not made up my mind, though what
I really mean to say is that Jane has not made up her mind. She never
makes up her mind until after I have made up mine, lest by some unhappy
accident she might choose the very excursion that I desire myself.



Chapter XXI. I remember, I remember.



For example, I wish to visit St. Bridget's Well, concerning which there
are some quaint old verses in a village history:--

     'Out of thy famous hille,
      There daylie springyeth,
      A water passynge stille,
      That alwayes bringyeth
      Grete comfort to all them
      That are diseased men,
      And makes them well again
          To prayse the Lord.

     'Hast thou a wound to heale,
      The wyche doth greve thee;
      Come thenn unto this welle;
      It will relieve thee;
      Nolie me tangeries,
      And other maladies,
      Have there theyr remedies,
          Prays'd be the Lord.'

St. Bridget's Well is a beautiful spot, and my desire to see it is a
perfectly laudable one. In strict justice, it is really no concern of
Jane whether my wishes are laudable or not; but it only makes the
case more flagrant when she interferes with the reasonable plans of a
reasonable being. Never since the day we first met have I harboured a
thought that I wished to conceal from Jane (would that she could say as
much!); nevertheless she treats me as if I were a monster of caprice. As
I said before, I wish to visit St. Bridget's Well, but Jane absolutely
refuses to take me there. After we pass Belvern churchyard we approach
two roads: the one to the right leads to the Holy Well; the one to the
left leads to Shady Dell Farm, where Jane lived when she was a girl. At
the critical moment I pull the right rein with all my force. In vain:
Jane is always overcome by sentiment when she sees that left-hand road.
She bears to the left like a whirlwind, and nothing can stop her mad
career until she is again amid the scenes so dear to her recollection,
the beloved pastures where the mother still lives at whose feet she
brayed in early youth!

Now this is all very pretty and touching. Her action has, in truth, its
springs in a most commendable sentiment that I should be the last to
underrate. Shady Dell Farm is interesting, too, for once, if one can
swallow one's wrath and dudgeon at being taken there against one's will;
and one feels that Jane's parents and Jane's early surroundings must
be worth a single visit, if they could produce a donkey of such unusual
capacity. Still, she must know, if she knows anything, that a person
does not come from America and pay one and fourpence the hour (or
thereabouts) merely in order to visit the home of her girlhood, which is
neither mentioned in Baedeker nor set down in the local guide-books as a
feature of interest.

Whether, in addition to her affection for Shady Dell Farm, she has an
objection to St. Bridget's Well, and thus is strengthened by a
double motive, I do not know. She may consider it a relic of
popish superstition; she may be a Protestant donkey; she is a
Dissenter,--there's no doubt about that.

But, you ask, have you tried various methods of bringing her to terms
and gaining your own desires? Certainly. I have coaxed, beaten, prodded,
prayed. I have tried leading her past the Shady Dell turn; she walks
all over my feet, and then starts for home, I running behind until I
can catch up with her. I have offered her one and tenpence the hour; she
remained firm. One morning I had a happy inspiration; I determined on
conquering Jane by a subterfuge. I said to myself: “I am going to start
for St. Bridget's Well, as usual; several yards before we reach the two
roads, I shall begin pulling, not the right, but the left rein. Jane
will lift her ears suddenly, and say to herself: 'What! has this girl
fallen in love with my birthplace at last, and does she now prefer it
to St. Bridget's Well? Then she shall not have it!' Whereupon Jane
will race madly down the right-hand road for the first time, I pulling
steadily at the left rein to keep up appearances, and I shall at last
realise my wishes.”

This was my inspiration. Would you believe that it failed utterly? It
should have succeeded, and would with an ordinary donkey, but Jane saw
through it. She obeyed my pull on the left rein, and went to Shady Dell
Farm as usual.

Another of Jane's eccentricities is a violent aversion to perambulators.
As Belvern is a fine, healthy, growing country, with steadily increasing
population, the roads are naturally alive with perambulators; or at
least alive with the babies inside the perambulators. These are the more
alarming to the timid eye in that many of them are double-barrelled,
so to speak, and are loaded to the muzzle with babies; for not only
do Belvern babies frequently appear as twins, but there are often two
youngsters of a perambulator age in the same family at the same time.
To weave that donkey and that Bath 'cheer' through the narrow streets
of the various Belverns without putting to death any babies, and without
engendering the outspoken condemnation of the screaming mothers and
nurserymaids, is a task for a Jehu. Of course Jane makes it more
difficult by lunging into one perambulator in avoiding another, but she
prefers even that risk to the degradation of treading the path I wish
her to tread.

I often wish that for one brief moment I might remove the lid of Jane's
brain and examine her mental processes. She would not exasperate me so
deeply if I could be certain of her springs of action. Is she old, is
she rheumatic, is she lazy, is she hungry? Sometimes I think she means
well, and is only ignorant and dull; but this hypothesis grows less and
less tenable as I know her better. Sometimes I conclude that she does
not understand me; that the difference in nationality may trouble her.
If an Englishman cannot understand an American woman all at once,
why should an English donkey? Perhaps it takes an American donkey to
comprehend an American woman. Yet I cannot bring myself to drive any
other donkey; I am always hoping to impress myself on her imagination,
and conquer her will through her fancy. Meanwhile, I like to feel myself
in the grasp of a nature stronger than my own, and so I hold to Jane,
and buy a photograph of St. Bridget's Well!



