Chapter XVIII. I meet Mrs. Bobby.



Mrs. Bobby and I were born for each other, though we have been a long
time in coming together. She is the pink of neatness and cheeriness, and
she has a broad, comfortable bosom on which one might lay a motherless
head, if one felt lonely in a stranger land. I never look at her without
remembering what the poet Samuel Rogers said of Lady Parke: 'She is so
good that when she goes to heaven she will find no difference save that
her ankles will be thinner and her head better dressed.'

No raw fowls visit my bedside here; food comes as I wish it to come when
I am painting, like manna from heaven. Mrs. Bobby brings me three times
a day something to eat, and though it is always whatever she likes, I
always agree in her choice, and send the blue dishes away empty. She
asked me this morning if I enjoyed my 'h'egg,' and remarked that she had
only one fowl, but it laid an egg for me every morning, so I might know
it was 'fresh as fresh.' It is certainly convenient: the fowl lays the
egg from seven to seven-thirty, I eat it from eight to eight-thirty; no
haste, no waste. Never before have I seen such heavenly harmony between
supply and demand. Never before have I been in such visible and unbroken
connection with the source of my food. If I should ever desire two eggs,
or if the fowl should turn sulky or indolent, I suppose Mrs. Bobby would
have to go half a mile to the nearest shop, but as yet everything has
worked to a charm. The cow is milked into my pitcher in the morning, and
the fowl lays her egg almost literally in my egg-cup. One of the little
Bobbies pulls a kidney bean or a tomato or digs a potato for my dinner,
about half an hour before it is served. There is a sheep in the garden,
but I hardly think it supplies the chops; those, at least, are not
raised on the premises.

One grievance I did have at first, but Mrs. Bobby removed the thorn
from the princess' pillow as soon as it was mentioned. Our next-door
neighbour had a kennel of homesick, discontented, and sleepless puppies
of various breeds, that were in the habit of howling all night until
Mrs. Bobby expostulated with Mrs. Gooch in my behalf. She told me that
she found Mrs. Gooch very snorty, very snorty indeed, because the pups
were an 'obby of her 'usbants; whereupon Mrs. Bobby responded that if
Mrs. Gooch's 'usbant 'ad to 'ave an 'obby, it was a shame it 'ad to be
'owling pups to keep h'innocent people awake o' nights. The puppies were
removed, but I almost felt guilty at finding fault with a dog in this
country. It is a matter of constant surprise to me, and it always give
me a warm glow in the region of the heart, to see the supremacy of the
dog in England. He is respected, admired, loved, and considered, as he
deserves to be everywhere, but as he frequently is not. He is admitted
on all excursions; he is taken into the country for his health; he is a
factor in all the master' plans; in short, the English dog is a member
of the family, in good and regular standing.

My interior surroundings are all charming. My little sitting-room, out
of which I turned Mrs. Bobby, is bright with potted ferns and flowering
plants, and on its walls, besides the photographs of a large and
unusually plain family, I have two works of art which inspire me anew
every time I gaze at them: the first a scriptural subject, treated by an
enthusiastic but inexperienced hand, 'Susanne dans le Bain, surprise par
les Deux Vieillards'; the second, 'The White Witch of Worcester on her
Way to the Stake at High Cross.' The unfortunate lady in the latter
picture is attired in a white lawn wrapper with angel sleeves, and is
followed by an abbess with prayer-book, and eight surpliced choir-boys
with candles. I have been long enough in England to understand the
significance of the candles. Doubtless the White Witch had paid four
shillings a week for each of them in her prison lodging, and she
naturally wished to burn them to the end.

One has no need, though, of pictures on the walls here, for the universe
seems unrolled at one's very feet. As I look out of my window the last
thing before I go to sleep, I see the lights of Great Belvern, the
dim shadows of the distant cathedral towers, the quaint priory seven
centuries old, and just the outline of Holly Bush Hill, a sacred seat of
magic science when the Druids investigated the secrets of the stars,
and sought, by auspices and sacrifices, to forecast the future and to
penetrate the designs of the gods.

It makes me feel very new, very undeveloped, to look out of that window.
If I were an Englishwoman, say the fifty-fifth duchess of something, I
could easily glow with pride to think that I was part and parcel of such
antiquity; the fortunate heiress not only of land and titles, but
of historic associations. But as I am an American with a very recent
background, I blow out my candle with the feeling that it is rather
grand to be making history for somebody else to inherit.



Chapter XIX. The heart of the artist.



I am almost too comfortable with Mrs. Bobby. In fact I wished to be
just a little miserable in Belvern, so that I could paint with a frenzy.
Sometimes, when I have been in a state of almost despairing loneliness
and gloom, the colours have glowed on my canvas and the lines have
shaped themselves under my hand independent of my own volition. Now,
tucked away in a corner of my consciousness is the knowledge that I need
never be lonely again unless I choose. When I yield myself fully to the
sweet enchantment of this thought, I feel myself in the mood to paint
sunshine, flowers, and happy children's faces; yet I am sadly lacking
in concentration, all the same. The fact is, I am no artist in the true
sense of the word. My hope flies ever in front of my best success, and
that momentary success does not deceive me in the very least. I know
exactly how much, or rather how little, I am worth; that I lack the
imagination, the industry, the training, the ambition, to achieve any
lasting results. I have the artistic temperament in so far that it is
impossible for me to work merely for money or popularity, or indeed for
anything less than the desire to express the best that is in me without
fear or favour. It would never occur to me to trade on present approval
and dash off unworthy stuff while I have command of the market. I am
quite above all that, but I am distinctly below that other mental and
spiritual level where art is enough; where pleasure does not signify;
where one shuts oneself up and produces from sheer necessity; where one
is compelled by relentless law; where sacrifice does not count; where
ideas throng the brain and plead for release in expression; where effort
is joy, and the prospect of doing something enduring lures the soul on
to new and ever new endeavour: so I shall never be rich or famous.

What shall I paint to-day? Shall it be the bit of garden underneath my
window, with the tangle of pinks and roses, and the cabbages growing
appetisingly beside the sweet-williams, the woodbine climbing over the
brown stone wall, the wicket-gate, and the cherry-tree with its fruit
hanging red against the whitewashed cottage? Ah, if I could only paint
it so truly that you could hear the drowsy hum of the bees among the
thyme, and smell the scented hay-meadows in the distance, and feel that
it is midsummer in England! That would indeed be truth, and that would
be art. Shall I paint the Bobby baby as he stoops to pick the cowslips
and the flax, his head as yellow and his eyes as blue as the flowers
themselves; or that bank opposite the gate, with its gorse bushes in
golden bloom, its mountain-ash hung with scarlet berries, its tufts
of harebells blossoming in the crevices of rock, and the quaint low
clock-tower at the foot? Can I not paint all these in the full glow of
summer-time in my secret heart whenever I open the door a bit and admit
its life-giving warmth and beauty? I think I can, if I can only quit
dreaming.

I wonder how the great artists worked, and under what circumstances
they threw aside the implements of their craft, impatient of all but
the throb of life itself? Could Raphael paint Madonnas the week of his
betrothal? Did Thackeray write a chapter the day his daughter was
born? Did Plato philosophise freely when he was in love? Were there
interruptions in the world's great revolutions, histories, dramas,
reforms, poems, and marbles when their creators fell for a brief moment
under the spell of the little blind tyrant who makes slaves of us all?
It must have been so. Your chronometer heart, on whose pulsations you
can reckon as on the procession of the equinoxes, never gave anything to
the world unless it were a system of diet, or something quite uncoloured
and unglorified by the imagination.



