CHAPTER V

UNION AND PROGRESS


Had not Khalid in his retirement touched his philosophic raptures with
a little local colouring, had he not given an account of his tramping
tour in the Lebanons, the hiatus in Shakib's _Histoire Intime_ could
not have been bridged. It would have remained, much to our vexation
and sorrow, somewhat like the ravine in which Khalid almost lost his
life. But now we return, after a year's absence, to our Scribe, who at
this time in Baalbek is soldering and hammering out rhymes in praise
of Niazi and Enver, Abd'ul-Hamid and the Dastur (Constitution).

"When Khalid, after his cousin's marriage, suddenly disappeared from
Baalbek," writes he, "I felt that something had struck me violently
on the brow, and everything around me was dark. I could not
withhold my tears: I wept like a child, even like Khalid's mother. I
remember he would often speak of suicide in those days. And on the
evening of that fatal day we spent many hours discussing the question.
'Why is not one free to kill himself,' he finally asked, 'if one is
free to become a Jesuit?' But I did not believe he was in earnest.
Alas, he was. For on the morning of the following day, I went up to
his tent on the roof and found nothing of Khalid's belongings but
a pamphlet on the subject, 'Is Suicide a Sin?' and right under the
title the monosyllable LA (no) and his signature. The frightfulness
of his intention stood like a spectre before me. I clapped one hand
upon the other and wept. I made inquiries in the city and in the
neighbouring places, but to no purpose. Oh, that dreadful, dismal
day, when everywhither I went something seemed to whisper in my
heart, 'Khalid is no more.' It was the first time in my life that I
felt the pangs of separation, the sting of death and sorrow. The
days and months passed, heartlessly confirming my conjecture, my
belief.

"One evening, when the last glimmer of hope passed away, I sat down
and composed a threnody in his memory. And I sent it to one of the
newspapers of Beirut, in the hope that Khalid, if he still lived,
might chance to see it. It was published and quoted by other journals
here and in Egypt, who, in their eulogies, spoke of Khalid as the
young Baalbekian philosopher and poet. One of these newspapers, whose
editor is a dear friend of mine, and of comely ancient virtue, did not
mention, from a subtle sense of tender regard for my feelings, the
fact that Khalid committed suicide. 'He died,' the Notice said, 'of a
sudden and violent defluxion of rheums,[1] which baffled the
physician and resisted his skill and physic.' Another journal, whose
editor's religion is of the Jesuitical pattern, spoke of him as a
miserable God-abandoned wretch who was not entitled to the right of
Christian burial; and fulminated at its contemporaries for eulogising
the youthful infidel and moaning his death, thus spreading and
justifying his evil example.

"And so, the days passed, and the months, and Khalid was still dead.
In the summer of this year, when the Constitution was proclaimed, and
the country was rioting in the saturnalia of Freedom and Equality, my
sorrow was keener, deeper than ever. Not I alone, but the cities and
the deserts of Syria and Arabia, missed my loving friend. How
gloriously he would have filled the tribune of the day, I sadly
mused.... O Khalid, I can never forgive this crime of thine against
the sacred rites of Friendship. Such heartlessness, such inexorable
cruelty, I have never before observed in thee. No matter how much thou
hast profited by thy retirement to the mountains, no matter how much
thy solitude hath given thee of health and power and wisdom, thy cruel
remissness can not altogether be drowned in my rejoicing. To forget
those who love thee above everything else in the world,--thy mother,
thy cousin, thine affectionate brother--"

And our Scribe goes on, blubbering like a good Syrian his complaint
and joy, gushing now in verse, now in what is worse, in rhymed prose,
until he reaches the point which is to us of import. Khalid, in the
winter of the first year of the Dastur (Constitution) writes to him
many letters from Beirut, of which he gives us not less than fifty!
And of these, the following, if not the most piquant and interesting,
are the most indispensable to our History.

Letter I (As numbered in the Original)

  My loving Brother Shakib:

  To whom, if not to you, before all, should I send the first word
  of peace, the first sign of the resurrection? To my mother? To
  my cousin Najma? Well, yes. But if I write to them, my letters
  will be brought to you to be read and answered. So I write now
  direct, hoping that you will convey to them these tidings of
  joy. 'Tis more than a year now since I slinked out of Baalbek,
  leaving you in the dark about me. Surely, I deserve the
  chastisement of your bitterest thoughts. But what could I do?
  Such is the rigour of the sort of life I lived that any
  communication with the outside world, especially with friends
  and lovers, would have marred it. So, I had to be silent as the
  pines in which I put up, until I became as healthy as the
  swallows, my companions there. When we meet, I shall recount to
  you the many curious incidents of my solitude and my journey in
  the sacred hills of Lebanon. To these auspicious mountains, my
  Brother, I am indebted for the health and joy and wisdom that
  are now mine; and yours, too, if you consider.

  Strange, is it not, that throughout my journey, and I have
  passed in many villages, nothing heard I of this great political
  upheaval in the Empire. Probably the people of the Lebanons
  cherish not the Revolution. There is so much in common, I find,
  between them and the Celtic races, who always in such instances
  have been more royalists than the king. And I think Mt. Lebanon
  is going to be the Vendée of the Turks.

  I have been in Beirut but a few days. And truly, I could not
  believe my eyes, when in the Place de la Concorde (I hope the
  Turks are not going to follow in the steps of the French
  Revolutionists in all things), I could not believe my eyes,
  when, in this muddy Square, on the holy Stump of Liberty, I
  beheld my old friend the Spouter dispensing to the turbaned and
  tarboushed crowd, among which were cameleers and muleteers with
  their camels and mules, of the blessing of that triple political
  abracadabra of the France of more than a century passed.
  Liberty, Fraternity, Equality!--it's a shame that the show has
  been running for six months now and I did not know it. I begin
  by applauding the Spouters of Concord Square, the donkey that I
  am. But how, with my cursed impulsiveness, can I always keep on
  the sidewalk of reason? I, who have suckled of the milk of
  freedom and broke the bottle, too, on my Nurse's head, I am not
  to blame, if from sheer joy, I cheer those who are crowning her
  on a dung-hill with wreaths of stable straw. It's better,
  billah, than breaking the bottle on her head, is it not? And so,
  let the Spouters spout. And let the sheikh and the priest and
  the rabbi embrace on that very Stump and make up. Live the Era
  of Concord and peace and love! Live the Dastur! Hurrah for the
  Union and Progress Heroes! Come down to Beirut and do some
  shouting with your fellow citizens.

