



                  *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note regarding the illustrations

  "The Book of Khalid" contains illustrations drawn by Khalil
  Gibran, the other early Arab-American writer (author of "The
  Prophet"), that are well-known and exceptional. There are no
  captions in the original book, and are very difficult to describe
  in words. Their locations in the text have been marked with the
  text '[Illustration]'. The reader is encouraged to view these
  illustrations in the HTML version of this ebook.

                  *       *       *       *       *




                          THE BOOK OF KHALID




                                 THE
                            BOOK OF KHALID

                                  BY
                             AMEEN RIHANI

[Illustration]




                               NEW YORK
                        DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
                                 1911




                           COPYRIGHT, 1911
                       BY DODD, MEAD & COMPANY

                      _Published, October_, 1911




CONTENTS

BOOK THE FIRST

IN THE EXCHANGE

 CHAPTER                                                          PAGE
         AL-FATIHAH                                                  v
         TO MAN                                                      3
       I PROBING THE TRIVIAL                                         5
      II THE CITY OF BAAL                                           14
     III VIA DOLOROSA                                               25
      IV ON THE WHARF OF ENCHANTMENT                                34
       V THE CELLAR OF THE SOUL                                     46
      VI THE SUMMER AFTERNOON OF A SHAM                             58
     VII IN THE TWILIGHT OF AN IDEA                                 70
    VIII WITH THE HURIS                                             83

BOOK THE SECOND

IN THE TEMPLE

         TO NATURE                                                  97
       I THE DOWRY OF DEMOCRACY                                     99
      II SUBTRANSCENDENTAL                                         115
     III THE FALSE DAWN                                            125
      IV THE LAST STAR                                             130
       V PRIESTO-PARENTAL                                          143
      VI FLOUNCES AND RUFFLES                                      154
     VII THE HOWDAJ OF FALSEHOOD                                   167
    VIII THE KAABA OF SOLITUDE                                     181
      IX SIGNS OF THE HERMIT                                       192
       X THE VINEYARD IN THE KAABA                                 202

BOOK THE THIRD

IN KULMAKAN

         TO GOD                                                    217
       I THE DISENTANGLEMENT OF THE ME                             219
      II THE VOICE OF THE DAWN                                     231
     III THE SELF ECSTATIC                                         239
      IV ON THE OPEN HIGHWAY                                       249
       V UNION AND PROGRESS                                        274
      VI REVOLUTIONS WITHIN AND WITHOUT                            287
     VII A DREAM OF EMPIRE                                         298
    VIII ADUMBRATIONS                                              311
      IX THE STONING AND FLIGHT                                    325
       X THE DESERT                                                333
         AL-KHATIMAH                                               341




AL-FATIHAH


In the Khedivial Library of Cairo, among the Papyri of the Scribe of
Amen-Ra and the beautifully illuminated copies of the Korân, the
modern Arabic Manuscript which forms the subject of this Book, was
found. The present Editor was attracted to it by the dedication and
the rough drawings on the cover; which, indeed, are as curious, if not
as mystical, as ancient Egyptian symbols. One of these is supposed to
represent a New York Skyscraper in the shape of a Pyramid, the other
is a dancing group under which is written: "The Stockbrokers and the
Dervishes." And around these symbols, in Arabic circlewise, these
words:--"_And this is my Book, the Book of Khalid, which I dedicate to
my Brother Man, my Mother Nature, and my Maker God._"

Needless to say we asked at once the Custodian of the Library to give
us access to this Book of Khalid, and after examining it, we hired an
amanuensis to make a copy for us. Which copy we subsequently used as
the warp of our material; the woof we shall speak of in the following
chapter. No, there is nothing in this Work which we can call ours,
except it be the Loom. But the weaving, we assure the Reader, was a
mortal process; for the material is of such a mixture that here and
there the raw silk of Syria is often spun with the cotton and wool of
America. In other words, the Author dips his antique pen in a modern
inkstand, and when the ink runs thick, he mixes it with a slabbering
of slang. But we started to write an Introduction, not a Criticism.
And lest we end by writing neither, we give here what is more to the
point than anything we can say: namely, Al-Fatihah, or the Opening
Word of Khalid himself.

With supreme indifference to the classic Arabic proem, he begins by
saying that his Book is neither a Memoir nor an Autobiography, neither
a Journal nor a Confession.

"Orientals," says he, "seldom adventure into that region of fancy and
fabrication so alluring to European and American writers; for, like
the eyes of huris, our vanity is soft and demure. This then is a book
of travels in an impalpable country, an enchanted country, from which
we have all risen, and towards which we are still rising. It is, as it
were, the chart and history of one little kingdom of the Soul,--the
Soul of a philosopher, poet and criminal. I am all three, I swear, for
I have lived both the wild and the social life. And I have thirsted in
the desert, and I have thirsted in the city: the springs of the former
were dry; the water in the latter was frozen in the pipes. That is
why, to save my life, I had to be an incendiary at times, and at
others a footpad. And whether on the streets of knowledge, or in the
open courts of love, or in the parks of freedom, or in the cellars and
garrets of thought and devotion, the only _saki_ that would give me a
drink without the asking was he who called himself Patience....

"And so, the Book of Khalid was written. It is the only one I wrote in
this world, having made, as I said, a brief sojourn in its civilised
parts. I leave it now where I wrote it, and I hope to write other
books in other worlds. Now understand, Allah keep and guide thee, I do
not leave it here merely as a certificate of birth or death. I do not
raise it up as an epitaph, a trade-sign, or any other emblem of
vainglory or lucre; but truly as a propylon through which my race and
those above and below my race, are invited to pass to that higher
Temple of mind and spirit. For we are all tourists, in a certain
sense, and this world is the most ancient of monuments. We go through
life as those pugreed-solar-hatted-Europeans go through Egypt. We are
pestered and plagued with guides and dragomans of every rank and
shade;--social and political guides, moral and religious dragomans: a
Tolstoy here, an Ibsen there, a Spencer above, a Nietzche below. And
there thou art left in perpetual confusion and despair. Where wilt
thou go? Whom wilt thou follow?

"Or wilt thou tarry to see the work of redemption accomplished? For
Society must be redeemed, and many are the redeemers. The Cross,
however, is out of fashion, and so is the Dona Dulcinea motive.
Howbeit, what an array of Masters and Knights have we, and what a
variety! The work can be done, and speedily, if we could but choose.
Wagner can do it with music; Bakunin, with dynamite; Karl Marx, with
the levelling rod; Haeckel, with an injection of protoplasmic logic;
the Pope, with a pinch of salt and chrism; and the Packer-Kings of
America, with pork and beef. What wilt thou have? Whom wilt thou
employ? Many are the applicants, many are the guides. But if they are
all going the way of Juhannam, the Beef-packer I would choose. For
verily, a gobbet of beef on the way were better than canned
protoplasmic logic or bottled salt and chrism....

"No; travel not on a Cook's ticket; avoid the guides. Take up thy
staff and foot it slowly and leisurely; tarry wherever thy heart
would tarry. There is no need of hurrying, O my Brother, whether
eternal Juhannam or eternal Jannat await us yonder. Come; if thou
hast not a staff, I have two. And what I have in my Scrip I will
share with thee. But turn thy back to the guides; for verily we see
more of them than of the ruins and monuments. Verily, we get more
of the Dragomans than of the Show. Why then continue to move and
remove at their command?--Take thy guidebook in hand and I will
tell thee what is in it.

"No; the time will come, I tell thee, when every one will be his own
guide and dragoman. The time will come when it will not be necessary
to write books for others, or to legislate for others, or to make
religions for others: the time will come when every one will write his
own Book in the Life he lives, and that Book will be his code and his
creed;--that Life-Book will be the palace and cathedral of his Soul in
all the Worlds."




BOOK THE FIRST

IN THE EXCHANGE




[Illustration]

TO MAN


_No matter how good thou art, O my Brother, or how bad thou art, no
matter how high or how low in the scale of being thou art, I still
would believe in thee, and have faith in thee, and love thee. For do I
not know what clings to thee, and what beckons to thee? The claws of
the one and the wings of the other, have I not felt and seen? Look up,
therefore, and behold this World-Temple, which, to us, shall be a
resting-place, and not a goal. On the border-line of the Orient and
Occident it is built, on the mountain-heights overlooking both. No
false gods are worshipped in it,--no philosophic, theologic, or
anthropomorphic gods. Yea, and the god of the priests and prophets is
buried beneath the Fountain, which is the altar of the Temple, and
from which flows the eternal spirit of our Maker--our Maker who
blinketh when the Claws are deep in our flesh, and smileth when the
Wings spring from our Wounds. Verily, we are the children of the God
of Humour, and the Fountain in His Temple is ever flowing. Tarry, and
refresh thyself, O my Brother, tarry, and refresh thyself._

                                                               KHALID.




CHAPTER I

PROBING THE TRIVIAL


The most important in the history of nations and individuals was once
the most trivial, and vice versa. The plebeian, who is called to-day
the man-in-the-street, can never see and understand the significance
of the hidden seed of things, which in time must develop or die. A
garter dropt in the ballroom of Royalty gives birth to an Order of
Knighthood; a movement to reform the spelling of the English language,
initiated by one of the presidents of a great Republic, becomes
eventually an object of ridicule. Only two instances to illustrate our
point, which is applicable also to time-honoured truths and
moralities. But no matter how important or trivial these, he who would
give utterance to them must do so in cap and bells, if he would be
heard nowadays. Indeed, the play is always the thing; the frivolous is
the most essential, if only as a disguise.--For look you, are we not
too prosperous to consider seriously your ponderous preachment? And
when you bring it to us in book form, do you expect us to take it into
our homes and take you into our hearts to boot?--Which argument is
convincing even to the man in the barn.

But the Author of the Khedivial Library Manuscript can make his
Genius dance the dance of the seven veils, if you but knew. It is
to be regretted, however, that he has not mastered the most subtle
of arts, the art of writing about one's self. He seldom brushes
his wings against the dust or lingers among the humble flowers close
to the dust: he does not follow the masters in their entertaining
trivialities and fatuities. We remember that even Gibbon interrupts
the turgid flow of his spirit to tell us in his Autobiography that he
really could, and often did, enjoy a game of cards in the evening. And
Rousseau, in a suppurative passion, whispers to us in his Confessions
that he even kissed the linen of Madame de Warens' bed when he was
alone in her room. And Spencer devotes whole pages in his dull and
ponderous history of himself to narrate the all-important narration
of his constant indisposition,--to assure us that his ill health more
than once threatened the mighty task he had in hand. These, to be
sure, are most important revelations. But Khalid here misses his cue.
Inspiration does not seem to come to him in firefly-fashion.

He would have done well, indeed, had he studied the method of the
professional writers of Memoirs, especially those of France. For might
he not then have discoursed delectably on The Romance of my Stick Pin,
The Tragedy of my Sombrero, The Scandal of my Red Flannel, The
Conquest of my Silk Socks, The Adventures of my Tuxedo, and such like?
But Khalid is modest only in the things that pertain to the outward
self. He wrote of other Romances and other Tragedies. And when his
Genius is not dancing the dance of the seven veils, she is either
flirting with the monks of the Lebanon hills or setting fire to
something in New York. But this is not altogether satisfactory to the
present Editor, who, unlike the Author of the Khedivial Library MS.,
must keep the reader in mind. 'Tis very well to endeavour to unfold a
few of the mysteries of one's palingenesis, but why conceal from us
his origin? For is it not important, is it not the fashion at least,
that one writing his own history should first expatiate on the humble
origin of his ancestors and the distant obscure source of his genius?
And having done this, should he not then tell us how he behaved in his
boyhood; whether or not he made anklets of his mother's dough for his
little sister; whether he did not kindle the fire with his father's
Korân; whether he did not walk under the rainbow and try to reach the
end of it on the hill-top; and whether he did not write verse when he
was but five years of age. About these essentialities Khalid is
silent. We only know from him that he is a descendant of the brave
sea-daring Phoenicians--a title which might be claimed with justice
even by the aborigines of Yucatan--and that he was born in the city of
Baalbek, in the shadow of the great Heliopolis, a little way from the
mountain-road to the Cedars of Lebanon. All else in this direction is
obscure.

And the K. L. MS. which we kept under our pillow for thirteen days
and nights, was beginning to worry us. After all, might it not be
a literary hoax, we thought, and might not this Khalid be a myth. And
yet, he does not seem to have sought any material or worldly good
from the writing of his Book. Why, then, should he resort to
deception? Still, we doubted. And one evening we were detained by
the sandomancer, or sand-diviner, who was sitting cross-legged on the
sidewalk in front of the mosque. "I know your mind," said he,
before we had made up our mind to consult him. And mumbling his
"abracadabra" over the sand spread on a cloth before him, he took up
his bamboo-stick and wrote therein--Khalid! This was amazing. "And I
know more," said he. But after scouring the heaven, he shook his head
regretfully and wrote in the sand the name of one of the hasheesh-dens
of Cairo. "Go thither; and come to see me again to-morrow evening."
Saying which, he folded his sand-book of magic, pocketed his fee,
and walked away.

In that hasheesh-den,--the reekiest, dingiest of the row in the Red
Quarter,--where the etiolated intellectualities of Cairo flock after
midnight, the name of Khalid evokes much resounding wit, and sarcasm,
and laughter.

"You mean the new Muhdi," said one, offering us his chobok of
hasheesh; "smoke to his health and prosperity. Ha, ha, ha."

And the chorus of laughter, which is part and parcel of a hasheesh
jag, was tremendous. Every one thereupon had something to say on the
subject. The contagion could not be checked. And Khalid was called
"the dervish of science" by one; "the rope-dancer of nature" by
another.

"Our Prophet lived in a cave in the wilderness of New York for five
years," remarked a third.

"And he sold his camel yesterday and bought a bicycle instead."

"The Young Turks can not catch him now."

"Ah, but wait till England gets after our new Muhdi."

"Wait till his new phthisic-stricken wife dies."

"Whom will our Prophet marry, if among all the virgins of Egypt we can
not find a consumptive for him?"

"And when he pulls down the pyramids to build American Skyscrapers
with their stones, where shall we bury then our Muhdi?"

All of which, although mystifying to us, and depressing, was none the
less reassuring. For Khalid, it seems, is not a myth. No; we can even
see him, we are told, and touch him, and hear him speak.

"Shakib the poet, his most intimate friend and disciple, will bring
you into the sacred presence."

"You can not miss him, for he is the drummer of our new Muhdi, ha, ha,
ha!"

And this Shakib was then suspended and stoned. But their humour, like
the odor and smoke of gunjah, (hasheesh) was become stifling. So, we
lay our chobok down; and, thanking them for the entertainment, we
struggle through the rolling reek and fling to the open air.

In the grill-room of the Mena House we meet the poet Shakib, who was
then drawing his inspiration from a glass of whiskey and soda. Nay, he
was drowning his sorrows therein, for his Master, alas! has
mysteriously disappeared.

"I have not seen him for ten days," said the Poet; "and I know not
where he is.--If I did? Ah, my friend, you would not then see me here.
Indeed, I should be with him, and though he be in the trap of the
Young Turks." And some real tears flowed down the cheeks of the Poet,
as he spoke.

The Mena House, a charming little Branch of Civilisation at the gate
of the desert, stands, like man himself, in the shadow of two terrible
immensities, the Sphinx and the Pyramid, the Origin and the End. And
in the grill-room, over a glass of whiskey and soda, we presume to
solve in few words the eternal mystery. But that is not what we came
for. And to avoid the bewildering depths into which we were led, we
suggested a stroll on the sands. Here the Poet waxed more eloquent,
and shed more tears.

"This is our favourite haunt," said he; "here is where we ramble, here
is where we loaf. And Khalid once said to me, 'In loafing here, I work
as hard as did the masons and hod-carriers who laboured on these
pyramids.' And I believe him. For is not a book greater than a
pyramid? Is not a mosque or a palace better than a tomb? An object is
great in proportion to its power of resistance to time and the
elements. That is why we think the pyramids are great. But see, the
desert is greater than the pyramids, and the sea is greater than the
desert, and the heavens are greater than the sea. And yet, there is
not in all these that immortal intelligence, that living, palpitating
soul, which you find in a great book. A man who conceives and writes a
great book, my friend, has done more work than all the helots that
laboured on these pyramidal futilities. That is why I find no
exaggeration in Khalid's words. For when he loafs, he does so in good
earnest. Not like the camel-driver there or the camel, but after the
manner of the great thinkers and mystics: like Al-Fared and
Jelal'ud-Deen Rumy, like Socrates and St. Francis of Assisi, Khalid
loafs. For can you escape being reproached for idleness by merely
working? Are you going to waste your time and power in useless
unproductive labour, carrying dates to Hajar (or coals to Newcastle,
which is the English equivalent), that you might not be called an
idler, a loafer?"

"Indeed not," we reply; "for the Poet taking in the sea, or the woods,
or the starry-night, the poet who might be just sharing the sunshine
with the salamander, is as much a labourer as the stoker or the
bricklayer."

And with a few more such remarks, we showed our friend that, not being
of india-rubber, we could not but expand under the heat of his
grandiosity.

We then make our purpose known, and Shakib is overjoyed. He offers to
kiss us for the noble thought.

"Yes, Europe should know Khalid better, and only through you and me
can this be done. For you can not properly understand him, unless you
read the _Histoire Intime_, which I have just finished. That will give
you _les dessous de cartes_ of his character."

"_Les dessons_"--and the Poet who intersperses his Arabic with fancy
French, explains.--"The lining, the ligaments."--"Ah, that is exactly
what we want."

And he offers to let us have the use of his Manuscript, if we link his
name with that of his illustrious Master in this Book. To which we
cheerfully agree. For after all, what's in a name?

On the following day, lugging an enormous bundle under each arm, the
Poet came. We were stunned as he stood in the door; we felt as if he
had struck us in the head with them.

"This is the _Histoire Intime_," said he, laying it gently on the
table.

And we laid our hand upon it, fetching a deep sigh. Our misgivings,
however, were lighted with a happy idea. We will hire a few boys to
read it, we thought, and mark out the passages which please them most.
That will be just what an editor wants.

"And this," continued the Poet, laying down the other bundle, "is the
original manuscript of my forthcoming Book of Poems.--"

Sweet of him, we thought, to present it to us.

"It will be issued next Autumn in Cairo.--"

Fortunate City!

"And if you will get to work on it at once,--"

Mercy!

"You can get out an English Translation in three month, I am sure--"

We sink in our chair in breathless amazement.

"The Book will then appear simultaneously both in London and Cairo."

We sit up, revived with another happy idea, and assure the Poet that
his Work will be translated into a universal language, and that very
soon. For which assurance he kisses us again and again, and goes away
hugging his Muse.

The idea! A Book of Poems to translate into the English language! As
if the English language has not enough of its own troubles! Translate
it, O Fire, into your language! Which work the Fire did in two
minutes. And the dancing, leaping, singing flames, the white and blue
and amber flames, were more beautiful, we thought, than anything the
Ms. might contain.

As for the _Histoire Intime_, we split it into three parts and got our
boys working on it. The result was most satisfying. For now we can
show, and though he is a native of Asia, the land of the Prophets, and
though he conceals from us his origin after the manner of the
Prophets, that he was born and bred and fed, and even thwacked, like
all his fellows there, this Khalid.




