Letter V

  No; I do not approve of your idea of associating with that young
  Mohammedan editor. You know what is said about the tiger and its
  spots. Besides, I had another offer from a Christian oldtimer;
  but you might as well ask me to become a Jesuit as to became a
  Journalist. I wrote last week a political article, in which I
  criticised Majesty's Address to the Parliament, and mauled those
  oleaginous, palavering, mealy-mouthed Representatives, who would
  not dare point out the lies in it. They hear the Chief Clerk
  read of "the efforts made by the Government during the past
  thirty years in the interest of education," and applaud; while
  at the Royal Banquet they jostle and hustle each other to kiss
  the edge of Majesty's frock-coat. The abject slaves!

  The article was much quoted and commented upon; I was flouted by
  many, defended by a few, these asked: "Was the Government of
  Abd'ul-Hamid, committing all its crimes in the interest of
  education, were we being trained by the Censorship and the
  Bosphorus Terror for the Dastur?" "But the person of Majesty,
  the sacredness of the Khalifate," cried the others. And a
  certain one, in the course of his attack, denies the existence
  of Khalid, who died, said he, a year ago. And what matters it if
  a dead man can stir a whole city and blow into the nostrils of
  its walking spectres a breath of life?

  I spoke last night in one of the music halls and gave the
  Mohammedans a piece of my mind. The poor Christians!--they
  feared the Government in the old régime; they cower before the
  boatmen in this. For the boatmen of Beirut have not lost their
  prestige and power. They are a sort of commune and are yet
  supreme. Yes, they are always riding the whirlwind and directing
  the storm. And who dares say a word against them? Every one of
  them, in his swagger and bluster, is an Abd'ul-Hamid. Alas,
  everything is yet in a chaotic state. The boatman's shriek can
  silence the Press and make the Spouters tremble.

  I am to lecture in the Public Hall of one of the Colleges here
  on the "Moral Revolution." Believe me, I would not utter a word
  or write a line if I were not impelled to it. And just as soon
  as some one comes to the front to champion in this land
  spiritual and moral freedom, I'll go "way back and sit down."
  For why should I then give myself the trouble? And the applause
  of the multitude, mind you, brings me not a single olive.

Letter XXII

  I had made up my mind to go to Cairo, and I was coming up to say
  farewell to you and mother. For I like not Beirut, where one in
  winter must go about in top-boots, and in a dust-coat in summer.
  I wonder what Rousseau, who called Paris the city of mud, would
  have said of this? Besides, a city ruled by boatmen is not a
  city for gentlemen to live in. So, I made up my mind to get out
  of it, and quickly. But yesterday morning, before I had taken my
  coffee, some one knocked at my door. I open, and lo, a policeman
  in shabby uniform, makes inquiry about Khalid. What have I done,
  I thought, to deserve this visit? And before I had time to
  imagine the worst, he delivers a card from the Deputy to Syria
  of the Union and Progress Society of Salonique. I am desired in
  this to come at my earliest convenience to the Club to meet this
  gentleman. There, I am received by an Army Officer and a certain
  Ahmed Bey. And after the coffee and the formalities of civility
  are over, I am asked to accompany them on a tour to the
  principal cities of upper Syria--to Damascus, Homs, Hama, and
  Aleppo. The young Army Officer is to speechify in Turkish, I, in
  Arabic, and Ahmed Bey, who is as oleaginous as a Turk could be,
  will take up, I think, the collection. Seeing in this a chance
  to spread the Idea among our people, I accept, and in a
  fortnight we shall be in Damascus. You must come there, for I am
  burning to meet and embrace you.

Letter XXV

  Whom do you think I met yesterday? Why, nothing gave me greater
  pleasure ever since I have been here than this: I was crossing
  the Square on my way to the Club, when some one plucking at my
  jubbah angrily greets me. I look back, and behold our dear old
  Im-Hanna, who has just returned from New York. She stood there
  waving her hand wildly and rating me for not returning her
  salaam. "You know no one any more, O Khalid," she said
  plaintively; "I call to you three times and you look not, hear
  not. No matter, O Khalid." Thereupon, she embraces me as fondly
  as my mother. "And why," she inquired, "do you wear this black
  jubbah? Are you now a monk? Were it not for that long hair and
  that cap of yours, I would not have known you. Let me see, isn't
  that the cap I bought you in New York?" And she takes it off my
  head to examine it. "Yes, that's it. How good of you to keep it.
  Well, how are you now? Do you cough any more? Are you still
  crazy about books? I don't think so, for you have rosy cheeks
  now." And sobbing for joy, she embraces me again and again.

  She is neatly dressed, wears a silk fiché, and is as alert as
  ever. In the afternoon, I visit her at the Hotel, and she asks
  me to accompany her to the Bank, where she cashes three bills of
  exchange for three hundred pounds each! I ask her what she is
  going to do with all this money, and she tells me that she is
  going to build a little home for her grandson and send him to
  the College of the Americans here.

  "And is there like America in all the world?" she exclaims. "Ah,
  my heart for America!" And on asking her why she did not remain
  there: "Fear not; just as soon as I build my house and place my
  son in the College I am going back to New York. What, O Khalid,
  will you return with me?" She then takes some gold pieces in her
  hand, and lowering her voice: "May be you need some money; take,
  take these." Dear old Im-Hanna, I would not refuse her favour,
  and I would not accept one such. What was I to do? Coming
  through the Jewellers' bazaar I hit upon an idea, and with the
  money she slipped into my pocket, I bought a gold watch in one
  of the stores and charged her to present it to her grandson.
  "Say it is from his brother, your other grandson Khalid." She
  protests, scolds, and finally takes the watch, saying, "Well,
  nothing is changed in you: still the same crazy Khalid."

  To-morrow she is coming to see my room, and to cook for me a
  dish of _mojadderah_! Ah, the old days in the cellar!

In the thirtieth Letter, one of considerable length, dated March, is
an exceedingly titillating divagation on the _gulma_ (oustraation of
animals), called forth, we are told, "by the rut of the d----d cats in
the yard." Poor Khalid can not sleep. One night he jumps out of bed
and chases them away with his skillet, saying, "Why don't I make such
a row, ye wantons?" They come again the following night, and Khalid on
the following morning moves to a Hotel which, by good or ill chance,
is adjacent to the lupanars of the city. His window opens on another
yard in which other cats, alas!--of the human species this time--are
caterwauling, harrowing the soul of him and the night. He makes a
second remove, but finds himself disturbed this time by the rut of a
certain roebuck within. Nature, O Khalid, will not be cheated, no more
than she will be abused, without retaliating soon or late. True, you
got out of many ruts heretofore; but this you can not get out of
except you go deeper into it. Your anecdotes from Ad-Damiry and your
quotations from Montaigne shall not help you. And your allusions to
March-cats and March-Khalids are too pitiful to be humorous. Indeed,
were not the tang of lubricity in this Letter too strong, we would
have given in full the confession it contains.

We now come to the last of this Series, in which Khalid speaks of a
certain American lady, a Mrs. Goodfree, or Gotfry, who is a votary of
Ebbas Effendi, the Pope of Babism at Heifa. Mrs. Gotfry may not be a
Babist in the strict sense of the word; but she is a votary and
worshipper of the Bab. To her the personal element in a creed is of
more importance than the ism. Hence, her pilgrimage every year to
Heifa. She comes with presents and gold; and Ebbas Effendi, who is not
impervious to the influence of other gods than his own, permits her
into the sanctuary, where she shares with him the light of divine
revelation and returns to the States, as the Priestess of the Cult, to
bless and console the Faithful. Khalid was dining with Ahmed Bey at
the Grand Hotel--but here is a portion of the Letter.

By a devilish mischance she occupied the seat opposite to mine. And
in this trap of Iblis was decoy enough for a poor mouse like me. It is
an age since I beheld such an Oriental gem in an American setting; or
such a strange Southern beauty in an exotic frame. For one would think
her from the South, or further down from Mexico. Nay, of Andalusian,
and consequently of Arabian, origin she must be. Her hair and her eyes
are of the richest jet; her glance, voluptuous, mysterious; her
complexion, neither white nor olive, but partakes of both,--a
gauze-like shade of heliotrope, as it were, over a pink and straw
surface, if you can imagine that; and her expression, a play between
devotion and diabolism--now a question mark to love, now an
exclamation to sorrow, and at times a dash between both. By what
mysterious medium of romance and adventure did America produce such a
beauty, I can not tell. Perhaps she, too, can not. If you saw her, O
Shakib, you'd do nothing for months but dedicate odes to her eyes,--to
the deep, dark infinity of their luring, devouring beauty,--which seem
to drop honey and poison from every arched hair of their fulsome
lashes. Withal,--another devilish mischance,--she was dressed in black
and wore a white silk ruffle, like myself. And her age? Well, she can
not have passed her sixth lustrum. And really, as the Novelist would
say in his Novel, she looks ten years younger.... To say we were
attracted to each other were presumptuous: but _I was_ taken.... Near
her sat a Syrian gentleman of my acquaintance, with whom she was
conversing when we entered. That is the lady whose beauty, when she
was sitting, I described to you: but when she got up to leave the
table,--alas, and _ay me_, and all the other expressions of regret and
sorrow. That such a beautiful face should be denied a corresponding
beauty of figure. And what is more pitiable about her, she is lame in
the right leg. Poor dear Misfortune, I wish it were in my power to add
an inch of my limb to hers.

And Khalid goes on limping, drooling, alassing, to the end. After
dinner he is introduced to his "poor dear Misfortune" by his Syrian
friend. But being with Ahmed Bey he can not remain this evening. On
the following day, however, he is invited to lunch; and on the terrace
facing the sea, they pass the afternoon discussing various subjects.
Mrs. Gotfry is surprised how a Syrian of Khalid's mind can not see the
beauties of Babism, or Buhaism, as it is now called, and the lofty
spirituality of the Bab. But she forgives him his lack of faith, gives
him her card, and invites him to her home, if he ever returns to the
United States.

Now, maugre the fact that, in a postscript to this Letter, Khalid
closes with these words, "And what have I to do with priests and
priestesses?" we can not but harbour a suspicion that his "Union and
Progress" tour is bound to have more than a political significance. By
ill or good hap those words are beginning to assume a double meaning;
and maugre all efforts to the contrary, the days must soon unfold the
twofold tendency and result of the "Union and Progress" ideas of
Khalid.

-----

 [1] In some parts of Syria, as in Arabia, almost every ill and
     affection is attributed to the rheums, or called so. Rheumatism,
     for instance, is explained by the Arab quack as a defluxion of
     rheums, failing to discharge through the upper orifices, progress
     downward, and settling in the muscles and joints, produce the
     affection. And might there not be more truth in that than the
     diagnosis of him who is a Membre de la Faculté de Medicine de
     France?--EDITOR.




