CHAPTER VI

Into Daylight's life came Dede Mason.  She came rather imperceptibly.
He had accepted her impersonally along with the office furnishing, the
office boy, Morrison, the chief, confidential, and only clerk, and all
the rest of the accessories of a superman's gambling place of business.
Had he been asked any time during the first months she was in his
employ, he would have been unable to tell the color of her eyes.  From
the fact that she was a demiblonde, there resided dimly in his
subconsciousness a conception that she was a brunette.  Likewise he had
an idea that she was not thin, while there was an absence in his mind
of any idea that she was fat.  As to how she dressed, he had no ideas
at all.  He had no trained eye in such matters, nor was he interested.
He took it for granted, in the lack of any impression to the contrary,
that she was dressed some how.  He knew her as "Miss Mason," and that
was all, though he was aware that as a stenographer she seemed quick
and accurate.  This impression, however, was quite vague, for he had
had no experience with other stenographers, and naturally believed that
they were all quick and accurate.

One morning, signing up letters, he came upon an I shall. Glancing
quickly over the page for similar constructions, he found a number of I
wills.  The I shall was alone.  It stood out conspicuously.  He pressed
the call-bell twice, and a moment later Dede Mason entered.  "Did I say
that, Miss Mason?" he asked, extending the letter to her and pointing
out the criminal phrase.  A shade of annoyance crossed her face.  She
stood convicted.

"My mistake," she said.  "I am sorry.  But it's not a mistake, you
know," she added quickly.

"How do you make that out?" challenged Daylight.  "It sure don't sound
right, in my way of thinking."

She had reached the door by this time, and now turned the offending
letter in her hand.  "It's right just the same."

"But that would make all those I wills wrong, then," he argued.

"It does," was her audacious answer.  "Shall I change them?"

"I shall be over to look that affair up on Monday."  Daylight repeated
the sentence from the letter aloud.  He did it with a grave, serious
air, listening intently to the sound of his own voice.  He shook his
head.  "It don't sound right, Miss Mason. It just don't sound right.
Why, nobody writes to me that way. They all say I will--educated men,
too, some of them.  Ain't that so?"

"Yes," she acknowledged, and passed out to her machine to make the
correction.

It chanced that day that among the several men with whom he sat at
luncheon was a young Englishman, a mining engineer.  Had it happened
any other time it would have passed unnoticed, but, fresh from the tilt
with his stenographer, Daylight was struck immediately by the
Englishman's I shall.  Several times, in the course of the meal, the
phrase was repeated, and Daylight was certain there was no mistake
about it.

After luncheon he cornered Macintosh, one of the members whom he knew
to have been a college man, because of his football reputation.

"Look here, Bunny," Daylight demanded, "which is right, I shall be over
to look that affair up on Monday, or I will be over to look that affair
up on Monday?"

The ex-football captain debated painfully for a minute.  "Blessed if I
know," he confessed.  "Which way do I say it?"

"Oh, I will, of course."

"Then the other is right, depend upon it.  I always was rotten on
grammar."

On the way back to the office, Daylight dropped into a bookstore and
bought a grammar; and for a solid hour, his feet up on the desk, he
toiled through its pages.  "Knock off my head with little apples if the
girl ain't right," he communed aloud at the end of the session.  For
the first time it struck him that there was something about his
stenographer.  He had accepted her up to then, as a female creature and
a bit of office furnishing.  But now, having demonstrated that she knew
more grammar than did business men and college graduates, she became an
individual. She seemed to stand out in his consciousness as
conspicuously as the I shall had stood out on the typed page, and he
began to take notice.

He managed to watch her leaving that afternoon, and he was aware for
the first time that she was well-formed, and that her manner of dress
was satisfying.  He knew none of the details of women's dress, and he
saw none of the details of her neat shirt-waist and well-cut tailor
suit.  He saw only the effect in a general, sketchy way.  She looked
right.  This was in the absence of anything wrong or out of the way.

"She's a trim little good-looker," was his verdict, when the outer
office door closed on her.

The next morning, dictating, he concluded that he liked the way she did
her hair, though for the life of him he could have given no description
of it.  The impression was pleasing, that was all.

She sat between him and the window, and he noted that her hair was
light brown, with hints of golden bronze.  A pale sun, shining in,
touched the golden bronze into smouldering fires that were very
pleasing to behold.  Funny, he thought, that he had never observed this
phenomenon before.

In the midst of the letter he came to the construction which had caused
the trouble the day before.  He remembered his wrestle with the
grammar, and dictated.

"I shall meet you halfway this proposition--"

Miss Mason gave a quick look up at him.  The action was purely
involuntary, and, in fact, had been half a startle of surprise. The
next instant her eyes had dropped again, and she sat waiting to go on
with the dictation.  But in that moment of her glance Daylight had
noted that her eyes were gray.  He was later to learn that at times
there were golden lights in those same gray eyes; but he had seen
enough, as it was, to surprise him, for he became suddenly aware that
he had always taken her for a brunette with brown eyes, as a matter of
course.

"You were right, after all," he confessed, with a sheepish grin that
sat incongruously on his stern, Indian-like features.

Again he was rewarded by an upward glance and an acknowledging smile,
and this time he verified the fact that her eyes were gray.

"But it don't sound right, just the same," he complained.  At this she
laughed outright.

"I beg your pardon," she hastened to make amends, and then spoiled it
by adding, "but you are so funny."

Daylight began to feel a slight awkwardness, and the sun would persist
in setting her hair a-smouldering.

"I didn't mean to be funny," he said.

"That was why I laughed.  But it is right, and perfectly good grammar."

"All right," he sighed--"I shall meet you halfway in this
proposition--got that?" And the dictation went on.  He discovered that
in the intervals, when she had nothing to do, she read books and
magazines, or worked on some sort of feminine fancy work.

Passing her desk, once, he picked up a volume of Kipling's poems and
glanced bepuzzled through the pages.  "You like reading, Miss Mason?"
he said, laying the book down.

"Oh, yes," was her answer; "very much."

Another time it was a book of Wells', The Wheels of Change. "What's it
all about?" Daylight asked.

"Oh, it's just a novel, a love-story."  She stopped, but he still stood
waiting, and she felt it incumbent to go on.

"It's about a little Cockney draper's assistant, who takes a vacation
on his bicycle, and falls in with a young girl very much above him.
Her mother is a popular writer and all that.  And the situation is very
curious, and sad, too, and tragic.  Would you care to read it?"

"Does he get her?" Daylight demanded.

"No; that's the point of it.  He wasn't--"

"And he doesn't get her, and you've read all them pages, hundreds of
them, to find that out?" Daylight muttered in amazement.

Miss Mason was nettled as well as amused.

"But you read the mining and financial news by the hour," she retorted.

"But I sure get something out of that.  It's business, and it's
different.  I get money out of it.  What do you get out of books?"

"Points of view, new ideas, life."

"Not worth a cent cash."

"But life's worth more than cash," she argued.

"Oh, well," he said, with easy masculine tolerance, "so long as you
enjoy it.  That's what counts, I suppose; and there's no accounting for
taste."

Despite his own superior point of view, he had an idea that she knew a
lot, and he experienced a fleeting feeling like that of a barbarian
face to face with the evidence of some tremendous culture.  To Daylight
culture was a worthless thing, and yet, somehow, he was vaguely
troubled by a sense that there was more in culture than he imagined.

Again, on her desk, in passing, he noticed a book with which he was
familiar.  This time he did not stop, for he had recognized the cover.
It was a magazine correspondent's book on the Klondike, and he knew
that he and his photograph figured in it and he knew, also, of a
certain sensational chapter concerned with a woman's suicide, and with
one "Too much Daylight."

After that he did not talk with her again about books.  He imagined
what erroneous conclusions she had drawn from that particular chapter,
and it stung him the more in that they were undeserved. Of all unlikely
things, to have the reputation of being a lady-killer,--he, Burning
Daylight,--and to have a woman kill herself out of love for him.  He
felt that he was a most unfortunate man and wondered by what luck that
one book of all the thousands of books should have fallen into his
stenographer's hands.  For some days afterward he had an uncomfortable
sensation of guiltiness whenever he was in Miss Mason's presence; and
once he was positive that he caught her looking at him with a curious,
intent gaze, as if studying what manner of man he was.

He pumped Morrison, the clerk, who had first to vent his personal
grievance against Miss Mason before he could tell what little he knew
of her.

"She comes from Siskiyou County.  She's very nice to work with in the
office, of course, but she's rather stuck on herself--exclusive, you
know."

"How do you make that out?" Daylight queried.

"Well, she thinks too much of herself to associate with those she works
with, in the office here, for instance.  She won't have anything to do
with a fellow, you see.  I've asked her out repeatedly, to the theatre
and the chutes and such things.  But nothing doing.  Says she likes
plenty of sleep, and can't stay up late, and has to go all the way to
Berkeley--that's where she lives."

This phase of the report gave Daylight a distinct satisfaction. She was
a bit above the ordinary, and no doubt about it.  But Morrison's next
words carried a hurt.

"But that's all hot air.  She's running with the University boys,
that's what she's doing.  She needs lots of sleep and can't go to the
theatre with me, but she can dance all hours with them.  I've heard it
pretty straight that she goes to all their hops and such things.
Rather stylish and high-toned for a stenographer, I'd say.  And she
keeps a horse, too.  She rides astride all over those hills out there.
I saw her one Sunday myself.  Oh, she's a high-flyer, and I wonder how
she does it.  Sixty-five a month don't go far.  Then she has a sick
brother, too."

"Live with her people?" Daylight asked.

"No; hasn't got any.  They were well to do, I've heard.  They must have
been, or that brother of hers couldn't have gone to the University of
California.  Her father had a big cattle-ranch, but he got to fooling
with mines or something, and went broke before he died.  Her mother
died long before that.  Her brother must cost a lot of money.  He was a
husky once, played football, was great on hunting and being out in the
mountains and such things. He got his accident breaking horses, and
then rheumatism or something got into him.  One leg is shorter than the
other and withered up some.  He has to walk on crutches.  I saw her out
with him once--crossing the ferry.  The doctors have been experimenting
on him for years, and he's in the French Hospital now, I think."

All of which side-lights on Miss Mason went to increase Daylight's
interest in her.  Yet, much as he desired, he failed to get acquainted
with her.  He had thoughts of asking her to luncheon, but his was the
innate chivalry of the frontiersman, and the thoughts never came to
anything.  He knew a self-respecting, square-dealing man was not
supposed to take his stenographer to luncheon.  Such things did happen,
he knew, for he heard the chaffing gossip of the club; but he did not
think much of such men and felt sorry for the girls.  He had a strange
notion that a man had less rights over those he employed than over mere
acquaintances or strangers.  Thus, had Miss Mason not been his
employee, he was confident that he would have had her to luncheon or
the theatre in no time.  But he felt that it was an imposition for an
employer, because he bought the time of an employee in working hours,
to presume in any way upon any of the rest of that employee's time.  To
do so was to act like a bully. The situation was unfair.  It was taking
advantage of the fact that the employee was dependent on one for a
livelihood.  The employee might permit the imposition through fear of
angering the employer and not through any personal inclination at all.

In his own case he felt that such an imposition would be peculiarly
obnoxious, for had she not read that cursed Klondike correspondent's
book?  A pretty idea she must have of him, a girl that was too
high-toned to have anything to do with a good-looking, gentlemanly
fellow like Morrison.  Also, and down under all his other reasons,
Daylight was timid.  The only thing he had ever been afraid of in his
life was woman, and he had been afraid all his life.  Nor was that
timidity to be put easily to flight now that he felt the first
glimmering need and desire for woman.  The specter of the apron-string
still haunted him, and helped him to find excuses for getting on no
forwarder with Dede Mason.



