CHAPTER XI.

TEMPER.[1]

Temper is the harmonious and well-balanced working of the different
powers of the mind.  Good temper is when harmony is maintained; bad
temper when it is violated.  "Temper," it was said by an English
bishop, "is nine-tenths of Christianity."  We may think this an
exaggerated statement, but there is much to commend it.  The fruit of
the Spirit of God is peace, and peace is the condition of a heart which
is at rest--in harmony with God and man.  Peace may be taken as the
Scriptural word for temper.

Good temper is a sign that the different powers of the soul are working
in harmony.--For instance, the atmosphere is well tempered when it is
neither too hot nor too cold, neither too dry nor too moist, having
neither too much electricity nor too little.  Then the weather is
called fine.  It is a pleasure to live.  When the weather is bad, the
balance of the elements is broken, and life is disagreeable and
unpleasant.  The body is well tempered when the nervous system and the
blood and the nutritive system all work in due harmony.  When these
three great constituents of the body are well balanced against each
other, the result is health.  The body is not well tempered in a
student who takes no exercise, and where everything goes to feed the
brain; nor in a pugilist in training, where everything goes to feed the
muscles.  The result is disease.  We all know the musical instrument
called the harp.  All the strings are tuned into perfect harmony.  If
there is a false note struck, that is a sign to the musician that there
is something wrong, and that the instrument needs to be tuned.  The
discord is a symptom, that some cords are out of order.  So, bad temper
is a sign that some string in our moral constitution is out of harmony
and needs to be tuned.

Good temper can be acquired.--It is the result of culture.  There are
two things often confounded with it--(_a_) good nature and (_b_) good
humor.  Good nature is something born with us--an easy, contented
disposition, and a tendency to take things quietly and pleasantly.  We
inherit it.  There is little merit in possessing it.  Good humor is the
result of pleasant surroundings and agreeable circumstances.  A
good-humored man is so when everything goes right; when things go
wrong, his good humor departs and bad humor takes its place.  But good
temper results from training and self-control--keeping constant watch
over our passions and feelings, and above all being in constant harmony
with God; for he who is at peace with God is at peace with man, and
will keep the "even tenor of his way."

There are various signs or forms of ill-temper that may be adverted to.

One form of ill-temper is irritability.--We perhaps know what it is to
have a tooth where the nerve is exposed.  Everything that touches it
sends a thrill of pain through us.  Some people get into a moral state
corresponding to that.  The least thing puts them out, vexes them,
throws them into a disagreeable frame of mind.  When one gets into that
state, he should feel that there is something wrong with him--something
is off the balance, some nerve is exposed.  He had better look to it
and go off to the dentist.

Another form of ill-temper is readiness to find fault.--This is a sure
sign of a screw being loose somewhere.  An ill-tempered person is
always making grievances, imagining himself ill-used, discontented with
his position, dissatisfied with his circumstances.  He never blames
himself for anything wrong; it is always someone else.  He is like a
workman who is always excusing himself by throwing the blame on his
tools; like a bad driver who is always finding fault with his horses.

  Some fretful tempers wince at every touch,
  You always do too little or too much;
  He shakes with cold; you stir the fire and strive
  To make a blaze; that's roasting him alive.
  Serve him with venison, and he chooses fish;
  With sole; that's just the sort he would not wish.
  Alas! his efforts double his distress,
  He likes yours little, and his own still less.
  Thus, always teasing others, always teased,
  His only pleasure is--to be displeased.

If we find ourselves getting into this state of mind, it is high time
to inquire what is wrong with us.

Another form of ill-temper is passion.--Some people are very subject to
this development.  They are "gunpowdery," and when a small spark
touches them they fly out, and there is a blaze.  It is a very unlovely
feature of a man's character, and if people in a passion could only see
themselves in a glass, their eyes flashing, their brow contracted and
their features distorted, they would feel that they have cause to be
ashamed of themselves.  After having been in what is called "a towering
rage," there often comes to a man the feeling expressed in the words,
"I have made a great ass of myself."  If we have done so, we should
resolve never to make ourselves ridiculous again.

Perhaps the worst form of ill-temper is sulkiness.--This is passion not
dying out, but continuing to smoulder like the embers of a fire where
there is no flame.  A sullen disposition is as bad a sign of something
being wrong as there could well be.  It is like what the doctors call
"suppressed gout."  The disease has got driven into the system, and has
taken so firm a hold that it cannot easily be dislodged.  Better a man
whose temper bubbles over and is gone, than the man who cherishes it in
his bosom and allows, not the sun of one day, but of many days, to go
down on his wrath.

A word or two is perhaps necessary, in addition to what has been said,
as to the means by which good temper is to be preserved and bad temper
avoided.

I.  _We should cherish a deep and strong detestation of the evil
effects of bad temper in all its forms_.--(_a_) It has a bad effect
physically.  It produces consequences injurious to health.  The man who
indulges in it habitually cannot do so with impunity.  Doctors
constantly warn their patients to refrain from irritating disputes, and
to avoid men and things likely to provoke their anger.  (_b_) It has a
bad effect socially.  The bad-tempered man is seldom a favorite with
society.  Men eventually dislike him and shun him as a nuisance.  His
family, if he has one, come to regard him with dread rather than love.
(_c_) It has a bad effect as regards success in life.  "Everything,"
the proverb says, "comes to him who waits."  The patient and forbearing
man attains his object much sooner than the man of passion and abuse.
Such a person is continually thwarted in his plans.  People refuse to
be bullied into acquiescence; and threats, which have well been called
"the arguments of a coward," raise rather than disarm opposition.
(_d_) It has a bad effect spiritually.  (1) The man of evil temper
wants the calm disposition of soul necessary to communion with God.
The glass through which he looks into the spiritual world is clouded
and gives a distorted vision.  He whose soul is filled with anger and
clouded by passion cannot pray.  Before he lays his gift upon the
altar, he must be reconciled to his brother.  (2) Scripture is full of
warnings against evil temper: "He that is soon angry dealeth
foolishly."  "Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious
man thou shalt not go, lest thou learn his ways and get a snare to thy
soul."  "An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth
in transgression."  "Be ye angry and sin not; let not the sun go down
upon your wrath."  "Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, with all malice; and be
ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as
God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you."  The example of our blessed
Lord specially teaches the same lessen.  Calmly and peacefully He
pursued His divine work.  "When reviled he reviled not again, but
committed himself to him that judgeth righteously."  Before the High
Priest, Pilate and Herod, His indignant silence was more eloquent than
scorching words.

II.  _We should deliberately cultivate self-control_.--If a railway
train is going swiftly along, and the driver sees something on the
track, he applies the brake, and thus avoids collision.  In regard to
temper, self-control is like the brake, and we should be ever ready to
put it on.  A person can come, in time, to get a wonderful control over
his temper if he watches against it.  The writer knew a young man who
was at one time of an ungovernable temper; he used to be at times like
"one possessed."  But by watching and resolutely putting on the brake
he grew up one of the sweetest-tempered and most lovable of men.  He
fought the wild beast within him, lashed it and kept it down.  A
merchant had passionately abused a Quaker, who received his outburst of
ill-temper in silence.  Being afterwards ashamed of himself, he asked
the other how he was able to show such patience.  "Friend," replied the
Quaker, "I will tell thee.  I was naturally as hot and violent as thou
art.  I knew that to indulge temper was sinful, and I found it was
imprudent.  I observed that men in a passion always spoke loud, and I
thought if I could control my voice I should repress my passion.  I
have therefore made it a rule never to allow my voice to be above a
certain key, and by a careful observance of this rule I have, by the
blessing of God, mastered my natural temper."  Strong resolution can do
much.  "If the pot boils," says the proverb, "take it off the fire."  A
little care, a word swallowed, a rising sentence struck down in us by a
simple rule, may save us humiliation.  "By reflection, by restraint and
control a wise man can make himself an island which no floods can
overwhelm.  He who is tolerant with the intolerant, mild with the
fault-finders, and free from passion with the passionate, him I indeed
call a wise man."--Buddhist saying.

III.  But while an act of self-control can restore the proper temper
and balance to the mind when it is in danger, _the best way is to keep
it so that it will not go off the balance_.  You know that if a clock
stops, we may perhaps make it go again by a shake; if it does not keep
time, we can often put the hands right; but the best way is to keep the
machinery always so well balanced and adjusted that it will not stop or
go wrong.  We may watch and control the temper when it breaks out; but
the better way is to keep it so well balanced that it will not break
out.  The soul that is in harmony with God, that is full of the spirit
of Christ, will ever be peaceful and serene.  If ill-temper is our
besetting sin, God's grace, if we ask it, will give us power to conquer
it  While we watch against it, we should pray against it also.  The
beautiful words of Thomas a Kempis point out to us the secret of the
well-tempered and well-balanced mind: "First keep thyself in peace, and
then thou wilt be able to bring others to peace."  If "the peace of God
which passeth all understanding" keep our hearts and minds, through
Christ Jesus, our life will never have its serenity disturbed by
ill-temper.



[1] I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness for some hints in this
chapter to an interesting work on "Self-Culture," by James Freeman
Clarke.




