Chapter 2


VP Henry Tarbuck closed the file folder then shifted his bulk
to place it on a nearby table.  His expensive chair started to
groan in protest then as if remembering how much it cost,
only murmured quietly.  "We must be careful that this hearing gives
all the appearances of being completely fair, especially after
the disaster in Lyle's office."

Jonathan leaned forward and deposited his now empty cup on the
stand beside him.  "Yes, I heard about Lyle bungling that one.
First he yelled at her so loudly that the secretaries in the outer
office left in embarrassment and then was stupid enough to tell her
in front of witnesses that the hearing panel was only a formality
and that she would be terminated anyway."

The VP shrugged, obviously irritated.  "Admittedly, he pushed
too hard.  It came as a shock to him that she would refuse his
demand that she resign.  He lost his cool and tried to bully her
into it.  He's new to this, taking over as he did such a relatively
short time ago from Jimbo."

"Well it does appear that he had problems with her.  I do see
that she appears to have a propensity for causing discomfort,
but other women, and men too for that matter, have been troublesome.
Why the excessive anger toward her?"

"First off, Jonathan, the anger is not excessive, it is justified,"
Henry retorted testily.  "Yes, we've had critics, annoying critics,
but when we offered them some redress, they were grateful.  She,
on the other hand, considered every concession we made as
`a day late and a dollar short'--utterly maddening!
And what really frosts everyone's ass is that she is just
as recalcitrant when she argues on behalf of someone else.
Who the hell is she to care if someone feels unfairly treated by us?"

"Well, of course I'm still using the only frame of reference
that I have which is her personnel file and from what I can see she
was as much `sinned against as sinner'."

"That might have some validity up to the point where she openly
and publicly challenged the president of this university,"
retorted Henry waving the file he was holding in Jonathan's
face for emphasis, "but not anymore."

"You mean she picked on The Pope, Henry?"




Chapter 3


John T. Pope had been president of Belmont University for
nearly twelve years.  Because of his belief in his own
infallibility, he soon became referred to as The Pope.
He greatly increased the senior administrative staff
which now occupied one whole wing of the administration building.
This wing was known as the Vatican and when a person spoke of
kissing the Pope's ring, it was well understood what part
of the Pope's anatomy they were referring to.  The slew
of vice presidents, associate vp's and assistant vp's
around the president were soon called the Vee's.  Most people
believed Vee was short for vice president but insiders knew
it really stood for vestigial virgins.

He located the personnel office close by the Vatican.  It was
the administration's muscle and the buffer between it and the
so-called support staff.  Patterned after the military, it was
directed by, and key positions held by former military men.
The military analogy persists throughout the university structure.
Upper administration and faculty are designated as officers.

In order to insure staff cooperation, President Pope
had created a company union called the Staff Association.
To keep tabs on the members, he appointed the director
of personnel an ex-officio member.  The current director,
Greg Harrison, attended every meeting, answered questions,
directed staff activities and channeled them into acceptable areas.


"Yes, I do," Henry continued glowering.  "A year after Trenchant
got on the Staff Association, she was elected its chair and that body
turned from being a very convenient rubber stamp into a cohesive,
confrontational group of people.  She was reelected unanimously
for a second term and during those two years she managed to upset
nearly everybody in the Vatican--especially, The Pope.  It seems,
from what I was told when I was appointed academic vp, that during
this time a great deal of energy was directed toward damage control.

"Nothing worked with her.  All the tried and true methods of threat
or blandishment had no affect.  She didn't seem to notice
or understand that if she played ball she would become more
important than the staff she represented.

"She and the Staff Association encouraged the rest of the
staff to bring problems to their office.  We had almost daily calls
from the Attorney General's Office because she advised women to
make complaints if they were discriminated against or harassed.
She even boxed in Mark, the university attorney, and just four
years ago, she made a shambles of personnel by kicking Greg,
the director, out of the Staff Association.

"And that's not all.  Under her direction, the Staff Association
started to by-pass personnel altogether.  They investigated several
grievances and represented the grievers they felt were abused by the system.

"They started a staff newsletter to inform everyone about their rights--
especially concerning sex discrimination and sexual harassment.
The staff was told to stay away from the affirmative action office,
which was described as a tool of the personnel department,
and take their complaints directly to the Attorney General--
they even printed her phone number, for Christ's sake. . . .
"Trenchant and a committee met with a federal EEOC investigator.
He was presented with a list of staff and faculty positions
with a notation of the total number and how many were held by women.
The investigator was here to make sure the university was in compliance
for a million dollar federal research grant."

Surprise suffused Jonathan's face.  "How did she get that information, Henry?
I thought that was one of our better kept secrets."

The Vee exploded.  "We were exceedingly careful never to publish
anything like that.  Members of the Staff Association went through
the campus directory to compile the list.  Took a lot of time,
but they kept at it."

"Sonofabitch!"

"Yeah," agreed Henry.  Lyle gave her a faculty appointment to get
her out of staff politics.  He had her teaching every semester with
the hope that she'd be too busy to cause anymore trouble.
Next thing we know, she's threatening to sue the NERD for plagiarism.
You know the rest and we have just time enough to get ready.
Use the facilities if you need to."  He pointed in the direction
of an adjoining washroom, then opened a closet door and removed his cap
and gown which he laid across the table.  Jonathan opened the case
he had brought with him.

As both men donned their robes, Jonathan asked, "why is the
Trenchant hearing being held so soon after graduation?"

"We wanted to wait until the students left, of course.
They've been pestering us with petitions in support of her and we
sure don't want them around during her hearing.  Also everyone
wants to leave as soon as possible for summer vacations, Jonathan.
We want this mess cleaned up before we leave."

"Well, my station for the grand march is west campus.  Yours?"
Fully garbed in medieval academic splendor, Jonathan paused by the open door.

"My department forms up in front of the library.  See you next week."

"Right."

The two men left the office together then separated at the
founder's statue to reach their appointed destinations.

What a farce, ruminated Jonathan as he made his way between
the colorful plantings bordering the walk.  Shakespeare would
have loved it.  Much ado about nothing and a tempest in a teapot.
What a hoot, making all this fuss about seven student feedback forms.
Nobody ever pays any attention to them yet suddenly they are so important.

Hard to figure a valid reason for such violent reactions from the Vee.
Just a couple of years ago, Professor Beand was convicted of child molestation.
He was suspended for a few months but they took him right back with no loss
of pay or position.

And then there was that dean in the History Department who
altered faculty promotion papers.  Nothing happened to him.
I remember one of the Vee's saying at that time that he shouldn't
be disciplined for it because other faculty had done far worse things
and were not punished.  That's sure true. I remember several incidents
involving students, alcohol, drugs. . .all swept quietly under the rug.

It's obvious what is going on here.  Lyle needs to pull the
chestnuts out of the fire for those two new faculty he took on so
they can be reappointed and tenured.  If he can pin some of their
negative critiques on Diana Trenchant, he can argue that all the
years of bad critiques are suspect and nullify them.

And, of course, Henry and the rest are going along with it
out of revenge--they are just plain pissed off because they
couldn't win her over with snob appeal.  She scorned them,
their exalted positions and their offerings.  That's it, I bet
anything that's it.  Silently apologizing to William Congrave,
Jonathan paraphrased, "Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turned
nor Hell more fury than a good 'ol boy scorned."  The medical student
that wrote the open letter to The Pope was right--this hearing is
an administrative gang bang.

Jonathan was soon joined by others in brightly colored or
richly black gowns.  Peacocked with the educational badge each
had attained and crowned with a mortar board which got its name
from a board used by masons to hold cement.  How appropriate that
it is worn on the head.

Commencement--a colorful, glorious grouping traditioned by time.
All nicely covering the decay and tarnish of some of its stewards.





THE HEARING - DAY 1



