Chapter 17


Andrea Stern was barely sworn when Esther demanded,
"are you a medical student?"

Then, suddenly realizing that she had spoken out of turn
since it was Diana's prerogative to question her witnesses first,
she apologized.

Trenchant immediately asked Andrea to give her name and
occupation for the record.  Replying to further questions,
Andrea testified that she had known Diana for many years
and had rented a room in her house for six of them.
She attested to the overall integrity of Trenchant.
Boldly, mincing no words, she fixed the panel with
a friendly smile and continued.

"I think these charges are ludicrous, for two reasons.
One is that when Diana Trenchant has a problem with someone,
she marches right up and tells them.  She is very forthright
and would not do anything devious or underhanded.  The second reason
is that she has always had a high opinion of academic honesty."

A young woman of exceptional intelligence and ability,
Andrea had graduated from Belmont, summa cum laude,
with a BA, after completion of a double, self-designed major.
Because of her great love and knowledge of books, she found
employment in the library where she soon became indispensable.
There were those at Belmont who recognized and revered
exceptional ability and were not threatened by it.

On being questioned as to what she knew about work conditions in NERD,
she observed that from what she had heard from Diana, it wasn't a very
happy place to work.  Directing her answer toward Trenchant, she divulged,
"You were not my only source for this information.  My aunt works in the
department and I heard from both of you enough to form that impression.

"Just last month, my aunt told me that you may have been given
an excessive course load in an attempt to break your spirit
or drive you out of the department, much in the same way that
she was given a very minimum salary increase, in an attempt
to get her to move on."

Andrea continued by confirming that the laboratory manual that
had been used in the course for two years was indeed written by Diana
in her own home, with her own equipment and on her own time.
She, Andrea, had witnessed this and had helped with the proof reading.

Feigning a bored expression that he did not feel, Henry asked
if she had any evidence specific to the critiques in question.

"No, nothing specific, except if she were out to discredit
someone on the faculty, she would certainly have brains
enough to do something effective--not play with SmurFFs,"
Andrea delivered, with a chuckle.  Then she continued in a serious,
almost censoring tone, "I'm surprised that you actually take this
charge seriously.  You should have better sense.  The whole campus
is laughing at you."

As Henry seemed on the verge of apoplexy, Anuse quickly
asked who her aunt was.

Andrea looked directly at him and answered, "Dr. Biggot.
She teaches nutrition to the freshman medical students."

Esther wanted to be clear.  "Your aunt confirmed in both cases,
hers and Trenchant, that this was an underlying way of getting rid of them."

"Exactly.  She felt that they were not welcome in the department
and that this was a way to encourage them to move on."

"Now, we'll have no more of this," Henry interjected,
"we really can't take second hand information here.
I have already warned you people on the panel about this."

"All I did was have her repeat what she'd said already,"
Esther squeaked, "I didn't ask the question."

Henry was not pacified by her remark.  More information
positive toward Trenchant was being presented then he was
willing to hear--or then he wanted the panel to hear.
He turned to Trenchant and said harshly, "your witnesses must
address the charge here.  Since this witness does not have any
information directly relating to that charge, she is excused."

Andrea glanced at Diana who nodded, then smiling brightly,
she thanked the panel for listening and left the room.

"Eventually, I will call witness that will speak directly
to the charge you refer to.  Right now, since you have allowed
massive testimony against me that had nothing to do with
the specific charge you keep referring to, I mean to respond
to all of those allegations.

"You wrote me a letter which I have here, saying that
the hearing would not be conducted with strict rules.
You stated that I could present anything that I deemed important
and that is what I am doing.  And, in a much briefer manner
than you have presented the evidence against me.  I'll remind you
that you allowed plenty of hearsay testimony when your witnesses
were testifying."

Henry let out an exasperated breath, turned toward the panel
and said, "I think we'd better break for lunch and discuss how
much of this irrelevant material we are prepared to listen to.
We also will have to consider having Ann Biggot testify and bring
Lyle back.  We cannot let these unsubstantiated charges stand."

At the word lunch, the stenographer packed up her gear with
alacrity and headed out the door closely followed by Trenchant.
No words were exchanged this time, just a mutual groan of relief
at their escape.




