Chapter 28


It is the first of July.  The committee has met two times
since the hearing ended.  The first time, the split was three
to two.  The three women were resolute that there was not
enough evidence to believe that Diana had written the documents.
They did not put much credence into the report of the document
examiner and they didn't believe Lyle.

Henry could not and would not agree to write the report
announcing this to The Pope.  His instructions were clear
--get Trenchant.  Seeking distance, he suggested that they should,
in any event, wait for the complete transcript of the hearing.
When that had arrived and everyone had refreshed their memories,
they would hold another meeting.

The second meeting, held two weeks later, lasted four hours.
By the end of the session, everyone was tired and angry
and no one had moved from their original position.
It was a battle of the transcript.  Not only had Anuse
and Henry burned the midnight oil preparing for the meeting
with suitable quotes from the transcript, but the same
could be said of Jane, Esther and Annette.

As tempers, which had so far been under control, flared
and threatened to widen the gulf between the two sides,
Henry realized that the arguments were just solidifying
the opposition and, damn it to hell, they were the majority!
Since the handwriting evidence was so shaky, he dared not
force the issue. He would find another way.

He quickly called an end to it, told them tersely that
he would let them know when the next meeting would be
and then before anyone else moved, he left the room.




Chapter 29


August slipped into September.

What's happening with the hearing?   Everyone was asking.
No one had an answer.

Then the president of N.O.W, Ellie Smeal, came on campus to give
a speech.  The room was packed with women from all over campus.
Afterwards, Esther saw Diana and went up to her.

"What is going on?  Have you heard anything?" she inquired.

"You're the one on the committee.  I haven't heard anything
since the hearing ended.  You guys told me a month, tops.
Haven't you been writing the report?"  Trenchant answered tersely.
She was becoming increasingly strung out by the delay and by
the obvious fact that the committee chair had once again lied to her.

"Oh," said Esther, alarm showing on her pudgy face,  "I'm not
supposed to talk about it.  I haven't heard anything."
She finished, walking away leaving Diana more in the dark
than ever. . .and more apprehensive.

October dropped its leaves.

November brought an early snow.

Christmas flashed brightly, dulled and stood aside for the
start of a new year.

It had been nearly seven months since the hearing had ended
but Henry had not been idle.  After the debacle of the second
meeting of the panel, The Pope and Henry had decided to send the
material away for confirmation by another document examiner.
The women on the panel were not privy to this information.
"If they can't cooperate, leave them out in the cold,"
was Henry's decision.


"How many had you contacted before you found this one, Henry?"
Frank Anuse had stopped by Henry's office in the administration building
at Henry's invitation.  A great deal of time had gone by and he had
been getting edgy with all the questions aimed at him by concerned faculty.
It was great to have some positive results.  Even though he couldn't
broadcast them, he could give his inquisitors a knowing look
and indicate that it was in the bag.

"This makes the fourth.  The bastards take forever to make
up their minds.  They say they are busy with other analyses,
but you'd think with all we're paying them that. . ."
Henry shook his head in disgust.

"And they all said the same thing.  They didn't like to
make a positive match using copies of the standards we sent?"
Frank Anuse asked.

"That's it.  They all wanted originals."

"The guy that has them now though, called and said essentially
the same thing at first, except he thought if he could have a lot
more standards, he could make a decision even if they were copies."

"And. . ."

"And, I sent off copies of everything in her personnel file."

"You mean forms and such like?  Don't they have other people's
writing on them besides Trenchant's?"

"Oh, yes, but that doesn't matter.  The main thing is
we got confirmation.  The guy will testify to that and then
those damn lady-professors are going to toe the line, or else."

"You've already sent Trenchant the copies and notice of the next hearing?"

"Yup.  Did it this morning.  Same mail as I sent it to the rest
of the committee."

"Seems as though it would have been simpler just to have her write
something in front of witnesses and use those originals instead
of farting around all this time with copies," Anuse suggested.
"This process has taken nearly a year already."

"There's reasons.  Not something you and I have to know about,
but there's reasons.  Anyway, here's your copy.  Enjoy."




