Chapter 39


The university PR system was cranked up to its fullest.
Letters were sent out to various alumni groups around the
country and speakers to these groups were alerted and advised.
The trashing of Diana blossomed into an intellectual lynching
of the lowest order.   Much later on, as people came to understand
that the university had not complied with the findings of the court
and Attorney General, there was a general loss of respect for Belmont
which contributed to a decrease in enrollment.

The official Belmont University response was delivered by
the public relations spokesperson who dismissed the LOD as,
"inconsequential.  I don't know what all the fuss is about,"
he said.  "When you cut through the fancy title at the top
it's just a lawyer's opinion."  No one else at Belmont
was available for comment.

The Pope did know what all the fuss was about and was
stung by the words of condemnation contained in the LOD.
He immediately called his contact at the Washington DC office
of the EEOC.  He complained fiercely that the LOD never gave
the university's side of the question.  "No one here was
interviewed by the investigator from the Attorney General's Office,"
he protested peevishly.

He got that right!

His contact got his protest an immediate hearing by the EEOC chairman,
who directed the regional office to quash the Attorney General's LOD.
No one in the head office bothered to read the LOD and learn
that the reason there were no interviews of university personnel
because they refused to cooperate with the investigation.
Friends in high places, indeed.

In addition, The Pope called a meeting to discuss their
court strategy.  "Now," The Pope said forcefully, "It's time
we did something to end the legal hassle.  That damned judge!
And, this A.G. letter on top of it.  We are getting too much
bad publicity.  The letters and phone calls are driving everyone
crazy around here.  It's gone on long enough--too long!"  Sitting
around the conference table in the west wing of his office with
him was Murrain, Henry Tarbuck and Jimbo.

Murrain spoke confidently.  "The court business is nearly finished.
I have already petitioned the judge for permission to start discovery.
Unless the plaintiff is sitting on a gold mine, that will finish off her
bank account right there."

"How's that?" asked Jimbo.

"During discovery, we take depositions.  Al Garret will have to
depose a lot more witness than we do in order to even come close
to presenting his case.  Conservatively speaking, he's looking
at nearly a thousand bucks a day that he must bill Trenchant.

"And that's not even the best part."  Murrain caressed his
face with his hand as if re-oiling the smile on its surface.
"I'll coach our people in evasive answers, which means that
it will take days of deposition time for him to get the
information that an unprepared witness would give in a hour.

"Good."  The Pope was pleased.

Not so pleased was Al Garret and the plaintiff.  Both attorneys
had agreed some months ago that the process of discovery would not
be commenced until the judge had given his final ruling on the motions
and the trial date set.  Murrain delivered his low blow without missing
a beat.  "Oh," he cooed when Al called him to complain, "I must have
misunderstood.  I thought you wanted to get started before the final ruling."

Al was outclassed and he knew it.  Apologetically, he called the plaintiff
and drew her the financial picture.  An appeal to the judge for permission
to delay discovery was ignored--Murrain had carefully picked his time.
It was one of the last orders the judge signed before departing
on his vacation.

That's all she wrote, Diana acknowledged  In debt and unemployed,
she dropped her illegal-termination suit against Belmont University.




AFTERGLOW


Chapter 40


Deep within the bowels of the Belmont library building,
the university archivist, Igor O'Toole, had been keeping an
informal running tally of events relating to the SmurFF Affair.
He had gleaned the information from his friend, Diana, confirmed
gossip, media sources, university documents and private sources
which he knew to be reliable and would not reveal.  He had,
over the past two years, posted it in a scrapbook.

His interest had been whetted when the story first broke.
Everyone repeating it on campus was incredulous. . .termination
for cause on account of seven SmurFFs?  Really?  It must be a joke.

But Igor, casting out his informational net, discovered that
it wasn't.  It was discrimination, pure and simple and he,
because of his race, knew discrimination when he came on it.

He remembered how close he had come to not landing his
present position.   A man in his late forties, he had
impeccable credentials and years of experience in archival work.
He was also an African American.  Strong, competent and unassuming,
he had applied for the posted position of senior archivist
and then waited for the decision from personnel.

Time passed.  They told him they were still interviewing,
but he had learned from a contact he had made in the library
that they had reposted the advertisement for the job because
no qualified applicants had been sent from personnel.
That was how Igor's pool of informational sources began.

Then suddenly, he was called in for an interview.  By now his
contacts had grown and he discovered that his name had won him the job.
Someone in the personnel department had inadvertently listed him
to the library as a viable candidate based on his last name. . .
obviously Irish.  His race had been overlooked.

The library director was delighted with his credentials and
called him in for an interview.  This firmly established to all
and sundry that he was black.  Back then, tokenism was rampant
so when the director hired him, the administration went along
with it, albeit reluctantly.  After all, the archives were in
the basement, who would notice?

Now having enjoyed many years at Belmont and made many friends,
he was turning the last few pages of his scrapbook.
It was by now a huge tome, meticulously kept and
recently augmented by Diana's contribution of letters,
court papers and related documents.  He had reached the
final section dealing with the people involved and the aftermath.

Grimly, he noted that despite the several instances of plagiarism
committed by the two faculty men, Ian Heathson and Randy Fecesi,
they were promoted and given tenure.  The years of adverse student
evaluations of their teaching abilities were all thrown out
on the basis of five `suspect' ones and Henry's report.

Randy, at the insistence of the medical students, was moved
out of the medical radiology course and into an undergraduate
nutrition course.  A year later there were problems involving
some of the young women in the course.  The women were hushed up
and Randy was given an immediate sabbatical of indefinite length.

Ian continued in the radiology course but was never able to
capture any grants to continue his research.

The best all around teacher in NERD, fed up to the gills
with having to continually save the department's teaching bacon,
quit and moved away.  This excellent teacher, Ray Stinnis,
could no longer turn his back on the rampant dishonesty inherent in
the department--the treatment afforded Diana had been the last straw.

After Ray's departure, Lyle Stone was forced to give
lucrative courses up to other departments.  The resulting
decrease in revenue caused a severe decline in his research
programs and plans were underway to abolish the NERD entirely.

Frank Anuse had suffered a near fatal heart attack.  Months later
when he returned to work, it was reported that he was a changed man.
His attitude toward the women in his sector improved and it was
reported that he regretted his role on the Trenchant panel.

Esther received the promised promotion and a raise.  A year later,
she was retired--broken and unhappy.

Annette quit her position and moved out of the area with her roommate.

Jane, who had been tenured, left.  The circumstances were never divulged.

Jimbo and Dean Broadhurst were quietly retired.

An administrative intern in The Pope's office was summarily fired
for injudiciously stating that it would have been more cost effective
to retire Diana than spend the thousands of dollars to terminate her.

"You see," he explained to the assembled president and Vees,
with more ignorance than good sense, "Our current policy would
have paid for her retirement without any further outlay of
monies on our part.  The hearings, document examiners, courts and
subsequent damage control has cost nearly one hundred thousand dollars."


Still reading, Igor marveled at how the ripples created by Diana's
struggle had widened and spread out of Belmont into the state.
Her short but important court venture resulted in twenty areas
of state statutes cited.  These annotated statutes served to
strengthen the application of the cited state laws to Belmont.
Using these laws, a faculty union was kindled and an
Animal Rights Organization sued successfully to attend
Belmont animal research meetings.

Applications for enrollment decreased as many became
turned off by Belmont's noncompliance with the law.

The legislature of the state became disenchanted with the university
because of the notoriety, and decreased its annual appropriation.
A legislative investigation was initiated to ascertain the number
and salaries of the central administration of Belmont.

The Pope felt the heat and got out of the kitchen--very suddenly.
An interim president was appointed by the trustees.

Henry Tarbuck elected to stay when the new president
came on board and was demoted to an associate Vee.
His wife successfully sued for divorce and Henry's claim
for alimony was denied by the judge.  This meant that he had
to go back to living on his own salary.

Two women successfully brought charges of sexual harassment
against a Belmont administrator.  A court subsequently awarded
them nearly a million dollars in compensatory and punitive damages.

So many sex discrimination cases were initiated by Belmont staff
that the new administration created an entire unit to investigate
and put out fires.

Diana applied for unemployment compensation which the Belmont
administration opposed on the grounds that she was discharged
for dishonesty.  At the State Employment Service hearing,
Diana submitted the Judge's Order and the LOD from the Attorney General.

Although the entire upper administrative wing of the
personnel department appeared to testify against her,
the Employment Service hearing officer decided that she
had been unfairly terminated.  She drew unemployment checks
for only a few weeks.  They enabled her to get by until plans
for self-employment could be formulated.  Continuing in her
teaching career was out--no references would be forthcoming from
her last employer.  She started a small delivery business from
her home and with that, her friends and Social Security,
she managed all right.



