PART II--THE KNIGHT


CHAPTER ONE--THE FERNDALE


I have said that the story of Flora de Barral was imparted to me in
stages.  At this stage I did not see Marlow for some time.  At last, one
evening rather early, very soon after dinner, he turned up in my rooms.

I had been waiting for his call primed with a remark which had not
occurred to me till after he had gone away.

"I say," I tackled him at once, "how can you be certain that Flora de
Barral ever went to sea?  After all, the wife of the captain of the
_Ferndale_--" the lady that mustn't be disturbed "of the old
ship-keeper--may not have been Flora."

"Well, I do know," he said, "if only because I have been keeping in touch
with Mr. Powell."

"You have!" I cried.  "This is the first I hear of it.  And since when?"

"Why, since the first day.  You went up to town leaving me in the inn.  I
slept ashore.  In the morning Mr. Powell came in for breakfast; and after
the first awkwardness of meeting a man you have been yarning with over-
night had worn off, we discovered a liking for each other."

As I had discovered the fact of their mutual liking before either of
them, I was not surprised.

"And so you kept in touch," I said.

"It was not so very difficult.  As he was always knocking about the river
I hired Dingle's sloop-rigged three-tonner to be more on an equality.
Powell was friendly but elusive.  I don't think he ever wanted to avoid
me.  But it is a fact that he used to disappear out of the river in a
very mysterious manner sometimes.  A man may land anywhere and bolt
inland--but what about his five-ton cutter?  You can't carry that in your
hand like a suit-case.

"Then as suddenly he would reappear in the river, after one had given him
up.  I did not like to be beaten.  That's why I hired Dingle's decked
boat.  There was just the accommodation in her to sleep a man and a dog.
But I had no dog-friend to invite.  Fyne's dog who saved Flora de
Barral's life is the last dog-friend I had.  I was rather lonely cruising
about; but that, too, on the river has its charm, sometimes.  I chased
the mystery of the vanishing Powell dreamily, looking about me at the
ships, thinking of the girl Flora, of life's chances--and, do you know,
it was very simple."

"What was very simple?" I asked innocently.

"The mystery."

"They generally are that," I said.

Marlow eyed me for a moment in a peculiar manner.

"Well, I have discovered the mystery of Powell's disappearances.  The
fellow used to run into one of these narrow tidal creeks on the Essex
shore.  These creeks are so inconspicuous that till I had studied the
chart pretty carefully I did not know of their existence.  One afternoon,
I made Powell's boat out, heading into the shore.  By the time I got
close to the mud-flat his craft had disappeared inland.  But I could see
the mouth of the creek by then.  The tide being on the turn I took the
risk of getting stuck in the mud suddenly and headed in.  All I had to
guide me was the top of the roof of some sort of small building.  I got
in more by good luck than by good management.  The sun had set some time
before; my boat glided in a sort of winding ditch between two low grassy
banks; on both sides of me was the flatness of the Essex marsh, perfectly
still.  All I saw moving was a heron; he was flying low, and disappeared
in the murk.  Before I had gone half a mile, I was up with the building
the roof of which I had seen from the river.  It looked like a small
barn.  A row of piles driven into the soft bank in front of it and
supporting a few planks made a sort of wharf.  All this was black in the
falling dusk, and I could just distinguish the whitish ruts of a cart-
track stretching over the marsh towards the higher land, far away.  Not a
sound was to be heard.  Against the low streak of light in the sky I
could see the mast of Powell's cutter moored to the bank some twenty
yards, no more, beyond that black barn or whatever it was.  I hailed him
with a loud shout.  Got no answer.  After making fast my boat just
astern, I walked along the bank to have a look at Powell's.  Being so
much bigger than mine she was aground already.  Her sails were furled;
the slide of her scuttle hatch was closed and padlocked.  Powell was
gone.  He had walked off into that dark, still marsh somewhere.  I had
not seen a single house anywhere near; there did not seem to be any human
habitation for miles; and now as darkness fell denser over the land I
couldn't see the glimmer of a single light.  However, I supposed that
there must be some village or hamlet not very far away; or only one of
these mysterious little inns one comes upon sometimes in most unexpected
and lonely places.

"The stillness was oppressive.  I went back to my boat, made some coffee
over a spirit-lamp, devoured a few biscuits, and stretched myself aft, to
smoke and gaze at the stars.  The earth was a mere shadow, formless and
silent, and empty, till a bullock turned up from somewhere, quite shadowy
too.  He came smartly to the very edge of the bank as though he meant to
step on board, stretched his muzzle right over my boat, blew heavily
once, and walked off contemptuously into the darkness from which he had
come.  I had not expected a call from a bullock, though a moment's
thought would have shown me that there must be lots of cattle and sheep
on that marsh.  Then everything became still as before.  I might have
imagined myself arrived on a desert island.  In fact, as I reclined
smoking a sense of absolute loneliness grew on me.  And just as it had
become intense, very abruptly and without any preliminary sound I heard
firm, quick footsteps on the little wharf.  Somebody coming along the
cart-track had just stepped at a swinging gait on to the planks.  That
somebody could only have been Mr. Powell.  Suddenly he stopped short,
having made out that there were two masts alongside the bank where he had
left only one.  Then he came on silent on the grass.  When I spoke to him
he was astonished.

"Who would have thought of seeing you here!" he exclaimed, after
returning my good evening.

"I told him I had run in for company.  It was rigorously true."

"You knew I was here?" he exclaimed.

"Of course," I said.  "I tell you I came in for company."

"He is a really good fellow," went on Marlow.  "And his capacity for
astonishment is quickly exhausted, it seems.  It was in the most matter-
of-fact manner that he said, 'Come on board of me, then; I have here
enough supper for two.'  He was holding a bulky parcel in the crook of
his arm.  I did not wait to be asked twice, as you may guess.  His cutter
has a very neat little cabin, quite big enough for two men not only to
sleep but to sit and smoke in.  We left the scuttle wide open, of course.
As to his provisions for supper, they were not of a luxurious kind.  He
complained that the shops in the village were miserable.  There was a big
village within a mile and a half.  It struck me he had been very long
doing his shopping; but naturally I made no remark.  I didn't want to
talk at all except for the purpose of setting him going."

"And did you set him going?" I asked.

"I did," said Marlow, composing his features into an impenetrable
expression which somehow assured me of his success better than an air of
triumph could have done.

* * * * *

"You made him talk?" I said after a silence.

"Yes, I made him . . . about himself."

"And to the point?"

"If you mean by this," said Marlow, "that it was about the voyage of the
_Ferndale_, then again, yes.  I brought him to talk about that voyage,
which, by the by, was not the first voyage of Flora de Barral.  The man
himself, as I told you, is simple, and his faculty of wonder not very
great.  He's one of those people who form no theories about facts.
Straightforward people seldom do.  Neither have they much penetration.
But in this case it did not matter.  I--we--have already the inner
knowledge.  We know the history of Flora de Barral.  We know something of
Captain Anthony.  We have the secret of the situation.  The man was
intoxicated with the pity and tenderness of his part.  Oh yes!
Intoxicated is not too strong a word; for you know that love and desire
take many disguises.  I believe that the girl had been frank with him,
with the frankness of women to whom perfect frankness is impossible,
because so much of their safety depends on judicious reticences.  I am
not indulging in cheap sneers.  There is necessity in these things.  And
moreover she could not have spoken with a certain voice in the face of
his impetuosity, because she did not have time to understand either the
state of her feelings, or the precise nature of what she was doing.

Had she spoken ever so clearly he was, I take it, too elated to hear her
distinctly.  I don't mean to imply that he was a fool.  Oh dear no!  But
he had no training in the usual conventions, and we must remember that he
had no experience whatever of women.  He could only have an ideal
conception of his position.  An ideal is often but a flaming vision of
reality.

To him enters Fyne, wound up, if I may express myself so irreverently,
wound up to a high pitch by his wife's interpretation of the girl's
letter.  He enters with his talk of meanness and cruelty, like a bucket
of water on the flame.  Clearly a shock.  But the effects of a bucket of
water are diverse.  They depend on the kind of flame.  A mere blaze of
dry straw, of course . . . but there can be no question of straw there.
Anthony of the _Ferndale_ was not, could not have been, a straw-stuffed
specimen of a man.  There are flames a bucket of water sends leaping sky-
high.

We may well wonder what happened when, after Fyne had left him, the
hesitating girl went up at last and opened the door of that room where
our man, I am certain, was not extinguished.  Oh no!  Nor cold; whatever
else he might have been.

It is conceivable he might have cried at her in the first moment of
humiliation, of exasperation, "Oh, it's you!  Why are you here?  If I am
so odious to you that you must write to my sister to say so, I give you
back your word."  But then, don't you see, it could not have been that.  I
have the practical certitude that soon afterwards they went together in a
hansom to see the ship--as agreed.  That was my reason for saying that
Flora de Barral did go to sea . . . "

"Yes.  It seems conclusive," I agreed.  "But even without that--if, as
you seem to think, the very desolation of that girlish figure had a sort
of perversely seductive charm, making its way through his compassion to
his senses (and everything is possible)--then such words could not have
been spoken."

"They might have escaped him involuntarily," observed Marlow.  "However,
a plain fact settles it.  They went off together to see the ship."

"Do you conclude from this that nothing whatever was said?" I inquired.

"I should have liked to see the first meeting of their glances upstairs
there," mused Marlow.  "And perhaps nothing was said.  But no man comes
out of such a 'wrangle' (as Fyne called it) without showing some traces
of it.  And you may be sure that a girl so bruised all over would feel
the slightest touch of anything resembling coldness.  She was
mistrustful; she could not be otherwise; for the energy of evil is so
much more forcible than the energy of good that she could not help
looking still upon her abominable governess as an authority.  How could
one have expected her to throw off the unholy prestige of that long
domination?  She could not help believing what she had been told; that
she was in some mysterious way odious and unlovable.  It was cruelly
true--_to her_.  The oracle of so many years had spoken finally.  Only
other people did not find her out at once . . . I would not go so far as
to say she believed it altogether.  That would be hardly possible.  But
then haven't the most flattered, the most conceited of us their moments
of doubt?  Haven't they?  Well, I don't know.  There may be lucky beings
in this world unable to believe any evil of themselves.  For my own part
I'll tell you that once, many years ago now, it came to my knowledge that
a fellow I had been mixed up with in a certain transaction--a clever
fellow whom I really despised--was going around telling people that I was
a consummate hypocrite.  He could know nothing of it.  It suited his
humour to say so.  I had given him no ground for that particular calumny.
Yet to this day there are moments when it comes into my mind, and
involuntarily I ask myself, 'What if it were true?'  It's absurd, but it
has on one or two occasions nearly affected my conduct.  And yet I was
not an impressionable ignorant young girl.  I had taken the exact measure
of the fellow's utter worthlessness long before.  He had never been for
me a person of prestige and power, like that awful governess to Flora de
Barral.  See the might of suggestion?  We live at the mercy of a
malevolent word.  A sound, a mere disturbance of the air, sinks into our
very soul sometimes.  Flora de Barral had been more astounded than
convinced by the first impetuosity of Roderick Anthony.  She let herself
be carried along by a mysterious force which her person had called into
being, as her father had been carried away out of his depth by the
unexpected power of successful advertising.

They went on board that morning.  The _Ferndale_ had just come to her
loading berth.  The only living creature on board was the
ship-keeper--whether the same who had been described to us by Mr. Powell,
or another, I don't know.  Possibly some other man.  He, looking over the
side, saw, in his own words, 'the captain come sailing round the corner
of the nearest cargo-shed, in company with a girl.'  He lowered the
accommodation ladder down on to the jetty . . . "

"How do you know all this?" I interrupted.

Marlow interjected an impatient:

"You shall see by and by . . . Flora went up first, got down on deck and
stood stock-still till the captain took her by the arm and led her aft.
The ship-keeper let them into the saloon.  He had the keys of all the
cabins, and stumped in after them.  The captain ordered him to open all
the doors, every blessed door; state-rooms, passages, pantry,
fore-cabin--and then sent him away.

"The _Ferndale_ had magnificent accommodation.  At the end of a passage
leading from the quarter-deck there was a long saloon, its sumptuosity
slightly tarnished perhaps, but having a grand air of roominess and
comfort.  The harbour carpets were down, the swinging lamps hung, and
everything in its place, even to the silver on the sideboard.  Two large
stern cabins opened out of it, one on each side of the rudder casing.
These two cabins communicated through a small bathroom between them, and
one was fitted up as the captain's state-room.  The other was vacant, and
furnished with arm-chairs and a round table, more like a room on shore,
except for the long curved settee following the shape of the ship's
stern.  In a dim inclined mirror, Flora caught sight down to the waist of
a pale-faced girl in a white straw hat trimmed with roses, distant,
shadowy, as if immersed in water, and was surprised to recognize herself
in those surroundings.  They seemed to her arbitrary, bizarre, strange.
Captain Anthony moved on, and she followed him.  He showed her the other
cabins.  He talked all the time loudly in a voice she seemed to have
known extremely well for a long time; and yet, she reflected, she had not
heard it often in her life.  What he was saying she did not quite follow.
He was speaking of comparatively indifferent things in a rather moody
tone, but she felt it round her like a caress.  And when he stopped she
could hear, alarming in the sudden silence, the precipitated beating of
her heart.

The ship-keeper dodged about the quarter-deck, out of hearing, and trying
to keep out of sight.  At the same time, taking advantage of the open
doors with skill and prudence, he could see the captain and "that girl"
the captain had brought aboard.  The captain was showing her round very
thoroughly.  Through the whole length of the passage, far away aft in the
perspective of the saloon the ship-keeper had interesting glimpses of
them as they went in and out of the various cabins, crossing from side to
side, remaining invisible for a time in one or another of the
state-rooms, and then reappearing again in the distance.  The girl,
always following the captain, had her sunshade in her hands.  Mostly she
would hang her head, but now and then she would look up.  They had a lot
to say to each other, and seemed to forget they weren't alone in the
ship.  He saw the captain put his hand on her shoulder, and was preparing
himself with a certain zest for what might follow, when the "old man"
seemed to recollect himself, and came striding down all the length of the
saloon.  At this move the ship-keeper promptly dodged out of sight, as
you may believe, and heard the captain slam the inner door of the
passage.  After that disappointment the ship-keeper waited resentfully
for them to clear out of the ship.  It happened much sooner than he had
expected.  The girl walked out on deck first.  As before she did not look
round.  She didn't look at anything; and she seemed to be in such a hurry
to get ashore that she made for the gangway and started down the ladder
without waiting for the captain.

What struck the ship-keeper most was the absent, unseeing expression of
the captain, striding after the girl.  He passed him, the ship-keeper,
without notice, without an order, without so much as a look.  The captain
had never done so before.  Always had a nod and a pleasant word for a
man.  From this slight the ship-keeper drew a conclusion unfavourable to
the strange girl.  He gave them time to get down on the wharf before
crossing the deck to steal one more look at the pair over the rail.  The
captain took hold of the girl's arm just before a couple of railway
trucks drawn by a horse came rolling along and hid them from the ship-
keeper's sight for good.

Next day, when the chief mate joined the ship, he told him the tale of
the visit, and expressed himself about the girl "who had got hold of the
captain" disparagingly.  She didn't look healthy, he explained.  "Shabby
clothes, too," he added spitefully.

The mate was very much interested.  He had been with Anthony for several
years, and had won for himself in the course of many long voyages, a
footing of familiarity, which was to be expected with a man of Anthony's
character.  But in that slowly-grown intimacy of the sea, which in its
duration and solitude had its unguarded moments, no words had passed,
even of the most casual, to prepare him for the vision of his captain
associated with any kind of girl.  His impression had been that women did
not exist for Captain Anthony.  Exhibiting himself with a girl!  A girl!
What did he want with a girl?  Bringing her on board and showing her
round the cabin!  That was really a little bit too much.  Captain Anthony
ought to have known better.

Franklin (the chief mate's name was Franklin) felt disappointed; almost
disillusioned.  Silly thing to do!  Here was a confounded old ship-keeper
set talking.  He snubbed the ship-keeper, and tried to think of that
insignificant bit of foolishness no more; for it diminished Captain
Anthony in his eyes of a jealously devoted subordinate.

Franklin was over forty; his mother was still alive.  She stood in the
forefront of all women for him, just as Captain Anthony stood in the
forefront of all men.  We may suppose that these groups were not very
large.  He had gone to sea at a very early age.  The feeling which caused
these two people to partly eclipse the rest of mankind were of course not
similar; though in time he had acquired the conviction that he was
"taking care" of them both.  The "old lady" of course had to be looked
after as long as she lived.  In regard to Captain Anthony, he used to say
that: why should he leave him?  It wasn't likely that he would come
across a better sailor or a better man or a more comfortable ship.  As to
trying to better himself in the way of promotion, commands were not the
sort of thing one picked up in the streets, and when it came to that,
Captain Anthony was as likely to give him a lift on occasion as anyone in
the world.

From Mr. Powell's description Franklin was a short, thick black-haired
man, bald on the top.  His head sunk between the shoulders, his staring
prominent eyes and a florid colour, gave him a rather apoplectic
appearance.  In repose, his congested face had a humorously melancholy
expression.

The ship-keeper having given him up all the keys and having been chased
forward with the admonition to mind his own business and not to chatter
about what did not concern him, Mr. Franklin went under the poop.  He
opened one door after another; and, in the saloon, in the captain's state-
room and everywhere, he stared anxiously as if expecting to see on the
bulkheads, on the deck, in the air, something unusual--sign, mark,
emanation, shadow--he hardly knew what--some subtle change wrought by the
passage of a girl.  But there was nothing.  He entered the unoccupied
stern cabin and spent some time there unscrewing the two stern ports.  In
the absence of all material evidences his uneasiness was passing away.
With a last glance round he came out and found himself in the presence of
his captain advancing from the other end of the saloon.

Franklin, at once, looked for the girl.  She wasn't to be seen.  The
captain came up quickly.  'Oh! you are here, Mr. Franklin.'  And the mate
said, 'I was giving a little air to the place, sir.'  Then the captain,
his hat pulled down over his eyes, laid his stick on the table and asked
in his kind way: 'How did you find your mother, Franklin?'--'The old
lady's first-rate, sir, thank you.'  And then they had nothing to say to
each other.  It was a strange and disturbing feeling for Franklin.  He,
just back from leave, the ship just come to her loading berth, the
captain just come on board, and apparently nothing to say!  The several
questions he had been anxious to ask as to various things which had to be
done had slipped out of his mind.  He, too, felt as though he had nothing
to say.

The captain, picking up his stick off the table, marched into his state-
room and shut the door after him.  Franklin remained still for a moment
and then started slowly to go on deck.  But before he had time to reach
the other end of the saloon he heard himself called by name.  He turned
round.  The captain was staring from the doorway of his state-room.
Franklin said, "Yes, sir."  But the captain, silent, leaned a little
forward grasping the door handle.  So he, Franklin, walked aft keeping
his eyes on him.  When he had come up quite close he said again, "Yes,
sir?" interrogatively.  Still silence.  The mate didn't like to be stared
at in that manner, a manner quite new in his captain, with a defiant and
self-conscious stare, like a man who feels ill and dares you to notice
it.  Franklin gazed at his captain, felt that there was something wrong,
and in his simplicity voiced his feelings by asking point-blank:

"What's wrong, sir?"

The captain gave a slight start, and the character of his stare changed
to a sort of sinister surprise.  Franklin grew very uncomfortable, but
the captain asked negligently:

"What makes you think that there's something wrong?"

"I can't say exactly.  You don't look quite yourself, sir," Franklin
owned up.

"You seem to have a confoundedly piercing eye," said the captain in such
an aggressive tone that Franklin was moved to defend himself.

"We have been together now over six years, sir, so I suppose I know you a
bit by this time.  I could see there was something wrong directly you
came on board."

"Mr. Franklin," said the captain, "we have been more than six years
together, it is true, but I didn't know you for a reader of faces.  You
are not a correct reader though.  It's very far from being wrong.  You
understand?  As far from being wrong as it can very well be.  It ought to
teach you not to make rash surmises.  You should leave that to the shore
people.  They are great hands at spying out something wrong.  I dare say
they know what they have made of the world.  A dam' poor job of it and
that's plain.  It's a confoundedly ugly place, Mr. Franklin.  You don't
know anything of it?  Well--no, we sailors don't.  Only now and then one
of us runs against something cruel or underhand, enough to make your hair
stand on end.  And when you do see a piece of their wickedness you find
that to set it right is not so easy as it looks . . . Oh!  I called you
back to tell you that there will be a lot of workmen, joiners and all
that sent down on board first thing to-morrow morning to start making
alterations in the cabin.  You will see to it that they don't loaf.  There
isn't much time."

Franklin was impressed by this unexpected lecture upon the wickedness of
the solid world surrounded by the salt, uncorruptible waters on which he
and his captain had dwelt all their lives in happy innocence.  What he
could not understand was why it should have been delivered, and what
connection it could have with such a matter as the alterations to be
carried out in the cabin.  The work did not seem to him to be called for
in such a hurry.  What was the use of altering anything?  It was a very
good accommodation, spacious, well-distributed, on a rather old-fashioned
plan, and with its decorations somewhat tarnished.  But a dab of varnish,
a touch of gilding here and there, was all that was necessary.  As to
comfort, it could not be improved by any alterations.  He resented the
notion of change; but he said dutifully that he would keep his eye on the
workmen if the captain would only let him know what was the nature of the
work he had ordered to be done.

"You'll find a note of it on this table.  I'll leave it for you as I go
ashore," said Captain Anthony hastily.  Franklin thought there was no
more to hear, and made a movement to leave the saloon.  But the captain
continued after a slight pause, "You will be surprised, no doubt, when
you look at it.  There'll be a good many alterations.  It's on account of
a lady coming with us.  I am going to get married, Mr. Franklin!"



CHAPTER TWO--YOUNG POWELL SEES AND HEARS


"You remember," went on Marlow, "how I feared that Mr. Powell's want of
experience would stand in his way of appreciating the unusual.  The
unusual I had in my mind was something of a very subtle sort: the unusual
in marital relations.  I may well have doubted the capacity of a young
man too much concerned with the creditable performance of his
professional duties to observe what in the nature of things is not easily
observable in itself, and still less so under the special circumstances.
In the majority of ships a second officer has not many points of contact
with the captain's wife.  He sits at the same table with her at meals,
generally speaking; he may now and then be addressed more or less kindly
on insignificant matters, and have the opportunity to show her some small
attentions on deck.  And that is all.  Under such conditions, signs can
be seen only by a sharp and practised eye.  I am alluding now to troubles
which are subtle often to the extent of not being understood by the very
hearts they devastate or uplift.

Yes, Mr. Powell, whom the chance of his name had thrown upon the floating
stage of that tragicomedy would have been perfectly useless for my
purpose if the unusual of an obvious kind had not aroused his attention
from the first.

We know how he joined that ship so suddenly offered to his anxious desire
to make a real start in his profession.  He had come on board breathless
with the hurried winding up of his shore affairs, accompanied by two
horrible night-birds, escorted by a dock policeman on the make, received
by an asthmatic shadow of a ship-keeper, warned not to make a noise in
the darkness of the passage because the captain and his wife were already
on board.  That in itself was already somewhat unusual.  Captains and
their wives do not, as a rule, join a moment sooner than is necessary.
They prefer to spend the last moments with their friends and relations.  A
ship in one of London's older docks with their restrictions as to lights
and so on is not the place for a happy evening.  Still, as the tide
served at six in the morning, one could understand them coming on board
the evening before.

Just then young Powell felt as if anybody ought to be glad enough to be
quit of the shore.  We know he was an orphan from a very early age,
without brothers or sisters--no near relations of any kind, I believe,
except that aunt who had quarrelled with his father.  No affection stood
in the way of the quiet satisfaction with which he thought that now all
the worries were over, that there was nothing before him but duties, that
he knew what he would have to do as soon as the dawn broke and for a long
succession of days.  A most soothing certitude.  He enjoyed it in the
dark, stretched out in his bunk with his new blankets pulled over him.
Some clock ashore beyond the dock-gates struck two.  And then he heard
nothing more, because he went off into a light sleep from which he woke
up with a start.  He had not taken his clothes off, it was hardly worth
while.  He jumped up and went on deck.

The morning was clear, colourless, grey overhead; the dock like a sheet
of darkling glass crowded with upside-down reflections of warehouses, of
hulls and masts of silent ships.  Rare figures moved here and there on
the distant quays.  A knot of men stood alongside with clothes-bags and
wooden chests at their feet.  Others were coming down the lane between
tall, blind walls, surrounding a hand-cart loaded with more bags and
boxes.  It was the crew of the _Ferndale_.  They began to come on board.
He scanned their faces as they passed forward filling the roomy deck with
the shuffle of their footsteps and the murmur of voices, like the
awakening to life of a world about to be launched into space.

Far away down the clear glassy stretch in the middle of the long dock Mr.
Powell watched the tugs coming in quietly through the open gates.  A
subdued firm voice behind him interrupted this contemplation.  It was
Franklin, the thick chief mate, who was addressing him with a watchful
appraising stare of his prominent black eyes: "You'd better take a couple
of these chaps with you and look out for her aft.  We are going to cast
off."

"Yes, sir," Powell said with proper alacrity; but for a moment they
remained looking at each other fixedly.  Something like a faint smile
altered the set of the chief mate's lips just before he moved off forward
with his brisk step.

Mr. Powell, getting up on the poop, touched his cap to Captain Anthony,
who was there alone.  He tells me that it was only then that he saw his
captain for the first time.  The day before, in the shipping office, what
with the bad light and his excitement at this berth obtained as if by a
brusque and unscrupulous miracle, did not count.  He had then seemed to
him much older and heavier.  He was surprised at the lithe figure, broad
of shoulder, narrow at the hips, the fire of the deep-set eyes, the
springiness of the walk.  The captain gave him a steady stare, nodded
slightly, and went on pacing the poop with an air of not being aware of
what was going on, his head rigid, his movements rapid.

Powell stole several glances at him with a curiosity very natural under
the circumstances.  He wore a short grey jacket and a grey cap.  In the
light of the dawn, growing more limpid rather than brighter, Powell
noticed the slightly sunken cheeks under the trimmed beard, the
perpendicular fold on the forehead, something hard and set about the
mouth.

It was too early yet for the work to have begun in the dock.  The water
gleamed placidly, no movement anywhere on the long straight lines of the
quays, no one about to be seen except the few dock hands busy alongside
the _Ferndale_, knowing their work, mostly silent or exchanging a few
words in low tones as if they, too, had been aware of that lady 'who
mustn't be disturbed.'  The _Ferndale_ was the only ship to leave that
tide.  The others seemed still asleep, without a sound, and only here and
there a figure, coming up on the forecastle, leaned on the rail to watch
the proceedings idly.  Without trouble and fuss and almost without a
sound was the _Ferndale_ leaving the land, as if stealing away.  Even the
tugs, now with their engines stopped, were approaching her without a
ripple, the burly-looking paddle-boat sheering forward, while the other,
a screw, smaller and of slender shape, made for her quarter so gently
that she did not divide the smooth water, but seemed to glide on its
surface as if on a sheet of plate-glass, a man in her bow, the master at
the wheel visible only from the waist upwards above the white screen of
the bridge, both of them so still-eyed as to fascinate young Powell into
curious self-forgetfulness and immobility.  He was steeped, sunk in the
general quietness, remembering the statement 'she's a lady that mustn't
be disturbed,' and repeating to himself idly: 'No.  She won't be
disturbed.  She won't be disturbed.'  Then the first loud words of that
morning breaking that strange hush of departure with a sharp hail: 'Look
out for that line there,' made him start.  The line whizzed past his
head, one of the sailors aft caught it, and there was an end to the
fascination, to the quietness of spirit which had stolen on him at the
very moment of departure.  From that moment till two hours afterwards,
when the ship was brought up in one of the lower reaches of the Thames
off an apparently uninhabited shore, near some sort of inlet where
nothing but two anchored barges flying a red flag could be seen, Powell
was too busy to think of the lady 'that mustn't be disturbed,' or of his
captain--or of anything else unconnected with his immediate duties.  In
fact, he had no occasion to go on the poop, or even look that way much;
but while the ship was about to anchor, casting his eyes in that
direction, he received an absurd impression that his captain (he was up
there, of course) was sitting on both sides of the aftermost skylight at
once.  He was too occupied to reflect on this curious delusion, this
phenomenon of seeing double as though he had had a drop too much.  He
only smiled at himself.

As often happens after a grey daybreak the sun had risen in a warm and
glorious splendour above the smooth immense gleam of the enlarged
estuary.  Wisps of mist floated like trails of luminous dust, and in the
dazzling reflections of water and vapour, the shores had the murky semi-
transparent darkness of shadows cast mysteriously from below.  Powell,
who had sailed out of London all his young seaman's life, told me that it
was then, in a moment of entranced vision an hour or so after sunrise,
that the river was revealed to him for all time, like a fair face often
seen before, which is suddenly perceived to be the expression of an inner
and unsuspected beauty, of that something unique and only its own which
rouses a passion of wonder and fidelity and an unappeasable memory of its
charm.  The hull of the _Ferndale_, swung head to the eastward, caught
the light, her tall spars and rigging steeped in a bath of red-gold, from
the water-line full of glitter to the trucks slight and gleaming against
the delicate expanse of the blue.

"Time we had a mouthful to eat," said a voice at his side.  It was Mr.
Franklin, the chief mate, with his head sunk between his shoulders, and
melancholy eyes.  "Let the men have their breakfast, bo'sun," he went on,
"and have the fire out in the galley in half an hour at the latest, so
that we can call these barges of explosives alongside.  Come along, young
man.  I don't know your name.  Haven't seen the captain, to speak to,
since yesterday afternoon when he rushed off to pick up a second mate
somewhere.  How did he get you?"

Young Powell, a little shy notwithstanding the friendly disposition of
the other, answered him smilingly, aware somehow that there was something
marked in this inquisitiveness, natural, after all--something anxious.
His name was Powell, and he was put in the way of this berth by Mr.
Powell, the shipping master.  He blushed.

"Ah, I see.  Well, you have been smart in getting ready.  The
ship-keeper, before he went away, told me you joined at one o'clock.  I
didn't sleep on board last night.  Not I.  There was a time when I never
cared to leave this ship for more than a couple of hours in the evening,
even while in London, but now, since--"

He checked himself with a roll of his prominent eyes towards that
youngster, that stranger.  Meantime, he was leading the way across the
quarter-deck under the poop into the long passage with the door of the
saloon at the far end.  It was shut.  But Mr. Franklin did not go so far.
After passing the pantry he opened suddenly a door on the left of the
passage, to Powell's great surprise.

"Our mess-room," he said, entering a small cabin painted white, bare,
lighted from part of the foremost skylight, and furnished only with a
table and two settees with movable backs.  "That surprises you?  Well, it
isn't usual.  And it wasn't so in this ship either, before.  It's only
since--"

He checked himself again.  "Yes.  Here we shall feed, you and I, facing
each other for the next twelve months or more--God knows how much more!
The bo'sun keeps the deck at meal-times in fine weather."

He talked not exactly wheezing, but like a man whose breath is somewhat
short, and the spirit (young Powell could not help thinking) embittered
by some mysterious grievance.

There was enough of the unusual there to be recognized even by Powell's
inexperience.  The officers kept out of the cabin against the custom of
the service, and then this sort of accent in the mate's talk.  Franklin
did not seem to expect conversational ease from the new second mate.  He
made several remarks about the old, deploring the accident.  Awkward.
Very awkward this thing to happen on the very eve of sailing.

"Collar-bone and arm broken," he sighed.  "Sad, very sad.  Did you notice
if the captain was at all affected?  Eh?  Must have been."

Before this congested face, these globular eyes turned yearningly upon
him, young Powell (one must keep in mind he was but a youngster then) who
could not remember any signs of visible grief, confessed with an
embarrassed laugh that, owing to the suddenness of this lucky chance
coming to him, he was not in a condition to notice the state of other
people.

"I was so pleased to get a ship at last," he murmured, further
disconcerted by the sort of pent-up gravity in Mr. Franklin's aspect.

"One man's food another man's poison," the mate remarked.  "That holds
true beyond mere victuals.  I suppose it didn't occur to you that it was
a dam' poor way for a good man to be knocked out."

Mr. Powell admitted openly that he had not thought of that.  He was ready
to admit that it was very reprehensible of him.  But Franklin had no
intention apparently to moralize.  He did not fall silent either.  His
further remarks were to the effect that there had been a time when
Captain Anthony would have showed more than enough concern for the least
thing happening to one of his officers.  Yes, there had been a time!

"And mind," he went on, laying down suddenly a half-consumed piece of
bread and butter and raising his voice, "poor Mathews was the second man
the longest on board.  I was the first.  He joined a month later--about
the same time as the steward by a few days.  The bo'sun and the carpenter
came the voyage after.  Steady men.  Still here.  No good man need ever
have thought of leaving the _Ferndale_ unless he were a fool.  Some good
men are fools.  Don't know when they are well off.  I mean the best of
good men; men that you would do anything for.  They go on for years, then
all of a sudden--"

Our young friend listened to the mate with a queer sense of discomfort
growing on him.  For it was as though Mr. Franklin were thinking aloud,
and putting him into the delicate position of an unwilling eavesdropper.
But there was in the mess-room another listener.  It was the steward, who
had come in carrying a tin coffee-pot with a long handle, and stood
quietly by: a man with a middle-aged, sallow face, long features, heavy
eyelids, a soldierly grey moustache.  His body encased in a short black
jacket with narrow sleeves, his long legs in very tight trousers, made up
an agile, youthful, slender figure.  He moved forward suddenly, and
interrupted the mate's monologue.

"More coffee, Mr. Franklin?  Nice fresh lot.  Piping hot.  I am going to
give breakfast to the saloon directly, and the cook is raking his fire
out.  Now's your chance."

The mate who, on account of his peculiar build, could not turn his head
freely, twisted his thick trunk slightly, and ran his black eyes in the
corners towards the steward.

"And is the precious pair of them out?" he growled.

The steward, pouring out the coffee into the mate's cup, muttered moodily
but distinctly: "The lady wasn't when I was laying the table."

Powell's ears were fine enough to detect something hostile in this
reference to the captain's wife.  For of what other person could they be
speaking?  The steward added with a gloomy sort of fairness: "But she
will be before I bring the dishes in.  She never gives that sort of
trouble.  That she doesn't."

"No.  Not in that way," Mr. Franklin agreed, and then both he and the
steward, after glancing at Powell--the stranger to the ship--said nothing
more.

But this had been enough to rouse his curiosity.  Curiosity is natural to
man.  Of course it was not a malevolent curiosity which, if not exactly
natural, is to be met fairly frequently in men and perhaps more
frequently in women--especially if a woman be in question; and that woman
under a cloud, in a manner of speaking.  For under a cloud Flora de
Barral was fated to be even at sea.  Yes.  Even that sort of darkness
which attends a woman for whom there is no clear place in the world hung
over her.  Yes.  Even at sea!

* * * * *

And this is the pathos of being a woman.  A man can struggle to get a
place for himself or perish.  But a woman's part is passive, say what you
like, and shuffle the facts of the world as you may, hinting at lack of
energy, of wisdom, of courage.  As a matter of fact, almost all women
have all that--of their own kind.  But they are not made for attack.  Wait
they must.  I am speaking here of women who are really women.  And it's
no use talking of opportunities, either.  I know that some of them do
talk of it.  But not the genuine women.  Those know better.  Nothing can
beat a true woman for a clear vision of reality; I would say a cynical
vision if I were not afraid of wounding your chivalrous feelings--for
which, by the by, women are not so grateful as you may think, to fellows
of your kind . . .

"Upon my word, Marlow," I cried, "what are you flying out at me for like
this?  I wouldn't use an ill-sounding word about women, but what right
have you to imagine that I am looking for gratitude?"

Marlow raised a soothing hand.

"There!  There!  I take back the ill-sounding word, with the remark,
though, that cynicism seems to me a word invented by hypocrites.  But let
that pass.  As to women, they know that the clamour for opportunities for
them to become something which they cannot be is as reasonable as if
mankind at large started asking for opportunities of winning immortality
in this world, in which death is the very condition of life.  You must
understand that I am not talking here of material existence.  That
naturally is implied; but you won't maintain that a woman who, say,
enlisted, for instance (there have been cases) has conquered her place in
the world.  She has only got her living in it--which is quite
meritorious, but not quite the same thing.

All these reflections which arise from my picking up the thread of Flora
de Barral's existence did not, I am certain, present themselves to Mr.
Powell--not the Mr. Powell we know taking solitary week-end cruises in
the estuary of the Thames (with mysterious dashes into lonely creeks) but
to the young Mr. Powell, the chance second officer of the ship
_Ferndale_, commanded (and for the most part owned) by Roderick Anthony,
the son of the poet--you know.  A Mr. Powell, much slenderer than our
robust friend is now, with the bloom of innocence not quite rubbed off
his smooth cheeks, and apt not only to be interested but also to be
surprised by the experience life was holding in store for him.  This
would account for his remembering so much of it with considerable
vividness.  For instance, the impressions attending his first breakfast
on board the _Ferndale_, both visual and mental, were as fresh to him as
if received yesterday.

The surprise, it is easy to understand, would arise from the inability to
interpret aright the signs which experience (a thing mysterious in
itself) makes to our understanding and emotions.  For it is never more
than that.  Our experience never gets into our blood and bones.  It
always remains outside of us.  That's why we look with wonder at the
past.  And this persists even when from practice and through growing
callousness of fibre we come to the point when nothing that we meet in
that rapid blinking stumble across a flick of sunshine--which our life
is--nothing, I say, which we run against surprises us any more.  Not at
the time, I mean.  If, later on, we recover the faculty with some such
exclamation: 'Well!  Well!  I'll be hanged if I ever, . . . ' it is
probably because this very thing that there should be a past to look back
upon, other people's, is very astounding in itself when one has the time,
a fleeting and immense instant to think of it . . . "

I was on the point of interrupting Marlow when he stopped of himself, his
eyes fixed on vacancy, or--perhaps--(I wouldn't be too hard on him) on a
vision.  He has the habit, or, say, the fault, of defective mantelpiece
clocks, of suddenly stopping in the very fulness of the tick.  If you
have ever lived with a clock afflicted with that perversity, you know how
vexing it is--such a stoppage.  I was vexed with Marlow.  He was smiling
faintly while I waited.  He even laughed a little.  And then I said
acidly:

"Am I to understand that you have ferreted out something comic in the
history of Flora de Barral?"

"Comic!" he exclaimed.  "No!  What makes you say?  . . . Oh, I
laughed--did I?  But don't you know that people laugh at absurdities that
are very far from being comic?  Didn't you read the latest books about
laughter written by philosophers, psychologists?  There is a lot of them
. . . "

"I dare say there has been a lot of nonsense written about laughter--and
tears, too, for that matter," I said impatiently.

"They say," pursued the unabashed Marlow, "that we laugh from a sense of
superiority.  Therefore, observe, simplicity, honesty, warmth of feeling,
delicacy of heart and of conduct, self-confidence, magnanimity are
laughed at, because the presence of these traits in a man's character
often puts him into difficult, cruel or absurd situations, and makes us,
the majority who are fairly free as a rule from these peculiarities, feel
pleasantly superior."

"Speak for yourself," I said.  "But have you discovered all these fine
things in the story; or has Mr. Powell discovered them to you in his
artless talk?  Have you two been having good healthy laughs together?
Come!  Are your sides aching yet, Marlow?"

Marlow took no offence at my banter.  He was quite serious.

"I should not like to say off-hand how much of that there was," he
pursued with amusing caution.  "But there was a situation, tense enough
for the signs of it to give many surprises to Mr. Powell--neither of them
shocking in itself, but with a cumulative effect which made the whole
unforgettable in the detail of its progress.  And the first surprise came
very soon, when the explosives (to which he owed his sudden chance of
engagement)--dynamite in cases and blasting powder in barrels--taken on
board, main hatch battened for sea, cook restored to his functions in the
galley, anchor fished and the tug ahead, rounding the South Foreland, and
with the sun sinking clear and red down the purple vista of the channel,
he went on the poop, on duty, it is true, but with time to take the first
freer breath in the busy day of departure.  The pilot was still on board,
who gave him first a silent glance, and then passed an insignificant
remark before resuming his lounging to and fro between the steering wheel
and the binnacle.  Powell took his station modestly at the break of the
poop.  He had noticed across the skylight a head in a grey cap.  But
when, after a time, he crossed over to the other side of the deck he
discovered that it was not the captain's head at all.  He became aware of
grey hairs curling over the nape of the neck.  How could he have made
that mistake?  But on board ship away from the land one does not expect
to come upon a stranger.

Powell walked past the man.  A thin, somewhat sunken face, with a tightly
closed mouth, stared at the distant French coast, vague like a suggestion
of solid darkness, lying abeam beyond the evening light reflected from
the level waters, themselves growing more sombre than the sky; a stare,
across which Powell had to pass and did pass with a quick side glance,
noting its immovable stillness.  His passage disturbed those eyes no more
than if he had been as immaterial as a ghost.  And this failure of his
person in producing an impression affected him strangely.  Who could that
old man be?

He was so curious that he even ventured to ask the pilot in a low voice.
The pilot turned out to be a good-natured specimen of his kind,
condescending, sententious.  He had been down to his meals in the main
cabin, and had something to impart.

"That?  Queer fish--eh?  Mrs. Anthony's father.  I've been introduced to
him in the cabin at breakfast time.  Name of Smith.  Wonder if he has all
his wits about him.  They take him about with them, it seems.  Don't look
very happy--eh?"

Then, changing his tone abruptly, he desired Powell to get all hands on
deck and make sail on the ship.  "I shall be leaving you in half an hour.
You'll have plenty of time to find out all about the old gent," he added
with a thick laugh.

* * * * *

In the secret emotion of giving his first order as a fully responsible
officer, young Powell forgot the very existence of that old man in a
moment.  The following days, in the interest of getting in touch with the
ship, with the men in her, with his duties, in the rather anxious period
of settling down, his curiosity slumbered; for of course the pilot's few
words had not extinguished it.

This settling down was made easy for him by the friendly character of his
immediate superior--the chief.  Powell could not defend himself from some
sympathy for that thick, bald man, comically shaped, with his crimson
complexion and something pathetic in the rolling of his very movable
black eyes in an apparently immovable head, who was so tactfully ready to
take his competency for granted.

There can be nothing more reassuring to a young man tackling his life's
work for the first time.  Mr. Powell, his mind at ease about himself, had
time to observe the people around with friendly interest.  Very early in
the beginning of the passage, he had discovered with some amusement that
the marriage of Captain Anthony was resented by those to whom Powell
(conscious of being looked upon as something of an outsider) referred in
his mind as 'the old lot.'

They had the funny, regretful glances, intonations, nods of men who had
seen other, better times.  What difference it could have made to the
bo'sun and the carpenter Powell could not very well understand.  Yet
these two pulled long faces and even gave hostile glances to the poop.
The cook and the steward might have been more directly concerned.  But
the steward used to remark on occasion, 'Oh, she gives no extra trouble,'
with scrupulous fairness of the most gloomy kind.  He was rather a silent
man with a great sense of his personal worth which made his speeches
guarded.  The cook, a neat man with fair side whiskers, who had been only
three years in the ship, seemed the least concerned.  He was even known
to have inquired once or twice as to the success of some of his dishes
with the captain's wife.  This was considered a sort of disloyal falling
away from the ruling feeling.

The mate's annoyance was yet the easiest to understand.  As he let it out
to Powell before the first week of the passage was over: 'You can't
expect me to be pleased at being chucked out of the saloon as if I
weren't good enough to sit down to meat with that woman.'  But he
hastened to add: 'Don't you think I'm blaming the captain.  He isn't a
man to be found fault with.  You, Mr. Powell, are too young yet to
understand such matters.'

Some considerable time afterwards, at the end of a conversation of that
aggrieved sort, he enlarged a little more by repeating: 'Yes!  You are
too young to understand these things.  I don't say you haven't plenty of
sense.  You are doing very well here.  Jolly sight better than I
expected, though I liked your looks from the first.'

It was in the trade-winds, at night, under a velvety, bespangled sky; a
great multitude of stars watching the shadows of the sea gleaming
mysteriously in the wake of the ship; while the leisurely swishing of the
water to leeward was like a drowsy comment on her progress.  Mr. Powell
expressed his satisfaction by a half-bashful laugh.  The mate mused on:
'And of course you haven't known the ship as she used to be.  She was
more than a home to a man.  She was not like any other ship; and Captain
Anthony was not like any other master to sail with.  Neither is she now.
But before one never had a care in the world as to her--and as to him,
too.  No, indeed, there was never anything to worry about.'

Young Powell couldn't see what there was to worry about even then.  The
serenity of the peaceful night seemed as vast as all space, and as
enduring as eternity itself.  It's true the sea is an uncertain element,
but no sailor remembers this in the presence of its bewitching power any
more than a lover ever thinks of the proverbial inconstancy of women.  And
Mr. Powell, being young, thought naively that the captain being married,
there could be no occasion for anxiety as to his condition.  I suppose
that to him life, perhaps not so much his own as that of others, was
something still in the nature of a fairy-tale with a 'they lived happy
ever after' termination.  We are the creatures of our light literature
much more than is generally suspected in a world which prides itself on
being scientific and practical, and in possession of incontrovertible
theories.  Powell felt in that way the more because the captain of a ship
at sea is a remote, inaccessible creature, something like a prince of a
fairy-tale, alone of his kind, depending on nobody, not to be called to
account except by powers practically invisible and so distant, that they
might well be looked upon as supernatural for all that the rest of the
crew knows of them, as a rule.

So he did not understand the aggrieved attitude of the mate--or rather he
understood it obscurely as a result of simple causes which did not seem
to him adequate.  He would have dismissed all this out of his mind with a
contemptuous: 'What the devil do I care?' if the captain's wife herself
had not been so young.  To see her the first time had been something of a
shock to him.  He had some preconceived ideas as to captain's wives
which, while he did not believe the testimony of his eyes, made him open
them very wide.  He had stared till the captain's wife noticed it plainly
and turned her face away.  Captain's wife!  That girl covered with rugs
in a long chair.  Captain's . . . !  He gasped mentally.  It had never
occurred to him that a captain's wife could be anything but a woman to be
described as stout or thin, as jolly or crabbed, but always mature, and
even, in comparison with his own years, frankly old.  But this!  It was a
sort of moral upset as though he had discovered a case of abduction or
something as surprising as that.  You understand that nothing is more
disturbing than the upsetting of a preconceived idea.  Each of us
arranges the world according to his own notion of the fitness of things.
To behold a girl where your average mediocre imagination had placed a
comparatively old woman may easily become one of the strongest shocks
. . . "

Marlow paused, smiling to himself.

"Powell remained impressed after all these years by the very
recollection," he continued in a voice, amused perhaps but not mocking.
"He said to me only the other day with something like the first awe of
that discovery lingering in his tone--he said to me: "Why, she seemed so
young, so girlish, that I looked round for some woman which would be the
captain's wife, though of course I knew there was no other woman on board
that voyage."  The voyage before, it seems, there had been the steward's
wife to act as maid to Mrs. Anthony; but she was not taken that time for
some reason he didn't know.  Mrs. Anthony . . . !  If it hadn't been the
captain's wife he would have referred to her mentally as a kid, he said.
I suppose there must be a sort of divinity hedging in a captain's wife
(however incredible) which prevented him applying to her that
contemptuous definition in the secret of his thoughts.

I asked him when this had happened; and he told me that it was three days
after parting from the tug, just outside the channel--to be precise.  A
head wind had set in with unpleasant damp weather.  He had come up to
leeward of the poop, still feeling very much of a stranger, and an
untried officer, at six in the evening to take his watch.  To see her was
quite as unexpected as seeing a vision.  When she turned away her head he
recollected himself and dropped his eyes.  What he could see then was
only, close to the long chair on which she reclined, a pair of long, thin
legs ending in black cloth boots tucked in close to the skylight seat.
Whence he concluded that the 'old gentleman,' who wore a grey cap like
the captain's, was sitting by her--his daughter.  In his first
astonishment he had stopped dead short, with the consequence that now he
felt very much abashed at having betrayed his surprise.  But he couldn't
very well turn tail and bolt off the poop.  He had come there on duty.
So, still with downcast eyes, he made his way past them.  Only when he
got as far as the wheel-grating did he look up.  She was hidden from him
by the back of her deck-chair; but he had the view of the owner of the
thin, aged legs seated on the skylight, his clean-shaved cheek, his thin
compressed mouth with a hollow in each corner, the sparse grey locks
escaping from under the tweed cap, and curling slightly on the collar of
the coat.  He leaned forward a little over Mrs. Anthony, but they were
not talking.  Captain Anthony, walking with a springy hurried gait on the
other side of the poop from end to end, gazed straight before him.  Young
Powell might have thought that his captain was not aware of his presence
either.  However, he knew better, and for that reason spent a most
uncomfortable hour motionless by the compass before his captain stopped
in his swift pacing and with an almost visible effort made some remark to
him about the weather in a low voice.  Before Powell, who was startled,
could find a word of answer, the captain swung off again on his endless
tramp with a fixed gaze.  And till the supper bell rang silence dwelt
over that poop like an evil spell.  The captain walked up and down
looking straight before him, the helmsman steered, looking upwards at the
sails, the old gent on the skylight looked down on his daughter--and Mr.
Powell confessed to me that he didn't know where to look, feeling as
though he had blundered in where he had no business--which was absurd.  At
last he fastened his eyes on the compass card, took refuge, in spirit,
inside the binnacle.  He felt chilled more than he should have been by
the chilly dusk falling on the muddy green sea of the soundings from a
smoothly clouded sky.  A fitful wind swept the cheerless waste, and the
ship, hauled up so close as to check her way, seemed to progress by
languid fits and starts against the short seas which swept along her
sides with a snarling sound.

Young Powell thought that this was the dreariest evening aspect of the
sea he had ever seen.  He was glad when the other occupants of the poop
left it at the sound of the bell.  The captain first, with a sudden
swerve in his walk towards the companion, and not even looking once
towards his wife and his wife's father.  Those two got up and moved
towards the companion, the old gent very erect, his thin locks stirring
gently about the nape of his neck, and carrying the rugs over his arm.
The girl who was Mrs. Anthony went down first.  The murky twilight had
settled in deep shadow on her face.  She looked at Mr. Powell in passing.
He thought that she was very pale.  Cold perhaps.  The old gent stopped a
moment, thin and stiff, before the young man, and in a voice which was
low but distinct enough, and without any particular accent--not even of
inquiry--he said:

"You are the new second officer, I believe."

Mr. Powell answered in the affirmative, wondering if this were a friendly
overture.  He had noticed that Mr. Smith's eyes had a sort of inward look
as though he had disliked or disdained his surroundings.  The captain's
wife had disappeared then down the companion stairs.  Mr. Smith said
'Ah!' and waited a little longer to put another question in his incurious
voice.

"And did you know the man who was here before you?"

"No," said young Powell, "I didn't know anybody belonging to this ship
before I joined."

"He was much older than you.  Twice your age.  Perhaps more.  His hair
was iron grey.  Yes.  Certainly more."

The low, repressed voice paused, but the old man did not move away.  He
added: "Isn't it unusual?"

Mr. Powell was surprised not only by being engaged in conversation, but
also by its character.  It might have been the suggestion of the word
uttered by this old man, but it was distinctly at that moment that he
became aware of something unusual not only in this encounter but
generally around him, about everybody, in the atmosphere.  The very sea,
with short flashes of foam bursting out here and there in the gloomy
distances, the unchangeable, safe sea sheltering a man from all passions,
except its own anger, seemed queer to the quick glance he threw to
windward where the already effaced horizon traced no reassuring limit to
the eye.  In the expiring, diffused twilight, and before the clouded
night dropped its mysterious veil, it was the immensity of space made
visible--almost palpable.  Young Powell felt it.  He felt it in the
sudden sense of his isolation; the trustworthy, powerful ship of his
first acquaintance reduced to a speck, to something almost
undistinguishable, the mere support for the soles of his two feet before
that unexpected old man becoming so suddenly articulate in a darkening
universe.

It took him a moment or so to seize the drift of the question.  He
repeated slowly: 'Unusual . . . Oh, you mean for an elderly man to be the
second of a ship.  I don't know.  There are a good many of us who don't
get on.  He didn't get on, I suppose.'

The other, his head bowed a little, had the air of listening with acute
attention.

"And now he has been taken to the hospital," he said.

"I believe so.  Yes.  I remember Captain Anthony saying so in the
shipping office."

"Possibly about to die," went on the old man, in his careful deliberate
tone.  "And perhaps glad enough to die."

Mr. Powell was young enough to be startled at the suggestion, which
sounded confidential and blood-curdling in the dusk.  He said sharply
that it was not very likely, as if defending the absent victim of the
accident from an unkind aspersion.  He felt, in fact, indignant.  The
other emitted a short stifled laugh of a conciliatory nature.  The second
bell rang under the poop.  He made a movement at the sound, but lingered.

"What I said was not meant seriously," he murmured, with that strange air
of fearing to be overheard.  "Not in this case.  I know the man."

The occasion, or rather the want of occasion, for this conversation, had
sharpened the perceptions of the unsophisticated second officer of the
_Ferndale_.  He was alive to the slightest shade of tone, and felt as if
this "I know the man" should have been followed by a "he was no friend of
mine."  But after the shortest possible break the old gentleman continued
to murmur distinctly and evenly:

"Whereas you have never seen him.  Nevertheless, when you have gone
through as many years as I have, you will understand how an event putting
an end to one's existence may not be altogether unwelcome.  Of course
there are stupid accidents.  And even then one needn't be very angry.
What is it to be deprived of life?  It's soon done.  But what would you
think of the feelings of a man who should have had his life stolen from
him?  Cheated out of it, I say!"

He ceased abruptly, and remained still long enough for the astonished
Powell to stammer out an indistinct: "What do you mean?  I don't
understand."  Then, with a low 'Good-night' glided a few steps, and sank
through the shadow of the companion into the lamplight below which did
not reach higher than the turn of the staircase.

The strange words, the cautious tone, the whole person left a strong
uneasiness in the mind of Mr. Powell.  He started walking the poop in
great mental confusion.  He felt all adrift.  This was funny talk and no
mistake.  And this cautious low tone as though he were watched by someone
was more than funny.  The young second officer hesitated to break the
established rule of every ship's discipline; but at last could not resist
the temptation of getting hold of some other human being, and spoke to
the man at the wheel.

"Did you hear what this gentleman was saying to me?"

"No, sir," answered the sailor quietly.  Then, encouraged by this
evidence of laxity in his officer, made bold to add, "A queer fish, sir."
This was tentative, and Mr. Powell, busy with his own view, not saying
anything, he ventured further.  "They are more like passengers.  One sees
some queer passengers."

"Who are like passengers?" asked Powell gruffly.

"Why, these two, sir."



CHAPTER THREE--DEVOTED SERVANTS--AND THE LIGHT OF A FLARE


Young Powell thought to himself: "The men, too, are noticing it."  Indeed,
the captain's behaviour to his wife and to his wife's father was
noticeable enough.  It was as if they had been a pair of not very
congenial passengers.  But perhaps it was not always like that.  The
captain might have been put out by something.

When the aggrieved Franklin came on deck Mr. Powell made a remark to that
effect.  For his curiosity was aroused.

The mate grumbled "Seems to you? . . . Putout?  . . . eh?"  He buttoned
his thick jacket up to the throat, and only then added a gloomy "Aye,
likely enough," which discouraged further conversation.  But no
encouragement would have induced the newly-joined second mate to enter
the way of confidences.  His was an instinctive prudence.  Powell did not
know why it was he had resolved to keep his own counsel as to his
colloquy with Mr. Smith.  But his curiosity did not slumber.  Some time
afterwards, again at the relief of watches, in the course of a little
talk, he mentioned Mrs. Anthony's father quite casually, and tried to
find out from the mate who he was.

"It would take a clever man to find that out, as things are on board
now," Mr. Franklin said, unexpectedly communicative.  "The first I saw of
him was when she brought him alongside in a four-wheeler one morning
about half-past eleven.  The captain had come on board early, and was
down in the cabin that had been fitted out for him.  Did I tell you that
if you want the captain for anything you must stamp on the port side of
the deck?  That's so.  This ship is not only unlike what she used to be,
but she is like no other ship, anyhow.  Did you ever hear of the
captain's room being on the port side?  Both of them stern cabins have
been fitted up afresh like a blessed palace.  A gang of people from some
tip-top West-End house were fussing here on board with hangings and
furniture for a fortnight, as if the Queen were coming with us.  Of
course the starboard cabin is the bedroom one, but the poor captain hangs
out to port on a couch, so that in case we want him on deck at night,
Mrs. Anthony should not be startled.  Nervous!  Phoo!  A woman who
marries a sailor and makes up her mind to come to sea should have no
blamed jumpiness about her, I say.  But never mind.  Directly the old cab
pointed round the corner of the warehouse I called out to the captain
that his lady was coming aboard.  He answered me, but as I didn't see him
coming, I went down the gangway myself to help her alight.  She jumps out
excitedly without touching my arm, or as much as saying "thank you" or
"good morning" or anything, turns back to the cab, and then that old
joker comes out slowly.  I hadn't noticed him inside.  I hadn't expected
to see anybody.  It gave me a start.  She says: "My father--Mr.
Franklin."  He was staring at me like an owl.  "How do you do, sir?" says
I.  Both of them looked funny.  It was as if something had happened to
them on the way.  Neither of them moved, and I stood by waiting.  The
captain showed himself on the poop; and I saw him at the side looking
over, and then he disappeared; on the way to meet them on shore, I
expected.  But he just went down below again.  So, not seeing him, I
said: "Let me help you on board, sir."  "On board!" says he in a silly
fashion.  "On board!"  "It's not a very good ladder, but it's quite
firm," says I, as he seemed to be afraid of it.  And he didn't look a
broken-down old man, either.  You can see yourself what he is.  Straight
as a poker, and life enough in him yet.  But he made no move, and I began
to feel foolish.  Then she comes forward.  "Oh!  Thank you, Mr. Franklin.
I'll help my father up."  Flabbergasted me--to be choked off like this.
Pushed in between him and me without as much as a look my way.  So of
course I dropped it.  What do you think?  I fell back.  I would have gone
up on board at once and left them on the quay to come up or stay there
till next week, only they were blocking the way.  I couldn't very well
shove them on one side.  Devil only knows what was up between them.  There
she was, pale as death, talking to him very fast.  He got as red as a
turkey-cock--dash me if he didn't.  A bad-tempered old bloke, I can tell
you.  And a bad lot, too.  Never mind.  I couldn't hear what she was
saying to him, but she put force enough into it to shake her.  It
seemed--it seemed, mind!--that he didn't want to go on board.  Of course
it couldn't have been that.  I know better.  Well, she took him by the
arm, above the elbow, as if to lead him, or push him rather.  I was
standing not quite ten feet off.  Why should I have gone away?  I was
anxious to get back on board as soon as they would let me.  I didn't want
to overhear her blamed whispering either.  But I couldn't stay there for
ever, so I made a move to get past them if I could.  And that's how I
heard a few words.  It was the old chap--something nasty about being
"under the heel" of somebody or other.  Then he says, "I don't want this
sacrifice."  What it meant I can't tell.  It was a quarrel--of that I am
certain.  She looks over her shoulder, and sees me pretty close to them.
I don't know what she found to say into his ear, but he gave way
suddenly.  He looked round at me too, and they went up together so
quickly then that when I got on the quarter-deck I was only in time to
see the inner door of the passage close after them.  Queer--eh?  But if
it were only queerness one wouldn't mind.  Some luggage in new trunks
came on board in the afternoon.  We undocked at midnight.  And may I be
hanged if I know who or what he was or is.  I haven't been able to find
out.  No, I don't know.  He may have been anything.  All I know is that
once, years ago when I went to see the Derby with a friend, I saw a pea-
and-thimble chap who looked just like that old mystery father out of a
cab."

All this the goggle-eyed mate had said in a resentful and melancholy
voice, with pauses, to the gentle murmur of the sea.  It was for him a
bitter sort of pleasure to have a fresh pair of ears, a newcomer, to whom
he could repeat all these matters of grief and suspicion talked over
endlessly by the band of Captain Anthony's faithful subordinates.  It was
evidently so refreshing to his worried spirit that it made him forget the
advisability of a little caution with a complete stranger.  But really
with Mr. Powell there was no danger.  Amused, at first, at these plaints,
he provoked them for fun.  Afterwards, turning them over in his mind, he
became impressed, and as the impression grew stronger with the days his
resolution to keep it to himself grew stronger too.

* * * * *

What made it all the easier to keep--I mean the resolution--was that
Powell's sentiment of amused surprise at what struck him at first as mere
absurdity was not unmingled with indignation.  And his years were too
few, his position too novel, his reliance on his own opinion not yet firm
enough to allow him to express it with any effect.  And then--what would
have been the use, anyhow--and where was the necessity?

But this thing, familiar and mysterious at the same time, occupied his
imagination.  The solitude of the sea intensifies the thoughts and the
facts of one's experience which seems to lie at the very centre of the
world, as the ship which carries one always remains the centre figure of
the round horizon.  He viewed the apoplectic, goggle-eyed mate and the
saturnine, heavy-eyed steward as the victims of a peculiar and secret
form of lunacy which poisoned their lives.  But he did not give them his
sympathy on that account.  No.  That strange affliction awakened in him a
sort of suspicious wonder.

Once--and it was at night again; for the officers of the _Ferndale_
keeping watch and watch as was customary in those days, had but few
occasions for intercourse--once, I say, the thick Mr. Franklin, a
quaintly bulky figure under the stars, the usual witnesses of his
outpourings, asked him with an abruptness which was not callous, but in
his simple way:

"I believe you have no parents living?"

Mr. Powell said that he had lost his father and mother at a very early
age.

"My mother is still alive," declared Mr. Franklin in a tone which
suggested that he was gratified by the fact.  "The old lady is lasting
well.  Of course she's got to be made comfortable.  A woman must be
looked after, and, if it comes to that, I say, give me a mother.  I dare
say if she had not lasted it out so well I might have gone and got
married.  I don't know, though.  We sailors haven't got much time to look
about us to any purpose.  Anyhow, as the old lady was there I haven't, I
may say, looked at a girl in all my life.  Not that I wasn't partial to
female society in my time," he added with a pathetic intonation, while
the whites of his goggle eyes gleamed amorously under the clear night
sky.  "Very partial, I may say."

Mr. Powell was amused; and as these communications took place only when
the mate was relieved off duty he had no serious objection to them.  The
mate's presence made the first half-hour and sometimes even more of his
watch on deck pass away.  If his senior did not mind losing some of his
rest it was not Mr. Powell's affair.  Franklin was a decent fellow.  His
intention was not to boast of his filial piety.

"Of course I mean respectable female society," he explained.  "The other
sort is neither here nor there.  I blame no man's conduct, but a well-
brought-up young fellow like you knows that there's precious little fun
to be got out of it."  He fetched a deep sigh.  "I wish Captain Anthony's
mother had been a lasting sort like my old lady.  He would have had to
look after her and he would have done it well.  Captain Anthony is a
proper man.  And it would have saved him from the most foolish--"

He did not finish the phrase which certainly was turning bitter in his
mouth.  Mr. Powell thought to himself: "There he goes again."  He laughed
a little.

"I don't understand why you are so hard on the captain, Mr. Franklin.  I
thought you were a great friend of his."

Mr. Franklin exclaimed at this.  He was not hard on the captain.  Nothing
was further from his thoughts.  Friend!  Of course he was a good friend
and a faithful servant.  He begged Powell to understand that if Captain
Anthony chose to strike a bargain with Old Nick to-morrow, and Old Nick
were good to the captain, he (Franklin) would find it in his heart to
love Old Nick for the captain's sake.  That was so.  On the other hand,
if a saint, an angel with white wings came along and--"

He broke off short again as if his own vehemence had frightened him.  Then
in his strained pathetic voice (which he had never raised) he observed
that it was no use talking.  Anybody could see that the man was changed.

"As to that," said young Powell, "it is impossible for me to judge."

"Good Lord!" whispered the mate.  "An educated, clever young fellow like
you with a pair of eyes on him and some sense too!  Is that how a happy
man looks?  Eh?  Young you may be, but you aren't a kid; and I dare you
to say 'Yes!'"

Mr. Powell did not take up the challenge.  He did not know what to think
of the mate's view.  Still, it seemed as if it had opened his
understanding in a measure.  He conceded that the captain did not look
very well.

"Not very well," repeated the mate mournfully.  "Do you think a man with
a face like that can hope to live his life out?  You haven't knocked
about long in this world yet, but you are a sailor, you have been in
three or four ships, you say.  Well, have you ever seen a shipmaster
walking his own deck as if he did not know what he had underfoot?  Have
you?  Dam'me if I don't think that he forgets where he is.  Of course he
can be no other than a prime seaman; but it's lucky, all the same, he has
me on board.  I know by this time what he wants done without being told.
Do you know that I have had no order given me since we left port?  Do you
know that he has never once opened his lips to me unless I spoke to him
first?  I?  His chief officer; his shipmate for full six years, with whom
he had no cross word--not once in all that time.  Aye.  Not a cross look
even.  True that when I do make him speak to me, there is his dear old
self, the quick eye, the kind voice.  Could hardly be other to his old
Franklin.  But what's the good?  Eyes, voice, everything's miles away.
And for all that I take good care never to address him when the poop
isn't clear.  Yes!  Only we two and nothing but the sea with us.  You
think it would be all right; the only chief mate he ever had--Mr.
Franklin here and Mr. Franklin there--when anything went wrong the first
word you would hear about the decks was 'Franklin!'--I am thirteen years
older than he is--you would think it would be all right, wouldn't you?
Only we two on this poop on which we saw each other first--he a young
master--told me that he thought I would suit him very well--we two, and
thirty-one days out at sea, and it's no good!  It's like talking to a man
standing on shore.  I can't get him back.  I can't get at him.  I feel
sometimes as if I must shake him by the arm: "Wake up!  Wake up!  You are
wanted, sir . . . !"

Young Powell recognized the expression of a true sentiment, a thing so
rare in this world where there are so many mutes and so many excellent
reasons even at sea for an articulate man not to give himself away, that
he felt something like respect for this outburst.  It was not loud.  The
grotesque squat shape, with the knob of the head as if rammed down
between the square shoulders by a blow from a club, moved vaguely in a
circumscribed space limited by the two harness-casks lashed to the front
rail of the poop, without gestures, hands in the pockets of the jacket,
elbows pressed closely to its side; and the voice without resonance,
passed from anger to dismay and back again without a single louder word
in the hurried delivery, interrupted only by slight gasps for air as if
the speaker were being choked by the suppressed passion of his grief.

Mr. Powell, though moved to a certain extent, was by no means carried
away.  And just as he thought that it was all over, the other, fidgeting
in the darkness, was heard again explosive, bewildered but not very loud
in the silence of the ship and the great empty peace of the sea.

"They have done something to him!  What is it?  What can it be?  Can't
you guess?  Don't you know?"

"Good heavens!" Young Powell was astounded on discovering that this was
an appeal addressed to him.  "How on earth can I know?"

"You do talk to that white-faced, black-eyed . . . I've seen you talking
to her more than a dozen times."

Young Powell, his sympathy suddenly chilled, remarked in a disdainful
tone that Mrs. Anthony's eyes were not black.

"I wish to God she had never set them on the captain, whatever colour
they are," retorted Franklin.  "She and that old chap with the scraped
jaws who sits over her and stares down at her dead-white face with his
yellow eyes--confound them!  Perhaps you will tell us that his eyes are
not yellow?"

Powell, not interested in the colour of Mr. Smith's eyes, made a vague
gesture.  Yellow or not yellow, it was all one to him.

The mate murmured to himself.  "No.  He can't know.  No!  No more than a
baby.  It would take an older head."

"I don't even understand what you mean," observed Mr. Powell coldly.

"And even the best head would be puzzled by such devil-work," the mate
continued, muttering.  "Well, I have heard tell of women doing for a man
in one way or another when they got him fairly ashore.  But to bring
their devilry to sea and fasten on such a man! . . . It's something I
can't understand.  But I can watch.  Let them look out--I say!"

His short figure, unable to stoop, without flexibility, could not express
dejection.  He was very tired suddenly; he dragged his feet going off the
poop.  Before he left it with nearly an hour of his watch below
sacrificed, he addressed himself once more to our young man who stood
abreast of the mizzen rigging in an unreceptive mood expressed by silence
and immobility.  He did not regret, he said, having spoken openly on this
very serious matter.

"I don't know about its seriousness, sir," was Mr. Powell's frank answer.
"But if you think you have been telling me something very new you are
mistaken.  You can't keep that matter out of your speeches.  It's the
sort of thing I've been hearing more or less ever since I came on board."

Mr. Powell, speaking truthfully, did not mean to speak offensively.  He
had instincts of wisdom; he felt that this was a serious affair, for it
had nothing to do with reason.  He did not want to raise an enemy for
himself in the mate.  And Mr. Franklin did not take offence.  To Mr.
Powell's truthful statement he answered with equal truth and simplicity
that it was very likely, very likely.  With a thing like that (next door
to witchcraft almost) weighing on his mind, the wonder was that he could
think of anything else.  The poor man must have found in the restlessness
of his thoughts the illusion of being engaged in an active contest with
some power of evil; for his last words as he went lingeringly down the
poop ladder expressed the quaint hope that he would get him, Powell, "on
our side yet."

Mr. Powell--just imagine a straightforward youngster assailed in this
fashion on the high seas--answered merely by an embarrassed and uneasy
laugh which reflected exactly the state of his innocent soul.  The
apoplectic mate, already half-way down, went up again three steps of the
poop ladder.  Why, yes.  A proper young fellow, the mate expected,
wouldn't stand by and see a man, a good sailor and his own skipper, in
trouble without taking his part against a couple of shore people who--Mr.
Powell interrupted him impatiently, asking what was the trouble?

"What is it you are hinting at?" he cried with an inexplicable
irritation.

"I don't like to think of him all alone down there with these two,"
Franklin whispered impressively.  "Upon my word I don't.  God only knows
what may be going on there . . . Don't laugh . . . It was bad enough last
voyage when Mrs. Brown had a cabin aft; but now it's worse.  It frightens
me.  I can't sleep sometimes for thinking of him all alone there, shut
off from us all."

Mrs. Brown was the steward's wife.  You must understand that shortly
after his visit to the Fyne cottage (with all its consequences), Anthony
had got an offer to go to the Western Islands, and bring home the cargo
of some ship which, damaged in a collision or a stranding, took refuge in
St. Michael, and was condemned there.  Roderick Anthony had connections
which would put such paying jobs in his way.  So Flora de Barral had but
a five months' voyage, a mere excursion, for her first trial of sea-life.
And Anthony, dearly trying to be most attentive, had induced this Mrs.
Brown, the wife of his faithful steward, to come along as maid to his
bride.  But for some reason or other this arrangement was not continued.
And the mate, tormented by indefinite alarms and forebodings, regretted
it.  He regretted that Jane Brown was no longer on board--as a sort of
representative of Captain Anthony's faithful servants, to watch quietly
what went on in that part of the ship this fatal marriage had closed to
their vigilance.  That had been excellent.  For she was a dependable
woman.

Powell did not detect any particular excellence in what seemed a spying
employment.  But in his simplicity he said that he should have thought
Mrs. Anthony would have been glad anyhow to have another woman on board.
He was thinking of the white-faced girlish personality which it seemed to
him ought to have been cared for.  The innocent young man always looked
upon the girl as immature; something of a child yet.

"She! glad!  Why it was she who had her fired out.  She didn't want
anybody around the cabin.  Mrs. Brown is certain of it.  She told her
husband so.  You ask the steward and hear what he has to say about it.
That's why I don't like it.  A capable woman who knew her place.  But no.
Out she must go.  For no fault, mind you.  The captain was ashamed to
send her away.  But that wife of his--aye the precious pair of them have
got hold of him.  I can't speak to him for a minute on the poop without
that thimble-rigging coon coming gliding up.  I'll tell you what.  I
overheard once--God knows I didn't try to--only he forgot I was on the
other side of the skylight with my sextant--I overheard him--you know how
he sits hanging over her chair and talking away without properly opening
his mouth--yes I caught the word right enough.  He was alluding to the
captain as "the jailer."  The jail . . . !"

Franklin broke off with a profane execration.  A silence reigned for a
long time and the slight, very gentle rolling of the ship slipping before
the N.E. trade-wind seemed to be a soothing device for lulling to sleep
the suspicions of men who trust themselves to the sea.

A deep sigh was heard followed by the mate's voice asking dismally if
that was the way one would speak of a man to whom one wished well?  No
better proof of something wrong was needed.  Therefore he hoped, as he
vanished at last, that Mr. Powell would be on their side.  And this time
Mr. Powell did not answer this hope with an embarrassed laugh.

That young officer was more and more surprised at the nature of the
incongruous revelations coming to him in the surroundings and in the
atmosphere of the open sea.  It is difficult for us to understand the
extent, the completeness, the comprehensiveness of his inexperience, for
us who didn't go to sea out of a small private school at the age of
fourteen years and nine months.  Leaning on his elbow in the mizzen
rigging and so still that the helmsman over there at the other end of the
poop might have (and he probably did) suspect him of being criminally
asleep on duty, he tried to "get hold of that thing" by some side which
would fit in with his simple notions of psychology.  "What the deuce are
they worrying about?" he asked himself in a dazed and contemptuous
impatience.  But all the same "jailer" was a funny name to give a man;
unkind, unfriendly, nasty.  He was sorry that Mr. Smith was guilty in
that matter because, the truth must be told, he had been to a certain
extent sensible of having been noticed in a quiet manner by the father of
Mrs. Anthony.  Youth appreciates that sort of recognition which is the
subtlest form of flattery age can offer.  Mr. Smith seized opportunities
to approach him on deck.  His remarks were sometimes weird and
enigmatical.

He was doubtless an eccentric old gent.  But from that to calling his son-
in-law (whom he never approached on deck) nasty names behind his back was
a long step.

And Mr. Powell marvelled . . . "

"While he was telling me all this,"--Marlow changed his tone--"I
marvelled even more.  It was as if misfortune marked its victims on the
forehead for the dislike of the crowd.  I am not thinking here of
numbers.  Two men may behave like a crowd, three certainly will when
their emotions are engaged.  It was as if the forehead of Flora de Barral
were marked.  Was the girl born to be a victim; to be always disliked and
crushed as if she were too fine for this world?  Or too luckless--since
that also is often counted as sin.

Yes, I marvelled more since I knew more of the girl than Mr. Powell--if
only her true name; and more of Captain Anthony--if only the fact that he
was the son of a delicate erotic poet of a markedly refined and
autocratic temperament.  Yes, I knew their joint stories which Mr. Powell
did not know.  The chapter in it he was opening to me, the sea-chapter,
with such new personages as the sentimental and apoplectic chief-mate and
the morose steward, however astounding to him in its detached condition
was much more so to me as a member of a series, following the chapter
outside the Eastern Hotel in which I myself had played my part.  In view
of her declarations and my sage remarks it was very unexpected.  She had
meant well, and I had certainly meant well too.  Captain Anthony--as far
as I could gather from little Fyne--had meant well.  As far as such lofty
words may be applied to the obscure personages of this story we were all
filled with the noblest sentiments and intentions.  The sea was there to
give them the shelter of its solitude free from the earth's petty
suggestions.  I could well marvel in myself, as to what had happened.

I hope that if he saw it, Mr. Powell forgave me the smile of which I was
guilty at that moment.  The light in the cabin of his little cutter was
dim.  And the smile was dim too.  Dim and fleeting.  The girl's life had
presented itself to me as a tragi-comical adventure, the saddest thing on
earth, slipping between frank laughter and unabashed tears.  Yes, the
saddest facts and the most common, and, being common perhaps the most
worthy of our unreserved pity.

The purely human reality is capable of lyrism but not of abstraction.
Nothing will serve for its understanding but the evidence of rational
linking up of characters and facts.  And beginning with Flora de Barral,
in the light of my memories I was certain that she at least must have
been passive; for that is of necessity the part of women, this waiting on
fate which some of them, and not the most intelligent, cover up by the
vain appearances of agitation.  Flora de Barral was not exceptionally
intelligent but she was thoroughly feminine.  She would be passive (and
that does not mean inanimate) in the circumstances, where the mere fact
of being a woman was enough to give her an occult and supreme
significance.  And she would be enduring which is the essence of woman's
visible, tangible power.  Of that I was certain.  Had she not endured
already?  Yet it is so true that the germ of destruction lies in wait for
us mortals, even at the very source of our strength, that one may die of
too much endurance as well as of too little of it.

Such was my train of thought.  And I was mindful also of my first view of
her--toying or perhaps communing in earnest with the possibilities of a
precipice.  But I did not ask Mr. Powell anxiously what had happened to
Mrs. Anthony in the end.  I let him go on in his own way feeling that no
matter what strange facts he would have to disclose, I was certain to
know much more of them than he ever did know or could possibly guess
. . . "

Marlow paused for quite a long time.  He seemed uncertain as though he
had advanced something beyond my grasp.  Purposely I made no sign.  "You
understand?" he asked.

"Perfectly," I said.  "You are the expert in the psychological
wilderness.  This is like one of those Red-skin stories where the noble
savages carry off a girl and the honest backwoodsman with his
incomparable knowledge follows the track and reads the signs of her fate
in a footprint here, a broken twig there, a trinket dropped by the way.  I
have always liked such stories.  Go on."

Marlow smiled indulgently at my jesting.  "It is not exactly a story for
boys," he said.  "I go on then.  The sign, as you call it, was not very
plentiful but very much to the purpose, and when Mr. Powell heard (at a
certain moment I felt bound to tell him) when he heard that I had known
Mrs. Anthony before her marriage, that, to a certain extent, I was her
confidant . . . For you can't deny that to a certain extent . . . Well
let us say that I had a look in . . . A young girl, you know, is
something like a temple.  You pass by and wonder what mysterious rites
are going on in there, what prayers, what visions?  The privileged men,
the lover, the husband, who are given the key of the sanctuary do not
always know how to use it.  For myself, without claim, without merit,
simply by chance I had been allowed to look through the half-opened door
and I had seen the saddest possible desecration, the withered brightness
of youth, a spirit neither made cringing nor yet dulled but as if
bewildered in quivering hopelessness by gratuitous cruelty;
self-confidence destroyed and, instead, a resigned recklessness, a
mournful callousness (and all this simple, almost naive)--before the
material and moral difficulties of the situation.  The passive anguish of
the luckless!

I asked myself: wasn't that ill-luck exhausted yet?  Ill-luck which is
like the hate of invisible powers interpreted, made sensible and
injurious by the actions of men?

Mr. Powell as you may well imagine had opened his eyes at my statement.
But he was full of his recalled experiences on board the _Ferndale_, and
the strangeness of being mixed up in what went on aboard, simply because
his name was also the name of a shipping-master, kept him in a state of
wonder which made other coincidences, however unlikely, not so very
surprising after all.

This astonishing occurrence was so present to his mind that he always
felt as though he were there under false pretences.  And this feeling was
so uncomfortable that it nerved him to break through the awe-inspiring
aloofness of his captain.  He wanted to make a clean breast of it.  I
imagine that his youth stood in good stead to Mr. Powell.  Oh, yes.  Youth
is a power.  Even Captain Anthony had to take some notice of it, as if it
refreshed him to see something untouched, unscarred, unhardened by
suffering.  Or perhaps the very novelty of that face, on board a ship
where he had seen the same faces for years, attracted his attention.

Whether one day he dropped a word to his new second officer or only
looked at him I don't know; but Mr. Powell seized the opportunity
whatever it was.  The captain who had started and stopped in his
everlasting rapid walk smoothed his brow very soon, heard him to the end
and then laughed a little.

"Ah!  That's the story.  And you felt you must put me right as to this."

"Yes, sir."

"It doesn't matter how you came on board," said Anthony.  And then
showing that perhaps he was not so utterly absent from his ship as
Franklin supposed: "That's all right.  You seem to be getting on very
well with everybody," he said in his curt hurried tone, as if talking
hurt him, and his eyes already straying over the sea as usual.

"Yes, sir."

Powell tells me that looking then at the strong face to which that
haggard expression was returning, he had the impulse, from some confused
friendly feeling, to add: "I am very happy on board here, sir."

The quickly returning glance, its steadiness, abashed Mr. Powell and made
him even step back a little.  The captain looked as though he had
forgotten the meaning of the word.

"You--what?  Oh yes . . . You . . . of course . . . Happy.  Why not?"

This was merely muttered; and next moment Anthony was off on his headlong
tramp his eyes turned to the sea away from his ship.

A sailor indeed looks generally into the great distances, but in Captain
Anthony's case there was--as Powell expressed it--something particular,
something purposeful like the avoidance of pain or temptation.  It was
very marked once one had become aware of it.  Before, one felt only a
pronounced strangeness.  Not that the captain--Powell was careful to
explain--didn't see things as a ship-master should.  The proof of it was
that on that very occasion he desired him suddenly after a period of
silent pacing, to have all the staysails sheets eased off, and he was
going on with some other remarks on the subject of these staysails when
Mrs. Anthony followed by her father emerged from the companion.  She
established herself in her chair to leeward of the skylight as usual.
Thereupon the captain cut short whatever he was going to say, and in a
little while went down below.

I asked Mr. Powell whether the captain and his wife never conversed on
deck.  He said no--or at any rate they never exchanged more than a couple
of words.  There was some constraint between them.  For instance, on that
very occasion, when Mrs. Anthony came out they did look at each other;
the captain's eyes indeed followed her till she sat down; but he did not
speak to her; he did not approach her; and afterwards left the deck
without turning his head her way after this first silent exchange of
glances.

I asked Mr. Powell what did he do then, the captain being out of the way.
"I went over and talked to Mrs. Anthony.  I was thinking that it must be
very dull for her.  She seemed to be such a stranger to the ship."

"The father was there of course?"

"Always," said Powell.  "He was always there sitting on the skylight, as
if he were keeping watch over her.  And I think," he added, "that he was
worrying her.  Not that she showed it in any way.  Mrs. Anthony was
always very quiet and always ready to look one straight in the face."

"You talked together a lot?" I pursued my inquiries.  "She mostly let me
talk to her," confessed Mr. Powell.  "I don't know that she was very much
interested--but still she let me.  She never cut me short."

All the sympathies of Mr. Powell were for Flora Anthony nee de Barral.
She was the only human being younger than himself on board that ship
since the _Ferndale_ carried no boys and was manned by a full crew of
able seamen.  Yes! their youth had created a sort of bond between them.
Mr. Powell's open countenance must have appeared to her distinctly
pleasing amongst the mature, rough, crabbed or even inimical faces she
saw around her.  With the warm generosity of his age young Powell was on
her side, as it were, even before he knew that there were sides to be
taken on board that ship, and what this taking sides was about.  There
was a girl.  A nice girl.  He asked himself no questions.  Flora de
Barral was not so much younger in years than himself; but for some
reason, perhaps by contrast with the accepted idea of a captain's wife,
he could not regard her otherwise but as an extremely youthful creature.
At the same time, apart from her exalted position, she exercised over him
the supremacy a woman's earlier maturity gives her over a young man of
her own age.  As a matter of fact we can see that, without ever having
more than a half an hour's consecutive conversation together, and the
distances duly preserved, these two were becoming friends--under the eye
of the old man, I suppose.

How he first got in touch with his captain's wife Powell relates in this
way.  It was long before his memorable conversation with the mate and
shortly after getting clear of the channel.  It was gloomy weather; dead
head wind, blowing quite half a gale; the _Ferndale_ under reduced sail
was stretching close-hauled across the track of the homeward bound ships,
just moving through the water and no more, since there was no object in
pressing her and the weather looked threatening.  About ten o'clock at
night he was alone on the poop, in charge, keeping well aft by the
weather rail and staring to windward, when amongst the white, breaking
seas, under the black sky, he made out the lights of a ship.  He watched
them for some time.  She was running dead before the wind of course.  She
will pass jolly close--he said to himself; and then suddenly he felt a
great mistrust of that approaching ship.  She's heading straight for
us--he thought.  It was not his business to get out of the way.  On the
contrary.  And his uneasiness grew by the recollection of the forty tons
of dynamite in the body of the _Ferndale_; not the sort of cargo one
thinks of with equanimity in connection with a threatened collision.  He
gazed at the two small lights in the dark immensity filled with the angry
noise of the seas.  They fascinated him till their plainness to his sight
gave him a conviction that there was danger there.  He knew in his mind
what to do in the emergency, but very properly he felt that he must call
the captain out at once.

He crossed the deck in one bound.  By the immemorial custom and usage of
the sea the captain's room is on the starboard side.  You would just as
soon expect your captain to have his nose at the back of his head as to
have his state-room on the port side of the ship.  Powell forgot all
about the direction on that point given him by the chief.  He flew over
as I said, stamped with his foot and then putting his face to the cowl of
the big ventilator shouted down there: "Please come on deck, sir," in a
voice which was not trembling or scared but which we may call fairly
expressive.  There could not be a mistake as to the urgence of the call.
But instead of the expected alert "All right!" and the sound of a rush
down there, he heard only a faint exclamation--then silence.

Think of his astonishment!  He remained there, his ear in the cowl of the
ventilator, his eyes fastened on those menacing sidelights dancing on the
gusts of wind which swept the angry darkness of the sea.  It was as
though he had waited an hour but it was something much less than a minute
before he fairly bellowed into the wide tube "Captain Anthony!"  An
agitated "What is it?" was what he heard down there in Mrs. Anthony's
voice, light rapid footsteps . . . Why didn't she try to wake him up!  "I
want the captain," he shouted, then gave it up, making a dash at the
companion where a blue light was kept, resolved to act for himself.

On the way he glanced at the helmsman whose face lighted up by the
binnacle lamps was calm.  He said rapidly to him: "Stand by to spin that
helm up at the first word."  The answer "Aye, aye, sir," was delivered in
a steady voice.  Then Mr. Powell after a shout for the watch on deck to
"lay aft," ran to the ship's side and struck the blue light on the rail.

A sort of nasty little spitting of sparks was all that came.  The light
(perhaps affected by damp) had failed to ignite.  The time of all these
various acts must be counted in seconds.  Powell confessed to me that at
this failure he experienced a paralysis of thought, of voice, of limbs.
The unexpectedness of this misfire positively overcame his faculties.  It
was the only thing for which his imagination was not prepared.  It was
knocked clean over.  When it got up it was with the suggestion that he
must do something at once or there would be a broadside smash accompanied
by the explosion of dynamite, in which both ships would be blown up and
every soul on board of them would vanish off the earth in an enormous
flame and uproar.

He saw the catastrophe happening and at the same moment, before he could
open his mouth or stir a limb to ward off the vision, a voice very near
his ear, the measured voice of Captain Anthony said: "Wouldn't light--eh?
Throw it down!  Jump for the flare-up."

The spring of activity in Mr. Powell was released with great force.  He
jumped.  The flare-up was kept inside the companion with a box of matches
ready to hand.  Almost before he knew he had moved he was diving under
the companion slide.  He got hold of the can in the dark and tried to
strike a light.  But he had to press the flare-holder to his breast with
one arm, his fingers were damp and stiff, his hands trembled a little.
One match broke.  Another went out.  In its flame he saw the colourless
face of Mrs. Anthony a little below him, standing on the cabin stairs.
Her eyes which were very close to his (he was in a crouching posture on
the top step) seemed to burn darkly in the vanishing light.  On deck the
captain's voice was heard sudden and unexpectedly sardonic: "You had
better look sharp, if you want to be in time."

"Let me have the box," said Mrs. Anthony in a hurried and familiar
whisper which sounded amused as if they had been a couple of children up
to some lark behind a wall.  He was glad of the offer which seemed to him
very natural, and without ceremony--

"Here you are.  Catch hold."

Their hands touched in the dark and she took the box while he held the
paraffin soaked torch in its iron holder.  He thought of warning her:
"Look out for yourself."  But before he had the time to finish the
sentence the flare blazed up violently between them and he saw her throw
herself back with an arm across her face.  "Hallo," he exclaimed; only he
could not stop a moment to ask if she was hurt.  He bolted out of the
companion straight into his captain who took the flare from him and held
it high above his head.

The fierce flame fluttered like a silk flag, throwing an angry swaying
glare mingled with moving shadows over the poop, lighting up the concave
surfaces of the sails, gleaming on the wet paint of the white rails.  And
young Powell turned his eyes to windward with a catch in his breath.

The strange ship, a darker shape in the night, did not seem to be moving
onwards but only to grow more distinct right abeam, staring at the
_Ferndale_ with one green and one red eye which swayed and tossed as if
they belonged to the restless head of some invisible monster ambushed in
the night amongst the waves.  A moment, long like eternity, elapsed, and,
suddenly, the monster which seemed to take to itself the shape of a
mountain shut its green eye without as much as a preparatory wink.

Mr. Powell drew a free breath.  "All right now," said Captain Anthony in
a quiet undertone.  He gave the blazing flare to Powell and walked aft to
watch the passing of that menace of destruction coming blindly with its
parti-coloured stare out of a blind night on the wings of a sweeping
wind.  Her very form could be distinguished now black and elongated
amongst the hissing patches of foam bursting along her path.

As is always the case with a ship running before wind and sea she did not
seem to an onlooker to move very fast; but to be progressing indolently
in long leisurely bounds and pauses in the midst of the overtaking waves.
It was only when actually passing the stern within easy hail of the
_Ferndale_, that her headlong speed became apparent to the eye.  With the
red light shut off and soaring like an immense shadow on the crest of a
wave she was lost to view in one great, forward swing, melting into the
lightless space.

"Close shave," said Captain Anthony in an indifferent voice just raised
enough to be heard in the wind.  "A blind lot on board that ship.  Put
out the flare now."

Silently Mr. Powell inverted the holder, smothering the flame in the can,
bringing about by the mere turn of his wrist the fall of darkness upon
the poop.  And at the same time vanished out of his mind's eye the vision
of another flame enormous and fierce shooting violently from a white
churned patch of the sea, lighting up the very clouds and carrying
upwards in its volcanic rush flying spars, corpses, the fragments of two
destroyed ships.  It vanished and there was an immense relief.  He told
me he did not know how scared he had been, not generally but of that very
thing his imagination had conjured, till it was all over.  He measured it
(for fear is a great tension) by the feeling of slack weariness which
came over him all at once.

He walked to the companion and stooping low to put the flare in its usual
place saw in the darkness the motionless pale oval of Mrs. Anthony's
face.  She whispered quietly:

"Is anything going to happen?  What is it?"

"It's all over now," he whispered back.

He remained bent low, his head inside the cover staring at that white
ghostly oval.  He wondered she had not rushed out on deck.  She had
remained quietly there.  This was pluck.  Wonderful self-restraint.  And
it was not stupidity on her part.  She knew there was imminent danger and
probably had some notion of its nature.

"You stayed here waiting for what would come," he murmured admiringly.

"Wasn't that the best thing to do?" she asked.

He didn't know.  Perhaps.  He confessed he could not have done it.  Not
he.  His flesh and blood could not have stood it.  He would have felt he
must see what was coming.  Then he remembered that the flare might have
scorched her face, and expressed his concern.

"A bit.  Nothing to hurt.  Smell the singed hair?"

There was a sort of gaiety in her tone.  She might have been frightened
but she certainly was not overcome and suffered from no reaction.  This
confirmed and augmented if possible Mr. Powell's good opinion of her as a
"jolly girl," though it seemed to him positively monstrous to refer in
such terms to one's captain's wife.  "But she doesn't look it," he
thought in extenuation and was going to say something more to her about
the lighting of that flare when another voice was heard in the companion,
saying some indistinct words.  Its tone was contemptuous; it came from
below, from the bottom of the stairs.  It was a voice in the cabin.  And
the only other voice which could be heard in the main cabin at this time
of the evening was the voice of Mrs. Anthony's father.  The indistinct
white oval sank from Mr. Powell's sight so swiftly as to take him by
surprise.  For a moment he hung at the opening of the companion and now
that her slight form was no longer obstructing the narrow and winding
staircase the voices came up louder but the words were still indistinct.
The old gentleman was excited about something and Mrs. Anthony was
"managing him" as Powell expressed it.  They moved away from the bottom
of the stairs and Powell went away from the companion.  Yet he fancied he
had heard the words "Lost to me" before he withdrew his head.  They had
been uttered by Mr. Smith.

Captain Anthony had not moved away from the taffrail.  He remained in the
very position he took up to watch the other ship go by rolling and
swinging all shadowy in the uproar of the following seas.  He stirred
not; and Powell keeping near by did not dare speak to him, so enigmatical
in its contemplation of the night did his figure appear to his young
eyes: indistinct--and in its immobility staring into gloom, the prey of
some incomprehensible grief, longing or regret.

Why is it that the stillness of a human being is often so impressive, so
suggestive of evil--as if our proper fate were a ceaseless agitation?  The
stillness of Captain Anthony became almost intolerable to his second
officer.  Mr. Powell loitering about the skylight wanted his captain off
the deck now.  "Why doesn't he go below?" he asked himself impatiently.
He ventured a cough.

Whether the effect of the cough or not Captain Anthony spoke.  He did not
move the least bit.  With his back remaining turned to the whole length
of the ship he asked Mr. Powell with some brusqueness if the chief mate
had neglected to instruct him that the captain was to be found on the
port side.

"Yes, sir," said Mr. Powell approaching his back.  "The mate told me to
stamp on the port side when I wanted you; but I didn't remember at the
moment."

"You should remember," the captain uttered with an effort.  Then added
mumbling "I don't want Mrs. Anthony frightened.  Don't you see? . . ."

"She wasn't this time," Powell said innocently: "She lighted the flare-up
for me, sir."

"This time," Captain Anthony exclaimed and turned round.  "Mrs. Anthony
lighted the flare?  Mrs. Anthony! . . . "  Powell explained that she was
in the companion all the time.

"All the time," repeated the captain.  It seemed queer to Powell that
instead of going himself to see the captain should ask him:

"Is she there now?"

Powell said that she had gone below after the ship had passed clear of
the _Ferndale_.  Captain Anthony made a movement towards the companion
himself, when Powell added the information.  "Mr. Smith called to Mrs.
Anthony from the saloon, sir.  I believe they are talking there now."

He was surprised to see the captain give up the idea of going below after
all.

He began to walk the poop instead regardless of the cold, of the damp
wind and of the sprays.  And yet he had nothing on but his sleeping suit
and slippers.  Powell placing himself on the break of the poop kept a
look-out.  When after some time he turned his head to steal a glance at
his eccentric captain he could not see his active and shadowy figure
swinging to and fro.  The second mate of the _Ferndale_ walked aft
peering about and addressed the seaman who steered.

"Captain gone below?"

"Yes, sir," said the fellow who with a quid of tobacco bulging out his
left cheek kept his eyes on the compass card.  "This minute.  He
laughed."

"Laughed," repeated Powell incredulously.  "Do you mean the captain did?
You must be mistaken.  What would he want to laugh for?"

"Don't know, sir."

The elderly sailor displayed a profound indifference towards human
emotions.  However, after a longish pause he conceded a few words more to
the second officer's weakness.  "Yes.  He was walking the deck as usual
when suddenly he laughed a little and made for the companion.  Thought of
something funny all at once."

Something funny!  That Mr. Powell could not believe.  He did not ask
himself why, at the time.  Funny thoughts come to men, though, in all
sorts of situations; they come to all sorts of men.  Nevertheless Mr.
Powell was shocked to learn that Captain Anthony had laughed without
visible cause on a certain night.  The impression for some reason was
disagreeable.  And it was then, while finishing his watch, with the
chilly gusts of wind sweeping at him out of the darkness where the short
sea of the soundings growled spitefully all round the ship, that it
occurred to his unsophisticated mind that perhaps things are not what
they are confidently expected to be; that it was possible that Captain
Anthony was not a happy man . . . In so far you will perceive he was to a
certain extent prepared for the apoplectic and sensitive Franklin's
lamentations about his captain.  And though he treated them with a
contempt which was in a great measure sincere, yet he admitted to me that
deep down within him an inexplicable and uneasy suspicion that all was
not well in that cabin, so unusually cut off from the rest of the ship,
came into being and grew against his will.



CHAPTER FOUR--ANTHONY AND FLORA


Marlow emerged out of the shadow of the book-case to get himself a cigar
from a box which stood on a little table by my side.  In the full light
of the room I saw in his eyes that slightly mocking expression with which
he habitually covers up his sympathetic impulses of mirth and pity before
the unreasonable complications the idealism of mankind puts into the
simple but poignant problem of conduct on this earth.

He selected and lit the cigar with affected care, then turned upon me, I
had been looking at him silently.

"I suppose," he said, the mockery of his eyes giving a pellucid quality
to his tone, "that you think it's high time I told you something
definite.  I mean something about that psychological cabin mystery of
discomfort (for it's obvious that it must be psychological) which
affected so profoundly Mr. Franklin the chief mate, and had even
disturbed the serene innocence of Mr. Powell, the second of the ship
_Ferndale_, commanded by Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet, you
know."

"You are going to confess now that you have failed to find it out," I
said in pretended indignation.

"It would serve you right if I told you that I have.  But I won't.  I
haven't failed.  I own though that for a time, I was puzzled.  However, I
have now seen our Powell many times under the most favourable
conditions--and besides I came upon a most unexpected source of
information . . . But never mind that.  The means don't concern you
except in so far as they belong to the story.  I'll admit that for some
time the old-maiden-lady-like occupation of putting two and two together
failed to procure a coherent theory.  I am speaking now as an
investigator--a man of deductions.  With what we know of Roderick Anthony
and Flora de Barral I could not deduct an ordinary marital quarrel
beautifully matured in less than a year--could I?  If you ask me what is
an ordinary marital quarrel I will tell you, that it is a difference
about nothing; I mean, these nothings which, as Mr. Powell told us when
we first met him, shore people are so prone to start a row about, and
nurse into hatred from an idle sense of wrong, from perverted ambition,
for spectacular reasons too.  There are on earth no actors too humble and
obscure not to have a gallery; that gallery which envenoms the play by
stealthy jeers, counsels of anger, amused comments or words of perfidious
compassion.  However, the Anthonys were free from all demoralizing
influences.  At sea, you know, there is no gallery.  You hear no
tormenting echoes of your own littleness there, where either a great
elemental voice roars defiantly under the sky or else an elemental
silence seems to be part of the infinite stillness of the universe.

Remembering Flora de Barral in the depths of moral misery, and Roderick
Anthony carried away by a gust of tempestuous tenderness, I asked myself,
Is it all forgotten already?  What could they have found to estrange them
from each other with this rapidity and this thoroughness so far from all
temptations, in the peace of the sea and in an isolation so complete that
if it had not been the jealous devotion of the sentimental Franklin
stimulating the attention of Powell, there would have been no record, no
evidence of it at all.

I must confess at once that it was Flora de Barral whom I suspected.  In
this world as at present organized women are the suspected half of the
population.  There are good reasons for that.  These reasons are so
discoverable with a little reflection that it is not worth my while to
set them out for you.  I will only mention this: that the part falling to
women's share being all "influence" has an air of occult and mysterious
action, something not altogether trustworthy like all natural forces
which, for us, work in the dark because of our imperfect comprehension.

If women were not a force of nature, blind in its strength and capricious
in its power, they would not be mistrusted.  As it is one can't help it.
You will say that this force having been in the person of Flora de Barral
captured by Anthony . . . Why yes.  He had dealt with her masterfully.
But man has captured electricity too.  It lights him on his way, it warms
his home, it will even cook his dinner for him--very much like a woman.
But what sort of conquest would you call it?  He knows nothing of it.  He
has got to be mighty careful what he is about with his captive.  And the
greater the demand he makes on it in the exultation of his pride the more
likely it is to turn on him and burn him to a cinder . . . "

"A far-fetched enough parallel," I observed coldly to Marlow.  He had
returned to the arm-chair in the shadow of the bookcase.  "But accepting
the meaning you have in your mind it reduces itself to the knowledge of
how to use it.  And if you mean that this ravenous Anthony--"

"Ravenous is good," interrupted Marlow.  "He was a-hungering and
a-thirsting for femininity to enter his life in a way no mere feminist
could have the slightest conception of.  I reckon that this accounts for
much of Fyne's disgust with him.  Good little Fyne.  You have no idea
what infernal mischief he had worked during his call at the hotel.  But
then who could have suspected Anthony of being a heroic creature.  There
are several kinds of heroism and one of them at least is idiotic.  It is
the one which wears the aspect of sublime delicacy.  It is apparently the
one of which the son of the delicate poet was capable.

He certainly resembled his father, who, by the way, wore out two women
without any satisfaction to himself, because they did not come up to his
supra-refined standard of the delicacy which is so perceptible in his
verses.  That's your poet.  He demands too much from others.  The
inarticulate son had set up a standard for himself with that need for
embodying in his conduct the dreams, the passion, the impulses the poet
puts into arrangements of verses, which are dearer to him than his own
self--and may make his own self appear sublime in the eyes of other
people, and even in his own eyes.

Did Anthony wish to appear sublime in his own eyes?  I should not like to
make that charge; though indeed there are other, less noble, ambitions at
which the world does not dare to smile.  But I don't think so; I do not
even think that there was in what he did a conscious and lofty confidence
in himself, a particularly pronounced sense of power which leads men so
often into impossible or equivocal situations.  Looked at abstractedly
(the way in which truth is often seen in its real shape) his life had
been a life of solitude and silence--and desire.

Chance had thrown that girl in his way; and if we may smile at his
violent conquest of Flora de Barral we must admit also that this eager
appropriation was truly the act of a man of solitude and desire; a man
also, who, unless a complete imbecile, must have been a man of long and
ardent reveries wherein the faculty of sincere passion matures slowly in
the unexplored recesses of the heart.  And I know also that a passion,
dominating or tyrannical, invading the whole man and subjugating all his
faculties to its own unique end, may conduct him whom it spurs and
drives, into all sorts of adventures, to the brink of unfathomable
dangers, to the limits of folly, and madness, and death.

To the man then of a silence made only more impressive by the
inarticulate thunders and mutters of the great seas, an utter stranger to
the clatter of tongues, there comes the muscular little Fyne, the most
marked representative of that mankind whose voice is so strange to him,
the husband of his sister, a personality standing out from the misty and
remote multitude.  He comes and throws at him more talk than he had ever
heard boomed out in an hour, and certainly touching the deepest things
Anthony had ever discovered in himself, and flings words like "unfair"
whose very sound is abhorrent to him.  Unfair!  Undue advantage!  He!
Unfair to that girl?  Cruel to her!

No scorn could stand against the impression of such charges advanced with
heat and conviction.  They shook him.  They were yet vibrating in the air
of that stuffy hotel-room, terrific, disturbing, impossible to get rid
of, when the door opened and Flora de Barral entered.

He did not even notice that she was late.  He was sitting on a sofa
plunged in gloom.  Was it true?  Having himself always said exactly what
he meant he imagined that people (unless they were liars, which of course
his brother-in-law could not be) never said more than they meant.  The
deep chest voice of little Fyne was still in his ear.  "He knows,"
Anthony said to himself.  He thought he had better go away and never see
her again.  But she stood there before him accusing and appealing.  How
could he abandon her?  That was out of the question.  She had no one.  Or
rather she had someone.  That father.  Anthony was willing to take him at
her valuation.  This father may have been the victim of the most
atrocious injustice.  But what could a man coming out of jail do?  An old
man too.  And then--what sort of man?  What would become of them both?
Anthony shuddered slightly and the faint smile with which Flora had
entered the room faded on her lips.  She was used to his impetuous
tenderness.  She was no longer afraid of it.  But she had never seen him
look like this before, and she suspected at once some new cruelty of
life.  He got up with his usual ardour but as if sobered by a momentous
resolve and said:

"No.  I can't let you out of my sight.  I have seen you.  You have told
me your story.  You are honest.  You have never told me you loved me."

She waited, saying to herself that he had never given her time, that he
had never asked her!  And that, in truth, she did not know!

I am inclined to believe that she did not.  As abundance of experience is
not precisely her lot in life, a woman is seldom an expert in matters of
sentiment.  It is the man who can and generally does "see himself" pretty
well inside and out.  Women's self-possession is an outward thing;
inwardly they flutter, perhaps because they are, or they feel themselves
to be, engaged.  All this speaking generally.  In Flora de Barral's
particular case ever since Anthony had suddenly broken his way into her
hopeless and cruel existence she lived like a person liberated from a
condemned cell by a natural cataclysm, a tempest, an earthquake; not
absolutely terrified, because nothing can be worse than the eve of
execution, but stunned, bewildered--abandoning herself passively.  She
did not want to make a sound, to move a limb.  She hadn't the strength.
What was the good?  And deep down, almost unconsciously she was seduced
by the feeling of being supported by this violence.  A sensation she had
never experienced before in her life.

She felt as if this whirlwind were calming down somehow!  As if this
feeling of support, which was tempting her to close her eyes deliciously
and let herself be carried on and on into the unknown undefiled by vile
experiences, were less certain, had wavered threateningly.  She tried to
read something in his face, in that energetic kindly face to which she
had become accustomed so soon.  But she was not yet capable of
understanding its expression.  Scared, discouraged on the threshold of
adolescence, plunged in moral misery of the bitterest kind, she had not
learned to read--not that sort of language.

If Anthony's love had been as egoistic as love generally is, it would
have been greater than the egoism of his vanity--or of his generosity, if
you like--and all this could not have happened.  He would not have hit
upon that renunciation at which one does not know whether to grin or
shudder.  It is true too that then his love would not have fastened
itself upon the unhappy daughter of de Barral.  But it was a love born of
that rare pity which is not akin to contempt because rooted in an
overwhelmingly strong capacity for tenderness--the tenderness of the
fiery kind--the tenderness of silent solitary men, the voluntary,
passionate outcasts of their kind.  At the time I am forced to think that
his vanity must have been enormous.

"What big eyes she has," he said to himself amazed.  No wonder.  She was
staring at him with all the might of her soul awakening slowly from a
poisoned sleep, in which it could only quiver with pain but could neither
expand nor move.  He plunged into them breathless and tense, deep, deep,
like a mad sailor taking a desperate dive from the masthead into the blue
unfathomable sea so many men have execrated and loved at the same time.
And his vanity was immense.  It had been touched to the quick by that
muscular little feminist, Fyne.  "I!  I!  Take advantage of her
helplessness.  I!  Unfair to that creature--that wisp of mist, that white
shadow homeless in an ugly dirty world.  I could blow her away with a
breath," he was saying to himself with horror.  "Never!"  All the
supremely refined delicacy of tenderness, expressed in so many fine lines
of verse by Carleon Anthony, grew to the size of a passion filling with
inward sobs the big frame of the man who had never in his life read a
single one of those famous sonnets singing of the most highly civilized,
chivalrous love, of those sonnets which . . . You know there's a volume
of them.  My edition has the portrait of the author at thirty, and when I
showed it to Mr. Powell the other day he exclaimed: "Wonderful!  One
would think this the portrait of Captain Anthony himself if . . ."  I
wanted to know what that if was.  But Powell could not say.  There was
something--a difference.  No doubt there was--in fineness perhaps.  The
father, fastidious, cerebral, morbidly shrinking from all contacts, could
only sing in harmonious numbers of what the son felt with a dumb and
reckless sincerity.

* * * * *

Possessed by most strong men's touching illusion as to the frailness of
women and their spiritual fragility, it seemed to Anthony that he would
be destroying, breaking something very precious inside that being.  In
fact nothing less than partly murdering her.  This seems a very extreme
effect to flow from Fyne's words.  But Anthony, unaccustomed to the
chatter of the firm earth, never stayed to ask himself what value these
words could have in Fyne's mouth.  And indeed the mere dark sound of them
was utterly abhorrent to his native rectitude, sea-salted, hardened in
the winds of wide horizons, open as the day.

He wished to blurt out his indignation but she regarded him with an
expectant air which checked him.  His visible discomfort made her uneasy.
He could only repeat "Oh yes.  You are perfectly honest.  You might have,
but I dare say you are right.  At any rate you have never said anything
to me which you didn't mean."

"Never," she whispered after a pause.

He seemed distracted, choking with an emotion she could not understand
because it resembled embarrassment, a state of mind inconceivable in that
man.

She wondered what it was she had said; remembering that in very truth she
had hardly spoken to him except when giving him the bare outline of her
story which he seemed to have hardly had the patience to hear, waving it
perpetually aside with exclamations of horror and anger, with fiercely
sombre mutters "Enough!  Enough!" and with alarming starts from a forced
stillness, as though he meant to rush out at once and take vengeance on
somebody.  She was saying to herself that he caught her words in the air,
never letting her finish her thought.  Honest.  Honest.  Yes certainly
she had been that.  Her letter to Mrs. Fyne had been prompted by honesty.
But she reflected sadly that she had never known what to say to him.  That
perhaps she had nothing to say.

"But you'll find out that I can be honest too," he burst out in a
menacing tone, she had learned to appreciate with an amused thrill.

She waited for what was coming.  But he hung in the wind.  He looked
round the room with disgust as if he could see traces on the walls of all
the casual tenants that had ever passed through it.  People had
quarrelled in that room; they had been ill in it, there had been misery
in that room, wickedness, crime perhaps--death most likely.  This was not
a fit place.  He snatched up his hat.  He had made up his mind.  The
ship--the ship he had known ever since she came off the stocks, his
home--her shelter--the uncontaminated, honest ship, was the place.

"Let us go on board.  We'll talk there," he said.  "And you will have to
listen to me.  For whatever happens, no matter what they say, I cannot
let you go."

You can't say that (misgivings or no misgivings) she could have done
anything else but go on board.  It was the appointed business of that
morning.  During the drive he was silent.  Anthony was the last man to
condemn conventionally any human being, to scorn and despise even
deserved misfortune.  He was ready to take old de Barral--the convict--on
his daughter's valuation without the slightest reserve.  But love like
his, though it may drive one into risky folly by the proud consciousness
of its own strength, has a sagacity of its own.  And now, as if lifted up
into a higher and serene region by its purpose of renunciation, it gave
him leisure to reflect for the first time in these last few days.  He
said to himself: "I don't know that man.  She does not know him either.
She was barely sixteen when they locked him up.  She was a child.  What
will he say?  What will he do?  No, he concluded, I cannot leave her
behind with that man who would come into the world as if out of a grave.

They went on board in silence, and it was after showing her round and
when they had returned to the saloon that he assailed her in his fiery,
masterful fashion.  At first she did not understand.  Then when she
understood that he was giving her her liberty she went stiff all over,
her hand resting on the edge of the table, her face set like a carving of
white marble.  It was all over.  It was as that abominable governess had
said.  She was insignificant, contemptible.  Nobody could love her.
Humiliation clung to her like a cold shroud--never to be shaken off,
unwarmed by this madness of generosity.

"Yes.  Here.  Your home.  I can't give it to you and go away, but it is
big enough for us two.  You need not be afraid.  If you say so I shall
not even look at you.  Remember that grey head of which you have been
thinking night and day.  Where is it going to rest?  Where else if not
here, where nothing evil can touch it.  Don't you understand that I won't
let you buy shelter from me at the cost of your very soul.  I won't.  You
are too much part of me.  I have found myself since I came upon you and I
would rather sell my own soul to the devil than let you go out of my
keeping.  But I must have the right."

He went away brusquely to shut the door leading on deck and came back the
whole length of the cabin repeating:

"I must have the legal right.  Are you ashamed of letting people think
you are my wife?"

He opened his arms as if to clasp her to his breast but mastered the
impulse and shook his clenched hands at her, repeating: "I must have the
right if only for your father's sake.  I must have the right.  Where
would you take him?  To that infernal cardboard box-maker.  I don't know
what keeps me from hunting him up in his virtuous home and bashing his
head in.  I can't bear the thought.  Listen to me, Flora!  Do you hear
what I am saying to you?  You are not so proud that you can't understand
that I as a man have my pride too?"

He saw a tear glide down her white cheek from under each lowered eyelid.
Then, abruptly, she walked out of the cabin.  He stood for a moment,
concentrated, reckoning his own strength, interrogating his heart, before
he followed her hastily.  Already she had reached the wharf.

At the sound of his pursuing footsteps her strength failed her.  Where
could she escape from this?  From this new perfidy of life taking upon
itself the form of magnanimity.  His very voice was changed.  The
sustaining whirlwind had let her down, to stumble on again, weakened by
the fresh stab, bereft of moral support which is wanted in life more than
all the charities of material help.  She had never had it.  Never.  Not
from the Fynes.  But where to go?  Oh yes, this dock--a placid sheet of
water close at hand.  But there was that old man with whom she had walked
hand in hand on the parade by the sea.  She seemed to see him coming to
meet her, pitiful, a little greyer, with an appealing look and an
extended, tremulous arm.  It was for her now to take the hand of that
wronged man more helpless than a child.  But where could she lead him?
Where?  And what was she to say to him?  What words of cheer, of courage
and of hope?  There were none.  Heaven and earth were mute, unconcerned
at their meeting.  But this other man was coming up behind her.  He was
very close now.  His fiery person seemed to radiate heat, a tingling
vibration into the atmosphere.  She was exhausted, careless, afraid to
stumble, ready to fall.  She fancied she could hear his breathing.  A
wave of languid warmth overtook her, she seemed to lose touch with the
ground under her feet; and when she felt him slip his hand under her arm
she made no attempt to disengage herself from that grasp which closed
upon her limb, insinuating and firm.

He conducted her through the dangers of the quayside.  Her sight was dim.
A moving truck was like a mountain gliding by.  Men passed by as if in a
mist; and the buildings, the sheds, the unexpected open spaces, the
ships, had strange, distorted, dangerous shapes.  She said to herself
that it was good not to be bothered with what all these things meant in
the scheme of creation (if indeed anything had a meaning), or were just
piled-up matter without any sense.  She felt how she had always been
unrelated to this world.  She was hanging on to it merely by that one arm
grasped firmly just above the elbow.  It was a captivity.  So be it.  Till
they got out into the street and saw the hansom waiting outside the gates
Anthony spoke only once, beginning brusquely but in a much gentler tone
than she had ever heard from his lips.

"Of course I ought to have known that you could not care for a man like
me, a stranger.  Silence gives consent.  Yes?  Eh?  I don't want any of
that sort of consent.  And unless some day you find you can speak . . .
No!  No!  I shall never ask you.  For all the sign I will give you you
may go to your grave with sealed lips.  But what I have said you must
do!"

He bent his head over her with tender care.  At the same time she felt
her arm pressed and shaken inconspicuously, but in an undeniable manner.
"You must do it."  A little shake that no passer-by could notice; and
this was going on in a deserted part of the dock.  "It must be done.  You
are listening to me--eh? or would you go again to my sister?"

His ironic tone, perhaps from want of use, had an awful grating ferocity.

"Would you go to her?" he pursued in the same strange voice.  "Your best
friend!  And say nicely--I am sorry.  Would you?  No!  You couldn't.
There are things that even you, poor dear lost girl, couldn't stand.  Eh?
Die rather.  That's it.  Of course.  Or can you be thinking of taking
your father to that infernal cousin's house.  No!  Don't speak.  I can't
bear to think of it.  I would follow you there and smash the door!"

The catch in his voice astonished her by its resemblance to a sob.  It
frightened her too.  The thought that came to her head was: "He mustn't."
He was putting her into the hansom.  "Oh!  He mustn't, he mustn't."  She
was still more frightened by the discovery that he was shaking all over.
Bewildered, shrinking into the far off corner, avoiding his eyes, she yet
saw the quivering of his mouth and made a wild attempt at a smile, which
broke the rigidity of her lips and set her teeth chattering suddenly.

"I am not coming with you," he was saying.  "I'll tell the man . . . I
can't.  Better not.  What is it?  Are you cold?  Come!  What is it?  Only
to go to a confounded stuffy room, a hole of an office.  Not a quarter of
an hour.  I'll come for you--in ten days.  Don't think of it too much.
Think of no man, woman or child of all that silly crowd cumbering the
ground.  Don't think of me either.  Think of yourself.  Ha!  Nothing will
be able to touch you then--at last.  Say nothing.  Don't move.  I'll have
everything arranged; and as long as you don't hate the sight of me--and
you don't--there's nothing to be frightened about.  One of their silly
offices with a couple of ink-slingers of no consequence; poor, scribbling
devils."

The hansom drove away with Flora de Barral inside, without movement,
without thought, only too glad to rest, to be alone and still moving away
without effort, in solitude and silence.

Anthony roamed the streets for hours without being able to remember in
the evening where he had been--in the manner of a happy and exulting
lover.  But nobody could have thought so from his face, which bore no
signs of blissful anticipation.  Exulting indeed he was but it was a
special sort of exultation which seemed to take him by the throat like an
enemy.

Anthony's last words to Flora referred to the registry office where they
were married ten days later.  During that time Anthony saw no one or
anything, though he went about restlessly, here and there, amongst men
and things.  This special state is peculiar to common lovers, who are
known to have no eyes for anything except for the contemplation, actual
or inward, of one human form which for them contains the soul of the
whole world in all its beauty, perfection, variety and infinity.  It must
be extremely pleasant.  But felicity was denied to Roderick Anthony's
contemplation.  He was not a common sort of lover; and he was punished
for it as if Nature (which it is said abhors a vacuum) were so very
conventional as to abhor every sort of exceptional conduct.  Roderick
Anthony had begun already to suffer.  That is why perhaps he was so
industrious in going about amongst his fellowmen who would have been
surprised and humiliated, had they known how little solidity and even
existence they had in his eyes.  But they could not suspect anything so
queer.  They saw nothing extraordinary in him during that fortnight.  The
proof of this is that they were willing to transact business with him.
Obviously they were; since it is then that the offer of chartering his
ship for the special purpose of proceeding to the Western Islands was put
in his way by a firm of shipbrokers who had no doubt of his sanity.

He probably looked sane enough for all the practical purposes of
commercial life.  But I am not so certain that he really was quite sane
at that time.

However, he jumped at the offer.  Providence itself was offering him this
opportunity to accustom the girl to sea-life by a comparatively short
trip.  This was the time when everything that happened, everything he
heard, casual words, unrelated phrases, seemed a provocation or an
encouragement, confirmed him in his resolution.  And indeed to be busy
with material affairs is the best preservative against reflection, fears,
doubts--all these things which stand in the way of achievement.  I
suppose a fellow proposing to cut his throat would experience a sort of
relief while occupied in stropping his razor carefully.

And Anthony was extremely careful in preparing for himself and for the
luckless Flora, an impossible existence.  He went about it with no more
tremors than if he had been stuffed with rags or made of iron instead of
flesh and blood.  An existence, mind you, which, on shore, in the thick
of mankind, of varied interests, of distractions, of infinite
opportunities to preserve your distance from each other, is hardly
conceivable; but on board ship, at sea, _en tete-a-tete_ for days and
weeks and months together, could mean nothing but mental torture, an
exquisite absurdity of torment.  He was a simple soul.  His hopelessly
masculine ingenuousness is displayed in a touching way by his care to
procure some woman to attend on Flora.  The condition of guaranteed
perfect respectability gave him moments of anxious thought.  When he
remembered suddenly his steward's wife he must have exclaimed _eureka_
with particular exultation.  One does not like to call Anthony an ass.
But really to put any woman within scenting distance of such a secret and
suppose that she would not track it out!

No woman, however simple, could be as ingenuous as that.  I don't know
how Flora de Barral qualified him in her thoughts when he told her of
having done this amongst other things intended to make her comfortable.  I
should think that, for all _her_ simplicity, she must have been appalled.
He stood before her on the appointed day outwardly calmer than she had
ever seen him before.  And this very calmness, that scrupulous attitude
which he felt bound in honour to assume then and for ever, unless she
would condescend to make a sign at some future time, added to the
heaviness of her heart innocent of the most pardonable guile.

The night before she had slept better than she had done for the past ten
nights.  Both youth and weariness will assert themselves in the end
against the tyranny of nerve-racking stress.  She had slept but she woke
up with her eyes full of tears.  There were no traces of them when she
met him in the shabby little parlour downstairs.  She had swallowed them
up.  She was not going to let him see.  She felt bound in honour to
accept the situation for ever and ever unless . . . Ah, unless . . . She
dissembled all her sentiments but it was not duplicity on her part.  All
she wanted was to get at the truth; to see what would come of it.

She beat him at his own honourable game and the thoroughness of her
serenity disconcerted Anthony a bit.  It was he who stammered when it
came to talking.  The suppressed fierceness of his character carried him
on after the first word or two masterfully enough.  But it was as if they
both had taken a bite of the same bitter fruit.  He was thinking with
mournful regret not unmixed with surprise: "That fellow Fyne has been
telling me the truth.  She does not care for me a bit."  It humiliated
him and also increased his compassion for the girl who in this darkness
of life, buffeted and despairing, had fallen into the grip of his
stronger will, abandoning herself to his arms as on a night of shipwreck.
Flora on her side with partial insight (for women are never blind with
the complete masculine blindness) looked on him with some pity; and she
felt pity for herself too.  It was a rejection, a casting out; nothing
new to her.  But she who supposed all her sensibility dead by this time,
discovered in herself a resentment of this ultimate betrayal.  She had no
resignation for this one.  With a sort of mental sullenness she said to
herself: "Well, I am here.  I am here without any nonsense.  It is not my
fault that I am a mere worthless object of pity."

And these things which she could tell herself with a clear conscience
served her better than the passionate obstinacy of purpose could serve
Roderick Anthony.  She was much more sure of herself than he was.  Such
are the advantages of mere rectitude over the most exalted generosity.

And so they went out to get married, the people of the house where she
lodged having no suspicion of anything of the sort.  They were only
excited at a "gentleman friend" (a very fine man too) calling on Miss
Smith for the first time since she had come to live in the house.  When
she returned, for she did come back alone, there were allusions made to
that outing.  She had to take her meals with these rather vulgar people.
The woman of the house, a scraggy, genteel person, tried even to provoke
confidences.  Flora's white face with the deep blue eyes did not strike
their hearts as it did the heart of Captain Anthony, as the very face of
the suffering world.  Her pained reserve had no power to awe them into
decency.

Well, she returned alone--as in fact might have been expected.  After
leaving the Registry Office Flora de Barral and Roderick Anthony had gone
for a walk in a park.  It must have been an East-End park but I am not
sure.  Anyway that's what they did.  It was a sunny day.  He said to her:
"Everything I have in the world belongs to you.  I have seen to that
without troubling my brother-in-law.  They have no call to interfere."

She walked with her hand resting lightly on his arm.  He had offered it
to her on coming out of the Registry Office, and she had accepted it
silently.  Her head drooped, she seemed to be turning matters over in her
mind.  She said, alluding to the Fynes: "They have been very good to me."
At that he exclaimed:

"They have never understood you.  Well, not properly.  My sister is not a
bad woman, but . . . "

Flora didn't protest; asking herself whether he imagined that he himself
understood her so much better.  Anthony dismissing his family out of his
thoughts went on: "Yes.  Everything is yours.  I have kept nothing back.
As to the piece of paper we have just got from that miserable
quill-driver if it wasn't for the law, I wouldn't mind if you tore it up
here, now, on this spot.  But don't you do it.  Unless you should some
day feel that--"

He choked, unexpectedly.  She, reflective, hesitated a moment then making
up her mind bravely.

"Neither am I keeping anything back from you."

She had said it!  But he in his blind generosity assumed that she was
alluding to her deplorable history and hastened to mutter:

"Of course!  Of course!  Say no more.  I have been lying awake thinking
of it all no end of times."

He made a movement with his other arm as if restraining himself from
shaking an indignant fist at the universe; and she never even attempted
to look at him.  His voice sounded strangely, incredibly lifeless in
comparison with these tempestuous accents that in the broad fields, in
the dark garden had seemed to shake the very earth under her weary and
hopeless feet.

She regretted them.  Hearing the sigh which escaped her Anthony instead
of shaking his fist at the universe began to pat her hand resting on his
arm and then desisted, suddenly, as though he had burnt himself.  Then
after a silence:

"You will have to go by yourself to-morrow.  I . . . No, I think I
mustn't come.  Better not.  What you two will have to say to each other--"

She interrupted him quickly:

"Father is an innocent man.  He was cruelly wronged."

"Yes.  That's why," Anthony insisted earnestly.  "And you are the only
human being that can make it up to him.  You alone must reconcile him
with the world if anything can.  But of course you shall.  You'll have to
find words.  Oh you'll know.  And then the sight of you, alone, would
soothe--"

"He's the gentlest of men," she interrupted again.

Anthony shook his head.  "It would take no end of generosity, no end of
gentleness to forgive such a dead set.  For my part I would have liked
better to have been killed and done with at once.  It could not have been
worse for you--and I suppose it was of you that he was thinking most
while those infernal lawyers were badgering him in court.  Of you.  And
now I think of it perhaps the sight of you may bring it all back to him.
All these years, all these years--and you his child left alone in the
world.  I would have gone crazy.  For even if he had done wrong--"

"But he hasn't," insisted Flora de Barral with a quite unexpected
fierceness.  "You mustn't even suppose it.  Haven't you read the accounts
of the trial?"

"I am not supposing anything," Anthony defended himself.  He just
remembered hearing of the trial.  He assured her that he was away from
England, the second voyage of the _Ferndale_.  He was crossing the
Pacific from Australia at the time and didn't see any papers for weeks
and weeks.  He interrupted himself to suggest:

"You had better tell him at once that you are happy."

He had stammered a little, and Flora de Barral uttered a deliberate and
concise "Yes."

A short silence ensued.  She withdrew her hand from his arm.  They
stopped.  Anthony looked as if a totally unexpected catastrophe had
happened.

"Ah," he said.  "You mind . . . "

"No!  I think I had better," she murmured.

"I dare say.  I dare say.  Bring him along straight on board to-morrow.
Stop nowhere."

She had a movement of vague gratitude, a momentary feeling of peace which
she referred to the man before her.  She looked up at Anthony.  His face
was sombre.  He was miles away and muttered as if to himself:

"Where could he want to stop though?"

"There's not a single being on earth that I would want to look at his
dear face now, to whom I would willingly take him," she said extending
her hand frankly and with a slight break in her voice, "but
you--Roderick."

He took that hand, felt it very small and delicate in his broad palm.

"That's right.  That's right," he said with a conscious and hasty
heartiness and, as if suddenly ashamed of the sound of his voice, turned
half round and absolutely walked away from the motionless girl.  He even
resisted the temptation to look back till it was too late.  The gravel
path lay empty to the very gate of the park.  She was gone--vanished.  He
had an impression that he had missed some sort of chance.  He felt sad.
That excited sense of his own conduct which had kept him up for the last
ten days buoyed him no more.  He had succeeded!

He strolled on aimlessly a prey to gentle melancholy.  He walked and
walked.  There were but few people about in this breathing space of a
poor neighbourhood.  Under certain conditions of life there is precious
little time left for mere breathing.  But still a few here and there were
indulging in that luxury; yet few as they were Captain Anthony, though
the least exclusive of men, resented their presence.  Solitude had been
his best friend.  He wanted some place where he could sit down and be
alone.  And in his need his thoughts turned to the sea which had given
him so much of that congenial solitude.  There, if always with his ship
(but that was an integral part of him) he could always be as solitary as
he chose.  Yes.  Get out to sea!

The night of the town with its strings of lights, rigid, and crossed like
a net of flames, thrown over the sombre immensity of walls, closed round
him, with its artificial brilliance overhung by an emphatic blackness,
its unnatural animation of a restless, overdriven humanity.  His thoughts
which somehow were inclined to pity every passing figure, every single
person glimpsed under a street lamp, fixed themselves at last upon a
figure which certainly could not have been seen under the lamps on that
particular night.  A figure unknown to him.  A figure shut up within high
unscaleable walls of stone or bricks till next morning . . . The figure
of Flora de Barral's father.  De Barral the financier--the convict.

There is something in that word with its suggestions of guilt and
retribution which arrests the thought.  We feel ourselves in the presence
of the power of organized society--a thing mysterious in itself and still
more mysterious in its effect.  Whether guilty or innocent, it was as if
old de Barral had been down to the Nether Regions.  Impossible to imagine
what he would bring out from there to the light of this world of
uncondemned men.  What would he think?  What would he have to say?  And
what was one to say to him?

Anthony, a little awed, as one is by a range of feelings stretching
beyond one's grasp, comforted himself by the thought that probably the
old fellow would have little to say.  He wouldn't want to talk about it.
No man would.  It must have been a real hell to him.

And then Anthony, at the end of the day in which he had gone through a
marriage ceremony with Flora de Barral, ceased to think of Flora's father
except, as in some sort, the captive of his triumph.  He turned to the
mental contemplation of the white, delicate and appealing face with great
blue eyes which he had seen weep and wonder and look profoundly at him,
sometimes with incredulity, sometimes with doubt and pain, but always
irresistible in the power to find their way right into his breast, to
stir there a deep response which was something more than love--he said to
himself,--as men understand it.  More?  Or was it only something other?
Yes.  It was something other.  More or less.  Something as incredible as
the fulfilment of an amazing and startling dream in which he could take
the world in his arms--all the suffering world--not to possess its
pathetic fairness but to console and cherish its sorrow.

Anthony walked slowly to the ship and that night slept without dreams.



CHAPTER FIVE--THE GREAT DE BARRAL


Renovated certainly the saloon of the _Ferndale_ was to receive the
"strange woman."  The mellowness of its old-fashioned, tarnished
decoration was gone.  And Anthony looking round saw the glitter, the
gleams, the colour of new things, untried, unused, very bright--too
bright.  The workmen had gone only last night; and the last piece of work
they did was the hanging of the heavy curtains which looped midway the
length of the saloon--divided it in two if released, cutting off the
after end with its companion-way leading direct on the poop, from the
forepart with its outlet on the deck; making a privacy within a privacy,
as though Captain Anthony could not place obstacles enough between his
new happiness and the men who shared his life at sea.  He inspected that
arrangement with an approving eye then made a particular visitation of
the whole, ending by opening a door which led into a large state-room
made of two knocked into one.  It was very well furnished and had,
instead of the usual bedplace of such cabins, an elaborate swinging cot
of the latest pattern.  Anthony tilted it a little by way of trial.  "The
old man will be very comfortable in here," he said to himself, and
stepped back into the saloon closing the door gently.  Then another
thought occurred to him obvious under the circumstances but strangely
enough presenting itself for the first time.  "Jove!  Won't he get a
shock," thought Roderick Anthony.

He went hastily on deck.  "Mr. Franklin, Mr. Franklin."  The mate was not
very far.  "Oh!  Here you are.  Miss . . . Mrs. Anthony'll be coming on
board presently.  Just give me a call when you see the cab."

Then, without noticing the gloominess of the mate's countenance he went
in again.  Not a friendly word, not a professional remark, or a small
joke, not as much as a simple and inane "fine day."  Nothing.  Just
turned about and went in.

We know that, when the moment came, he thought better of it and decided
to meet Flora's father in that privacy of the main cabin which he had
been so careful to arrange.  Why Anthony appeared to shrink from the
contact, he who was sufficiently self-confident not only to face but to
absolutely create a situation almost insane in its audacious generosity,
is difficult to explain.  Perhaps when he came on the poop for a glance
he found that man so different outwardly from what he expected that he
decided to meet him for the first time out of everybody's sight.  Possibly
the general secrecy of his relation to the girl might have influenced
him.  Truly he may well have been dismayed.  That man's coming brought
him face to face with the necessity to speak and act a lie; to appear
what he was not and what he could never be, unless, unless--

In short, we'll say if you like that for various reasons, all having to
do with the delicate rectitude of his nature, Roderick Anthony (a man of
whom his chief mate used to say: he doesn't know what fear is) was
frightened.  There is a Nemesis which overtakes generosity too, like all
the other imprudences of men who dare to be lawless and proud . . . "

"Why do you say this?" I inquired, for Marlow had stopped abruptly and
kept silent in the shadow of the bookcase.

"I say this because that man whom chance had thrown in Flora's way was
both: lawless and proud.  Whether he knew anything about it or not it
does not matter.  Very likely not.  One may fling a glove in the face of
nature and in the face of one's own moral endurance quite innocently,
with a simplicity which wears the aspect of perfectly Satanic conceit.
However, as I have said it does not matter.  It's a transgression all the
same and has got to be paid for in the usual way.  But never mind that.  I
paused because, like Anthony, I find a difficulty, a sort of dread in
coming to grips with old de Barral.

You remember I had a glimpse of him once.  He was not an imposing
personality: tall, thin, straight, stiff, faded, moving with short steps
and with a gliding motion, speaking in an even low voice.  When the sea
was rough he wasn't much seen on deck--at least not walking.  He caught
hold of things then and dragged himself along as far as the after
skylight where he would sit for hours.  Our, then young, friend offered
once to assist him and this service was the first beginning of a sort of
friendship.  He clung hard to one--Powell says, with no figurative
intention.  Powell was always on the lookout to assist, and to assist
mainly Mrs. Anthony, because he clung so jolly hard to her that Powell
was afraid of her being dragged down notwithstanding that she very soon
became very sure-footed in all sorts of weather.  And Powell was the only
one ready to assist at hand because Anthony (by that time) seemed to be
afraid to come near them; the unforgiving Franklin always looked
wrathfully the other way; the boatswain, if up there, acted likewise but
sheepishly; and any hands that happened to be on the poop (a feeling
spreads mysteriously all over a ship) shunned him as though he had been
the devil.

We know how he arrived on board.  For my part I know so little of prisons
that I haven't the faintest notion how one leaves them.  It seems as
abominable an operation as the other, the shutting up with its mental
suggestions of bang, snap, crash and the empty silence outside--where an
instant before you were--you _were_--and now no longer are.  Perfectly
devilish.  And the release!  I don't know which is worse.  How do they do
it?  Pull the string, door flies open, man flies through: Out you go!
_Adios_!  And in the space where a second before you were not, in the
silent space there is a figure going away, limping.  Why limping?  I
don't know.  That's how I see it.  One has a notion of a maiming,
crippling process; of the individual coming back damaged in some subtle
way.  I admit it is a fantastic hallucination, but I can't help it.  Of
course I know that the proceedings of the best machine-made humanity are
employed with judicious care and so on.  I am absurd, no doubt, but still
. . . Oh yes it's idiotic.  When I pass one of these places . . . did you
notice that there is something infernal about the aspect of every
individual stone or brick of them, something malicious as if matter were
enjoying its revenge of the contemptuous spirit of man.  Did you notice?
You didn't?  Eh?  Well I am perhaps a little mad on that point.  When I
pass one of these places I must avert my eyes.  I couldn't have gone to
meet de Barral.  I should have shrunk from the ordeal.  You'll notice
that it looks as if Anthony (a brave man indubitably) had shirked it too.
Little Fyne's flight of fancy picturing three people in the fatal four
wheeler--you remember?--went wide of the truth.  There were only two
people in the four wheeler.  Flora did not shrink.  Women can stand
anything.  The dear creatures have no imagination when it comes to solid
facts of life.  In sentimental regions--I won't say.  It's another thing
altogether.  There they shrink from or rush to embrace ghosts of their
own creation just the same as any fool-man would.

No.  I suppose the girl Flora went on that errand reasonably.  And then,
why!  This was the moment for which she had lived.  It was her only point
of contact with existence.  Oh yes.  She had been assisted by the Fynes.
And kindly.  Certainly.  Kindly.  But that's not enough.  There is a kind
way of assisting our fellow-creatures which is enough to break their
hearts while it saves their outer envelope.  How cold, how infernally
cold she must have felt--unless when she was made to burn with
indignation or shame.  Man, we know, cannot live by bread alone but hang
me if I don't believe that some women could live by love alone.  If there
be a flame in human beings fed by varied ingredients earthly and
spiritual which tinge it in different hues, then I seem to see the colour
of theirs.  It is azure . . . What the devil are you laughing at . . . "

Marlow jumped up and strode out of the shadow as if lifted by indignation
but there was the flicker of a smile on his lips.  "You say I don't know
women.  Maybe.  It's just as well not to come too close to the shrine.
But I have a clear notion of _woman_.  In all of them, termagant, flirt,
crank, washerwoman, blue-stocking, outcast and even in the ordinary fool
of the ordinary commerce there is something left, if only a spark.  And
when there is a spark there can always be a flame . . . "

He went back into the shadow and sat down again.

"I don't mean to say that Flora de Barral was one of the sort that could
live by love alone.  In fact she had managed to live without.  But still,
in the distrust of herself and of others she looked for love, any kind of
love, as women will.  And that confounded jail was the only spot where
she could see it--for she had no reason to distrust her father.

She was there in good time.  I see her gazing across the road at these
walls which are, properly speaking, awful.  You do indeed seem to feel
along the very lines and angles of the unholy bulk, the fall of time,
drop by drop, hour by hour, leaf by leaf, with a gentle and implacable
slowness.  And a voiceless melancholy comes over one, invading,
overpowering like a dream, penetrating and mortal like poison.

When de Barral came out she experienced a sort of shock to see that he
was exactly as she remembered him.  Perhaps a little smaller.  Otherwise
unchanged.  You come out in the same clothes, you know.  I can't tell
whether he was looking for her.  No doubt he was.  Whether he recognized
her?  Very likely.  She crossed the road and at once there was reproduced
at a distance of years, as if by some mocking witchcraft, the sight so
familiar on the Parade at Brighton of the financier de Barral walking
with his only daughter.  One comes out of prison in the same clothes one
wore on the day of condemnation, no matter how long one has been put away
there.  Oh, they last!  They last!  But there is something which is
preserved by prison life even better than one's discarded clothing.  It
is the force, the vividness of one's sentiments.  A monastery will do
that too; but in the unholy claustration of a jail you are thrown back
wholly upon yourself--for God and Faith are not there.  The people
outside disperse their affections, you hoard yours, you nurse them into
intensity.  What they let slip, what they forget in the movement and
changes of free life, you hold on to, amplify, exaggerate into a rank
growth of memories.  They can look with a smile at the troubles and pains
of the past; but you can't.  Old pains keep on gnawing at your heart, old
desires, old deceptions, old dreams, assailing you in the dead stillness
of your present where nothing moves except the irrecoverable minutes of
your life.

De Barral was out and, for a time speechless, being led away almost
before he had taken possession of the free world, by his daughter.  Flora
controlled herself well.  They walked along quickly for some distance.
The cab had been left round the corner--round several corners for all I
know.  He was flustered, out of breath, when she helped him in and
followed herself.  Inside that rolling box, turning towards that
recovered presence with her heart too full for words she felt the desire
of tears she had managed to keep down abandon her suddenly, her
half-mournful, half-triumphant exultation subside, every fibre of her
body, relaxed in tenderness, go stiff in the close look she took at his
face.  He _was_ different.  There was something.  Yes, there was
something between them, something hard and impalpable, the ghost of these
high walls.

How old he was, how unlike!

She shook off this impression, amazed and frightened by it of course.  And
remorseful too.  Naturally.  She threw her arms round his neck.  He
returned that hug awkwardly, as if not in perfect control of his arms,
with a fumbling and uncertain pressure.  She hid her face on his breast.
It was as though she were pressing it against a stone.  They released
each other and presently the cab was rolling along at a jog-trot to the
docks with those two people as far apart as they could get from each
other, in opposite corners.

After a silence given up to mutual examination he uttered his first
coherent sentence outside the walls of the prison.

"What has done for me was envy.  Envy.  There was a lot of them just
bursting with it every time they looked my way.  I was doing too well.  So
they went to the Public Prosecutor--"

She said hastily "Yes!  Yes!  I know," and he glared as if resentful that
the child had turned into a young woman without waiting for him to come
out.  "What do you know about it?" he asked.  "You were too young."  His
speech was soft.  The old voice, the old voice!  It gave her a thrill.
She recognized its pointless gentleness always the same no matter what he
had to say.  And she remembered that he never had much to say when he
came down to see her.  It was she who chattered, chattered, on their
walks, while stiff and with a rigidly-carried head, he dropped a gentle
word now and then.

Moved by these recollections waking up within her, she explained to him
that within the last year she had read and studied the report of the
trial.

"I went through the files of several papers, papa."

He looked at her suspiciously.  The reports were probably very
incomplete.  No doubt the reporters had garbled his evidence.  They were
determined to give him no chance either in court or before the public
opinion.  It was a conspiracy . . . "My counsel was a fool too," he
added.  "Did you notice?  A perfect fool."

She laid her hand on his arm soothingly.  "Is it worth while talking
about that awful time?  It is so far away now."  She shuddered slightly
at the thought of all the horrible years which had passed over her young
head; never guessing that for him the time was but yesterday.  He folded
his arms on his breast, leaned back in his corner and bowed his head.  But
in a little while he made her jump by asking suddenly:

"Who has got hold of the Lone Valley Railway?  That's what they were
after mainly.  Somebody has got it.  Parfitts and Co. grabbed it--eh?  Or
was it that fellow Warner . . . "

"I--I don't know," she said quite scared by the twitching of his lips.

"Don't know!" he exclaimed softly.  Hadn't her cousin told her?  Oh yes.
She had left them--of course.  Why did she?  It was his first question
about herself but she did not answer it.  She did not want to talk of
these horrors.  They were impossible to describe.  She perceived though
that he had not expected an answer, because she heard him muttering to
himself that: "There was half a million's worth of work done and material
accumulated there."

"You mustn't think of these things, papa," she said firmly.  And he asked
her with that invariable gentleness, in which she seemed now to detect
some rather ugly shades, what else had he to think about?  Another year
or two, if they had only left him alone, he and everybody else would have
been all right, rolling in money; and she, his daughter, could have
married anybody--anybody.  A lord.

All this was to him like yesterday, a long yesterday, a yesterday gone
over innumerable times, analysed, meditated upon for years.  It had a
vividness and force for that old man of which his daughter who had not
been shut out of the world could have no idea.  She was to him the only
living figure out of that past, and it was perhaps in perfect good faith
that he added, coldly, inexpressive and thin-lipped: "I lived only for
you, I may say.  I suppose you understand that.  There were only you and
me."

Moved by this declaration, wondering that it did not warm her heart more,
she murmured a few endearing words while the uppermost thought in her
mind was that she must tell him now of the situation.  She had expected
to be questioned anxiously about herself--and while she desired it she
shrank from the answers she would have to make.  But her father seemed
strangely, unnaturally incurious.  It looked as if there would be no
questions.  Still this was an opening.  This seemed to be the time for
her to begin.  And she began.  She began by saying that she had always
felt like that.  There were two of them, to live for each other.  And if
he only knew what she had gone through!

Ensconced in his corner, with his arms folded, he stared out of the cab
window at the street.  How little he was changed after all.  It was the
unmovable expression, the faded stare she used to see on the esplanade
whenever walking by his side hand in hand she raised her eyes to his
face--while she chattered, chattered.  It was the same stiff, silent
figure which at a word from her would turn rigidly into a shop and buy
her anything it occurred to her that she would like to have.  Flora de
Barral's voice faltered.  He bent on her that well-remembered glance in
which she had never read anything as a child, except the consciousness of
her existence.  And that was enough for a child who had never known
demonstrative affection.  But she had lived a life so starved of all
feeling that this was no longer enough for her.  What was the good of
telling him the story of all these miseries now past and gone, of all
those bewildering difficulties and humiliations?  What she must tell him
was difficult enough to say.  She approached it by remarking cheerfully:

"You haven't even asked me where I am taking you."  He started like a
somnambulist awakened suddenly, and there was now some meaning in his
stare; a sort of alarmed speculation.  He opened his mouth slowly.  Flora
struck in with forced gaiety.  "You would never, guess."

He waited, still more startled and suspicious.  "Guess!  Why don't you
tell me?"

He uncrossed his arms and leaned forward towards her.  She got hold of
one of his hands.  "You must know first . . . "  She paused, made an
effort: "I am married, papa."

For a moment they kept perfectly still in that cab rolling on at a steady
jog-trot through a narrow city street full of bustle.  Whatever she
expected she did not expect to feel his hand snatched away from her grasp
as if from a burn or a contamination.  De Barral fresh from the stagnant
torment of the prison (where nothing happens) had not expected that sort
of news.  It seemed to stick in his throat.  In strangled low tones he
cried out, "You--married?  You, Flora!  When?  Married!  What for?  Who
to?  Married!"

His eyes which were blue like hers, only faded, without depth, seemed to
start out of their orbits.  He did really look as if he were choking.  He
even put his hand to his collar . . . "

* * * * *

"You know," continued Marlow out of the shadow of the bookcase and nearly
invisible in the depths of the arm-chair, "the only time I saw him he had
given me the impression of absolute rigidity, as though he had swallowed
a poker.  But it seems that he could collapse.  I can hardly picture this
to myself.  I understand that he did collapse to a certain extent in his
corner of the cab.  The unexpected had crumpled him up.  She regarded him
perplexed, pitying, a little disillusioned, and nodded at him gravely:
Yes.  Married.  What she did not like was to see him smile in a manner
far from encouraging to the devotion of a daughter.  There was something
unintentionally savage in it.  Old de Barral could not quite command his
muscles, as yet.  But he had recovered command of his gentle voice.

"You were just saying that in this wide world there we were, only you and
I, to stick to each other."

She was dimly aware of the scathing intention lurking in these soft low
tones, in these words which appealed to her poignantly.  She defended
herself.  Never, never for a single moment had she ceased to think of
him.  Neither did he cease to think of her, he said, with as much
sinister emphasis as he was capable of.

"But, papa," she cried, "I haven't been shut up like you."  She didn't
mind speaking of it because he was innocent.  He hadn't been understood.
It was a misfortune of the most cruel kind but no more disgraceful than
an illness, a maiming accident or some other visitation of blind fate.  "I
wish I had been too.  But I was alone out in the world, the horrid world,
that very world which had used you so badly."

"And you couldn't go about in it without finding somebody to fall in love
with?" he said.  A jealous rage affected his brain like the fumes of
wine, rising from some secret depths of his being so long deprived of all
emotions.  The hollows at the corners of his lips became more pronounced
in the puffy roundness of his cheeks.  Images, visions, obsess with
particular force, men withdrawn from the sights and sounds of active
life.  "And I did nothing but think of you!" he exclaimed under his
breath, contemptuously.  "Think of you!  You haunted me, I tell you."

Flora said to herself that there was a being who loved her.  "Then we
have been haunting each other," she declared with a pang of remorse.  For
indeed he had haunted her nearly out of the world, into a final and
irremediable desertion.  "Some day I shall tell you . . . No.  I don't
think I can ever tell you.  There was a time when I was mad.  But what's
the good?  It's all over now.  We shall forget all this.  There shall be
nothing to remind us."

De Barral moved his shoulders.

"I should think you were mad to tie yourself to . . . How long is it
since you are married?"

She answered "Not long" that being the only answer she dared to make.
Everything was so different from what she imagined it would be.  He
wanted to know why she had said nothing of it in any of her letters; in
her last letter.  She said:

"It was after."

"So recently!" he wondered.  "Couldn't you wait at least till I came out?
You could have told me; asked me; consulted me!  Let me see--"

She shook her head negatively.  And he was appalled.  He thought to
himself: Who can he be?  Some miserable, silly youth without a penny.  Or
perhaps some scoundrel?  Without making any expressive movement he wrung
his loosely-clasped hands till the joints cracked.  He looked at her.  She
was pretty.  Some low scoundrel who will cast her off.  Some plausible
vagabond . . . "You couldn't wait--eh?"

Again she made a slight negative sign.

"Why not?  What was the hurry?"  She cast down her eyes.  "It had to be.
Yes.  It was sudden, but it had to be."

He leaned towards her, his mouth open, his eyes wild with virtuous anger,
but meeting the absolute candour of her raised glance threw himself back
into his corner again.

"So tremendously in love with each other--was that it?  Couldn't let a
father have his daughter all to himself even for a day after--after such
a separation.  And you know I never had anyone, I had no friends.  What
did I want with those people one meets in the City.  The best of them are
ready to cut your throat.  Yes!  Business men, gentlemen, any sort of men
and women--out of spite, or to get something.  Oh yes, they can talk fair
enough if they think there's something to be got out of you . . . "  His
voice was a mere breath yet every word came to Flora as distinctly as if
charged with all the moving power of passion . . . "My girl, I looked at
them making up to me and I would say to myself: What do I care for all
that!  I am a business man.  I am the great Mr. de Barral (yes, yes, some
of them twisted their mouths at it, but I _was_ the great Mr. de Barral)
and I have my little girl.  I wanted nobody and I have never had
anybody."

A true emotion had unsealed his lips but the words that came out of them
were no louder than the murmur of a light wind.  It died away.

"That's just it," said Flora de Barral under her breath.  Without
removing his eyes from her he took off his hat.  It was a tall hat.  The
hat of the trial.  The hat of the thumb-nail sketches in the illustrated
papers.  One comes out in the same clothes, but seclusion counts!  It is
well known that lurid visions haunt secluded men, monks, hermits--then
why not prisoners?  De Barral the convict took off the silk hat of the
financier de Barral and deposited it on the front seat of the cab.  Then
he blew out his cheeks.  He was red in the face.

"And then what happens?" he began again in his contained voice.  "Here I
am, overthrown, broken by envy, malice and all uncharitableness.  I come
out--and what do I find?  I find that my girl Flora has gone and married
some man or other, perhaps a fool, how do I know; or perhaps--anyway not
good enough."

"Stop, papa."

"A silly love affair as likely as not," he continued monotonously, his
thin lips writhing between the ill-omened sunk corners.  "And a very
suspicious thing it is too, on the part of a loving daughter."

She tried to interrupt him but he went on till she actually clapped her
hand on his mouth.  He rolled his eyes a bit but when she took her hand
away he remained silent.

"Wait.  I must tell you . . .  And first of all, papa, understand this,
for everything's in that: he is the most generous man in the world.  He
is . . . "

De Barral very still in his corner uttered with an effort "You are in
love with him."

"Papa!  He came to me.  I was thinking of you.  I had no eyes for
anybody.  I could no longer bear to think of you.  It was then that he
came.  Only then.  At that time when--when I was going to give up."

She gazed into his faded blue eyes as if yearning to be understood, to be
given encouragement, peace--a word of sympathy.  He declared without
animation "I would like to break his neck."

She had the mental exclamation of the overburdened.

"Oh my God!" and watched him with frightened eyes.  But he did not appear
insane or in any other way formidable.  This comforted her.  The silence
lasted for some little time.  Then suddenly he asked:

"What's your name then?"

For a moment in the profound trouble of the task before her she did not
understand what the question meant.  Then, her face faintly flushing, she
whispered: "Anthony."

Her father, a red spot on each cheek, leaned his head back wearily in the
corner of the cab.

"Anthony.  What is he?  Where did he spring from?"

"Papa, it was in the country, on a road--"

He groaned, "On a road," and closed his eyes.

"It's too long to explain to you now.  We shall have lots of time.  There
are things I could not tell you now.  But some day.  Some day.  For now
nothing can part us.  Nothing.  We are safe as long as we live--nothing
can ever come between us."

"You are infatuated with the fellow," he remarked, without opening his
eyes.  And she said: "I believe in him," in a low voice.  "You and I must
believe in him."

"Who the devil is he?"

"He's the brother of the lady--you know Mrs. Fyne, she knew mother--who
was so kind to me.  I was staying in the country, in a cottage, with Mr.
and Mrs. Fyne.  It was there that we met.  He came on a visit.  He
noticed me.  I--well--we are married now."

She was thankful that his eyes were shut.  It made it easier to talk of
the future she had arranged, which now was an unalterable thing.  She did
not enter on the path of confidences.  That was impossible.  She felt he
would not understand her.  She felt also that he suffered.  Now and then
a great anxiety gripped her heart with a mysterious sense of guilt--as
though she had betrayed him into the hands of an enemy.  With his eyes
shut he had an air of weary and pious meditation.  She was a little
afraid of it.  Next moment a great pity for him filled her heart.  And in
the background there was remorse.  His face twitched now and then just
perceptibly.  He managed to keep his eyelids down till he heard that the
'husband' was a sailor and that he, the father, was being taken straight
on board ship ready to sail away from this abominable world of
treacheries, and scorns and envies and lies, away, away over the blue
sea, the sure, the inaccessible, the uncontaminated and spacious refuge
for wounded souls.

Something like that.  Not the very words perhaps but such was the general
sense of her overwhelming argument--the argument of refuge.

I don't think she gave a thought to material conditions.  But as part of
that argument set forth breathlessly, as if she were afraid that if she
stopped for a moment she could never go on again, she mentioned that
generosity of a stormy type, which had come to her from the sea, had
caught her up on the brink of unmentionable failure, had whirled her away
in its first ardent gust and could be trusted now, implicitly trusted, to
carry them both, side by side, into absolute safety.

She believed it, she affirmed it.  He understood thoroughly at last, and
at once the interior of that cab, of an aspect so pacific in the eyes of
the people on the pavements, became the scene of a great agitation.  The
generosity of Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet--affected the
ex-financier de Barral in a manner which must have brought home to Flora
de Barral the extreme arduousness of the business of being a woman.  Being
a woman is a terribly difficult trade since it consists principally of
dealings with men.  This man--the man inside the cab--cast oft his stiff
placidity and behaved like an animal.  I don't mean it in an offensive
sense.  What he did was to give way to an instinctive panic.  Like some
wild creature scared by the first touch of a net falling on its back, old
de Barral began to struggle, lank and angular, against the empty air--as
much of it as there was in the cab--with staring eyes and gasping mouth
from which his daughter shrank as far as she could in the confined space.

"Stop the cab.  Stop him I tell you.  Let me get out!" were the strangled
exclamations she heard.  Why?  What for?  To do what?  He would hear
nothing.  She cried to him "Papa!  Papa!  What do you want to do?"  And
all she got from him was: "Stop.  I must get out.  I want to think.  I
must get out to think."

It was a mercy that he didn't attempt to open the door at once.  He only
stuck his head and shoulders out of the window crying to the cabman.  She
saw the consequences, the cab stopping, a crowd collecting around a
raving old gentleman . . . In this terrible business of being a woman so
full of fine shades, of delicate perplexities (and very small rewards)
you can never know what rough work you may have to do, at any moment.
Without hesitation Flora seized her father round the body and pulled
back--being astonished at the ease with which she managed to make him
drop into his seat again.  She kept him there resolutely with one hand
pressed against his breast, and leaning across him, she, in her turn put
her head and shoulders out of the window.  By then the cab had drawn up
to the curbstone and was stopped.  "No!  I've changed my mind.  Go on
please where you were told first.  To the docks."

She wondered at the steadiness of her own voice.  She heard a grunt from
the driver and the cab began to roll again.  Only then she sank into her
place keeping a watchful eye on her companion.  He was hardly anything
more by this time.  Except for her childhood's impressions he was just--a
man.  Almost a stranger.  How was one to deal with him?  And there was
the other too.  Also almost a stranger.  The trade of being a woman was
very difficult.  Too difficult.  Flora closed her eyes saying to herself:
"If I think too much about it I shall go mad."  And then opening them she
asked her father if the prospect of living always with his daughter and
being taken care of by her affection away from the world, which had no
honour to give to his grey hairs, was such an awful prospect.

"Tell me, is it so bad as that?"

She put that question sadly, without bitterness.  The famous--or
notorious--de Barral had lost his rigidity now.  He was bent.  Nothing
more deplorably futile than a bent poker.  He said nothing.  She added
gently, suppressing an uneasy remorseful sigh:

"And it might have been worse.  You might have found no one, no one in
all this town, no one in all the world, not even me!  Poor papa!"

She made a conscience-stricken movement towards him thinking: "Oh!  I am
horrible, I am horrible."  And old de Barral, scared, tired, bewildered
by the extraordinary shocks of his liberation, swayed over and actually
leaned his head on her shoulder, as if sorrowing over his regained
freedom.

The movement by itself was touching.  Flora supporting him lightly
imagined that he was crying; and at the thought that had she smashed in a
quarry that shoulder, together with some other of her bones, this grey
and pitiful head would have had nowhere to rest, she too gave way to
tears.  They flowed quietly, easing her overstrained nerves.  Suddenly he
pushed her away from him so that her head struck the side of the cab,
pushing himself away too from her as if something had stung him.

All the warmth went out of her emotion.  The very last tears turned cold
on her cheek.  But their work was done.  She had found courage,
resolution, as women do, in a good cry.  With his hand covering the upper
part of his face whether to conceal his eyes or to shut out an unbearable
sight, he was stiffening up in his corner to his usual poker-like
consistency.  She regarded him in silence.  His thin obstinate lips
moved.  He uttered the name of the cousin--the man, you remember, who did
not approve of the Fynes, and whom rightly or wrongly little Fyne
suspected of interested motives, in view of de Barral having possibly put
away some plunder, somewhere before the smash.

I may just as well tell you at once that I don't know anything more of
him.  But de Barral was of the opinion, speaking in his low voice from
under his hand, that this relation would have been only too glad to have
secured his guidance.

"Of course I could not come forward in my own name, or person.  But the
advice of a man of my experience is as good as a fortune to anybody
wishing to venture into finance.  The same sort of thing can be done
again."

He shuffled his feet a little, let fall his hand; and turning carefully
toward his daughter his puffy round cheeks, his round chin resting on his
collar, he bent on her the faded, resentful gaze of his pale eyes, which
were wet.

"The start is really only a matter of judicious advertising.  There's no
difficulty.  And here you go and . . . "

He turned his face away.  "After all I am still de Barral, _the_ de
Barral.  Didn't you remember that?"

"Papa," said Flora; "listen.  It's you who must remember that there is no
longer a de Barral . . . "  He looked at her sideways anxiously.  "There
is Mr. Smith, whom no harm, no trouble, no wicked lies of evil people can
ever touch."

"Mr. Smith," he breathed out slowly.  "Where does he belong to?  There's
not even a Miss Smith."

"There is your Flora."

"My Flora!  You went and . . . I can't bear to think of it.  It's
horrible."

"Yes.  It was horrible enough at times," she said with feeling, because
somehow, obscurely, what this man said appealed to her as if it were her
own thought clothed in an enigmatic emotion.  "I think with shame
sometimes how I . . . No not yet.  I shall not tell you.  At least not
now."

The cab turned into the gateway of the dock.  Flora handed the tall hat
to her father.  "Here, papa.  And please be good.  I suppose you love me.
If you don't, then I wonder who--"

He put the hat on, and stiffened hard in his corner, kept a sidelong
glance on his girl.  "Try to be nice for my sake.  Think of the years I
have been waiting for you.  I do indeed want support--and peace.  A
little peace."

She clasped his arm suddenly with both hands pressing with all her might
as if to crush the resistance she felt in him.  "I could not have peace
if I did not have you with me.  I won't let you go.  Not after all I went
through.  I won't."  The nervous force of her grip frightened him a
little.  She laughed suddenly.  "It's absurd.  It's as if I were asking
you for a sacrifice.  What am I afraid of?  Where could you go?  I mean
now, to-day, to-night?  You can't tell me.  Have you thought of it?  Well
I have been thinking of it for the last year.  Longer.  I nearly went mad
trying to find out.  I believe I was mad for a time or else I should
never have thought . . . "

* * * * *

"This was as near as she came to a confession," remarked Marlow in a
changed tone.  "The confession I mean of that walk to the top of the
quarry which she reproached herself with so bitterly.  And he made of it
what his fancy suggested.  It could not possibly be a just notion.  The
cab stopped alongside the ship and they got out in the manner described
by the sensitive Franklin.  I don't know if they suspected each other's
sanity at the end of that drive.  But that is possible.  We all seem a
little mad to each other; an excellent arrangement for the bulk of
humanity which finds in it an easy motive of forgiveness.  Flora crossed
the quarter-deck with a rapidity born of apprehension.  It had grown
unbearable.  She wanted this business over.  She was thankful on looking
back to see he was following her.  "If he bolts away," she thought, "then
I shall know that I am of no account indeed!  That no one loves me, that
words and actions and protestations and everything in the world is
false--and I shall jump into the dock.  _That_ at least won't lie."

Well I don't know.  If it had come to that she would have been most
likely fished out, what with her natural want of luck and the good many
people on the quay and on board.  And just where the _Ferndale_ was
moored there hung on a wall (I know the berth) a coil of line, a pole,
and a life-buoy kept there on purpose to save people who tumble into the
dock.  It's not so easy to get away from life's betrayals as she thought.
However it did not come to that.  He followed her with his quick gliding
walk.  Mr. Smith!  The liberated convict de Barral passed off the solid
earth for the last time, vanished for ever, and there was Mr. Smith added
to that world of waters which harbours so many queer fishes.  An old
gentleman in a silk hat, darting wary glances.  He followed, because mere
existence has its claims which are obeyed mechanically.  I have no doubt
he presented a respectable figure.  Father-in-law.  Nothing more
respectable.  But he carried in his heart the confused pain of dismay and
affection, of involuntary repulsion and pity.  Very much like his
daughter.  Only in addition he felt a furious jealousy of the man he was
going to see.

A residue of egoism remains in every affection--even paternal.  And this
man in the seclusion of his prison had thought himself into such a sense
of ownership of that single human being he had to think about, as may
well be inconceivable to us who have not had to serve a long (and
wickedly unjust) sentence of penal servitude.  She was positively the
only thing, the one point where his thoughts found a resting-place, for
years.  She was the only outlet for his imagination.  He had not much of
that faculty to be sure, but there was in it the force of concentration.
He felt outraged, and perhaps it was an absurdity on his part, but I
venture to suggest rather in degree than in kind.  I have a notion that
no usual, normal father is pleased at parting with his daughter.  No.  Not
even when he rationally appreciates "Jane being taken off his hands" or
perhaps is able to exult at an excellent match.  At bottom, quite deep
down, down in the dark (in some cases only by digging), there is to be
found a certain repugnance . . .  With mothers of course it is different.
Women are more loyal, not to each other, but to their common femininity
which they behold triumphant with a secret and proud satisfaction.

The circumstances of that match added to Mr. Smith's indignation.  And if
he followed his daughter into that ship's cabin it was as if into a house
of disgrace and only because he was still bewildered by the suddenness of
the thing.  His will, so long lying fallow, was overborne by her
determination and by a vague fear of that regained liberty.

You will be glad to hear that Anthony, though he did shirk the welcome on
the quay, behaved admirably, with the simplicity of a man who has no
small meannesses and makes no mean reservations.  His eyes did not flinch
and his tongue did not falter.  He was, I have it on the best authority,
admirable in his earnestness, in his sincerity and also in his restraint.
He was perfect.  Nevertheless the vital force of his unknown
individuality addressing him so familiarly was enough to fluster Mr.
Smith.  Flora saw her father trembling in all his exiguous length, though
he held himself stiffer than ever if that was possible.  He muttered a
little and at last managed to utter, not loud of course but very
distinctly: "I am here under protest," the corners of his mouth sunk
disparagingly, his eyes stony.  "I am here under protest.  I have been
locked up by a conspiracy.  I--"

He raised his hands to his forehead--his silk hat was on the table rim
upwards; he had put it there with a despairing gesture as he came in--he
raised his hands to his forehead.  "It seems to me unfair.  I--"  He
broke off again.  Anthony looked at Flora who stood by the side of her
father.

"Well, sir, you will soon get used to me.  Surely you and she must have
had enough of shore-people and their confounded half-and-half ways to
last you both for a life-time.  A particularly merciful lot they are too.
You ask Flora.  I am alluding to my own sister, her best friend, and not
a bad woman either as they go."

The captain of the _Ferndale_ checked himself.  "Lucky thing I was there
to step in.  I want you to make yourself at home, and before long--"

The faded stare of the Great de Barral silenced Anthony by its
inexpressive fixity.  He signalled with his eyes to Flora towards the
door of the state-room fitted specially to receive Mr. Smith, the free
man.  She seized the free man's hat off the table and took him
caressingly under the arm.  "Yes!  This is home, come and see your room,
papa!"

Anthony himself threw open the door and Flora took care to shut it
carefully behind herself and her father.  "See," she began but desisted
because it was clear that he would look at none of the contrivances for
his comfort.  She herself had hardly seen them before.  He was looking
only at the new carpet and she waited till he should raise his eyes.

He didn't do that but spoke in his usual voice.  "So this is your
husband, that . . . And I locked up!"

"Papa, what's the good of harping on that," she remonstrated no louder.
"He is kind."

"And you went and . . . married him so that he should be kind to me.  Is
that it?  How did you know that I wanted anybody to be kind to me?"

"How strange you are!" she said thoughtfully.

"It's hard for a man who has gone through what I have gone through to
feel like other people.  Has that occurred to you?  . . . "  He looked up
at last . . .  "Mrs. Anthony, I can't bear the sight of the fellow."  She
met his eyes without flinching and he added, "You want to go to him now."
His mild automatic manner seemed the effect of tremendous
self-restraint--and yet she remembered him always like that.  She felt
cold all over.

"Why, of course, I must go to him," she said with a slight start.

He gnashed his teeth at her and she went out.

Anthony had not moved from the spot.  One of his hands was resting on the
table.  She went up to him, stopped, then deliberately moved still
closer.  "Thank you, Roderick."

"You needn't thank me," he murmured.  "It's I who . . . "

"No, perhaps I needn't.  You do what you like.  But you are doing it
well."

He sighed then hardly above a whisper because they were near the state-
room door, "Upset, eh?"

She made no sign, no sound of any kind.  The thorough falseness of the
position weighed on them both.  But he was the braver of the two.  "I
dare say.  At first.  Did you think of telling him you were happy?"

"He never asked me," she smiled faintly at him.  She was disappointed by
his quietness.  "I did not say more than I was absolutely obliged to
say--of myself."  She was beginning to be irritated with this man a
little.  "I told him I had been very lucky," she said suddenly
despondent, missing Anthony's masterful manner, that something arbitrary
and tender which, after the first scare, she had accustomed herself to
look forward to with pleasurable apprehension.  He was contemplating her
rather blankly.  She had not taken off her outdoor things, hat, gloves.
She was like a caller.  And she had a movement suggesting the end of a
not very satisfactory business call.  "Perhaps it would be just as well
if we went ashore.  Time yet."

He gave her a glimpse of his unconstrained self in the low vehement "You
dare!" which sprang to his lips and out of them with a most menacing
inflexion.

"You dare . . . What's the matter now?"

These last words were shot out not at her but at some target behind her
back.  Looking over her shoulder she saw the bald head with black bunches
of hair of the congested and devoted Franklin (he had his cap in his
hand) gazing sentimentally from the saloon doorway with his lobster eyes.
He was heard from the distance in a tone of injured innocence reporting
that the berthing master was alongside and that he wanted to move the
ship into the basin before the crew came on board.

His captain growled "Well, let him," and waved away the ulcerated and
pathetic soul behind these prominent eyes which lingered on the offensive
woman while the mate backed out slowly.  Anthony turned to Flora.

"You could not have meant it.  You are as straight as they make them."

"I am trying to be."

"Then don't joke in that way.  Think of what would become of--me."

"Oh yes.  I forgot.  No, I didn't mean it.  It wasn't a joke.  It was
forgetfulness.  You wouldn't have been wronged.  I couldn't have gone.
I--I am too tired."

He saw she was swaying where she stood and restrained himself violently
from taking her into his arms, his frame trembling with fear as though he
had been tempted to an act of unparalleled treachery.  He stepped aside
and lowering his eyes pointed to the door of the stern-cabin.  It was
only after she passed by him that he looked up and thus he did not see
the angry glance she gave him before she moved on.  He looked after her.
She tottered slightly just before reaching the door and flung it to
behind her nervously.

Anthony--he had felt this crash as if the door had been slammed inside
his very breast--stood for a moment without moving and then shouted for
Mrs. Brown.  This was the steward's wife, his lucky inspiration to make
Flora comfortable.  "Mrs. Brown!  Mrs. Brown!"  At last she appeared from
somewhere.  "Mrs. Anthony has come on board.  Just gone into the cabin.
Hadn't you better see if you can be of any assistance?"

"Yes, sir."

And again he was alone with the situation he had created in the hardihood
and inexperience of his heart.  He thought he had better go on deck.  In
fact he ought to have been there before.  At any rate it would be the
usual thing for him to be on deck.  But a sound of muttering and of faint
thuds somewhere near by arrested his attention.  They proceeded from Mr.
Smith's room, he perceived.  It was very extraordinary.  "He's talking to
himself," he thought.  "He seems to be thumping the bulkhead with his
fists--or his head."

Anthony's eyes grew big with wonder while he listened to these noises.  He
became so attentive that he did not notice Mrs. Brown till she actually
stopped before him for a moment to say:

"Mrs. Anthony doesn't want any assistance, sir."

* * * * *

This was you understand the voyage before Mr. Powell--young Powell
then--joined the _Ferndale_; chance having arranged that he should get
his start in life in that particular ship of all the ships then in the
port of London.  The most unrestful ship that ever sailed out of any port
on earth.  I am not alluding to her sea-going qualities.  Mr. Powell
tells me she was as steady as a church.  I mean unrestful in the sense,
for instance in which this planet of ours is unrestful--a matter of an
uneasy atmosphere disturbed by passions, jealousies, loves, hates and the
troubles of transcendental good intentions, which, though ethically
valuable, I have no doubt cause often more unhappiness than the plots of
the most evil tendency.  For those who refuse to believe in chance he, I
mean Mr. Powell, must have been obviously predestined to add his native
ingenuousness to the sum of all the others carried by the honest ship
_Ferndale_.  He was too ingenuous.  Everybody on board was, exception
being made of Mr. Smith who, however, was simple enough in his way, with
that terrible simplicity of the fixed idea, for which there is also
another name men pronounce with dread and aversion.  His fixed idea was
to save his girl from the man who had possessed himself of her (I use
these words on purpose because the image they suggest was clearly in Mr.
Smith's mind), possessed himself unfairly of her while he, the father,
was locked up.

"I won't rest till I have got you away from that man," he would murmur to
her after long periods of contemplation.  We know from Powell how he used
to sit on the skylight near the long deck-chair on which Flora was
reclining, gazing into her face from above with an air of guardianship
and investigation at the same time.

It is almost impossible to say if he ever had considered the event
rationally.  The avatar of de Barral into Mr. Smith had not been effected
without a shock--that much one must recognize.  It may be that it drove
all practical considerations out of his mind, making room for awful and
precise visions which nothing could dislodge afterwards.

And it might have been the tenacity, the unintelligent tenacity, of the
man who had persisted in throwing millions of other people's thrift into
the Lone Valley Railway, the Labrador Docks, the Spotted Leopard Copper
Mine, and other grotesque speculations exposed during the famous de
Barral trial, amongst murmurs of astonishment mingled with bursts of
laughter.  For it is in the Courts of Law that Comedy finds its last
refuge in our deadly serious world.  As to tears and lamentations, these
were not heard in the august precincts of comedy, because they were
indulged in privately in several thousand homes, where, with a fine
dramatic effect, hunger had taken the place of Thrift.

But there was one at least who did not laugh in court.  That person was
the accused.  The notorious de Barral did not laugh because he was
indignant.  He was impervious to words, to facts, to inferences.  It
would have been impossible to make him see his guilt or his folly--either
by evidence or argument--if anybody had tried to argue.

Neither did his daughter Flora try to argue with him.  The cruelty of her
position was so great, its complications so thorny, if I may express
myself so, that a passive attitude was yet her best refuge--as it had
been before her of so many women.

For that sort of inertia in woman is always enigmatic and therefore
menacing.  It makes one pause.  A woman may be a fool, a sleepy fool, an
agitated fool, a too awfully noxious fool, and she may even be simply
stupid.  But she is never dense.  She's never made of wood through and
through as some men are.  There is in woman always, somewhere, a spring.
Whatever men don't know about women (and it may be a lot or it may be
very little) men and even fathers do know that much.  And that is why so
many men are afraid of them.

Mr. Smith I believe was afraid of his daughter's quietness though of
course he interpreted it in his own way.

He would, as Mr. Powell depicts, sit on the skylight and bend over the
reclining girl, wondering what there was behind the lost gaze under the
darkened eyelids in the still eyes.  He would look and look and then he
would say, whisper rather, it didn't take much for his voice to drop to a
mere breath--he would declare, transferring his faded stare to the
horizon, that he would never rest till he had "got her away from that
man."

"You don't know what you are saying, papa."

She would try not to show her weariness, the nervous strain of these two
men's antagonism around her person which was the cause of her languid
attitudes.  For as a matter of fact the sea agreed with her.

As likely as not Anthony would be walking on the other side of the deck.
The strain was making him restless.  He couldn't sit still anywhere.  He
had tried shutting himself up in his cabin; but that was no good.  He
would jump up to rush on deck and tramp, tramp up and down that poop till
he felt ready to drop, without being able to wear down the agitation of
his soul, generous indeed, but weighted by its envelope of blood and
muscle and bone; handicapped by the brain creating precise images and
everlastingly speculating, speculating--looking out for signs, watching
for symptoms.

And Mr. Smith with a slight backward jerk of his small head at the
footsteps on the other side of the skylight would insist in his awful,
hopelessly gentle voice that he knew very well what he was saying.  Hadn't
she given herself to that man while he was locked up.

"Helpless, in jail, with no one to think of, nothing to look forward to,
but my daughter.  And then when they let me out at last I find her
gone--for it amounts to this.  Sold.  Because you've sold yourself; you
know you have."

With his round unmoved face, a lot of fine white hair waving in the wind-
eddies of the spanker, his glance levelled over the sea he seemed to be
addressing the universe across her reclining form.  She would protest
sometimes.

"I wish you would not talk like this, papa.  You are only tormenting me,
and tormenting yourself."

"Yes, I am tormented enough," he admitted meaningly.  But it was not
talking about it that tormented him.  It was thinking of it.  And to sit
and look at it was worse for him than it possibly could have been for her
to go and give herself up, bad as that must have been.

"For of course you suffered.  Don't tell me you didn't?  You must have."

She had renounced very soon all attempts at protests.  It was useless.  It
might have made things worse; and she did not want to quarrel with her
father, the only human being that really cared for her, absolutely,
evidently, completely--to the end.  There was in him no pity, no
generosity, nothing whatever of these fine things--it was for her, for
her very own self such as it was, that this human being cared.  This
certitude would have made her put up with worse torments.  For, of
course, she too was being tormented.  She felt also helpless, as if the
whole enterprise had been too much for her.  This is the sort of
conviction which makes for quietude.  She was becoming a fatalist.

What must have been rather appalling were the necessities of daily life,
the intercourse of current trifles.  That naturally had to go on.  They
wished good morning to each other, they sat down together to meals--and I
believe there would be a game of cards now and then in the evening,
especially at first.  What frightened her most was the duplicity of her
father, at least what looked like duplicity, when she remembered his
persistent, insistent whispers on deck.  However her father was a
taciturn person as far back as she could remember him best--on the
Parade.  It was she who chattered, never troubling herself to discover
whether he was pleased or displeased.  And now she couldn't fathom his
thoughts.  Neither did she chatter to him.  Anthony with a forced
friendly smile as if frozen to his lips seemed only too thankful at not
being made to speak.  Mr. Smith sometimes forgot himself while studying
his hand so long that Flora had to recall him to himself by a murmured
"Papa--your lead."  Then he apologized by a faint as if inward
ejaculation "Beg your pardon, Captain."  Naturally she addressed Anthony
as Roderick and he addressed her as Flora.  This was all the acting that
was necessary to judge from the wincing twitch of the old man's mouth at
every uttered "Flora."  On hearing the rare "Rodericks" he had sometimes
a scornful grimace as faint and faded and colourless as his whole stiff
personality.

He would be the first to retire.  He was not infirm.  With him too the
life on board ship seemed to agree; but from a sense of duty, of
affection, or to placate his hidden fury, his daughter always accompanied
him to his state-room "to make him comfortable."  She lighted his lamp,
helped him into his dressing-gown or got him a book from a bookcase
fitted in there--but this last rarely, because Mr. Smith used to declare
"I am no reader" with something like pride in his low tones.  Very often
after kissing her good-night on the forehead he would treat her to some
such fretful remark: "It's like being in jail--'pon my word.  I suppose
that man is out there waiting for you.  Head jailer!  Ough!"

She would smile vaguely; murmur a conciliatory "How absurd."  But once,
out of patience, she said quite sharply "Leave off.  It hurts me.  One
would think you hate me."

"It isn't you I hate," he went on monotonously breathing at her.  "No, it
isn't you.  But if I saw that you loved that man I think I could hate you
too."

That word struck straight at her heart.  "You wouldn't be the first
then," she muttered bitterly.  But he was busy with his fixed idea and
uttered an awfully equable "But you don't!  Unfortunate girl!"

She looked at him steadily for a time then said "Good-night, papa."

As a matter of fact Anthony very seldom waited for her alone at the table
with the scattered cards, glasses, water-jug, bottles and so on.  He took
no more opportunities to be alone with her than was absolutely necessary
for the edification of Mrs. Brown.  Excellent, faithful woman; the wife
of his still more excellent and faithful steward.  And Flora wished all
these excellent people, devoted to Anthony, she wished them all further;
and especially the nice, pleasant-spoken Mrs. Brown with her beady,
mobile eyes and her "Yes certainly, ma'am," which seemed to her to have a
mocking sound.  And so this short trip--to the Western Islands only--came
to an end.  It was so short that when young Powell joined the _Ferndale_
by a memorable stroke of chance, no more than seven months had elapsed
since the--let us say the liberation of the convict de Barral and his
avatar into Mr. Smith.

* * * * *

For the time the ship was loading in London Anthony took a cottage near a
little country station in Essex, to house Mr. Smith and Mr. Smith's
daughter.  It was altogether his idea.  How far it was necessary for Mr.
Smith to seek rural retreat I don't know.  Perhaps to some extent it was
a judicious arrangement.  There were some obligations incumbent on the
liberated de Barral (in connection with reporting himself to the police I
imagine) which Mr. Smith was not anxious to perform.  De Barral had to
vanish; the theory was that de Barral had vanished, and it had to be
upheld.  Poor Flora liked the country, even if the spot had nothing more
to recommend it than its retired character.

Now and then Captain Anthony ran down; but as the station was a real
wayside one, with no early morning trains up, he could never stay for
more than the afternoon.  It appeared that he must sleep in town so as to
be early on board his ship.  The weather was magnificent and whenever the
captain of the _Ferndale_ was seen on a brilliant afternoon coming down
the road Mr. Smith would seize his stick and toddle off for a solitary
walk.  But whether he would get tired or because it gave him some
satisfaction to see "that man" go away--or for some cunning reason of his
own, he was always back before the hour of Anthony's departure.  On
approaching the cottage he would see generally "that man" lying on the
grass in the orchard at some distance from his daughter seated in a chair
brought out of the cottage's living room.  Invariably Mr. Smith made
straight for them and as invariably had the feeling that his approach was
not disturbing a very intimate conversation.  He sat with them, through a
silent hour or so, and then it would be time for Anthony to go.  Mr.
Smith, perhaps from discretion, would casually vanish a minute or so
before, and then watch through the diamond panes of an upstairs room
"that man" take a lingering look outside the gate at the invisible Flora,
lift his hat, like a caller, and go off down the road.  Then only Mr.
Smith would join his daughter again.

These were the bad moments for her.  Not always, of course, but
frequently.  It was nothing extraordinary to hear Mr. Smith begin gently
with some observation like this:

"That man is getting tired of you."

He would never pronounce Anthony's name.  It was always "that man."

Generally she would remain mute with wide open eyes gazing at nothing
between the gnarled fruit trees.  Once, however, she got up and walked
into the cottage.  Mr. Smith followed her carrying the chair.  He banged
it down resolutely and in that smooth inexpressive tone so many ears used
to bend eagerly to catch when it came from the Great de Barral he said:

"Let's get away."

She had the strength of mind not to spin round.  On the contrary she went
on to a shabby bit of a mirror on the wall.  In the greenish glass her
own face looked far off like the livid face of a drowned corpse at the
bottom of a pool.  She laughed faintly.

"I tell you that man's getting--"

"Papa," she interrupted him.  "I have no illusions as to myself.  It has
happened to me before but--"

Her voice failing her suddenly her father struck in with quite an
unwonted animation.  "Let's make a rush for it, then."

Having mastered both her fright and her bitterness, she turned round, sat
down and allowed her astonishment to be seen.  Mr. Smith sat down too,
his knees together and bent at right angles, his thin legs parallel to
each other and his hands resting on the arms of the wooden arm-chair.  His
hair had grown long, his head was set stiffly, there was something
fatuously venerable in his aspect.

"You can't care for him.  Don't tell me.  I understand your motive.  And
I have called you an unfortunate girl.  You are that as much as if you
had gone on the streets.  Yes.  Don't interrupt me, Flora.  I was
everlastingly being interrupted at the trial and I can't stand it any
more.  I won't be interrupted by my own child.  And when I think that it
is on the very day before they let me out that you . . . "

He had wormed this fact out of her by that time because Flora had got
tired of evading the question.  He had been very much struck and
distressed.  Was that the trust she had in him?  Was that a proof of
confidence and love?  The very day before!  Never given him even half a
chance.  It was as at the trial.  They never gave him a chance.  They
would not give him time.  And there was his own daughter acting exactly
as his bitterest enemies had done.  Not giving him time!

The monotony of that subdued voice nearly lulled her dismay to sleep.  She
listened to the unavoidable things he was saying.

"But what induced that man to marry you?  Of course he's a gentleman.  One
can see that.  And that makes it worse.  Gentlemen don't understand
anything about city affairs--finance.  Why!--the people who started the
cry after me were a firm of gentlemen.  The counsel, the judge--all
gentlemen--quite out of it!  No notion of . . . And then he's a sailor
too.  Just a skipper--"

"My grandfather was nothing else," she interrupted.  And he made an
angular gesture of impatience.

"Yes.  But what does a silly sailor know of business?  Nothing.  No
conception.  He can have no idea of what it means to be the daughter of
Mr. de Barral--even after his enemies had smashed him.  What on earth
induced him--"

She made a movement because the level voice was getting on her nerves.
And he paused, but only to go on again in the same tone with the remark:

"Of course you are pretty.  And that's why you are lost--like many other
poor girls.  Unfortunate is the word for you."

She said: "It may be.  Perhaps it is the right word; but listen, papa.  I
mean to be honest."

He began to exhale more speeches.

"Just the sort of man to get tired and then leave you and go off with his
beastly ship.  And anyway you can never be happy with him.  Look at his
face.  I want to save you.  You see I was not perhaps a very good husband
to your poor mother.  She would have done better to have left me long
before she died.  I have been thinking it all over.  I won't have you
unhappy."

He ran his eyes over her with an attention which was surprisingly
noticeable.  Then said, "H'm!  Yes.  Let's clear out before it is too
late.  Quietly, you and I."

She said as if inspired and with that calmness which despair often gives:
"There is no money to go away with, papa."

He rose up straightening himself as though he were a hinged figure.  She
said decisively:

"And of course you wouldn't think of deserting me, papa?"

"Of course not," sounded his subdued tone.  And he left her, gliding away
with his walk which Mr. Powell described to me as being as level and wary
as his voice.  He walked as if he were carrying a glass full of water on
his head.

Flora naturally said nothing to Anthony of that edifying conversation.
His generosity might have taken alarm at it and she did not want to be
left behind to manage her father alone.  And moreover she was too honest.
She would be honest at whatever cost.  She would not be the first to
speak.  Never.  And the thought came into her head: "I am indeed an
unfortunate creature!"

It was by the merest coincidence that Anthony coming for the afternoon
two days later had a talk with Mr. Smith in the orchard.  Flora for some
reason or other had left them for a moment; and Anthony took that
opportunity to be frank with Mr. Smith.  He said: "It seems to me, sir,
that you think Flora has not done very well for herself.  Well, as to
that I can't say anything.  All I want you to know is that I have tried
to do the right thing."  And then he explained that he had willed
everything he was possessed of to her.  "She didn't tell you, I suppose?"

Mr. Smith shook his head slightly.  And Anthony, trying to be friendly,
was just saying that he proposed to keep the ship away from home for at
least two years.  "I think, sir, that from every point of view it would
be best," when Flora came back and the conversation, cut short in that
direction, languished and died.  Later in the evening, after Anthony had
been gone for hours, on the point of separating for the night, Mr. Smith
remarked suddenly to his daughter after a long period of brooding:

"A will is nothing.  One tears it up.  One makes another."  Then after
reflecting for a minute he added unemotionally:

"One tells lies about it."

Flora, patient, steeled against every hurt and every disgust to the point
of wondering at herself, said: "You push your dislike of--of--Roderick
too far, papa.  You have no regard for me.  You hurt me."

He, as ever inexpressive to the point of terrifying her sometimes by the
contrast of his placidity and his words, turned away from her a pair of
faded eyes.

"I wonder how far your dislike goes," he began.  "His very name sticks in
your throat.  I've noticed it.  It hurts me.  What do you think of that?
You might remember that you are not the only person that's hurt by your
folly, by your hastiness, by your recklessness."  He brought back his
eyes to her face.  "And the very day before they were going to let me
out."  His feeble voice failed him altogether, the narrow compressed lips
only trembling for a time before he added with that extraordinary
equanimity of tone, "I call it sinful."

Flora made no answer.  She judged it simpler, kinder and certainly safer
to let him talk himself out.  This, Mr. Smith, being naturally taciturn,
never took very long to do.  And we must not imagine that this sort of
thing went on all the time.  She had a few good days in that cottage.  The
absence of Anthony was a relief and his visits were pleasurable.  She was
quieter.  He was quieter too.  She was almost sorry when the time to join
the ship arrived.  It was a moment of anguish, of excitement; they
arrived at the dock in the evening and Flora after "making her father
comfortable" according to established usage lingered in the state-room
long enough to notice that he was surprised.  She caught his pale eyes
observing her quite stonily.  Then she went out after a cheery
good-night.

Contrary to her hopes she found Anthony yet in the saloon.  Sitting in
his arm-chair at the head of the table he was picking up some business
papers which he put hastily in his breast pocket and got up.  He asked
her if her day, travelling up to town and then doing some shopping, had
tired her.  She shook her head.  Then he wanted to know in a half-jocular
way how she felt about going away, and for a long voyage this time.

"Does it matter how I feel?" she asked in a tone that cast a gloom over
his face.  He answered with repressed violence which she did not expect:

"No, it does not matter, because I cannot go without you.  I've told you
. . . You know it.  You don't think I could."

"I assure you I haven't the slightest wish to evade my obligations," she
said steadily.  "Even if I could.  Even if I dared, even if I had to die
for it!"

He looked thunderstruck.  They stood facing each other at the end of the
saloon.  Anthony stuttered.  "Oh no.  You won't die.  You don't mean it.
You have taken kindly to the sea."

She laughed, but she felt angry.

"No, I don't mean it.  I tell you I don't mean to evade my obligations.  I
shall live on . . . feeling a little crushed, nevertheless."

"Crushed!" he repeated.  "What's crushing you?"

"Your magnanimity," she said sharply.  But her voice was softened after a
time.  "Yet I don't know.  There is a perfection in it--do you understand
me, Roderick?--which makes it almost possible to bear."

He sighed, looked away, and remarked that it was time to put out the lamp
in the saloon.  The permission was only till ten o'clock.

"But you needn't mind that so much in your cabin.  Just see that the
curtains of the ports are drawn close and that's all.  The steward might
have forgotten to do it.  He lighted your reading lamp in there before he
went ashore for a last evening with his wife.  I don't know if it was
wise to get rid of Mrs. Brown.  You will have to look after yourself,
Flora."

He was quite anxious; but Flora as a matter of fact congratulated herself
on the absence of Mrs. Brown.  No sooner had she closed the door of her
state-room than she murmured fervently, "Yes!  Thank goodness, she is
gone."  There would be no gentle knock, followed by her appearance with
her equivocal stare and the intolerable: "Can I do anything for you,
ma'am?" which poor Flora had learned to fear and hate more than any voice
or any words on board that ship--her only refuge from the world which had
no use for her, for her imperfections and for her troubles.

* * * * *

Mrs. Brown had been very much vexed at her dismissal.  The Browns were a
childless couple and the arrangement had suited them perfectly.  Their
resentment was very bitter.  Mrs. Brown had to remain ashore alone with
her rage, but the steward was nursing his on board.  Poor Flora had no
greater enemy, the aggrieved mate had no greater sympathizer.  And Mrs.
Brown, with a woman's quick power of observation and inference (the
putting of two and two together) had come to a certain conclusion which
she had imparted to her husband before leaving the ship.  The morose
steward permitted himself once to make an allusion to it in Powell's
hearing.  It was in the officers' mess-room at the end of a meal while he
lingered after putting a fruit pie on the table.  He and the chief mate
started a dialogue about the alarming change in the captain, the sallow
steward looking down with a sinister frown, Franklin rolling upwards his
eyes, sentimental in a red face.  Young Powell had heard a lot of that
sort of thing by that time.  It was growing monotonous; it had always
sounded to him a little absurd.  He struck in impatiently with the remark
that such lamentations over a man merely because he had taken a wife
seemed to him like lunacy.

Franklin muttered, "Depends on what the wife is up to."  The steward
leaning against the bulkhead near the door glowered at Powell, that
newcomer, that ignoramus, that stranger without right or privileges.  He
snarled:

"Wife!  Call her a wife, do you?"

"What the devil do you mean by this?" exclaimed young Powell.

"I know what I know.  My old woman has not been six months on board for
nothing.  You had better ask her when we get back."

And meeting sullenly the withering stare of Mr. Powell the steward
retreated backwards.

Our young friend turned at once upon the mate.  "And you let that
confounded bottle-washer talk like this before you, Mr. Franklin.  Well,
I am astonished."

"Oh, it isn't what you think.  It isn't what you think."  Mr. Franklin
looked more apoplectic than ever.  "If it comes to that I could astonish
you.  But it's no use.  I myself can hardly . . . You couldn't
understand.  I hope you won't try to make mischief.  There was a time,
young fellow, when I would have dared any man--any man, you hear?--to
make mischief between me and Captain Anthony.  But not now.  Not now.
There's a change!  Not in me though . . . "

Young Powell rejected with indignation any suggestion of making mischief.
"Who do you take me for?" he cried.  "Only you had better tell that
steward to be careful what he says before me or I'll spoil his good looks
for him for a month and will leave him to explain the why of it to the
captain the best way he can."

This speech established Powell as a champion of Mrs. Anthony.  Nothing
more bearing on the question was ever said before him.  He did not care
for the steward's black looks; Franklin, never conversational even at the
best of times and avoiding now the only topic near his heart, addressed
him only on matters of duty.  And for that, too, Powell cared very
little.  The woes of the apoplectic mate had begun to bore him long
before.  Yet he felt lonely a bit at times.  Therefore the little
intercourse with Mrs. Anthony either in one dog-watch or the other was
something to be looked forward to.  The captain did not mind it.  That
was evident from his manner.  One night he inquired (they were then alone
on the poop) what they had been talking about that evening?  Powell had
to confess that it was about the ship.  Mrs. Anthony had been asking him
questions.

"Takes interest--eh?" jerked out the captain moving rapidly up and down
the weather side of the poop.

"Yes, sir.  Mrs. Anthony seems to get hold wonderfully of what one's
telling her."

"Sailor's granddaughter.  One of the old school.  Old sea-dog of the best
kind, I believe," ejaculated the captain, swinging past his motionless
second officer and leaving the words behind him like a trail of sparks
succeeded by a perfect conversational darkness, because, for the next two
hours till he left the deck, he didn't open his lips again.

On another occasion . . . we mustn't forget that the ship had crossed the
line and was adding up south latitude every day by then . . . on another
occasion, about seven in the evening, Powell on duty, heard his name
uttered softly in the companion.  The captain was on the stairs, thin-
faced, his eyes sunk, on his arm a Shetland wool wrap.

"Mr. Powell--here."

"Yes, sir."

"Give this to Mrs. Anthony.  Evenings are getting chilly."

And the haggard face sank out of sight.  Mrs. Anthony was surprised on
seeing the shawl.

"The captain wants you to put this on," explained young Powell, and as
she raised herself in her seat he dropped it on her shoulders.  She
wrapped herself up closely.

"Where was the captain?" she asked.

"He was in the companion.  Called me on purpose," said Powell, and then
retreated discreetly, because she looked as though she didn't want to
talk any more that evening.  Mr. Smith--the old gentleman--was as usual
sitting on the skylight near her head, brooding over the long chair but
by no means inimical, as far as his unreadable face went, to those
conversations of the two youngest people on board.  In fact they seemed
to give him some pleasure.  Now and then he would raise his faded china
eyes to the animated face of Mr. Powell thoughtfully.  When the young
sailor was by, the old man became less rigid, and when his daughter, on
rare occasions, smiled at some artless tale of Mr. Powell, the
inexpressive face of Mr. Smith reflected dimly that flash of evanescent
mirth.  For Mr. Powell had come now to entertain his captain's wife with
anecdotes from the not very distant past when he was a boy, on board
various ships,--funny things do happen on board ship.  Flora was quite
surprised at times to find herself amused.  She was even heard to laugh
twice in the course of a month.  It was not a loud sound but it was
startling enough at the after-end of the _Ferndale_ where low tones or
silence were the rule.  The second time this happened the captain himself
must have been startled somewhere down below; because he emerged from the
depths of his unobtrusive existence and began his tramping on the
opposite side of the poop.

Almost immediately he called his young second officer over to him.  This
was not done in displeasure.  The glance he fastened on Mr. Powell
conveyed a sort of approving wonder.  He engaged him in desultory
conversation as if for the only purpose of keeping a man who could
provoke such a sound, near his person.  Mr. Powell felt himself liked.  He
felt it.  Liked by that haggard, restless man who threw at him
disconnected phrases to which his answers were, "Yes, sir," "No, sir,"
"Oh, certainly," "I suppose so, sir,"--and might have been clearly
anything else for all the other cared.

It was then, Mr. Powell told me, that he discovered in himself an already
old-established liking for Captain Anthony.  He also felt sorry for him
without being able to discover the origins of that sympathy of which he
had become so suddenly aware.

Meantime Mr. Smith, bending forward stiffly as though he had a hinged
back, was speaking to his daughter.

She was a child no longer.  He wanted to know if she believed in--in
hell.  In eternal punishment?

His peculiar voice, as if filtered through cotton-wool was inaudible on
the other side of the deck.  Poor Flora, taken very much unawares, made
an inarticulate murmur, shook her head vaguely, and glanced in the
direction of the pacing Anthony who was not looking her way.  It was no
use glancing in that direction.  Of young Powell, leaning against the
mizzen-mast and facing his captain she could only see the shoulder and
part of a blue serge back.

And the unworried, unaccented voice of her father went on tormenting her.

"You see, you must understand.  When I came out of jail it was with joy.
That is, my soul was fairly torn in two--but anyway to see you happy--I
had made up my mind to that.  Once I could be sure that you were happy
then of course I would have had no reason to care for life--strictly
speaking--which is all right for an old man; though naturally . . . no
reason to wish for death either.  But this sort of life!  What sense,
what meaning, what value has it either for you or for me?  It's just
sitting down to look at the death, that's coming, coming.  What else is
it?  I don't know how you can put up with that.  I don't think you can
stand it for long.  Some day you will jump overboard."

Captain Anthony had stopped for a moment staring ahead from the break of
the poop, and poor Flora sent at his back a look of despairing appeal
which would have moved a heart of stone.  But as though she had done
nothing he did not stir in the least.  She got out of the long chair and
went towards the companion.  Her father followed carrying a few small
objects, a handbag, her handkerchief, a book.  They went down together.

It was only then that Captain Anthony turned, looked at the place they
had vacated and resumed his tramping, but not his desultory conversation
with his second officer.  His nervous exasperation had grown so much that
now very often he used to lose control of his voice.  If he did not watch
himself it would suddenly die in his throat.  He had to make sure before
he ventured on the simplest saying, an order, a remark on the wind, a
simple good-morning.  That's why his utterance was abrupt, his answers to
people startlingly brusque and often not forthcoming at all.

It happens to the most resolute of men to find himself at grips not only
with unknown forces, but with a well-known force the real might of which
he had not understood.  Anthony had discovered that he was not the proud
master but the chafing captive of his generosity.  It rose in front of
him like a wall which his respect for himself forbade him to scale.  He
said to himself: "Yes, I was a fool--but she has trusted me!"  Trusted!  A
terrible word to any man somewhat exceptional in a world in which success
has never been found in renunciation and good faith.  And it must also be
said, in order not to make Anthony more stupidly sublime than he was,
that the behaviour of Flora kept him at a distance.  The girl was afraid
to add to the exasperation of her father.  It was her unhappy lot to be
made more wretched by the only affection which she could not suspect.  She
could not be angry with it, however, and out of deference for that
exaggerated sentiment she hardly dared to look otherwise than by stealth
at the man whose masterful compassion had carried her off.  And quite
unable to understand the extent of Anthony's delicacy, she said to
herself that "he didn't care."  He probably was beginning at bottom to
detest her--like the governess, like the maiden lady, like the German
woman, like Mrs. Fyne, like Mr. Fyne--only he was extraordinary, he was
generous.  At the same time she had moments of irritation.  He was
violent, headstrong--perhaps stupid.  Well, he had had his way.

A man who has had his way is seldom happy, for generally he finds that
the way does not lead very far on this earth of desires which can never
be fully satisfied.  Anthony had entered with extreme precipitation the
enchanted gardens of Armida saying to himself "At last!"  As to Armida,
herself, he was not going to offer her any violence.  But now he had
discovered that all the enchantment was in Armida herself, in Armida's
smiles.  This Armida did not smile.  She existed, unapproachable, behind
the blank wall of his renunciation.  His force, fit for action,
experienced the impatience, the indignation, almost the despair of his
vitality arrested, bound, stilled, progressively worn down, frittered
away by Time; by that force blind and insensible, which seems inert and
yet uses one's life up by its imperceptible action, dropping minute after
minute on one's living heart like drops of water wearing down a stone.

He upbraided himself.  What else could he have expected?  He had rushed
in like a ruffian; he had dragged the poor defenceless thing by the hair
of her head, as it were, on board that ship.  It was really atrocious.
Nothing assured him that his person could be attractive to this or any
other woman.  And his proceedings were enough in themselves to make
anyone odious.  He must have been bereft of his senses.  She must fatally
detest and fear him.  Nothing could make up for such brutality.  And yet
somehow he resented this very attitude which seemed to him completely
justifiable.  Surely he was not too monstrous (morally) to be looked at
frankly sometimes.  But no!  She wouldn't.  Well, perhaps, some day . . .
Only he was not going ever to attempt to beg for forgiveness.  With the
repulsion she felt for his person she would certainly misunderstand the
most guarded words, the most careful advances.  Never!  Never!

It would occur to Anthony at the end of such meditations that death was
not an unfriendly visitor after all.  No wonder then that even young
Powell, his faculties having been put on the alert, began to think that
there was something unusual about the man who had given him his chance in
life.  Yes, decidedly, his captain was "strange."  There was something
wrong somewhere, he said to himself, never guessing that his young and
candid eyes were in the presence of a passion profound, tyrannical and
mortal, discovering its own existence, astounded at feeling itself
helpless and dismayed at finding itself incurable.

Powell had never before felt this mysterious uneasiness so strongly as on
that evening when it had been his good fortune to make Mrs. Anthony laugh
a little by his artless prattle.  Standing out of the way, he had watched
his captain walk the weather-side of the poop, he took full cognizance of
his liking for that inexplicably strange man and saw him swerve towards
the companion and go down below with sympathetic if utterly
uncomprehending eyes.

Shortly afterwards, Mr. Smith came up alone and manifested a desire for a
little conversation.  He, too, if not so mysterious as the captain, was
not very comprehensible to Mr. Powell's uninformed candour.  He often
favoured thus the second officer.  His talk alluded somewhat
enigmatically and often without visible connection to Mr. Powell's
friendliness towards himself and his daughter.  "For I am well aware that
we have no friends on board this ship, my dear young man," he would add,
"except yourself.  Flora feels that too."

And Mr. Powell, flattered and embarrassed, could but emit a vague murmur
of protest.  For the statement was true in a sense, though the fact was
in itself insignificant.  The feelings of the ship's company could not
possibly matter to the captain's wife and to Mr. Smith--her father.  Why
the latter should so often allude to it was what surprised our Mr.
Powell.  This was by no means the first occasion.  More like the
twentieth rather.  And in his weak voice, with his monotonous intonation,
leaning over the rail and looking at the water the other continued this
conversation, or rather his remarks, remarks of such a monstrous nature
that Mr. Powell had no option but to accept them for gruesome jesting.

"For instance," said Mr. Smith, "that mate, Franklin, I believe he would
just as soon see us both overboard as not."

"It's not so bad as that," laughed Mr. Powell, feeling uncomfortable,
because his mind did not accommodate itself easily to exaggeration of
statement.  "He isn't a bad chap really," he added, very conscious of Mr.
Franklin's offensive manner of which instances were not far to seek.
"He's such a fool as to be jealous.  He has been with the captain for
years.  It's not for me to say, perhaps, but I think the captain has
spoiled all that gang of old servants.  They are like a lot of pet old
dogs.  Wouldn't let anybody come near him if they could help it.  I've
never seen anything like it.  And the second mate, I believe, was like
that too."

"Well, he isn't here, luckily.  There would have been one more enemy,"
said Mr. Smith.  "There's enough of them without him.  And you being here
instead of him makes it much more pleasant for my daughter and myself.
One feels there may be a friend in need.  For really, for a woman all
alone on board ship amongst a lot of unfriendly men . . . "

"But Mrs Anthony is not alone," exclaimed Powell.  "There's you, and
there's the . . . "

Mr. Smith interrupted him.

"Nobody's immortal.  And there are times when one feels ashamed to live.
Such an evening as this for instance."

It was a lovely evening; the colours of a splendid sunset had died out
and the breath of a warm breeze seemed to have smoothed out the sea.  Away
to the south the sheet lightning was like the flashing of an enormous
lantern hidden under the horizon.  In order to change the conversation
Mr. Powell said:

"Anyway no one can charge you with being a Jonah, Mr. Smith.  We have had
a magnificent quick passage so far.  The captain ought to be pleased.  And
I suppose you are not sorry either."

This diversion was not successful.  Mr. Smith emitted a sort of bitter
chuckle and said: "Jonah!  That's the fellow that was thrown overboard by
some sailors.  It seems to me it's very easy at sea to get rid of a
person one does not like.  The sea does not give up its dead as the earth
does."

"You forget the whale, sir," said young Powell.

Mr. Smith gave a start.  "Eh?  What whale?  Oh!  Jonah.  I wasn't
thinking of Jonah.  I was thinking of this passage which seems so quick
to you.  But only think what it is to me?  It isn't a life, going about
the sea like this.  And, for instance, if one were to fall ill, there
isn't a doctor to find out what's the matter with one.  It's worrying.  It
makes me anxious at times."

"Is Mrs. Anthony not feeling well?" asked Powell.  But Mr. Smith's remark
was not meant for Mrs. Anthony.  She was well.  He himself was well.  It
was the captain's health that did not seem quite satisfactory.  Had Mr.
Powell noticed his appearance?

Mr. Powell didn't know enough of the captain to judge.  He couldn't tell.
But he observed thoughtfully that Mr. Franklin had been saying the same
thing.  And Franklin had known the captain for years.  The mate was quite
worried about it.

This intelligence startled Mr. Smith considerably.  "Does he think he is
in danger of dying?" he exclaimed with an animation quite extraordinary
for him, which horrified Mr. Powell.

"Heavens!  Die!  No!  Don't you alarm yourself, sir.  I've never heard a
word about danger from Mr. Franklin."

"Well, well," sighed Mr. Smith and left the poop for the saloon rather
abruptly.

As a matter of fact Mr. Franklin had been on deck for some considerable
time.  He had come to relieve young Powell; but seeing him engaged in
talk with the "enemy"--with one of the "enemies" at least--had kept at a
distance, which, the poop of the _Ferndale_ being aver seventy feet long,
he had no difficulty in doing.  Mr. Powell saw him at the head of the
ladder leaning on his elbow, melancholy and silent.  "Oh!  Here you are,
sir."

"Here I am.  Here I've been ever since six o'clock.  Didn't want to
interrupt the pleasant conversation.  If you like to put in half of your
watch below jawing with a dear friend, that's not my affair.  Funny taste
though."

"He isn't a bad chap," said the impartial Powell.

The mate snorted angrily, tapping the deck with his foot; then: "Isn't
he?  Well, give him my love when you come together again for another nice
long yarn."

"I say, Mr. Franklin, I wonder the captain don't take offence at your
manners."

"The captain.  I wish to goodness he would start a row with me.  Then I
should know at least I am somebody on board.  I'd welcome it, Mr. Powell.
I'd rejoice.  And dam' me I would talk back too till I roused him.  He's
a shadow of himself.  He walks about his ship like a ghost.  He's fading
away right before our eyes.  But of course you don't see.  You don't care
a hang.  Why should you?"

Mr. Powell did not wait for more.  He went down on the main deck.  Without
taking the mate's jeremiads seriously he put them beside the words of Mr.
Smith.  He had grown already attached to Captain Anthony.  There was
something not only attractive but compelling in the man.  Only it is very
difficult for youth to believe in the menace of death.  Not in the fact
itself, but in its proximity to a breathing, moving, talking, superior
human being, showing no sign of disease.  And Mr. Powell thought that
this talk was all nonsense.  But his curiosity was awakened.  There was
something, and at any time some circumstance might occur . . . No, he
would never find out . . . There was nothing to find out, most likely.
Mr. Powell went to his room where he tried to read a book he had already
read a good many times.  Presently a bell rang for the officers' supper.



CHAPTER SIX--. . . A MOONLESS NIGHT, THICK WITH STARS ABOVE, VERY DARK ON
THE WATER


In the mess-room Powell found Mr. Franklin hacking at a piece of cold
salt beef with a table knife.  The mate, fiery in the face and rolling
his eyes over that task, explained that the carver belonging to the mess-
room could not be found.  The steward, present also, complained savagely
of the cook.  The fellow got things into his galley and then lost them.
Mr. Franklin tried to pacify him with mournful firmness.

"There, there!  That will do.  We who have been all these years together
in the ship have other things to think about than quarrelling among
ourselves."

Mr. Powell thought with exasperation: "Here he goes again," for this
utterance had nothing cryptic for him.  The steward having withdrawn
morosely, he was not surprised to hear the mate strike the usual note.
That morning the mizzen topsail tie had carried away (probably a
defective link) and something like forty feet of chain and wire-rope,
mixed up with a few heavy iron blocks, had crashed down from aloft on the
poop with a terrifying racket.

"Did you notice the captain then, Mr. Powell.  Did you notice?"

Powell confessed frankly that he was too scared himself when all that lot
of gear came down on deck to notice anything.

"The gin-block missed his head by an inch," went on the mate
impressively.  "I wasn't three feet from him.  And what did he do?  Did
he shout, or jump, or even look aloft to see if the yard wasn't coming
down too about our ears in a dozen pieces?  It's a marvel it didn't.  No,
he just stopped short--no wonder; he must have felt the wind of that iron
gin-block on his face--looked down at it, there, lying close to his
foot--and went on again.  I believe he didn't even blink.  It isn't
natural.  The man is stupefied."

He sighed ridiculously and Mr. Powell had suppressed a grin, when the
mate added as if he couldn't contain himself:

"He will be taking to drink next.  Mark my words.  That's the next
thing."

Mr. Powell was disgusted.

"You are so fond of the captain and yet you don't seem to care what you
say about him.  I haven't been with him for seven years, but I know he
isn't the sort of man that takes to drink.  And then--why the devil
should he?"

"Why the devil, you ask.  Devil--eh?  Well, no man is safe from the
devil--and that's answer enough for you," wheezed Mr. Franklin not
unkindly.  "There was a time, a long time ago, when I nearly took to
drink myself.  What do you say to that?"

Mr. Powell expressed a polite incredulity.  The thick, congested mate
seemed on the point of bursting with despondency.  "That was bad example
though.  I was young and fell into dangerous company, made a fool of
myself--yes, as true as you see me sitting here.  Drank to forget.
Thought it a great dodge."

Powell looked at the grotesque Franklin with awakened interest and with
that half-amused sympathy with which we receive unprovoked confidences
from men with whom we have no sort of affinity.  And at the same time he
began to look upon him more seriously.  Experience has its prestige.  And
the mate continued:

"If it hadn't been for the old lady, I would have gone to the devil.  I
remembered her in time.  Nothing like having an old lady to look after to
steady a chap and make him face things.  But as bad luck would have it,
Captain Anthony has no mother living, not a blessed soul belonging to him
as far as I know.  Oh, aye, I fancy he said once something to me of a
sister.  But she's married.  She don't need him.  Yes.  In the old days
he used to talk to me as if we had been brothers," exaggerated the mate
sentimentally.  "'Franklin,'--he would say--'this ship is my nearest
relation and she isn't likely to turn against me.  And I suppose you are
the man I've known the longest in the world.'  That's how he used to
speak to me.  Can I turn my back on him?  He has turned his back on his
ship; that's what it has come to.  He has no one now but his old
Franklin.  But what's a fellow to do to put things back as they were and
should be.  Should be--I say!"

His starting eyes had a terrible fixity.  Mr. Powell's irresistible
thought, "he resembles a boiled lobster in distress," was followed by
annoyance.  "Good Lord," he said, "you don't mean to hint that Captain
Anthony has fallen into bad company.  What is it you want to save him
from?"

"I do mean it," affirmed the mate, and the very absurdity of the
statement made it impressive--because it seemed so absolutely audacious.
"Well, you have a cheek," said young Powell, feeling mentally helpless.
"I have a notion the captain would half kill you if he were to know how
you carry on."

"And welcome," uttered the fervently devoted Franklin.  "I am willing, if
he would only clear the ship afterwards of that . . . You are but a
youngster and you may go and tell him what you like.  Let him knock the
stuffing out of his old Franklin first and think it over afterwards.
Anything to pull him together.  But of course you wouldn't.  You are all
right.  Only you don't know that things are sometimes different from what
they look.  There are friendships that are no friendships, and marriages
that are no marriages.  Phoo!  Likely to be right--wasn't it?  Never a
hint to me.  I go off on leave and when I come back, there it is--all
over, settled!  Not a word beforehand.  No warning.  If only: 'What do
you think of it, Franklin?'--or anything of the sort.  And that's a man
who hardly ever did anything without asking my advice.  Why!  He couldn't
take over a new coat from the tailor without . . . first thing, directly
the fellow came on board with some new clothes, whether in London or in
China, it would be: 'Pass the word along there for Mr. Franklin.  Mr.
Franklin wanted in the cabin.'  In I would go.  'Just look at my back,
Franklin.  Fits all right, doesn't it?'  And I would say: 'First rate,
sir,' or whatever was the truth of it.  That or anything else.  Always
the truth of it.  Always.  And well he knew it; and that's why he dared
not speak right out.  Talking about workmen, alterations, cabins . . .
Phoo! . . . instead of a straightforward--'Wish me joy, Mr. Franklin!'
Yes, that was the way to let me know.  God only knows what they
are--perhaps she isn't his daughter any more than she is . . . She
doesn't resemble that old fellow.  Not a bit.  Not a bit.  It's very
awful.  You may well open your mouth, young man.  But for goodness' sake,
you who are mixed up with that lot, keep your eyes and ears open too in
case--in case of . . . I don't know what.  Anything.  One wonders what
can happen here at sea!  Nothing.  Yet when a man is called a jailer
behind his back."

Mr. Franklin hid his face in his hands for a moment and Powell shut his
mouth, which indeed had been open.  He slipped out of the mess-room
noiselessly.  "The mate's crazy," he thought.  It was his firm
conviction.  Nevertheless, that evening, he felt his inner tranquillity
disturbed at last by the force and obstinacy of this craze.  He couldn't
dismiss it with the contempt it deserved.  Had the word "jailer" really
been pronounced?  A strange word for the mate to even _imagine_ he had
heard.  A senseless, unlikely word.  But this word being the only clear
and definite statement in these grotesque and dismal ravings was
comparatively restful to his mind.  Powell's mind rested on it still when
he came up at eight o'clock to take charge of the deck.  It was a
moonless night, thick with stars above, very dark on the water.  A steady
air from the west kept the sails asleep.  Franklin mustered both watches
in low tones as if for a funeral, then approaching Powell:

"The course is east-south-east," said the chief mate distinctly.

"East-south-east, sir."

"Everything's set, Mr. Powell."

"All right, sir."

The other lingered, his sentimental eyes gleamed silvery in the shadowy
face.  "A quiet night before us.  I don't know that there are any special
orders.  A settled, quiet night.  I dare say you won't see the captain.
Once upon a time this was the watch he used to come up and start a chat
with either of us then on deck.  But now he sits in that infernal stern-
cabin and mopes.  Jailer--eh?"

Mr. Powell walked away from the mate and when at some distance said,
"Damn!" quite heartily.  It was a confounded nuisance.  It had ceased to
be funny; that hostile word "jailer" had given the situation an air of
reality.

* * * * *

Franklin's grotesque mortal envelope had disappeared from the poop to
seek its needful repose, if only the worried soul would let it rest a
while.  Mr. Powell, half sorry for the thick little man, wondered whether
it would let him.  For himself, he recognized that the charm of a quiet
watch on deck when one may let one's thoughts roam in space and time had
been spoiled without remedy.  What shocked him most was the implied
aspersion of complicity on Mrs. Anthony.  It angered him.  In his own
words to me, he felt very "enthusiastic" about Mrs. Anthony.
"Enthusiastic" is good; especially as he couldn't exactly explain to me
what he meant by it.  But he felt enthusiastic, he says.  That silly
Franklin must have been dreaming.  That was it.  He had dreamed it all.
Ass.  Yet the injurious word stuck in Powell's mind with its associated
ideas of prisoner, of escape.  He became very uncomfortable.  And just
then (it might have been half an hour or more since he had relieved
Franklin) just then Mr. Smith came up on the poop alone, like a gliding
shadow and leaned over the rail by his side.  Young Powell was affected
disagreeably by his presence.  He made a movement to go away but the
other began to talk--and Powell remained where he was as if retained by a
mysterious compulsion.  The conversation started by Mr. Smith had nothing
peculiar.  He began to talk of mail-boats in general and in the end
seemed anxious to discover what were the services from Port Elizabeth to
London.  Mr. Powell did not know for certain but imagined that there must
be communication with England at least twice a month.  "Are you thinking
of leaving us, sir; of going home by steam?  Perhaps with Mrs. Anthony,"
he asked anxiously.

"No!  No!  How can I?"  Mr. Smith got quite agitated, for him, which did
not amount to much.  He was just asking for the sake of something to talk
about.  No idea at all of going home.  One could not always do what one
wanted and that's why there were moments when one felt ashamed to live.
This did not mean that one did not want to live.  Oh no!

He spoke with careless slowness, pausing frequently and in such a low
voice that Powell had to strain his hearing to catch the phrases dropped
overboard as it were.  And indeed they seemed not worth the effort.  It
was like the aimless talk of a man pursuing a secret train of thought far
removed from the idle words we so often utter only to keep in touch with
our fellow beings.  An hour passed.  It seemed as though Mr. Smith could
not make up his mind to go below.  He repeated himself.  Again he spoke
of lives which one was ashamed of.  It was necessary to put up with such
lives as long as there was no way out, no possible issue.  He even
alluded once more to mail-boat services on the East coast of Africa and
young Powell had to tell him once more that he knew nothing about them.

"Every fortnight, I thought you said," insisted Mr. Smith.  He stirred,
seemed to detach himself from the rail with difficulty.  His long,
slender figure straightened into stiffness, as if hostile to the
enveloping soft peace of air and sea and sky, emitted into the night a
weak murmur which Mr. Powell fancied was the word, "Abominable" repeated
three times, but which passed into the faintly louder declaration: "The
moment has come--to go to bed," followed by a just audible sigh.

"I sleep very well," added Mr. Smith in his restrained tone.  "But it is
the moment one opens one's eyes that is horrible at sea.  These days!  Oh,
these days!  I wonder how anybody can . . . "

"I like the life," observed Mr. Powell.

"Oh, you.  You have only yourself to think of.  You have made your bed.
Well, it's very pleasant to feel that you are friendly to us.  My
daughter has taken quite a liking to you, Mr. Powell."

He murmured, "Good-night" and glided away rigidly.  Young Powell asked
himself with some distaste what was the meaning of these utterances.  His
mind had been worried at last into that questioning attitude by no other
person than the grotesque Franklin.  Suspicion was not natural to him.
And he took good care to carefully separate in his thoughts Mrs. Anthony
from this man of enigmatic words--her father.  Presently he observed that
the sheen of the two deck dead-lights of Mr. Smith's room had gone out.
The old gentleman had been surprisingly quick in getting into bed.
Shortly afterwards the lamp in the foremost skylight of the saloon was
turned out; and this was the sign that the steward had taken in the tray
and had retired for the night.

Young Powell had settled down to the regular officer-of-the-watch tramp
in the dense shadow of the world decorated with stars high above his
head, and on earth only a few gleams of light about the ship.  The lamp
in the after skylight was kept burning through the night.  There were
also the dead-lights of the stern-cabins glimmering dully in the deck far
aft, catching his eye when he turned to walk that way.  The brasses of
the wheel glittered too, with the dimly lit figure of the man detached,
as if phosphorescent, against the black and spangled background of the
horizon.

Young Powell, in the silence of the ship, reinforced by the great silent
stillness of the world, said to himself that there was something
mysterious in such beings as the absurd Franklin, and even in such beings
as himself.  It was a strange and almost improper thought to occur to the
officer of the watch of a ship on the high seas on no matter how quiet a
night.  Why on earth was he bothering his head?  Why couldn't he dismiss
all these people from his mind?  It was as if the mate had infected him
with his own diseased devotion.  He would not have believed it possible
that he should be so foolish.  But he was--clearly.  He was foolish in a
way totally unforeseen by himself.  Pushing this self-analysis further,
he reflected that the springs of his conduct were just as obscure.

"I may be catching myself any time doing things of which I have no
conception," he thought.  And as he was passing near the mizzen-mast he
perceived a coil of rope left lying on the deck by the oversight of the
sweepers.  By an impulse which had nothing mysterious in it, he stooped
as he went by with the intention of picking it up and hanging it up on
its proper pin.  This movement brought his head down to the level of the
glazed end of the after skylight--the lighted skylight of the most
private part of the saloon, consecrated to the exclusiveness of Captain
Anthony's married life; the part, let me remind you, cut off from the
rest of that forbidden space by a pair of heavy curtains.  I mention
these curtains because at this point Mr. Powell himself recalled the
existence of that unusual arrangement to my mind.

He recalled them with simple-minded compunction at that distance of time.
He said: "You understand that directly I stooped to pick up that coil of
running gear--the spanker foot-outhaul, it was--I perceived that I could
see right into that part of the saloon the curtains were meant to make
particularly private.  Do you understand me?" he insisted.

I told him that I understood; and he proceeded to call my attention to
the wonderful linking up of small facts, with something of awe left yet,
after all these years, at the precise workmanship of chance, fate,
providence, call it what you will!  "For, observe, Marlow," he said,
making at me very round eyes which contrasted funnily with the austere
touch of grey on his temples, "observe, my dear fellow, that everything
depended on the men who cleared up the poop in the evening leaving that
coil of rope on the deck, and on the topsail-tie carrying away in a most
incomprehensible and surprising manner earlier in the day, and the end of
the chain whipping round the coaming and shivering to bits the coloured
glass-pane at the end of the skylight.  It had the arms of the city of
Liverpool on it; I don't know why unless because the _Ferndale_ was
registered in Liverpool.  It was very thick plate glass.  Anyhow, the
upper part got smashed, and directly we had attended to things aloft Mr.
Franklin had set the carpenter to patch up the damage with some pieces of
plain glass.  I don't know where they got them; I think the people who
fitted up new bookcases in the captain's room had left some spare panes.
Chips was there the whole afternoon on his knees, messing with putty and
red-lead.  It wasn't a neat job when it was done, not by any means, but
it would serve to keep the weather out and let the light in.  Clear
glass.  And of course I was not thinking of it.  I just stooped to pick
up that rope and found my head within three inches of that clear glass,
and--dash it all!  I found myself out.  Not half an hour before I was
saying to myself that it was impossible to tell what was in people's
heads or at the back of their talk, or what they were likely to be up to.
And here I found myself up to as low a trick as you can well think of.
For, after I had stooped, there I remained prying, spying, anyway
looking, where I had no business to look.  Not consciously at first, may
be.  He who has eyes, you know, nothing can stop him from seeing things
as long as there are things to see in front of him.  What I saw at first
was the end of the table and the tray clamped on to it, a patent tray for
sea use, fitted with holders for a couple of decanters, water-jug and
glasses.  The glitter of these things caught my eye first; but what I saw
next was the captain down there, alone as far as I could see; and I could
see pretty well the whole of that part up to the cottage piano, dark
against the satin-wood panelling of the bulkhead.  And I remained
looking.  I did.  And I don't know that I was ashamed of myself either,
then.  It was the fault of that Franklin, always talking of the man,
making free with him to that extent that really he seemed to have become
our property, his and mine, in a way.  It's funny, but one had that
feeling about Captain Anthony.  To watch him was not so much worse than
listening to Franklin talking him over.  Well, it's no use making excuses
for what's inexcusable.  I watched; but I dare say you know that there
could have been nothing inimical in this low behaviour of mine.  On the
contrary.  I'll tell you now what he was doing.  He was helping himself
out of a decanter.  I saw every movement, and I said to myself mockingly
as though jeering at Franklin in my thoughts, 'Hallo!  Here's the captain
taking to drink at last.'  He poured a little brandy or whatever it was
into a long glass, filled it with water, drank about a fourth of it and
stood the glass back into the holder.  Every sign of a bad drinking bout,
I was saying to myself, feeling quite amused at the notions of that
Franklin.  He seemed to me an enormous ass, with his jealousy and his
fears.  At that rate a month would not have been enough for anybody to
get drunk.  The captain sat down in one of the swivel arm-chairs fixed
around the table; I had him right under me and as he turned the chair
slightly, I was looking, I may say, down his back.  He took another
little sip and then reached for a book which was lying on the table.  I
had not noticed it before.  Altogether the proceedings of a desperate
drunkard--weren't they?  He opened the book and held it before his face.
If this was the way he took to drink, then I needn't worry.  He was in no
danger from that, and as to any other, I assure you no human being could
have looked safer than he did down there.  I felt the greatest contempt
for Franklin just then, while I looked at Captain Anthony sitting there
with a glass of weak brandy-and-water at his elbow and reading in the
cabin of his ship, on a quiet night--the quietest, perhaps the finest, of
a prosperous passage.  And if you wonder why I didn't leave off my ugly
spying I will tell you how it was.  Captain Anthony was a great reader
just about that time; and I, too, I have a great liking for books.  To
this day I can't come near a book but I must know what it is about.  It
was a thickish volume he had there, small close print, double columns--I
can see it now.  What I wanted to make out was the title at the top of
the page.  I have very good eyes but he wasn't holding it conveniently--I
mean for me up there.  Well, it was a history of some kind, that much I
read and then suddenly he bangs the book face down on the table, jumps up
as if something had bitten him and walks away aft.

"Funny thing shame is.  I had been behaving badly and aware of it in a
way, but I didn't feel really ashamed till the fright of being found out
in my honourable occupation drove me from it.  I slunk away to the
forward end of the poop and lounged about there, my face and ears burning
and glad it was a dark night, expecting every moment to hear the
captain's footsteps behind me.  For I made sure he was coming on deck.
Presently I thought I had rather meet him face to face and I walked
slowly aft prepared to see him emerge from the companion before I got
that far.  I even thought of his having detected me by some means.  But
it was impossible, unless he had eyes in the top of his head.  I had
never had a view of his face down there.  It was impossible; I was safe;
and I felt very mean, yet, explain it as you may, I seemed not to care.
And the captain not appearing on deck, I had the impulse to go on being
mean.  I wanted another peep.  I really don't know what was the beastly
influence except that Mr. Franklin's talk was enough to demoralize any
man by raising a sort of unhealthy curiosity which did away in my case
with all the restraints of common decency.

"I did not mean to run the risk of being caught squatting in a suspicious
attitude by the captain.  There was also the helmsman to consider.  So
what I did--I am surprised at my low cunning--was to sit down naturally
on the skylight-seat and then by bending forward I found that, as I
expected, I could look down through the upper part of the end-pane.  The
worst that could happen to me then, if I remained too long in that
position, was to be suspected by the seaman aft at the wheel of having
gone to sleep there.  For the rest my ears would give me sufficient
warning of any movements in the companion.

"But in that way my angle of view was changed.  The field too was
smaller.  The end of the table, the tray and the swivel-chair I had right
under my eyes.  The captain had not come back yet.  The piano I could not
see now; but on the other hand I had a very oblique downward view of the
curtains drawn across the cabin and cutting off the forward part of it
just about the level of the skylight-end and only an inch or so from the
end of the table.  They were heavy stuff, travelling on a thick brass rod
with some contrivance to keep the rings from sliding to and fro when the
ship rolled.  But just then the ship was as still almost as a model shut
up in a glass case while the curtains, joined closely, and, perhaps on
purpose, made a little too long moved no more than a solid wall."

* * * * *

Marlow got up to get another cigar.  The night was getting on to what I
may call its deepest hour, the hour most favourable to evil purposes of
men's hate, despair or greed--to whatever can whisper into their ears the
unlawful counsels of protest against things that are; the hour of ill-
omened silence and chill and stagnation, the hour when the criminal plies
his trade and the victim of sleeplessness reaches the lowest depth of
dreadful discouragement; the hour before the first sight of dawn.  I know
it, because while Marlow was crossing the room I looked at the clock on
the mantelpiece.  He however never looked that way though it is possible
that he, too, was aware of the passage of time.  He sat down heavily.

"Our friend Powell," he began again, "was very anxious that I should
understand the topography of that cabin.  I was interested more by its
moral atmosphere, that tension of falsehood, of desperate acting, which
tainted the pure sea-atmosphere into which the magnanimous Anthony had
carried off his conquest and--well--his self-conquest too, trying to act
at the same time like a beast of prey, a pure spirit and the "most
generous of men."  Too big an order clearly because he was nothing of a
monster but just a common mortal, a little more self-willed and
self-confident than most, may be, both in his roughness and in his
delicacy.

As to the delicacy of Mr. Powell's proceedings I'll say nothing.  He
found a sort of depraved excitement in watching an unconscious man--and
such an attractive and mysterious man as Captain Anthony at that.  He
wanted another peep at him.  He surmised that the captain must come back
soon because of the glass two-thirds full and also of the book put down
so brusquely.  God knows what sudden pang had made Anthony jump up so.  I
am convinced he used reading as an opiate against the pain of his
magnanimity which like all abnormal growths was gnawing at his healthy
substance with cruel persistence.  Perhaps he had rushed into his cabin
simply to groan freely in absolute and delicate secrecy.  At any rate he
tarried there.  And young Powell would have grown weary and compunctious
at last if it had not become manifest to him that he had not been alone
in the highly incorrect occupation of watching the movements of Captain
Anthony.

Powell explained to me that no sound did or perhaps could reach him from
the saloon.  The first sign--and we must remember that he was using his
eyes for all they were worth--was an unaccountable movement of the
curtain.  It was wavy and very slight; just perceptible in fact to the
sharpened faculties of a secret watcher; for it can't be denied that our
wits are much more alert when engaged in wrong-doing (in which one
mustn't be found out) than in a righteous occupation.

He became suspicious, with no one and nothing definite in his mind.  He
was suspicious of the curtain itself and observed it.  It looked very
innocent.  Then just as he was ready to put it down to a trick of
imagination he saw trembling movements where the two curtains joined.
Yes!  Somebody else besides himself had been watching Captain Anthony.  He
owns artlessly that this roused his indignation.  It was really too much
of a good thing.  In this state of intense antagonism he was startled to
observe tips of fingers fumbling with the dark stuff.  Then they grasped
the edge of the further curtain and hung on there, just fingers and
knuckles and nothing else.  It made an abominable sight.  He was looking
at it with unaccountable repulsion when a hand came into view; a short,
puffy, old, freckled hand projecting into the lamplight, followed by a
white wrist, an arm in a grey coat-sleeve, up to the elbow, beyond the
elbow, extended tremblingly towards the tray.  Its appearance was weird
and nauseous, fantastic and silly.  But instead of grabbing the bottle as
Powell expected, this hand, tremulous with senile eagerness, swerved to
the glass, rested on its edge for a moment (or so it looked from above)
and went back with a jerk.  The gripping fingers of the other hand
vanished at the same time, and young Powell staring at the motionless
curtains could indulge for a moment the notion that he had been dreaming.

But that notion did not last long.  Powell, after repressing his first
impulse to spring for the companion and hammer at the captain's door,
took steps to have himself relieved by the boatswain.  He was in a state
of distraction as to his feelings and yet lucid as to his mind.  He
remained on the skylight so as to keep his eye on the tray.

Still the captain did not appear in the saloon.  "If he had," said Mr.
Powell, "I knew what to do.  I would have put my elbow through the pane
instantly--crash."

I asked him why?

"It was the quickest dodge for getting him away from that tray," he
explained.  "My throat was so dry that I didn't know if I could shout
loud enough.  And this was not a case for shouting, either."

The boatswain, sleepy and disgusted, arriving on the poop, found the
second officer doubled up over the end of the skylight in a pose which
might have been that of severe pain.  And his voice was so changed that
the man, though naturally vexed at being turned out, made no comment on
the plea of sudden indisposition which young Powell put forward.

The rapidity with which the sick man got off the poop must have
astonished the boatswain.  But Powell, at the moment he opened the door
leading into the saloon from the quarter-deck, had managed to control his
agitation.  He entered swiftly but without noise and found himself in the
dark part of the saloon, the strong sheen of the lamp on the other side
of the curtains visible only above the rod on which they ran.  The door
of Mr. Smith's cabin was in that dark part.  He passed by it assuring
himself by a quick side glance that it was imperfectly closed.  "Yes," he
said to me.  "The old man must have been watching through the crack.  Of
that I am certain; but it was not for me that he was watching and
listening.  Horrible!  Surely he must have been startled to hear and see
somebody he did not expect.  He could not possibly guess why I was coming
in, but I suppose he must have been concerned."  Concerned indeed!  He
must have been thunderstruck, appalled.

Powell's only distinct aim was to remove the suspected tumbler.  He had
no other plan, no other intention, no other thought.  Do away with it in
some manner.  Snatch it up and run out with it.

You know that complete mastery of one fixed idea, not a reasonable but an
emotional mastery, a sort of concentrated exaltation.  Under its empire
men rush blindly through fire and water and opposing violence, and
nothing can stop them--unless, sometimes, a grain of sand.  For his blind
purpose (and clearly the thought of Mrs. Anthony was at the bottom of it)
Mr. Powell had plenty of time.  What checked him at the crucial moment
was the familiar, harmless aspect of common things, the steady light, the
open book on the table, the solitude, the peace, the home-like effect of
the place.  He held the glass in his hand; all he had to do was to vanish
back beyond the curtains, flee with it noiselessly into the night on
deck, fling it unseen overboard.  A minute or less.  And then all that
would have happened would have been the wonder at the utter disappearance
of a glass tumbler, a ridiculous riddle in pantry-affairs beyond the wit
of anyone on board to solve.  The grain of sand against which Powell
stumbled in his headlong career was a moment of incredulity as to the
truth of his own conviction because it had failed to affect the safe
aspect of familiar things.  He doubted his eyes too.  He must have dreamt
it all!  "I am dreaming now," he said to himself.  And very likely for a
few seconds he must have looked like a man in a trance or profoundly
asleep on his feet, and with a glass of brandy-and-water in his hand.

What woke him up and, at the same time, fixed his feet immovably to the
spot, was a voice asking him what he was doing there in tones of thunder.
Or so it sounded to his ears.  Anthony, opening the door of his stern-
cabin had naturally exclaimed.  What else could you expect?  And the
exclamation must have been fairly loud if you consider the nature of the
sight which met his eye.  There, before him, stood his second officer, a
seemingly decent, well-bred young man, who, being on duty, had left the
deck and had sneaked into the saloon, apparently for the inexpressibly
mean purpose of drinking up what was left of his captain's brandy-and-
water.  There he was, caught absolutely with the glass in his hand.

But the very monstrosity of appearances silenced Anthony after the first
exclamation; and young Powell felt himself pierced through and through by
the overshadowed glance of his captain.  Anthony advanced quietly.  The
first impulse of Mr. Powell, when discovered, had been to dash the glass
on the deck.  He was in a sort of panic.  But deep down within him his
wits were working, and the idea that if he did that he could prove
nothing and that the story he had to tell was completely incredible,
restrained him.  The captain came forward slowly.  With his eyes now
close to his, Powell, spell-bound, numb all over, managed to lift one
finger to the deck above mumbling the explanatory words, "Boatswain on
the poop."

The captain moved his head slightly as much as to say, "That's all
right"--and this was all.  Powell had no voice, no strength.  The air was
unbreathable, thick, sticky, odious, like hot jelly in which all
movements became difficult.  He raised the glass a little with immense
difficulty and moved his trammelled lips sufficiently to form the words:

"Doctored."

Anthony glanced at it for an instant, only for an instant, and again
fastened his eyes on the face of his second mate.  Powell added a fervent
"I believe" and put the glass down on the tray.  The captain's glance
followed the movement and returned sternly to his face.  The young man
pointed a finger once more upwards and squeezed out of his iron-bound
throat six consecutive words of further explanation.  "Through the
skylight.  The white pane."

The captain raised his eyebrows very much at this, while young Powell,
ashamed but desperate, nodded insistently several times.  He meant to say
that: Yes.  Yes.  He had done that thing.  He had been spying . . .  The
captain's gaze became thoughtful.  And, now the confession was over, the
iron-bound feeling of Powell's throat passed away giving place to a
general anxiety which from his breast seemed to extend to all the limbs
and organs of his body.  His legs trembled a little, his vision was
confused, his mind became blankly expectant.  But he was alert enough.  At
a movement of Anthony he screamed in a strangled whisper.

"Don't, sir!  Don't touch it."

The captain pushed aside Powell's extended arm, took up the glass and
raised it slowly against the lamplight.  The liquid, of very pale amber
colour, was clear, and by a glance the captain seemed to call Powell's
attention to the fact.  Powell tried to pronounce the word, "dissolved"
but he only thought of it with great energy which however failed to move
his lips.  Only when Anthony had put down the glass and turned to him he
recovered such a complete command of his voice that he could keep it down
to a hurried, forcible whisper--a whisper that shook him.

"Doctored!  I swear it!  I have seen.  Doctored!  I have seen."

Not a feature of the captain's face moved.  His was a calm to take one's
breath away.  It did so to young Powell.  Then for the first time Anthony
made himself heard to the point.

"You did! . . . Who was it?"

And Powell gasped freely at last.  "A hand," he whispered fearfully, "a
hand and the arm--only the arm--like that."

He advanced his own, slow, stealthy, tremulous in faithful reproduction,
the tips of two fingers and the thumb pressed together and hovering above
the glass for an instant--then the swift jerk back, after the deed.

"Like that," he repeated growing excited.  "From behind this."  He
grasped the curtain and glaring at the silent Anthony flung it back
disclosing the forepart of the saloon.  There was no one to be seen.

Powell had not expected to see anybody.  "But," he said to me, "I knew
very well there was an ear listening and an eye glued to the crack of a
cabin door.  Awful thought.  And that door was in that part of the saloon
remaining in the shadow of the other half of the curtain.  I pointed at
it and I suppose that old man inside saw me pointing.  The captain had a
wonderful self-command.  You couldn't have guessed anything from his
face.  Well, it was perhaps more thoughtful than usual.  And indeed this
was something to think about.  But I couldn't think steadily.  My brain
would give a sort of jerk and then go dead again.  I had lost all notion
of time, and I might have been looking at the captain for days and months
for all I knew before I heard him whisper to me fiercely: "Not a word!"
This jerked me out of that trance I was in and I said "No!  No!  I didn't
mean even you."

"I wanted to explain my conduct, my intentions, but I read in his eyes
that he understood me and I was only too glad to leave off.  And there we
were looking at each other, dumb, brought up short by the question "What
next?"

"I thought Captain Anthony was a man of iron till I saw him suddenly
fling his head to the right and to the left fiercely, like a wild animal
at bay not knowing which way to break out . . . "

* * * * *

"Truly," commented Marlow, "brought to bay was not a bad comparison; a
better one than Mr. Powell was aware of.  At that moment the appearance
of Flora could not but bring the tension to the breaking point.  She came
out in all innocence but not without vague dread.  Anthony's exclamation
on first seeing Powell had reached her in her cabin, where, it seems, she
was brushing her hair.  She had heard the very words.  "What are you
doing here?"  And the unwonted loudness of the voice--his voice--breaking
the habitual stillness of that hour would have startled a person having
much less reason to be constantly apprehensive, than the captive of
Anthony's masterful generosity.  She had no means to guess to whom the
question was addressed and it echoed in her heart, as Anthony's voice
always did.  Followed complete silence.  She waited, anxious, expectant,
till she could stand the strain no longer, and with the weary mental
appeal of the overburdened.  "My God!  What is it now?" she opened the
door of her room and looked into the saloon.  Her first glance fell on
Powell.  For a moment, seeing only the second officer with Anthony, she
felt relieved and made as if to draw back; but her sharpened perception
detected something suspicious in their attitudes, and she came forward
slowly.

"I was the first to see Mrs. Anthony," related Powell, "because I was
facing aft.  The captain, noticing my eyes, looked quickly over his
shoulder and at once put his finger to his lips to caution me.  As if I
were likely to let out anything before her!  Mrs. Anthony had on a
dressing-gown of some grey stuff with red facings and a thick red cord
round her waist.  Her hair was down.  She looked a child; a pale-faced
child with big blue eyes and a red mouth a little open showing a glimmer
of white teeth.  The light fell strongly on her as she came up to the end
of the table.  A strange child though; she hardly affected one like a
child, I remember.  Do you know," exclaimed Mr. Powell, who clearly must
have been, like many seamen, an industrious reader, "do you know what she
looked like to me with those big eyes and something appealing in her
whole expression.  She looked like a forsaken elf.  Captain Anthony had
moved towards her to keep her away from my end of the table, where the
tray was.  I had never seen them so near to each other before, and it
made a great contrast.  It was wonderful, for, with his beard cut to a
point, his swarthy, sunburnt complexion, thin nose and his lean head
there was something African, something Moorish in Captain Anthony.  His
neck was bare; he had taken off his coat and collar and had drawn on his
sleeping jacket in the time that he had been absent from the saloon.  I
seem to see him now.  Mrs. Anthony too.  She looked from him to me--I
suppose I looked guilty or frightened--and from me to him, trying to
guess what there was between us two.  Then she burst out with a "What has
happened?" which seemed addressed to me.  I mumbled "Nothing!  Nothing,
ma'am," which she very likely did not hear.

"You must not think that all this had lasted a long time.  She had taken
fright at our behaviour and turned to the captain pitifully.  "What is it
you are concealing from me?"  A straight question--eh?  I don't know what
answer the captain would have made.  Before he could even raise his eyes
to her she cried out "Ah!  Here's papa" in a sharp tone of relief, but
directly afterwards she looked to me as if she were holding her breath
with apprehension.  I was so interested in her that, how shall I say it,
her exclamation made no connection in my brain at first.  I also noticed
that she had sidled up a little nearer to Captain Anthony, before it
occurred to me to turn my head.  I can tell you my neck stiffened in the
twisted position from the shock of actually seeing that old man!  He had
dared!  I suppose you think I ought to have looked upon him as mad.  But
I couldn't.  It would have been certainly easier.  But I could _not_.  You
should have seen him.  First of all he was completely dressed with his
very cap still on his head just as when he left me on deck two hours
before, saying in his soft voice: "The moment has come to go to
bed"--while he meant to go and do that thing and hide in his dark cabin,
and watch the stuff do its work.  A cold shudder ran down my back.  He
had his hands in the pockets of his jacket, his arms were pressed close
to his thin, upright body, and he shuffled across the cabin with his
short steps.  There was a red patch on each of his old soft cheeks as if
somebody had been pinching them.  He drooped his head a little, and
looked with a sort of underhand expectation at the captain and Mrs.
Anthony standing close together at the other end of the saloon.  The
calculating horrible impudence of it!  His daughter was there; and I am
certain he had seen the captain putting his finger on his lips to warn
me.  And then he had coolly come out!  He passed my imagination, I assure
you.  After that one shiver his presence killed every faculty in
me--wonder, horror, indignation.  I felt nothing in particular just as if
he were still the old gentleman who used to talk to me familiarly every
day on deck.  Would you believe it?"

"Mr. Powell challenged my powers of wonder at this internal phenomenon,"
went on Marlow after a slight pause.  "But even if they had not been
fully engaged, together with all my powers of attention in following the
facts of the case, I would not have been astonished by his statements
about himself.  Taking into consideration his youth they were by no means
incredible; or, at any rate, they were the least incredible part of the
whole.  They were also the least interesting part.  The interest was
elsewhere, and there of course all he could do was to look at the
surface.  The inwardness of what was passing before his eyes was hidden
from him, who had looked on, more impenetrably than from me who at a
distance of years was listening to his words.  What presently happened at
this crisis in Flora de Barral's fate was beyond his power of comment,
seemed in a sense natural.  And his own presence on the scene was so
strangely motived that it was left for me to marvel alone at this young
man, a completely chance-comer, having brought it about on that night.

Each situation created either by folly or wisdom has its psychological
moment.  The behaviour of young Powell with its mixture of boyish
impulses combined with instinctive prudence, had not created it--I can't
say that--but had discovered it to the very people involved.  What would
have happened if he had made a noise about his discovery?  But he didn't.
His head was full of Mrs. Anthony and he behaved with a discretion beyond
his years.  Some nice children often do; and surely it is not from
reflection.  They have their own inspirations.  Young Powell's
inspiration consisted in being "enthusiastic" about Mrs. Anthony.
'Enthusiastic' is really good.  And he was amongst them like a child,
sensitive, impressionable, plastic--but unable to find for himself any
sort of comment.

I don't know how much mine may be worth; but I believe that just then the
tension of the false situation was at its highest.  Of all the forms
offered to us by life it is the one demanding a couple to realize it
fully, which is the most imperative.  Pairing off is the fate of mankind.
And if two beings thrown together, mutually attracted, resist the
necessity, fail in understanding and voluntarily stop short of the--the
embrace, in the noblest meaning of the word, then they are committing a
sin against life, the call of which is simple.  Perhaps sacred.  And the
punishment of it is an invasion of complexity, a tormenting, forcibly
tortuous involution of feelings, the deepest form of suffering from which
indeed something significant may come at last, which may be criminal or
heroic, may be madness or wisdom--or even a straight if despairing
decision.

Powell on taking his eyes off the old gentleman noticed Captain Anthony,
swarthy as an African, by the side of Flora whiter than the lilies, take
his handkerchief out and wipe off his forehead the sweat of anguish--like
a man who is overcome.  "And no wonder," commented Mr. Powell here.  Then
the captain said, "Hadn't you better go back to your room."  This was to
Mrs. Anthony.  He tried to smile at her.  "Why do you look startled?  This
night is like any other night."

"Which," Powell again commented to me earnestly, "was a lie . . . No
wonder he sweated."  You see from this the value of Powell's comments.
Mrs. Anthony then said: "Why are you sending me away?"

"Why!  That you should go to sleep.  That you should rest."  And Captain
Anthony frowned.  Then sharply, "You stay here, Mr. Powell.  I shall want
you presently."

As a matter of fact Powell had not moved.  Flora did not mind his
presence.  He himself had the feeling of being of no account to those
three people.  He was looking at Mrs. Anthony as unabashed as the
proverbial cat looking at a king.  Mrs. Anthony glanced at him.  She did
not move, gripped by an inexplicable premonition.  She had arrived at the
very limit of her endurance as the object of Anthony's magnanimity; she
was the prey of an intuitive dread of she did not know what mysterious
influence; she felt herself being pushed back into that solitude, that
moral loneliness, which had made all her life intolerable.  And then, in
that close communion established again with Anthony, she felt--as on that
night in the garden--the force of his personal fascination.  The passive
quietness with which she looked at him gave her the appearance of a
person bewitched--or, say, mesmerically put to sleep--beyond any notion
of her surroundings.

After telling Mr. Powell not to go away the captain remained silent.
Suddenly Mrs. Anthony pushed back her loose hair with a decisive gesture
of her arms and moved still nearer to him.  "Here's papa up yet," she
said, but she did not look towards Mr. Smith.  "Why is it?  And you?  I
can't go on like this, Roderick--between you two.  Don't."

Anthony interrupted her as if something had untied his tongue.

"Oh yes.  Here's your father.  And . . . Why not.  Perhaps it is just as
well you came out.  Between us two?  Is that it?  I won't pretend I don't
understand.  I am not blind.  But I can't fight any longer for what I
haven't got.  I don't know what you imagine has happened.  Something has
though.  Only you needn't be afraid.  No shadow can touch you--because I
give up.  I can't say we had much talk about it, your father and I, but,
the long and the short of it is, that I must learn to live without
you--which I have told you was impossible.  I was speaking the truth.  But
I have done fighting, or waiting, or hoping.  Yes.  You shall go."

At this point Mr. Powell who (he confessed to me) was listening with
uncomprehending awe, heard behind his back a triumphant chuckling sound.
It gave him the shudders, he said, to mention it now; but at the time,
except for another chill down the spine, it had not the power to destroy
his absorption in the scene before his eyes, and before his ears too,
because just then Captain Anthony raised his voice grimly.  Perhaps he
too had heard the chuckle of the old man.

"Your father has found an argument which makes me pause, if it does not
convince me.  No!  I can't answer it.  I--I don't want to answer it.  I
simply surrender.  He shall have his way with you--and with me.  Only,"
he added in a gloomy lowered tone which struck Mr. Powell as if a pedal
had been put down, "only it shall take a little time.  I have never lied
to you.  Never.  I renounce not only my chance but my life.  In a few
days, directly we get into port, the very moment we do, I, who have said
I could never let you go, I shall let you go."

To the innocent beholder Anthony seemed at this point to become
physically exhausted.  My view is that the utter falseness of his, I may
say, aspirations, the vanity of grasping the empty air, had come to him
with an overwhelming force, leaving him disarmed before the other's mad
and sinister sincerity.  As he had said himself he could not fight for
what he did not possess; he could not face such a thing as this for the
sake of his mere magnanimity.  The normal alone can overcome the
abnormal.  He could not even reproach that man over there.  "I own myself
beaten," he said in a firmer tone.  "You are free.  I let you off since I
must."

Powell, the onlooker, affirms that at these incomprehensible words Mrs.
Anthony stiffened into the very image of astonishment, with a frightened
stare and frozen lips.  But next minute a cry came out from her heart,
not very loud but of a quality which made not only Captain Anthony (he
was not looking at her), not only him but also the more distant (and
equally unprepared) young man, catch their breath: "But I don't want to
be let off," she cried.

She was so still that one asked oneself whether the cry had come from
her.  The restless shuffle behind Powell's back stopped short, the
intermittent shadowy chuckling ceased too.  Young Powell, glancing round,
saw Mr. Smith raise his head with his faded eyes very still, puckered at
the corners, like a man perceiving something coming at him from a great
distance.  And Mrs. Anthony's voice reached Powell's ears, entreating and
indignant.

"You can't cast me off like this, Roderick.  I won't go away from you.  I
won't--"

Powell turned about and discovered then that what Mr. Smith was puckering
his eyes at, was the sight of his daughter clinging round Captain
Anthony's neck--a sight not in itself improper, but which had the power
to move young Powell with a bashfully profound emotion.  It was different
from his emotion while spying at the revelations of the skylight, but in
this case too he felt the discomfort, if not the guilt, of an unseen
beholder.  Experience was being piled up on his young shoulders.  Mrs.
Anthony's hair hung back in a dark mass like the hair of a drowned woman.
She looked as if she would let go and sink to the floor if the captain
were to withhold his sustaining arm.  But the captain obviously had no
such intention.  Standing firm and still he gazed with sombre eyes at Mr.
Smith.  For a time the low convulsive sobbing of Mr. Smith's daughter was
the only sound to trouble the silence.  The strength of Anthony's clasp
pressing Flora to his breast could not be doubted even at that distance,
and suddenly, awakening to his opportunity, he began to partly support
her, partly carry her in the direction of her cabin.  His head was bent
over her solicitously, then recollecting himself, with a glance full of
unwonted fire, his voice ringing in a note unknown to Mr. Powell, he
cried to him, "Don't you go on deck yet.  I want you to stay down here
till I come back.  There are some instructions I want to give you."

And before the young man could answer, Anthony had disappeared in the
stern-cabin, burdened and exulting.

"Instructions," commented Mr. Powell.  "That was all right.  Very likely;
but they would be such instructions as, I thought to myself, no ship's
officer perhaps had ever been given before.  It made me feel a little
sick to think what they would be dealing with, probably.  But there!
Everything that happens on board ship on the high seas has got to be
dealt with somehow.  There are no special people to fly to for
assistance.  And there I was with that old man left in my charge.  When
he noticed me looking at him he started to shuffle again athwart the
saloon.  He kept his hands rammed in his pockets, he was as stiff-backed
as ever, only his head hung down.  After a bit he says in his gentle soft
tone: "Did you see it?"

There were in Powell's head no special words to fit the horror of his
feelings.  So he said--he had to say something, "Good God!  What were you
thinking of, Mr. Smith, to try to . . . "   And then he left off.  He
dared not utter the awful word poison.  Mr. Smith stopped his prowl.

"Think!  What do you know of thinking.  I don't think.  There is
something in my head that thinks.  The thoughts in men, it's like being
drunk with liquor or--You can't stop them.  A man who thinks will think
anything.  No!  But have you seen it.  Have you?"

"I tell you I have!  I am certain!" said Powell forcibly.  "I was looking
at you all the time.  You've done something to the drink in that glass."

Then Powell lost his breath somehow.  Mr. Smith looked at him curiously,
with mistrust.

"My good young man, I don't know what you are talking about.  I ask
you--have you seen?  Who would have believed it? with her arms round his
neck.  When!  Oh!  Ha!  Ha!  You did see!  Didn't you?  It wasn't a
delusion--was it?  Her arms round . . . But I have never wholly trusted
her."

"Then I flew out at him, said Mr. Powell.  I told him he was jolly lucky
to have fallen upon Captain Anthony.  A man in a million.  He started
again shuffling to and fro.  "You too," he said mournfully, keeping his
eyes down.  "Eh?  Wonderful man?  But have you a notion who I am?  Listen!
I have been the Great Mr. de Barral.  So they printed it in the papers
while they were getting up a conspiracy.  And I have been doing time.  And
now I am brought low."  His voice died down to a mere breath.  "Brought
low."

He took his hands out of his pocket, dragged the cap down on his head and
stuck them back into his pockets, exactly as if preparing himself to go
out into a great wind.  "But not so low as to put up with this disgrace,
to see her, fast in this fellow's clutches, without doing something.  She
wouldn't listen to me.  Frightened?  Silly?  I had to think of some way
to get her out of this.  Did you think she cared for him?  No!  Would
anybody have thought so?  No!  She pretended it was for my sake.  She
couldn't understand that if I hadn't been an old man I would have flown
at his throat months ago.  As it was I was tempted every time he looked
at her.  My girl.  Ough!  Any man but this.  And all the time the wicked
little fool was lying to me.  It was their plot, their conspiracy!  These
conspiracies are the devil.  She has been leading me on, till she has
fairly put my head under the heel of that jailer, of that scoundrel, of
her husband . . .  Treachery!  Bringing me low.  Lower than herself.  In
the dirt.  That's what it means.  Doesn't it?  Under his heel!"

He paused in his restless shuffle and again, seizing his cap with both
hands, dragged it furiously right down on his ears.  Powell had lost
himself in listening to these broken ravings, in looking at that old
feverish face when, suddenly, quick as lightning, Mr. Smith spun round,
snatched up the captain's glass and with a stifled, hurried exclamation,
"Here's luck," tossed the liquor down his throat.

"I know now the meaning of the word 'Consternation,'" went on Mr. Powell.
"That was exactly my state of mind.  I thought to myself directly:
There's nothing in that drink.  I have been dreaming, I have made the
awfulest mistake! . . ."

Mr. Smith put the glass down.  He stood before Powell unharmed, quieted
down, in a listening attitude, his head inclined on one side, chewing his
thin lips.  Suddenly he blinked queerly, grabbed Powell's shoulder and
collapsed, subsiding all at once as though he had gone soft all over, as
a piece of silk stuff collapses.  Powell seized his arm instinctively and
checked his fall; but as soon as Mr. Smith was fairly on the floor he
jerked himself free and backed away.  Almost as quick he rushed forward
again and tried to lift up the body.  But directly he raised his
shoulders he knew that the man was dead!  Dead!

He lowered him down gently.  He stood over him without fear or any other
feeling, almost indifferent, far away, as it were.  And then he made
another start and, if he had not kept Mrs. Anthony always in his mind, he
would have let out a yell for help.  He staggered to her cabin-door, and,
as it was, his call for "Captain Anthony" burst out of him much too loud;
but he made a great effort of self-control.  "I am waiting for my orders,
sir," he said outside that door distinctly, in a steady tone.

It was very still in there; still as death.  Then he heard a shuffle of
feet and the captain's voice "All right.  Coming."  He leaned his back
against the bulkhead as you see a drunken man sometimes propped up
against a wall, half doubled up.  In that attitude the captain found him,
when he came out, pulling the door to after him quickly.  At once Anthony
let his eyes run all over the cabin.  Powell, without a word, clutched
his forearm, led him round the end of the table and began to justify
himself.  "I couldn't stop him," he whispered shakily.  "He was too quick
for me.  He drank it up and fell down."  But the captain was not
listening.  He was looking down at Mr. Smith, thinking perhaps that it
was a mere chance his own body was not lying there.  They did not want to
speak.  They made signs to each other with their eyes.  The captain
grasped Powell's shoulder as if in a vice and glanced at Mrs. Anthony's
cabin door, and it was enough.  He knew that the young man understood
him.  Rather!  Silence!  Silence for ever about this.  Their very glances
became stealthy.  Powell looked from the body to the door of the dead
man's state-room.  The captain nodded and let him go; and then Powell
crept over, hooked the door open and crept back with fearful glances
towards Mrs. Anthony's cabin.  They stooped over the corpse.  Captain
Anthony lifted up the shoulders.

Mr. Powell shuddered.  "I'll never forget that interminable journey
across the saloon, step by step, holding our breath.  For part of the way
the drawn half of the curtain concealed us from view had Mrs. Anthony
opened her door; but I didn't draw a free breath till after we laid the
body down on the swinging cot.  The reflection of the saloon light left
most of the cabin in the shadow.  Mr. Smith's rigid, extended body looked
shadowy too, shadowy and alive.  You know he always carried himself as
stiff as a poker.  We stood by the cot as though waiting for him to make
us a sign that he wanted to be left alone.  The captain threw his arm
over my shoulder and said in my very ear: "The steward'll find him in the
morning."

"I made no answer.  It was for him to say.  It was perhaps the best way.
It's no use talking about my thoughts.  They were not concerned with
myself, nor yet with that old man who terrified me more now than when he
was alive.  Him whom I pitied was the captain.  He whispered.  "I am
certain of you, Mr. Powell.  You had better go on deck now.  As to me
. . . " and I saw him raise his hands to his head as if distracted.  But his
last words before we stole out that cabin stick to my mind with the very
tone of his mutter--to himself, not to me:

"No!  No!  I am not going to stumble now over that corpse."

* * *

"This is what our Mr. Powell had to tell me," said Marlow, changing his
tone.  I was glad to learn that Flora de Barral had been saved from
_that_ sinister shadow at least falling upon her path.

We sat silent then, my mind running on the end of de Barral, on the
irresistible pressure of imaginary griefs, crushing conscience, scruples,
prudence, under their ever-expanding volume; on the sombre and venomous
irony in the obsession which had mastered that old man.

"Well," I said.

"The steward found him," Mr. Powell roused himself.  "He went in there
with a cup of tea at five and of course dropped it.  I was on watch
again.  He reeled up to me on deck pale as death.  I had been expecting
it; and yet I could hardly speak.  "Go and tell the captain quietly," I
managed to say.  He ran off muttering "My God!  My God!" and I'm hanged
if he didn't get hysterical while trying to tell the captain, and start
screaming in the saloon, "Fully dressed!  Dead!  Fully dressed!"  Mrs.
Anthony ran out of course but she didn't get hysterical.  Franklin, who
was there too, told me that she hid her face on the captain's breast and
then he went out and left them there.  It was days before Mrs. Anthony
was seen on deck.  The first time I spoke to her she gave me her hand and
said, "My poor father was quite fond of you, Mr. Powell."  She started
wiping her eyes and I fled to the other side of the deck.  One would like
to forget all this had ever come near her."

But clearly he could not, because after lighting his pipe he began musing
aloud: "Very strong stuff it must have been.  I wonder where he got it.
It could hardly be at a common chemist.  Well, he had it from somewhere--a
mere pinch it must have been, no more."

"I have my theory," observed Marlow, "which to a certain extent does away
with the added horror of a coldly premeditated crime.  Chance had stepped
in there too.  It was not Mr. Smith who obtained the poison.  It was the
Great de Barral.  And it was not meant for the obscure, magnanimous
conqueror of Flora de Barral; it was meant for the notorious financier
whose enterprises had nothing to do with magnanimity.  He had his
physician in his days of greatness.  I even seem to remember that the man
was called at the trial on some small point or other.  I can imagine that
de Barral went to him when he saw, as he could hardly help seeing, the
possibility of a "triumph of envious rivals"--a heavy sentence.

I doubt if for love or even for money, but I think possibly, from pity
that man provided him with what Mr. Powell called "strong stuff."  From
what Powell saw of the very act I am fairly certain it must have been
contained in a capsule and that he had it about him on the last day of
his trial, perhaps secured by a stitch in his waistcoat pocket.  He
didn't use it.  Why?  Did he think of his child at the last moment?  Was
it want of courage?  We can't tell.  But he found it in his clothes when
he came out of jail.  It had escaped investigation if there was any.
Chance had armed him.  And chance alone, the chance of Mr. Powell's life,
forced him to turn the abominable weapon against himself.

I imparted my theory to Mr. Powell who accepted it at once as, in a
sense, favourable to the father of Mrs. Anthony.  Then he waved his hand.
"Don't let us think of it."

I acquiesced and very soon he observed dreamily:

"I was with Captain and Mrs. Anthony sailing all over the world for near
on six years.  Almost as long as Franklin."

"Oh yes!  What about Franklin?" I asked.

Powell smiled.  "He left the _Ferndale_ a year or so afterwards, and I
took his place.  Captain Anthony recommended him for a command.  You
don't think Captain Anthony would chuck a man aside like an old glove.
But of course Mrs. Anthony did not like him very much.  I don't think she
ever let out a whisper against him but Captain Anthony could read her
thoughts.

And again Powell seemed to lose himself in the past.  I asked, for
suddenly the vision of the Fynes passed through my mind.

"Any children?"

Powell gave a start.  "No!  No!  Never had any children," and again
subsided, puffing at his short briar pipe.

"Where are they now?" I inquired next as if anxious to ascertain that all
Fyne's fears had been misplaced and vain as our fears often are; that
there were no undesirable cousins for his dear girls, no danger of
intrusion on their spotless home.  Powell looked round at me slowly, his
pipe smouldering in his hand.

"Don't you know?" he uttered in a deep voice.

"Know what?"

"That the _Ferndale_ was lost this four years or more.  Sunk.  Collision.
And Captain Anthony went down with her."

"You don't say so!" I cried quite affected as if I had known Captain
Anthony personally.  "Was--was Mrs. Anthony lost too?"

"You might as well ask if I was lost," Mr. Powell rejoined so testily as
to surprise me.  "You see me here,--don't you."

He was quite huffy, but noticing my wondering stare he smoothed his
ruffled plumes.  And in a musing tone.

"Yes.  Good men go out as if there was no use for them in the world.  It
seems as if there were things that, as the Turks say, are written.  Or
else fate has a try and sometimes misses its mark.  You remember that
close shave we had of being run down at night, I told you of, my first
voyage with them.  This go it was just at dawn.  A flat calm and a fog
thick enough to slice with a knife.  Only there were no explosives on
board.  I was on deck and I remember the cursed, murderous thing looming
up alongside and Captain Anthony (we were both on deck) calling out,
"Good God!  What's this!  Shout for all hands, Powell, to save
themselves.  There's no dynamite on board now.  I am going to get the
wife! . . "  I yelled, all the watch on deck yelled.  Crash!"

Mr. Powell gasped at the recollection.  "It was a Belgian Green Star
liner, the _Westland_," he went on, "commanded by one of those stop-for-
nothing skippers.  Flaherty was his name and I hope he will die without
absolution.  She cut half through the old _Ferndale_ and after the blow
there was a silence like death.  Next I heard the captain back on deck
shouting, "Set your engines slow ahead," and a howl of "Yes, yes,"
answering him from her forecastle; and then a whole crowd of people up
there began making a row in the fog.  They were throwing ropes down to us
in dozens, I must say.  I and the captain fastened one of them under Mrs.
Anthony's arms: I remember she had a sort of dim smile on her face."

"Haul up carefully," I shouted to the people on the steamer's deck.
"You've got a woman on that line."

The captain saw her landed up there safe.  And then we made a rush round
our decks to see no one was left behind.  As we got back the captain
says: "Here she's gone at last, Powell; the dear old thing!  Run down at
sea."

"Indeed she is gone," I said.  "But it might have been worse.  Shin up
this rope, sir, for God's sake.  I will steady it for you."

"What are you thinking about," he says angrily.  "It isn't my turn.  Up
with you."

These were the last words he ever spoke on earth I suppose.  I knew he
meant to be the last to leave his ship, so I swarmed up as quick as I
could, and those damned lunatics up there grab at me from above, lug me
in, drag me along aft through the row and the riot of the silliest
excitement I ever did see.  Somebody hails from the bridge, "Have you got
them all on board?" and a dozen silly asses start yelling all together,
"All saved!  All saved," and then that accursed Irishman on the bridge,
with me roaring No!  No! till I thought my head would burst, rings his
engines astern.  He rings the engines astern--I fighting like mad to make
myself heard!  And of course . . . "

I saw tears, a shower of them fall down Mr. Powell's face.  His voice
broke.

"The _Ferndale_ went down like a stone and Captain Anthony went down with
her, the finest man's soul that ever left a sailor's body.  I raved like
a maniac, like a devil, with a lot of fools crowding round me and asking,
"Aren't you the captain?"

"I wasn't fit to tie the shoe-strings of the man you have drowned," I
screamed at them . . .  Well!  Well!  I could see for myself that it was
no good lowering a boat.  You couldn't have seen her alongside.  No use.
And only think, Marlow, it was I who had to go and tell Mrs. Anthony.
They had taken her down below somewhere, first-class saloon.  I had to go
and tell her!  That Flaherty, God forgive him, comes to me as white as a
sheet, "I think you are the proper person."  God forgive him.  I wished
to die a hundred times.  A lot of kind ladies, passengers, were
chattering excitedly around Mrs. Anthony--a real parrot house.  The
ship's doctor went before me.  He whispers right and left and then there
falls a sudden hush.  Yes, I wished myself dead.  But Mrs. Anthony was a
brick.

Here Mr. Powell fairly burst into tears.  "No one could help loving
Captain Anthony.  I leave you to imagine what he was to her.  Yet before
the week was out it was she who was helping me to pull myself together."

"Is Mrs. Anthony in England now?" I asked after a while.

He wiped his eyes without any false shame.  "Oh yes."  He began to look
for matches, and while diving for the box under the table added: "And not
very far from here either.  That little village up there--you know."

"No!  Really!  Oh I see!"

Mr. Powell smoked austerely, very detached.  But I could not let him off
like this.  The sly beggar.  So this was the secret of his passion for
sailing about the river, the reason of his fondness for that creek.

"And I suppose," I said, "that you are still as 'enthusiastic' as ever.
Eh?  If I were you I would just mention my enthusiasm to Mrs. Anthony.
Why not?"

He caught his falling pipe neatly.  But if what the French call
_effarement_ was ever expressed on a human countenance it was on this
occasion, testifying to his modesty, his sensibility and his innocence.
He looked afraid of somebody overhearing my audacious--almost
sacrilegious hint--as if there had not been a mile and a half of lonely
marshland and dykes between us and the nearest human habitation.  And
then perhaps he remembered the soothing fact for he allowed a gleam to
light up his eyes, like the reflection of some inward fire tended in the
sanctuary of his heart by a devotion as pure as that of any vestal.

It flashed and went out.  He smiled a bashful smile, sighed:

"Pah!  Foolishness.  You ought to know better," he said, more sad than
annoyed.  "But I forgot that you never knew Captain Anthony," he added
indulgently.

I reminded him that I knew Mrs. Anthony; even before he--an old friend
now--had ever set eyes on her.  And as he told me that Mrs. Anthony had
heard of our meetings I wondered whether she would care to see me.  Mr.
Powell volunteered no opinion then; but next time we lay in the creek he
said, "She will be very pleased.  You had better go to-day."

The afternoon was well advanced before I approached the cottage.  The
amenity of a fine day in its decline surrounded me with a beneficent, a
calming influence; I felt it in the silence of the shady lane, in the
pure air, in the blue sky.  It is difficult to retain the memory of the
conflicts, miseries, temptations and crimes of men's self-seeking
existence when one is alone with the charming serenity of the unconscious
nature.  Breathing the dreamless peace around the picturesque cottage I
was approaching, it seemed to me that it must reign everywhere, over all
the globe of water and land and in the hearts of all the dwellers on this
earth.

Flora came down to the garden gate to meet me, no longer the perversely
tempting, sorrowful, wisp of white mist drifting in the complicated bad
dream of existence.  Neither did she look like a forsaken elf.  I
stammered out stupidly, "Again in the country, Miss . . . Mrs . . . "  She
was very good, returned the pressure of my hand, but we were slightly
embarrassed.  Then we laughed a little.  Then we became grave.

I am no lover of day-breaks.  You know how thin, equivocal, is the light
of the dawn.  But she was now her true self, she was like a fine tranquil
afternoon--and not so very far advanced either.  A woman not much over
thirty, with a dazzling complexion and a little colour, a lot of hair, a
smooth brow, a fine chin, and only the eyes of the Flora of the old days,
absolutely unchanged.

In the room into which she led me we found a Miss Somebody--I didn't
catch the name,--an unobtrusive, even an indistinct, middle-aged person
in black.  A companion.  All very proper.  She came and went and even sat
down at times in the room, but a little apart, with some sewing.  By the
time she had brought in a lighted lamp I had heard all the details which
really matter in this story.  Between me and her who was once Flora de
Barral the conversation was not likely to keep strictly to the weather.

The lamp had a rosy shade; and its glow wreathed her in perpetual
blushes, made her appear wonderfully young as she sat before me in a
deep, high-backed arm-chair.  I asked:

"Tell me what is it you said in that famous letter which so upset Mrs.
Fyne, and caused little Fyne to interfere in this offensive manner?"

"It was simply crude," she said earnestly.  "I was feeling reckless and I
wrote recklessly.  I knew she would disapprove and I wrote foolishly.  It
was the echo of her own stupid talk.  I said that I did not love her
brother but that I had no scruples whatever in marrying him."

She paused, hesitating, then with a shy half-laugh:

"I really believed I was selling myself, Mr. Marlow.  And I was proud of
it.  What I suffered afterwards I couldn't tell you; because I only
discovered my love for my poor Roderick through agonies of rage and
humiliation.  I came to suspect him of despising me; but I could not put
it to the test because of my father.  Oh!  I would not have been too
proud.  But I had to spare poor papa's feelings.  Roderick was perfect,
but I felt as though I were on the rack and not allowed even to cry out.
Papa's prejudice against Roderick was my greatest grief.  It was
distracting.  It frightened me.  Oh!  I have been miserable!  That night
when my poor father died suddenly I am certain they had some sort of
discussion, about me.  But I did not want to hold out any longer against
my own heart!  I could not."

She stopped short, then impulsively:

"Truth will out, Mr. Marlow."

"Yes," I said.

She went on musingly.

"Sorrow and happiness were mingled at first like darkness and light.  For
months I lived in a dusk of feelings.  But it was quiet.  It was warm
. . . "

Again she paused, then going back in her thoughts.  "No!  There was no
harm in that letter.  It was simply foolish.  What did I know of life
then?  Nothing.  But Mrs. Fyne ought to have known better.  She wrote a
letter to her brother, a little later.  Years afterwards Roderick allowed
me to glance at it.  I found in it this sentence: 'For years I tried to
make a friend of that girl; but I warn you once more that she has the
nature of a heartless adventuress . . . '  Adventuress!" repeated Flora
slowly.  "So be it.  I have had a fine adventure."

"It was fine, then," I said interested.

"The finest in the world!  Only think!  I loved and I was loved,
untroubled, at peace, without remorse, without fear.  All the world, all
life were transformed for me.  And how much I have seen!  How good people
were to me!  Roderick was so much liked everywhere.  Yes, I have known
kindness and safety.  The most familiar things appeared lighted up with a
new light, clothed with a loveliness I had never suspected.  The sea
itself! . . . You are a sailor.  You have lived your life on it.  But do
you know how beautiful it is, how strong, how charming, how friendly, how
mighty . . . "

I listened amazed and touched.  She was silent only a little while.

"It was too good to last.  But nothing can rob me of it now . . .  Don't
think that I repine.  I am not even sad now.  Yes, I have been happy.  But
I remember also the time when I was unhappy beyond endurance, beyond
desperation.  Yes.  You remember that.  And later on, too.  There was a
time on board the _Ferndale_ when the only moments of relief I knew were
when I made Mr. Powell talk to me a little on the poop.  You like
him?--Don't you?"

"Excellent fellow," I said warmly.  "You see him often?"

"Of course.  I hardly know another soul in the world.  I am alone.  And
he has plenty of time on his hands.  His aunt died a few years ago.  He's
doing nothing, I believe."

"He is fond of the sea," I remarked.  "He loves it."

"He seems to have given it up," she murmured.

"I wonder why?"

She remained silent.  "Perhaps it is because he loves something else
better," I went on.  "Come, Mrs. Anthony, don't let me carry away from
here the idea that you are a selfish person, hugging the memory of your
past happiness, like a rich man his treasure, forgetting the poor at the
gate."

I rose to go, for it was getting late.  She got up in some agitation and
went out with me into the fragrant darkness of the garden.  She detained
my hand for a moment and then in the very voice of the Flora of old days,
with the exact intonation, showing the old mistrust, the old doubt of
herself, the old scar of the blow received in childhood, pathetic and
funny, she murmured, "Do you think it possible that he should care for
me?"

"Just ask him yourself.  You are brave."

"Oh, I am brave enough," she said with a sigh.

"Then do.  For if you don't you will be wronging that patient man
cruelly."

I departed leaving her dumb.  Next day, seeing Powell making preparations
to go ashore, I asked him to give my regards to Mrs. Anthony.  He
promised he would.

"Listen, Powell," I said.  "We got to know each other by chance?"

"Oh, quite!" he admitted, adjusting his hat.

"And the science of life consists in seizing every chance that presents
itself," I pursued.  "Do you believe that?"

"Gospel truth," he declared innocently.

"Well, don't forget it."

"Oh, I!  I don't expect now anything to present itself," he said, jumping
ashore.

He didn't turn up at high water.  I set my sail and just as I had cast
off from the bank, round the black barn, in the dusk, two figures
appeared and stood silent, indistinct.

"Is that you, Powell?" I hailed.

"And Mrs. Anthony," his voice came impressively through the silence of
the great marsh.  "I am not sailing to-night.  I have to see Mrs. Anthony
home."

"Then I must even go alone," I cried.

Flora's voice wished me "_bon voyage_" in a most friendly but tremulous
tone.

"You shall hear from me before long," shouted Powell, suddenly, just as
my boat had cleared the mouth of the creek.

"This was yesterday," added Marlow, lolling in the arm-chair lazily.  "I
haven't heard yet; but I expect to hear any moment . . .  What on earth
are you grinning at in this sarcastic manner?  I am not afraid of going
to church with a friend.  Hang it all, for all my belief in Chance I am
not exactly a pagan . . . "

