LETTER III
FROM THE REV. JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER TO THE REV. HOSEA BALLOU.

PORTSMOUTH, JAN. 10, 1810.

_Dear Sir_,--It was not my intention, in the letter which I sometime
since addressed to you, to enter into a discussion of the subject of
Universalism, much less, for reasons that were suggested, provoke a
dispute upon it. I therefore endeavoured so to express myself that no
reply should be necessary.

My object was to discharge what I thought a duty of friendship and
affection, rendered more necessary by my personal declarations to you
at my house, by stating to you with frankness and decision what I was
persuaded would be the final result of that sentiment which you have
embraced, and are advocating among us; and to fulfil a duty which I
owe to myself, and to Him who has set me here to be a watchman, that I
might use every proper precaution to appear before my Judge at last
with unstained garments, preclude an occasion for a crimination and
reproach, and give up my account with joy and not with grief.

I might have a secret hope that the apprehensions so seriously and
candidly suggested might excite you to review your sentiments, and
renewedly compare them with the only standard, and that this serious,
calm and retired exercise might be accompanied with an influence from
above, that might alter your views and conclusions upon the subject;
but my principal design was to discharge what I thought my duty as
above stated. You have thought it your duty to remark upon the
address, and intimate an expectation that I should rejoin; your
professions and candor have induced me for a time, to hesitate whether
I ought not, in this instance, to depart from my general resolutions,
and this hesitation has had influence in my delay to notice your
letter. But the result of my hesitations, reflections and prayer, is a
more full persuasion, that if the writings of Dr. Edwards, Dr. Strong
and others who have discussed the subject, and which doubtless you
have seen, have produced no hesitation or conviction in your mind, it
would be vain and idle to expect it from any efforts of mine; and that
it would be a misuse of time, which might be employed in more hopeful
prospects of usefulness. This is a reason which I at present feel
satisfied to give to God and my conscience for declining to enter upon
a discussion of this subject, and I trust it will be accepted at the
tribunal of God. To that tribunal I humbly and cheerfully refer the
decision of the question that would be matter of dispute between us,
from which decision there will be no appeal, and to which there will
be no liberty to reply. I reciprocate the tender of every office of
friendship consistent with what I think my duty to God and my
conscience, and shall not cease to pray that those who have erred from
the truth may be recovered from their errors, and being sanctified by
the truth, may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. Your friend and
well wisher.

J. BUCKMINSTER.

       *       *       *       *       *

LETTER IV.

FROM THE REV. HOSEA BALLOU TO THE REV. JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER.

PORTSMOUTH, JAN. 11, 1810.

_Rev. Sir_,--Your favour of yesterday is acknowledged with that
respectful submission which your age and experience, together with the
spirit and import of your note justly impose, and with gratitude also,
for an obligation which I wished to be under in being satisfied of
your having received my epistle of the 1st inst. This I learn by the
friendly rebuke in your first section in which you speak of my reply
as unnecessary, and also by your condescending to refer to it again in
your fourth section. Had I, sir, viewed your address altogether in the
light which you inform me you did, or had you informed me that a reply
would not be expected, I should by no means have troubled you contrary
to your wishes. However, as you are an experienced judge of all such
matters, so you will condescend to pardon me if in your judgment my
epistle is destitute of important subjects. You are so kind as to
repeat the design of your address again, certifying me that your
object was to discharge the office of friendship, by stating to me
with frankness and decision what you are persuaded will be the final
result of that sentiment which I have embraced and am advocating. No
man, sir, will ever be more ready to acknowledge a friendly office
with sentiments of gratitude than your humble servant; but I am sure
it cannot be expected by you, that I should receive the testimony of a
man, however friendly to me, as a decision against that gospel which I
did not receive of man, nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

Your precautions in warning me as they regard your final justification
before God, I hope will be superceded by the acceptable atonement of
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world; though that
shall not render your faithfulness void of approbation in a
subordinate sense. The secret hope which you entertained of exciting
me, by your serious apprehensions to review my sentiments and
renewedly to compare them with the only standard, would perhaps appear
not altogether so necessary, did you know that my daily business is to
study the law and the testimony, which increase their light as they
are more examined, and furnish every hour I study them, new proofs of
the unbounded goodness of God to the sinful race of Adam. O my dear
friend! Could you but know the inexpressible consolation and peace
which I enjoy in believing that he, who gave himself a ransom for all
men, will finally see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied,
you could not feel concerned about the final issue of the doctrine
which I believe and advocate!

I feel that my blessed Lord and kind Redeemer deserves every exertion
of mine to persuade men to the knowledge of that truth which would
make them free; nor can I easily forbear to express my desire that
your greater experience and better abilities might be employed in
shewing to poor benighted sinners the divine amplitude of gospel grace
for the salvation of all mankind. I believe, dear sir, if it should
please God to discover this soul rejoicing truth to you, that the
angels would rejoice in heaven, and saints on earth would be made
exceeding glad: yes, your church and parish would follow you with
rapturous joy to the fountain which is open for Judah and Jerusalem to
wash in from sin and uncleanness, and to which the fulness of the
Gentiles shall be gathered.

I am not at all disposed to complain of your decision not to enter
into an investigation of the doctrine against the truth of which you
have opposed your testimony; though I should hardly have believed that
in your judgment, such a testimony could have been thought proper
unless preceded or succeeded by some colour of evidence. No man, my
dear sir, is less calculated to enjoy a dry, unfruitful controversy on
religious sentiments than I am--though I wish to hold myself in
perpetual readiness to give an answer to every man who may ask me a
reason for the hope that is within me with meekness and fear.

The arguments of Dr. Edwards and Dr. Strong being disposed to
represent the divine economy of grace less extensive than the plain
and positive promises of God, the testimony of the prophets, the word
of life through Christ and the witnessing apostles, have declared it
to be, stand forever refuted by that cloud of witnesses, as they are
also by the spirit of Christ in every humble believing heart. It is
far more easy for the rational lover of Christ to believe those
learned doctors, deceived by the vain traditions of the schools, than
to believe that the grace of God in Christ Jesus is less extensive
than his word and spirit declare it to be.

If there never were a true Christian whose desires did not extend to
the whole human race, that all might be brought to a saving repentance
and to holy and happy life in Christ, then Jesus has never left
himself without a witness in his disciples, that all the creeds of men
which limit the divine favour are false. With whatsoever panics worms
of the dust may have struck their fellow worms by challenging them to
a decision of their weak, insignificant notions at a tribunal of an
omnipotent judge, such solemn appeals can have but little effect on
the humble mind who leans not to his own wisdom, and who views every
thing already decided in the eternal system of that God whose tender
mercies are over all the works of his hands.

The mode in which you express the circumstance of final judgment is
rather indicative of what I hope you do not mean, as it intimates that
too much freedom has been assumed by me in presuming to reply to your
address. There is much to excite my gratitude in the assurance you
give me of reciprocating offices of friendship, consistent with duty
to God;--and while you, sir, give me to understand that I have an
interest in your prayers, permit me to beg your supplications, that I
may be faithful unto death; and to assure you of my humble desire that
you may continue to be useful to your fellow pilgrims while you live,
and find acceptance with God through Christ at last. Your most obliged
friend and humble servant in Christ. HOSEA BALLOU.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NOTE FROM THE REV. DR. BUCKMINSTER TO THE REV. MR. BALLOU.

FRIDAY, P. M.

It is a duty which Mr. Buckminster owes to himself to declare that the
thought of intimating that it was any assumption or presumption in Mr.
Ballou to reply to his address, never once entered his mind; and he is
sorry if any thing in Mr. Buckminster's communications could give
ground to suspect such foolish vanity; but it confirms the correctness
of the opinion, that _disputes however temperately conducted are
rarely productive of any good_. All that he meant was that the
decision at the tribunal of God would be final.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NOTE FROM THE REV. MR. BALLOU TO THE REV. DR. BUCKMINSTER,
IN REPLY.

SATURDAY, P. M.

Mr. Ballou is happy to acknowledge the honour done him by the Doctor's
note of Friday, P. M. by which he realizes the hope expressed in his
epistle of the 11th inst, that what appeared to be intimated by the
Doctor's letter of the 10th inst. in relation to final judgment was
not meant. In the mean time Mr. Ballou thinks it a duty which he owes
to himself to point out to the Doctor the items in his letter which
were misunderstood. The Doctor's expression, "I therefore endeavoured
so to express myself that no reply should be necessary," was
understood to intimate that the reply was unnecessary; and the
Doctor's expression, "there will be no liberty to reply," was
understood to intimate that liberty had been assumed unnecessarily. In
confirming the opinion, that "_disputes however temperately conducted,
are rarely productive of any good_." Mr. Ballou thinks his mistake has
produced but little consequence, as that opinion was so confirmed
before, that even a reason for an assertion could not with propriety
be given.


