PART I.

When any portion of the earth is colonized by civilized man, an era
of change and readjustment at once begins. The untilled plain, the
primeval forest, the bridgeless river, the malaria-breathing swamp, and
the jungle—lurking place for beasts of prey—are all obstructions which
must be removed from the highway of social and industrial progress.
Until a new environment had been created, the colonists of Virginia
and New England were like helpless children, compared with the Indians
whom they had come to disinherit. The hills were soon cleared, and the
water-courses dried up, swamps were drained, and lakes were made in the
valleys, the plains were plowed and planted with exotic vegetation, and
great regions of land were entirely changed in character by irrigation
and the use of manure. The New World has in two centuries become in
very truth a new world, for its physical features have been entirely
reconstructed. The aboriginal man retreated before the advancing strides
of civilization, and has now been practically exterminated, at least east
of the Mississippi River.

The manner in which the man of European descent has eliminated and
replaced the son of the soil is fairly typical of changes which have
occurred in the animal and vegetable life of the continent. Bear,
moose, caribou, deer, wolf, beaver, and all other large animals have
been entirely destroyed in many parts of the country, and the time is
not far remote when they will exist among us only in a state of partial
or entire domestication. The prairie chicken once reared its brood
in Massachusetts, but is now never seen east of the Alleghenies. The
alligator is fast being exterminated in Florida and Mississippi, and the
buffalo is now rarely to be seen except in captivity. The sea cow of the
north Pacific, the great auk of New England and Newfoundland stand with
the dodo, the moa, and the zebra in the list of animals which have become
extinct within the memory of man, and the list will continue to increase.
A similar story might be told for birds, reptiles, and plants. The
rattlesnake is retreating to the mountain tops, the turkey, the pigeon,
the woodpecker and hosts of others are disappearing, the medicinal plant
ginseng, once so important in the Alleghenies, is almost a rarity to
botanists.

The aboriginal animals and plants go. They are replaced by others,
which in that struggle for existence which plays so important a part in
determining careers for plants and animals, have become particularly
well fitted to be man’s companions. The clover, the ox-eye daisy, the
buttercup, the thistle, the mullein, the dandelion, followed the European
to America, and with them the broad-leaved plantain, which, as every one
knows, the Indians called “the white man’s foot,” because it sprung up at
once in every meadow where the soles of his shoes had touched. With these
came the European mouse, the rat, the cat, the dog. The browsing herds of
deer and buffalo were replaced by oxen, horses and sheep, and the greedy,
quarrelsome, impertinent sparrow was permitted to drive out the native
birds which many of us would have been glad to keep as relics of the old
dispensation.

Not less important in many regions have been the changes in the life in
the waters. In many of our streams and lakes the fish, formerly abundant,
have been entirely exterminated. Sometimes, perhaps we may charitably say
usually, this has been the result of ignorance, but often, I fear, it may
be ascribed to recklessness or cupidity.

Fishes may be grouped, according to their habits, into two
classes—resident and migratory. Representatives of each of these classes
may be found both in fresh water and in the sea. Among resident fresh
water fishes may be mentioned the perch, the catfish, suckers and dace,
the pike and pickerel, the black bass. Resident sea fishes are typified
by the flounders, cod, sheepshead, blackfish and sea bass, which are
found near the shore in winter as well as summer. In cold climates,
resident fishes always retreat in winter into deeper water to avoid the
cold, and if they can not get beyond its reach they subside into a state
of torpidity or hibernation, in which all the vital functions are more or
less inert. The carp, and many other kinds of fish, at this time, burrow
into “kettles” or holes in the mud in the bottom of the pond, where they
remain for months. A hybernating fish may be frozen solid in the middle
of a cake of ice, and emerge when thawed out, unharmed.

Migratory fishes, on the other hand, are those which wander extensively
from season to season. There are migrating fish in the sea, which, like
the mackerel, the bluefish, the menhaden and the porgy come near our
northern coasts only in the summer, and in winter retreat to regions
either in the south or far out at sea unknown; others, like the smelt and
the sea herring, which retreat northward in summer and only appear in
quantity on the Atlantic coast of the United States in the colder months
of the year.

Then there are migratory fishes which live part of the year in the
rivers. Such are the shad and the river-herrings or alewives, which leave
the sea in the spring and ascend to the river heads to spawn, and the
salmon, which does likewise, to spawn in the brooklets in November and
December. Still more remarkable is the eel, which breeds in the sea,
where the male eels always remain, while the young females, when as large
as darning needles, ascend in the spring to inland lakes and streams,
there to remain, until, after three or four years, they are grown to
maturity, when they descend to salt water, to reproduce their kind and
die.

There are also migratory fish in fresh water, like the white fish, the
salmon, trout, and the siscowet, which live in the abyssal depths of the
great lakes and swim up into the shallows and creeks in winter to spawn
their eggs, and the brook trout and dace, which for a similar purpose
ascend from the pools and quiet meadow stretches to the pebble-paved
ripplets near the spring sources of the brooks in which they live.

Having, in a general way, classified fish according to their habits, we
are in a position to consider the manner in which man has succeeded in
exterminating them. As a general rule, fish deposit their eggs in shallow
water, and the time of egg-laying is very closely dependent upon the
temperature of the water. The eggs of a fish are, as every one knows,
enclosed in two sacs, or ovaries, which are situated close to the walls
of the abdominal cavity, and separated from the water by thin walls of
skin and flesh, rarely, even in the largest fish, more than a sixteenth
of an inch in thickness. Experiment has shown that the temperature of
the blood in the abdomen of a fish deviates very little from that of the
water in which it is floating. Experiment has also shown that as soon
as the water has reached a certain degree of warmth, variable with each
kind of fish, the eggs are sure to be laid within a very few hours. This
being the case, it usually happens that great schools of fish always
congregate together at one time upon the spawning grounds. Since the
spawning grounds of many kinds of fish are in shallow water, and the fish
are at that time most easily caught, it happens that many of the most
extensive fisheries are carried on in the spawning season. The delicious
little smelts which our neighbors in Maine and New Brunswick send us by
the hundred car-loads each winter, packed in little boxes of snow, are
always full of eggs—so are the lake white fish, when they are caught, and
the shad, and the Potomac herrings, and the cod, and the mullet, and the
herring, and in early spring the mackerel.

Now consider how easy it is, taking these fish so much at a disadvantage,
to diminish their numbers, simply by catching them. The man who catches
a spawning cod destroys anywhere from 5,000,000 to 7,000,000 of eggs, a
spawning halibut at least 2,000,000, a shad from 50,000 to 2,000,000. Is
not the American breakfasting on broiled shad roe a modern representative
of him who killed the goose which laid the golden egg? When we consider
that the yearly catch of mother-fish along the New England coast does
not fall short of ten to fifteen millions of individuals, we may gain an
adequate idea of the destruction of fish life by the fisheries.

Still it is not necessary to be alarmed at these figures. They are
presented simply in illustration of the immense possibilities of
destruction when the fisheries are carried on at the spawning season. As
a matter of fact, cod are just as abundant along our coasts as they ever
were, and it has not yet been demonstrated that any kind of sea fish has
ever been diminished in numbers by hook and line fishing or by netting
them at a distance from the shore.

Some kinds of fishes, however, enter narrow bays and estuaries to spawn,
and if they are there recklessly destroyed, the local supply at least
may be permanently interfered with. This has apparently been the case
with certain species in Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island. For instance,
the scuppaug or porgy has been seriously diminished in numbers in
certain seasons, years ago; the supply will probably be replenished from
adjoining waters by the reparative tendencies of nature, if this indeed
has not already been done. So, too, the halibut has been exterminated
in Massachusetts, where it was once so abundant as to be regarded as a
nuisance by the fishermen. It is in the inland or freshwater fisheries,
however, that the work of extermination has been thorough, and here, from
the nature of the case, the work once accomplished, it is beyond the
power of nature to remedy the damage. If I could take the reader with
me next May to one of the many little streamlets of Cape Cod, flowing
southward into Nantucket Sound, I could show him a scene which he would
never forget. The little rill has been encased at bottom and sides with
planks, so that it flows for a mile or two, down to its junction with the
sea, in a straight trough not over fifteen inches wide, and a foot in
depth. At a convenient level place a shed has been built over the trough,
and in the floor is a kind of cistern, through which the waters of the
brook flow as it goes on its course. In the shed stand two men, each
with a great scoop of netting, with which they labor, dipping the fish
out of the cistern as they fill it, swimming up the trough from the sea.
Several barrels are taken out every day, and in some of these streams one
or two thousand barrels always reward a season’s work, the brook being
the property of the township, and the privilege of fishing being sold at
auction for the benefit of the public. Dip! dip! dip it is all day long,
and as the little alewives are tumbled into barrels and carts, the eye of
the practiced observer notes the plump sides and the brilliant iridescent
coloring of the silvery scales, which indicate that the fish are loaded
with a precious burden of eggs, to deposit which in the pond at the head
of the stream is the motive which leads them to press forward so blindly
into the trap men have set for them.

In these enlightened days the town laws generally require that the brooks
shall be unobstructed for one or two days each week, and so a few fish
get by the barriers and are allowed to perpetuate their kind. In the
past, however, many excellent “herring brooks” have been completely
deprived of their fish.

This illustrates how completely man has the destinies of river fish
under his control. Suppose that instead of a fish house with movable
barriers, an impassable dam had been built. Of course the fish would
have been locked out, and their kind exterminated in that immediate
region. This is precisely what has happened in almost every river and
stream on the Atlantic coast of the United States. Shad and salmon were
formerly abundant in every river of New England—and shad and alewives
in every considerable stream south to Florida. Now, they are excluded,
either entirely or in great part from the waters in which they once
swarmed in great schools. Take, for instance, the Connecticut River. In
colonial days, salmon were there in immense numbers. All summer long
they were swimming up from the sea to the headwaters of the river, to
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont, where they deposited their
eggs in the cool, clear rapids of the main river and its tributaries.
They were so abundant that the shad fishermen used to require their
customers to take one salmon with every shad, and, as the hackneyed
old story goes, the apprentices were accustomed to stipulate in their
papers that they should not be required to eat salmon above three times
a week. In 1798 a dam was built across the river at Miller’s Falls.
Next year many salmon were seen at the base of the dam, the following
year a smaller number, and in less than ten years salmon had entirely
disappeared from the Connecticut. Not a salmon was seen in those waters
until seventy years later, when, in 1871, a single artificially bred fish
was caught at Saybrook. I could show you a map prepared by an associate
of mine, in which the present and former limits of the shad are shown,
and you would see how they once ranged clear up into the mountains, far
up the Susquehanna into New York State, up the Connecticut into New
Hampshire and Vermont, and how now, in many rivers, they are confined to
very restrictive stretches at the river mouths.

The dams operate in still another way. We have considered hitherto only
their influence upon the sea fish which ascend the rivers to spawn.
Their effect upon the resident fish is quite as baneful. As the suckers,
and the bass, and the cat fish, and dace, and trout, grow large, they
naturally go down stream in search of deeper water and wider pools, where
they get more room and better food. If they luckily escape the baskets
and traps set for them in every dam, they never can get back. The streams
are gradually sifted out and left tenantless.

Little need be said of the manner in which ponds are drained dry in
order to get all the fish in them, in which immense seines are hauled
in little lakes, clearing out everything, great and small, of the use
of explosives, lime, or _cocculus indicus_, in the work of wholesale
destruction. The fact stands undisputed and undisputable, that in many
parts of the United States the native fish are actually exterminated, and
the mud turtles, muskrats and fresh water clams left as sole occupants.
Even the harmonious bull-frog has been devoured by man, and only his
diminutive cousins, the cricket frogs and hylas left—the aquatic choir
can henceforth perform only soprano and contralto songs, unless the fish
culturist finds some way of bringing back the basso whose obligatos we
once admired.

Oysters, scallops, and lobsters are going the same way. Although they
live in free waters, they are stationary in their habits, and wholesale
gathering will soon complete the work of extermination so recklessly
begun. The forthcoming census reports on the fisheries will show
conclusively the need of immediate protection.

What is the remedy for these great evils? One hundred thousand men are
actively engaged in the fisheries of the United States, and at least
one fiftieth of the entire population of the country are, to a large
extent, dependent on the fishery industry. Fish is the poor man’s food,
for unlike any other food product it may be had for the taking. A fish
swimming in the water has cost no man labor. There floats four pounds of
savory shad, fifty pounds of nutritious sturgeon, a hundred barrels of
whale oil; there lies a bushel of oysters, or a barrel of sponges. They
are God’s gift, and man has only to gather them in, and possibly submit
them to a very simple process of preparation, to be the possessor of a
valuable piece of property. If the matter can be properly regulated, good
fish ought to be sold in every town and village for two thirds or half
the price of beef and pork. As it is, poor fish often cost more than beef
and pork, and in many localities good fish can not be had at any price.
It is a great problem in political economy, and one which we are, as yet,
far from thoroughly understanding.

We are confronted with the question, What can be done to neutralize these
destructive tendencies?

There are evidently three things to do.

1. To preserve fish waters, especially those inland, as nearly as
possible in their normal condition.

2. To prohibit wasteful or immoderate fishing.

3. To employ the art of fish breeding.

    _a._ To aid in maintaining a natural supply;

    _b._ To repair the effects of past improvidence, and

    _c._ To increase the supply beyond its natural limits, rapidly
    enough to meet the necessities of a constantly increasing
    population.

The preservation of normal conditions in inland waters is comparatively
simple. A reasonable system of forestry and water purification is
all that is required, and this is needed not only by the fish in the
streams, but by the people living on the banks. It has been shown
that a river which is too foul for fish to live in is not fit to flow
near the habitations of man. Obstructions, such as dams, may, in most
instances, be overcome by fish ladders. The salmon has profited much by
these devices in Europe, and the immense dams in American rivers will
doubtless be passable, even for shad and alewives, if the new system of
fish-way construction devised by Col. McDonald, and now being applied on
the Savannah, James, and Potomac, and other large rivers, fulfills its
present promises of success.

Up to the present time, however, although much ingenuity and expense
have been lavished upon fish-ways by the various state fish commissions
of this country, there has been little practical outcome from their use.
Our dams are too high, and the shad and alewives, which we are especially
desirous to carry over these obstructions, do not seem to take kindly to
the narrow, tortuous defiles of the fish ladders.

The protection of fish by law is what legislators have been trying to
effect for many centuries, and we are bound to admit that the success of
their efforts has been very slight indeed. Protective legislation rarely
succeeds. The statute books of each state are crowded with laws which no
one understands, least of all the men who made them, and which the state
governments are powerless to enforce. Every one remembers Whittier’s
grand old hero, Abraham Davenport, the Connecticut statesman, who, “on
a May day of that far old year 1780,” when the earth was shrouded in
darkness, and he and all his colleagues in the State Assembly felt that
the judgment day had come, stood up, “albeit with trembling hands and
shaking voice, and read an act to amend an act to regulate the shad and
alewife fisheries”—and then went on to rebuke those around for their
fearfulness and desire to leave the post of duty. Connecticut is as
much at a loss now as then to know how to regulate her shad and alewife
fisheries. Under a republican form of government, restrictive laws are
not popular, and money would never be voted to enforce such laws, which,
without an extensive police force, would be powerless. Some one has
sagely remarked that the salmon is an aristocratic fish, which can only
thrive under the shadow of a throne. Many states now have laws protecting
fresh water fish in the breeding season, and numerous game protective
associations are laboring with some success for their enforcement. Sales
of fish out of season are also successfully prevented in certain city
markets.

The attempts to regulate the fisheries at the mouths of rivers, so that
spawning fish may be allowed free passage for a few hours, generally from
Saturday evening to Monday morning, are meeting with but little success.

Maryland and Virginia attempt to some extent the protection of their
oyster beds, and the former state keeps up an expensive police
organization. The oyster law is founded in ignorance, however, and the
chief effort being to keep away fishermen from other states, for the
benefit of their own, there are small results except frequent quarrels
and occasional bloodshed.

Connecticut is making the experiment of giving to individuals personal
title to submerged land, to be used in oyster culture, and this,
perhaps, is the wisest step taken. Oyster production must soon cease to
be a free grabbing enterprise, and be placed upon the same footing as
agriculture, or the United States will lose its beloved oyster crop, and
in this country, as in England, a fresh oyster will be worth as much as
a new-laid egg. Great Britain has, at present, two schools of fishery
economists, the one headed by Professor Huxley, opposed to legislation,
save for the preservation of fish in inland waters, the other, of which
Dr. Francis Day is the chief leader, advocating a most strenuous legal
regulation of the sea fisheries. Continental Europe is by tradition
and belief committed to the last named policy. In the United States,
on the contrary, public opinion is generally antagonistic to fishery
legislation, and our Commissioner of Fisheries, after carrying on for
fourteen years investigations upon this very question, has not yet
become satisfied that laws are necessary for the perpetuation of the
sea fisheries, nor has he ever recommended to Congress enactment of any
description. Just here we meet the test problem in fish culture. Many of
the most important commercial fisheries of the world, the cod fishery,
the herring fishery, the sardine fishery, the shad and alewife fishery,
the mullet fishery, the salmon fishery, the whitefish fishery, the smelt
fishery, and many others, owe their existence to the fact that once a
year these fishes gather together in closely swimming schools, to spawn
in shallow water, on shoals, or in estuaries and rivers. There is a large
school of _quasi_ economists, who clamor for the complete prohibition of
fishing during spawning time. This demand demonstrates their ignorance.
Deer, game birds, and other land animals may easily be protected in the
breeding season, so may trout and other fishes of strictly local habits.
Not so the anadromous and pelagic fishes. If they are not caught in the
spawning season, they can not be caught at all. I heard a prominent fish
culturist recently advocating before a committee of the United States
Senate, the view that shad should not be caught in the rivers, because
they came into the rivers to spawn. When asked what would become of our
immense shad fisheries if this were done, he said that doubtless some
ingenious person would invent a means of catching them at sea.

The fallacy in the argument of these men lies in the supposition that
it is more destructive to the progeny of a given fish to kill it when
its eggs are nearly ripe, than to kill the same fish eight or ten months
earlier.

We must not, however, ignore the counter argument. Such is the
mortality among fish that only an infinitesimal percentage attain to
maturity. Möbius has shown that for every grown oyster upon the beds of
Schleswig-Holstein, 1,045,000 have died. Only a very small percentage,
perhaps not greater than this, of the shad or the smelt ever come upon
the breeding grounds. Some consideration, then, ought to be shown to the
individuals which have escaped from their enemies and have come up to
deposit the precious burden of eggs. How much must they be protected?

Here the fish culturist comes in with the proposition “_that it is
cheaper to make fish so plenty by artificial means that every fisherman
may take all he can catch, than to enforce a code of protective laws_.”

The salmon rivers of the Pacific slope, and the shad rivers of the east,
and the whitefish fisheries of the lakes, are now so thoroughly under
control by the fish culturist, that it is doubtful if any one will
venture to contradict his assertion. The question now is, whether he can
extend his domain to other species.

Legislation and fish-ways, then, are, as yet, of little practical
importance. Actually, they repeat the proverbial act of the clown who
locked the stable door after his horse had been stolen. No one makes laws
or builds fish-ways until he is of the decided opinion that the fish are
pretty nearly gone.

Artificial fish culture seems to offer the only remedy for the evils
which have been described.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




THE LIFE OF GEORGE ELIOT.


There is now and then a biography so written that the reader is able to
become intimately acquainted with the subject, to feel after reading that
he has had a personal contact, and has formed a friendship which is warm
and living. Such “Lives” are rare. Most works of this kind are so biased
by the interpretations of the author, so full of facts and opinions that
the reader loses all feeling of companionship in reading; he closes the
book, knowing much about the subject, but rarely understanding him. A
book which presents a man or woman in that personal way which makes a
friendship through the medium of the book possible, confers a great gift
upon the reading public.

The peculiar fitness of Mr. Cross’s “Life of George Eliot”[B] for giving
us a new friend, must be attributed to the really remarkable taste and
skill of his editing. The work bears the mark of a reverential hand. It
is an _In Memoriam_ whose only object has been to lay before the world a
memory too strong and precious to be kept secret. But no such a biography
could have been given the world had it not been for the peculiar nature
of George Eliot herself. The material for this “Life” grew out of two
strong elements in her character: the affectionate and persistent
friendship which led her to reveal herself so fully to those she loved
in her letters, and that constant introspection which made her journal
often a mirror of her inner life. These materials make up the book, which
is largely a study of her character, and, too, of her character as she
understood it. She has verily written her own life. The interpretation
remains for the readers.

It would have been possible for Mr. Cross to have given much information
about her character which he has withheld, her opinions and much of her
conversation; but he has wisely given the world only what she herself
chose to reveal to her friends.

The story begins early. The first revelations in character are the
strongest; the happiness and misery of the future life are revealed in
the childhood traits. The earliest revelations which we find in George
Eliot’s life are of affection and ambition; either, if strong enough to
become a passion, drives its possessor along a thorny path until it is
itself mastered, and where both exist in a nature, continual collision
must occur between them. Before each is satisfied there must be a life
struggle of the keenest sort. Such a struggle was presaged for Marian
Evans very early. She herself tells how, when she was but four years
of age, she played on the piano, of which she did not know a note, in
order to impress the servant with a proper notion of her acquirements
and generally distinguished position. As eager, too, she was for love as
for recognition. In her reminiscences of her early life most vividly
she portrays her earliest passion—one very common among affectionate
girls—her love for her brother. “She used always to be at his heels,
insisting on doing everything that he did.” When his first boyish
craze took possession of him in shape of a pony, and she found it was
separating them, she was nearly heart broken. Impressible, eager for work
and ambitious for knowledge, she began life under an emotional pressure,
which drove her into incessant distress lest those she loved should
fail her, and which brought her devotion to her loved ones in constant
collision with her ambition. At twenty-one, writing to a very intimate
friend, she said: “I do not mean to be so sinful as to say that I have
not friends most undeservedly kind and tender, and disposed to form a
far too favorable estimate of me, but I mean I have no one who enters
into my pleasures and griefs, no one with whom I can pour out my soul.”
Eight years after this, having lost her father, she went abroad for a
few months’ residence, and her letters home were full of eager longing
for their sympathy and restless fear lest they should forget her. No
change in her life diminished this feeling. She became an editor of the
_Westminster Review_, and while overwhelmed with manuscripts and proofs
she wrote: “You must know that I am not a little desponding now and then,
and think that old friends will die off, and I shall be left with no
power to make new ones again.” Undoubtedly this feeling tended to make
her morbid in her younger days, and consequently dwarf her power. It
is an important study of her life to trace the gradual melting of this
disposition, and the final growth into a healthy happiness. When quite
past the heyday of her life, she wrote a friend of her girlhood: “I am
one of those, perhaps, exceptional people whose early childish dreams
were much less happy than the outcome of life,” and again, but four years
before her death: “I have completely lost my _personal_ melancholy. I
often, of course, have melancholy thoughts about the destinies of my
fellow creatures, but I am never in the mood of sadness, which used to
be my frequent visitant, even in the midst of external happiness; and
this, notwithstanding a very vivid sense that life is declining, and
death close at hand.” This release from morbidness had two causes. She
had taught her strong, affectional nature to find satisfaction in that
commonplace, but little understood duty, loving her neighbors, and she
had learned to enjoy things on their own account. The first article in
this creed of happiness became George Eliot’s religion. She had abandoned
her belief in the Christian religion when twenty-one years of age. She
could not believe fully, and she was too independent and too reliant upon
her own mind to conform to a religion she did not believe. The steps she
took did not destroy the religious sense in her life. The earnestness
which led her to write at nineteen, “May the Lord give me such an insight
into what is truly good, that I may not rest contented with making
Christianity a mere addendum to my pursuits, or with tacking it as a
fringe to my garments;” which induced her to consider the novel and even
oratorio as dangerous to spiritual development still remained, though
without form. She was intensely in earnest, but it was many years before
her love for mankind became a religion to her. A less strong character
would have become flippant or scornful under this loss; hers only became
more serious. She seems never to have forgotten what she had abandoned.

Though radically differing from most of her friends on religious
questions, she never was uncharitable. “Of all intolerance, the
intolerance calling itself philosophical is the most odious to me,” she
wrote, and she lived out this opinion, in no way allowing the widest
diversity to separate her from her friends. Her sympathy and charity
indeed seem to increase, even if the breach in their opinion widened.

This habit of thought and feeling resulted in much personal moral
benefit. “My own experience and development deepen every day my
conviction that our moral progress may be measured by the degree in which
we sympathize with individual suffering and individual joy.”

As she grew older, she comforted herself with the thought that “with that
renunciation of self which age inevitably brings we get more freedom
of soul to enter into the life of others.” She tried for “a religion
which must express less care for personal consolation and a more deeply
awing sense of responsibility to man, springing from sympathy with that
which of all things is most certainly known to us, the difficulty of the
human lot.” This was the great lesson in her growth toward happiness. A
secondary step was her appreciation of the value of things in themselves.
It is a serious obstacle to the happiness of women, that in the main they
care for exterior life only as it is of value in the personal life. A
book is dear because a friend has read or recommended it. This verse is
fine from association; this strain of music because they heard it in a
certain connection. Take the _personal_ out of Art and Nature, and too
often women care little for them. George Eliot learned to appreciate and
love things for their own value. Music, to which she was from childhood
deeply susceptible, she cultivated thoroughly, and no fine rendering of
_good_ music ever was missed by her. She took the true, high view of
life, which declares that from every good all possible enjoyment should
be gained. Art was very dear to her, and we find in these quotations
from her journal, notes on all the leading galleries of Europe, but in
the very midst of her art studies she drops this comment, after noting
a sight she had had of the snow covered Alps: “Sight more to me than
all the art in Munich, though I love the _art_ nevertheless. The great,
wide-stretching earth, and the all-embracing sky—the birthright of us
all—are what I care most to look at.”

But it would have been impossible for even her deep love for mankind,
her fine enjoyment of the good and beautiful, to have completed her
life. These things satisfied her affections, but there was another
quality we have mentioned as prominent in her life: it was her ambition.
At twenty she wrote despondently: “I feel that my besetting sin is the
one of all others most destroying, as it is the faithful parent of them
all—ambition, a desire insatiable for the esteem of my fellow-creatures.”
Whatever she did, was done with all her might. Her mother died early,
and she became housekeeper. Her struggles with the knotty questions
of housewifery kept her in a constant worry, but she would do things
right—whether it be currant jelly or a German translation. The same
perfection marked her novels. Her progress was soon marked; it
recommended her to people of standing, and gradually she had a circle of
friends—people of strong minds and much culture—about her. Eager to do
something, a way opened to her in 1844, when she was twenty-five years
old. It was to translate into English a work of the German philosopher,
Strauss. She did it, and what was better, did it well. Five years later
she writes: “The only ardent hope I have for my future life is to have
given me some woman’s duty.” The ambition to excel is already bending
to the stronger emotion of affection. For a long time she worked, eager
and anxious, but nothing seemed to open. In 1851 she went to London as
assistant editor of _Westminster Review_, and here most satisfactory
opportunities for culture opened. She formed lasting friendships with
Herbert Spenser, Harriet Martineau, Florence Nightingale, and indeed with
all the people worth knowing, who filled London in the ’fifties. But her
editing left no opportunity to do that special work to which she was
looking, and which she did not understand. She wrote many reviews and
essays. This writing was a sort of safety valve for her intellect, but it
was not until September, 1856, that the new era began in her life. It was
when she began to write fiction. The popular idea of fiction as stories
which will do to kill time, but which for serious reading are quite
useless, was not the idea of George Eliot. A nature so intensely serious,
so anxious for noble work, could not content itself with trivial story
telling; she did not aim at that, but at studies of life. As she finely
writes to Mr. John Blackwood, who became her publisher: “My artistic bent
is directed not all to the presentation of irreproachable character, but
to the presentation of mixed human beings, in such a way as to call forth
tolerant judgment, pity, and sympathy. And I can not step aside from
what I _feel_ to be _true_ in character.” And again: “I should like to
touch every heart among my readers with nothing but loving humor, with
tenderness, with belief in goodness.” The story of her great success
is familiar—her books are well known. In rapid succession she sent out
“Scenes of Clerical Life,” “Adam Bede,” “The Mill on the Floss,” “Silas
Marner,” “Romola,” “Felix Holt,” “The Spanish Gypsy,” “Middlemarch,”
“Daniel Deronda,” and “Theophrastus Such.” Her convictions about how
she should work were intense. She wrote and _lived_ her story, and once
when urged to re-write a tale, replied that she could no more re-write
a book than she could live over a year in her own life. Her novels are
the embodiment of what she had felt, written that they might strengthen
others. The conscientiousness with which she labored made her work
sometimes most painful to her. Despondency lest she should fail, fear
lest she had misinterpreted a character, depression lest this chapter
should fall below a preceding in merit, tortured her in succession, but
she worked because she believed she had found her place, and to do her
best for mankind was her religion. The slow-growing nature struggling
with eager desire for human love, and with a mastering ambition,
not often reaches so ripe a stage as did hers. The rigid system of
self-culture which she pursued through her life was the outgrowth of her
ambition and of her intense interest in things, an interest which we have
noticed as being one of the leading elements in her happiness. Reading,
study, conversation, observation, writing, travel, were in turns employed
in her course of self-discipline. She read incessantly, and _thoroughly_.
Notice this list of books, the work of one month, and that when she was
nearly fifty years of age: First book of “Lucretius;” sixth book of
the “Iliad;” “Samson Agonistes;” Warton’s “History of English Poetry;”
“Grote,” second volume; “Marcus Aurelius;” “Vita Nuova,” vol. iv; chapter
one of the “Politique Positive;” Guest on “English Rhythms;” Maunce’s
“Lectures on Casuistry.” Few months fell below this in reading, and this,
too, while she was writing, seeing people, conversing, and suffering, for
she had the misfortune to know, as she says, that “one thing is needful:
a good digestion.”

As a life of earnest purpose, of continued struggle for a high living, of
deepest desire to make the most of everything, and for everybody, there
is none more marked than that of George Eliot. Non-conformity to the
religion and the law in which we believe, must sadden her life for all,
but an honest student of her character must, after reading this “Life,”
accord to her what she herself never failed to give to the erring—charity.


FOOTNOTES

[B] George Eliot’s Life, as related in her Letters and Journals. Arranged
and edited by her husband, J. W. Cross. In three volumes. New York:
Harper & Brothers.




ARBOR DAY.

BY THE HON. B. G. NORTHROP, LL.D.


Recent spring floods and the diminished flow of rivers in summer have
called public attention to the cause and the remedy as never before. At
the opening of the last session of Congress, its attention was called
to the subject of Forestry, for the first time in any presidential
message. Bills for the protection and extension of forests are now
before Congress, and before many state legislatures. The last census
presents striking facts which prove this to be a question of both state
and national importance. The recent action of the national government
shows a new appreciation of forestry. The marvel now is, that the general
government did not earlier seek to protect its magnificent forests, once
the best and most extensive in the world. Their importance to the nation
was little understood. Even after a century of reckless waste, the United
States government still owns 85,000,000 acres of timber—a mere fraction
of what has been cut, or burned, without a thought of reproduction.
The Forestry Division of the United States Department of Agriculture,
though organized but six years ago, has already spread much valuable
information before the country by its reports and by those of its special
agents, commissioned to investigate the forests of the country and the
means of their protection and extension. Ex-Governor R. W. Furnas, of
Nebraska, for example, investigated the forests of California, Oregon,
Washington Territory, and the western slope of the Rocky Mountains. His
official reports on the stealing and reckless destruction of those timber
lands, and also in regard to the new and extensive timber growing on the
treeless plains of Nebraska, were of great public interest. The reports
of Dr. F. B. Hough of New York, and F. B. Baker, of Kansas—also agents of
the United States Forestry Division—have been extensively circulated and
still more widely summarized in the press.

The National Forestry Congress is another index of the growth of popular
interest on this subject. A large volume of the proceedings of that
association at its meeting in Montreal was officially published by
the Dominion of Canada. The best papers given at its three subsequent
meetings have been published by the United States Department of
Agriculture. The subject has been ably discussed in State Agricultural
Reports, and many state and local associations have been formed to
further this interest. The passage of the Timber Culture Act has greatly
increased the area of planted woodland.

But of all these agencies no one has awakened so general an interest in
agriculture as the appointment of Arbor Day, by governors of states, by
legislatures, and by state, county and town superintendents of schools.
The plan of Arbor Day is simple and inexpensive, and hence the more
readily adopted and widely effective. In some states the work has been
well done without any legislation. The best results, however, are secured
when an act is passed requesting the Governor, each spring, to recommend
the observance of Arbor Day, by a special message. The chief magistrate
of the state thus most effectually calls the attention of all the people
to its importance, and secures general and concerted action. _How_
forests conserve the water supplies and lessen floods is aside from the
topic of this paper. While the fact of the increase of spring freshets
is everywhere admitted, and scientists agree as to the cause, the
popular disbelief of the true theory is the great hindrance to remedial
action. The bills for the protection of the Adirondack forests, in the
legislature of New York, in 1884, failed by reason of the opposition of
the lumbermen, and the common doubt and denial of the benefits of forests
in the conservation of the rainfall. I often met the same skepticism in
the Ohio valley, even among the sufferers from the flood disasters. They
were attributed to the extensive use of tile drains. But both in 1883
and 1884, these floods occurred when the ground was frozen deep, and the
drains were therefore inoperative.

That so simple a cause as forest denudation should produce such
disastrous results seems at first incredible. It is only when the vast
areas contributing to a single river are considered, that the proof of
the forest theory seems clear. Take the Ohio River, for illustration. The
area drained by it is 214,000 square miles, or twenty-two times as much
as that which in Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts and Connecticut
is drained by the Connecticut River; an area which includes portions of
New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, West Virginia, Virginia,
North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Kentucky.
The length of the Ohio is about 1,000 miles, and that of its ten leading
tributaries nearly 4,000, and that of the many minor affluents as much
more. The smallest influences working over such immense regions, and
ultimately combining in one stream, may enormously swell its volume.
As the destruction of forests has been going on for centuries, the
remedy must be the work of time, for it must include slow processes
and agencies, each _separately_ minute, which become important when
multiplied by myriads and extended over broad areas. Arbor Day has proved
such an agency.

A brief history of Arbor Day will show its aims. The surprising results
already accomplished promise a still broader influence in the near
future. The plan originated with ex-Governor J. Sterling Morton, the
pioneer tree-planter of Nebraska. He secured the coöperation of the State
Board of Agriculture, some thirteen years ago, when the Governor was
induced to appoint the second Wednesday in April as a day to be devoted
to economic tree-planting. By pen and tongue, as editor and lecturer,
with arguments from theory and facts from his own practice, Mr. Morton
succeeded in awakening popular enthusiasm in this work, in which he was
ably seconded by Ex-Governor Furnas, of Nebraska, who has long served as
Forest Commissioner for the United States Department of Agriculture.

In Nebraska a remarkable interest was awakened in the observance of
her first Arbor Day, and over 12,000,000 trees were planted on that
day. That enthusiasm was not a temporary effervescence. Each successive
Governor has annually appointed such a day by an official proclamation,
and the interest has been sustained and even increased from year to
year. The State Board of Agriculture annually awards liberal prizes to
encourage tree-planting. Hence Nebraska is the banner state of America
in this work, having, according to official reports, as I am informed
by ex-Governor Furnas, 244,353 acres of cultivated woodland, or more
than twice that of any other state. The originator of Arbor Day is now
recognized as a public benefactor, and hence, during the last campaign,
as a candidate for Governor, ran some three thousand ahead of his party
ticket. Though at first aiming at economic tree-planting, Nebraska now
observes Arbor Day in schools. The example of Nebraska was soon followed
by Kansas, which had over 120,000 acres of planted woodland. The Governor
of that state issues an annual proclamation for Arbor Day, and it is
observed by teachers and scholars and parents, in adorning both school
and home grounds.

Four years ago the legislature of Michigan requested the Governor
to appoint an Arbor Day. Such an appointment has been repeated each
succeeding April. For the last three years a similar day has been
appointed by the Governor of Ohio. Many schools, especially those of
Cincinnati and Columbus, fitly kept the designated day. No man in this
country has had a better opportunity of observing the influence of Arbor
Day in schools than Superintendent Peaslee, who, after a trial of three
years, says: “The observance of Arbor Day is the most impressive means
of interesting the young in this subject. Should this celebration become
general, such a public sentiment would lead to the beautifying by trees
of every city, town, and village, as well as the public highways, church,
and school grounds, and the homes of the people. If but the youth of Ohio
could be led to plant their two trees each, how, by the children alone,
would the state be enriched and beautified within the next fifty years.
By our Arbor Day observance the importance of forestry was impressed
upon the minds of thousands of children who then learned to care for and
protect trees. Not one of those 20,000 children in Eden Park on Arbor Day
injured a single tree.”

West Virginia furnishes another illustration of the influence of
observing Arbor Day in schools. In the face of many difficulties, State
School Superintendent Butcher appointed an Arbor Day in schools in April,
1883. Without waiting for any legislative or gubernatorial sanction,
solely on his own responsibility, he invited the school officers,
teachers, parents, and pupils on the designated day to plant trees on
the grounds of their schools and homes. He made the April number of
his _School Journal_ an “Arbor” number, and circulated it gratuitously
over the State. The results exceeded his expectations. It started good
influences on _minds_ as well as grounds. This great success prompted
a similar observance last April, for which greater preparations were
made, with still better results. When called to advocate this measure In
various parts of West Virginia last spring, I found the people and the
press most responsive in encouraging this practical movement. On the day
after the celebration, the papers of Wheeling, for example, commended
the work in such terms as the following: “Arbor Day was gloriously
celebrated yesterday, and was a splendid success. All—the oldest and the
youngest—evinced the liveliest interest. Arbor Day will be one of the
institutions of our schools.”

At the annual meeting of the State Teachers’ Association of Indiana,
held in December, 1883, a kindred plan was recommended and unanimously
adopted, and an efficient committee appointed to carry it out. The State
Board of Horticulture heartily endorsed the measure. After a statement
of the plan, the State Board of Agriculture invited me to prepare a
resolution in its favor, which they promptly adopted. Governor Porter
received my suggestions with special interest, and said the measure
should have his cordial support. He soon after gave it his official
sanction, and issued a proclamation to the teachers and people of the
state, in which he predicted that the appointed day would be a memorable
one, and “the beginning of a movement for a much more extended system
of tree-culture, and the restoration of the varieties of trees, useful
and beautiful, which have been so recklessly sacrificed that nature
cries aloud for redress,” closing by calling on “the teachers to do all
in their power to make Arbor Day a day of the most ardent and inspiring
interest.” State School Superintendent Holcombe gave his personal and
official influence heartily to this work. The lectures given by his
invitation on this subject were fully reported by the press, for the
newspapers of Indiana cordially coöperated in this movement. These
combined influences secured the general observance of the appointed day,
and the results were most gratifying. Such combined agencies in nearly
every state of the Union would promise similar results.

At the last annual Convention of the State Teachers’ Association of
Wisconsin, the presentation of Arbor Day in schools led to the adoption
of a resolution in favor of such an observance, and to the appointment
of an efficient committee to carry out the plan. At the National
Educational Association held in Madison, Wisconsin, with an attendance of
over five thousand, a resolution recommending the observance of Arbor Day
in schools in all our states was unanimously adopted. Such a day has been
observed with great interest in some of the provinces of Canada.

The American Forestry Congress, which includes the leading arborists of
Canada and the United States, adopted, at my suggestion, the following
resolution: “In view of the wide-spread results of the observance of
Arbor Day in many states, this Congress recommends the appointment of
such a day in all our states and in the provinces of the dominion of
Canada,” and appointed a committee, consisting of the Chief of the
Forestry Division of the United States Department of Agriculture, the
State Superintendent of Schools of West Virginia, and myself to secure
the general adoption of this plan, and especially Arbor Day in schools.
As chairman of that committee, I have already presented this subject to
the Governors of many states, and the proposition has met a favorable
response.

It may be objected to Arbor Day, or to any lessons on forestry in
schools, that the course of study is already overcrowded, and this fact
I admit. But the requisite talks on trees, their value and beauty, need
occupy but two or three hours. In some large cities there may be little
or no room for tree-planting, and no call for even a half-holiday for
this work, but even there such talks, or the memorizing of suitable
selections, on the designated day, would be impressive and useful. The
essential thing is to _start_ habits of observation and occupation with
trees, which will prompt pupils in their walks, or when at work, or at
play, to study them. The talks on this subject, which Superintendent
Peaslee says were the most interesting and profitable lessons the pupils
of Cincinnati ever had in a single day, occupied only the morning of
Arbor Day, the afternoon being given to the practical work. Such talks
will lead our youth to admire trees, and realize that they are the
grandest products of nature, and form the finest drapery that adorns this
earth in all lands. Thus taught, they will wish to plant and protect
trees, and find in their own happy experience that there is a peculiar
pleasure in their parentage, whether forest, fruit, or ornamental—a
pleasure which never cloys, but grows with their growth. Like grateful
children, trees bring rich filial returns, and compensate a thousand fold
for all the care they cost. This love of trees, early implanted in the
school, and fostered in the home, will make our youth practical arborists.

They should learn that trees have been the admiration of the greatest
and best men of all ages. The ancients understood well the beauty as
well as the economic and hygienic value of trees. The Hebrew almost
venerated the palm. It was the chosen symbol of Judea on their coins,
and was graven on the doors of the Temple as the sacred sign of justice.
The Cedar of Lebanon was justly the pride of the Jews, and became to
them the emblem of strength and beauty. The Egyptians, Greeks, and
Romans were proficients in tree-planting. Hence Thebes, Memphis, Athens,
Carthage, Rome, Pompeii and Herculaneum, as their ruins still show,
had their shaded streets or parks. Two thousand years ago, the richest
Romans maintained a rural home, as does the wealthy Londoner, Viennese,
or Berliner to-day, and their ancient villas were lavishly adorned. The
Paradise of the Persians was filled with trees and roses. This taste for
beautiful gardens was transplanted from Persia to Greece, and the Greek
philosophers held their schools in beautiful gardens, or groves. The
devastations of parks, the destruction of shade trees, the neglect of
public streets and private grounds, the decay of rural tastes, and the
utter slight of home adornments, were clearer proofs of the great relapse
to barbarism than the vandalism which destroyed the proud monuments of
classic art and literature.

Arbor Day has already initiated a movement of vast importance in eight
states. In tree-planting, the beginning only is difficult. The obstacles
are all met at the outset, because they are usually magnified by the
popular ignorance of this subject. It is the first step that costs—at
least, it costs effort to set this thing on foot, but that step once
taken, others are sure to follow. This very fact that the main tug is at
the start, on account of the inertia of ignorance and indifference, shows
that such start should be made easy, as is best done by an Arbor Day
proclamation of the Governor, which is sure to interest and enlist the
youth of an entire state in the good work. When the school children are
invited each to plant at least “two trees” on the home or school grounds,
the aggregate number planted will be more than twice that of the children
enlisted, for parents and the public will participate in the work.

Tree-planting is fitted to give a needful lesson of forethought to
the juvenile mind. Living only in the present and for the present,
youth are apt to sow only where they can quickly reap. A meager crop
soon in hand, outweighs a golden harvest long in maturing. They should
learn to forecast the future as the condition of wisdom. Arboriculture
is a discipline in foresight—it is always planting for the future.
There is nothing more ennobling for youth, than the consciousness of
doing something for future generations, something which shall prove a
_growing_ benefaction in coming years. Tree-planting is an easy way of
perpetuating one’s memory long after he has passed away. The poorest can
in this way provide himself with a monument grander than the loftiest
shaft of chiseled stone which may suggest duty to the living, while it
commemorates the dead. Such associations grow in interest from year to
year and from generation to generation. By stimulating a general interest
in tree-planting among our youth, Arbor Day will yield a rich harvest
to future generations. George Peabody originated the motto, so happily
illustrated by his munificent gifts to promote education: “Education—the
debt of the present to future generations.” We owe it to our children
to leave our lands the better for our tillage and tree-planting, and
we wrong ourselves and them, if our fields are impoverished by our
improvidence.

Arbor Day in school has led youth to adorn the surroundings of their
homes, as well as of the schools, and to extensive planting by the
wayside. How attractive our roads may become by long avenues of trees!
This is beautifully illustrated in many countries of Europe. In France,
for example, the government keeps a statistical record of the trees along
the roads. The total length of public roads in France is 18,750 miles, of
which 7,250 are bordered with trees, while 4,500 are now being, or are
soon to be, planted. Growing on lands otherwise running to waste, such
trees are grateful to the traveler, but doubly so to the planter.

The influence of Arbor Day in schools in awakening a just appreciation
of trees, first among pupils and parents, and then the people at large,
is of vast importance in another respect. The frequency of forest fires
is the greatest hindrance to practical forestry. But let the _sentiment_
of trees be duly cultivated, first among our youth, and then among the
people, and they will be regarded as our friends, as is the case in
Germany. The public need to learn that the interests of all classes are
concerned in the conservation of forests. Through the teaching of their
schools this result was long since accomplished in Germany, Switzerland,
Sweden, and other European countries. The people everywhere realize the
need of protecting trees. An enlightened public sentiment has proved
a better guardian of their forests than the national police. A person
wantonly setting fire to a forest would there be looked upon as an
outlaw, like the miscreant who should poison a public drinking fountain.




HOW TO WORK ALONE.

BY CHANCELLOR J. H. VINCENT, D.D.


Not all members of the “C. L. S. C.” can enjoy the benefits of a local
circle. Some live in the country, or in remote parts of the city. They
can not get out at night, through lack of company, or because the house,
the boys, or the baby must not be left alone; the local circle is not
under wise direction, and is unprofitable; or it may be that the only
accessible local circle is a close corporation, and is “inaccessible.”
Father or husband objects to the time wasted, or the long walk, or
something else. So the student is solitary. Whatever is done must be done
alone.

This is not an unmixed evil, because it may develop power in the student,
or drive him or her to find associates at home, associates who are not
enrolled in Plainfield as “regulars,” and some of whom are quite too
young to be enrolled at all. No deprivation in this world that does not
make a place for some other unsought, unexpected blessing.

I purpose to offer a few hints to these solitary readers, who may, I
trust, find much profit out of the restrictions of providence, and do
their work well even though it be done alone. On the blank pages of
your necessity you may make records of your own, worth more to you than
volumes of other people’s print.

1. Although alone, remember that you are associated with a great Circle
numbering thousands and tens of thousands of members. You are not alone,
but one of many. This thought helps you. It sets currents of sympathy in
motion. It annihilates distance. It fills the very air about you with
companions with whom you are in sweet fellowship, although you have
never seen them. They are a great cloud of witnesses. They march under
the same banner; put their names on the same great record book in the
central office; read the same pages; sing the same songs; answer the same
questions; recite the same mottoes; observe the same memorial days; and
turn with tender hearts to the same heavens, under the mystic spell of
the vesper hour; experience the same longings after true culture, and
have hearts full of sympathy for their fellow-students everywhere. This
thought of oneness in work gives feelings of kinship and companionship.
The solitary student in the little room—kitchen, sitting room, library,
or bed chamber—is surrounded by thousands of fellow-students. They seem
to look over the page with you. They seem to whisper words of good will
and faith, and some of them, I assure you, are royal people. They would
give you such greeting, if they had opportunity, as would make you proud
and glad of your connection with the Circle. Indeed, solitariness is
impossible to the thoughtful member of the C. L. S. C.

2. This sense of fellowship is increased, and a helpful stimulus given
to the solitary worker, by reflecting on the character of the great
fraternity of which you are a part. We now enroll more than seventy
thousand members. Perhaps twenty-five thousand have practically given
up the readings. Only fifty thousand remain with us. Many thousands
of readers are connected with local circles who have never joined as
“regulars” at the central office in Plainfield, N. J. There are thousands
who are reading a part of the course, but who neither belong to the local
nor general circle. I believe that these non-recorded and irregular
readers make up for the lapsed thousands, so that to-day we have nearly
or quite seventy thousand people doing all or a part of the required
reading. This, therefore, becomes a great institution. Its territorial
extent is as vast as its numerical strength. There are “C. L. S. C.s”
in all parts of the world. Our office records contain names from India,
China, Japan, the Sandwich Islands, and many other outlying regions,
while the list in Canada and on the Pacific coast runs up among the
thousands. In every state and territory members are to be found.

And who are these with whom you, my solitary student, are associated?
They represent every calling in life, and almost every grade, social and
intellectual. Here are lawyers, judges, physicians, clergymen, doctors of
divinity, college graduates, literally by the thousand, who seek through
our course to review the studies of other and earlier years. Here are
seminary and high school graduates, and people old and young who dropped
out of the grammar school when they were too young to understand their
folly in doing so. Here are business men, mechanics and farmers who
have been prospered, and who covet now a measure of culture to fit them
for society, that their money may gain for them and their families more
than a mere social recognition. Here are mothers good and true, who do
not want to part hands with sons and daughters as they enter the higher
schools, but who propose by our course of reading to keep in the literary
and scientific world where their children are to be at home. Here are
people of “low degree,” who toil for bread, with lengthened hours of
service, that they may help those who are dependent upon them. They are
in shops and kitchens, and have souls that would put honor into palaces.
They want outlook as they go weighted down through busy and weary years.
They do not expect always to be slaves to society and circumstance. There
is blood-royal in every heart-beat, and power to hold princedoms in some
near future. So, despised of men who live, they hold converse through
books with gifted and kingly souls who, though dead, yet live, and who
work in other kingly souls. There are many of these disguised princes and
princesses in your Circle.

Here too are sufferers in homes of bereavement and pain, where arms are
empty and hearts are full, where love calls but receives no answer, where
disease binds the body but leaves the mind free to grieve over its loss;
where lack of work gives place to temptation, and renders occupation of
some sort a moral and religious necessity; where worldliness, that makes
the soul barren, needs thoughtfulness to moisten, beautify and fructify
the life.

In such great and gracious companionship you sit down for solitary study.
Dismiss the thought, therefore, that this is solitude. Reach out your
soul to greet the currents of invisible and loving influence that pour in
upon you from every quarter.

3. Select and furnish your Chautauqua corner. Do not be too anxious
to have it harmonize with other corners of the room. Put shelves for
your books “required” and for “review.” On the lowest shelf pile THE
CHAUTAUQUANS. On the wall put up the motto cards, the list of memorial
days, the Chautauqua calendar, the photograph or engraving of the Hall
of Philosophy, and such other Chautauqua views as you approve. Put up
busts or engravings of the great leaders—Homer, Cicero, Dante, Milton,
Goethe. Somewhere place a picture of Bryant, the earliest distinguished
friend of the C. L. S. C. By gradual additions fill the Chautauqua corner
with pictures and bookshelves, busts and mottoes, all in the line of
your reading, until the other corners and the intervening walls shall be
filled with reminders of Chautauqua and the world of literature, science
and art it represents. And if somehow you can place on the wall that
matchless engraving representing the great Master with his two disciples
on the way to Emmaus, you will, in a sense, sanctify your room, and set
forth most effectively, the aim, scope and spirit of the great Chautauqua
movement. In such a room, or in such a corner, can students be solitary?

4. You will greatly increase your power by systematic habits. One may
“read up” at any time, but the regular daily reading which renders
unnecessary what is called “reading up,” is much the better way. It
renders the work comparatively light; it makes the C. L. S. C. a help
to other less congenial work of the day into which it falls like a
refreshing shower. It forces life into a system which always expedites
and lightens labor. It schools the will. It brings lower duties into
proper subjection to the higher. It is every way better to do each day’s
work as each day comes. Thus working alone, but systematically, one keeps
the hand in and does not lose grasp, taste or delight.

5. Though compelled to work alone, make casual contacts with others
afford opportunities for drawing them out, for finding out what they
know, or for corroborating your own views. Ask questions. Elicit
opinions. Start conversation. Try to tell what you know or think. Tell
your children. Tell your neighbors. As you interest them, you set them in
search of knowledge, which finding, they will later on report to you, and
you thus give them a start in lines of self-improvement.

6. This setting others at work in quest of knowledge for you is a most
practicable way of getting knowledge and doing good to the finders
thereof.

Write out ten different questions, and give one to each of ten young boys
and girls of a high school, for example. They will ransack libraries,
consult teachers, find out and report what you want to know, and be
immensely helped by the knowledge found and the service rendered. Though
alone, you need not work alone.

7. Practice talking to yourself about the things you have read. Put facts
and dates into sentences. Now and then write out these sentences, or
speak them off. Recite a lesson to yourself every day. Make a speech with
yourself as audience. Put facts into recitative lullabies, by which you
sing baby to sleep. Don’t do too much of all this, lest it weary you,
but do a little of this sentence-framing and solitary speech-making, and
nursery-crooning every day. You will then have a local circle of you,
and yourself and your own soul. Now one’s self makes very good society
sometimes; there are so many powers and voices and thoughts and projects
in a single soul.

8. Lift your soul up to its height, now and then, and breathe a thought
of the heart that may grow into a prayer as you recall the great Circle
of which you are a member. Think in silence of their multiplied and
varied circumstances, perils, temptations and necessities. Think of the
disheartened, the bereaved, the suffering, the doubting; those who have
great power, but do not know how to use it; those who are sick of sin and
worldliness, and do not know how to get into the path of holiness and
peace. Think of all these, and then pray. Let your heart swell toward God
in sympathy and longing.

Thus will you find in your solitude the presence of the Spirit invisible
and eternal, whose name is love, and whose home is heaven, and whose
children are the lowly and meek and devout, who love souls—the world full
of souls—and who daily bear them in tender sympathy to the throne.

They who do these things can not be alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

If it were not for my love of beautiful nature and poetry, my heart would
have died within me long ago. I never felt before what immeasurable
benefactors these same poets are to their kind, and how large a measure,
both of actual happiness and prevention of misery they have imparted to
the race. I would willingly give up half my fortune, and some little of
the fragments of health and bodily enjoyment that remain to me, rather
than that Shakspere should not have lived before me.—_Lord Jeffrey (from
a letter to Lord Cockburn, 1833)._




OUTLINE AND PROGRAMS.


OUTLINE OF REQUIRED READINGS FOR APRIL.

_First Week_ (ending April 8).—1. “Chemistry,” chapters XVIII, XIX and XX.

2. “History of the Reformation,” from page 1 to 27.

3. “The Circle of the Sciences,” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

4. Sunday Readings for April 5, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Second Week_ (ending April 15).—1. “Chemistry,” chapters XXI and XXII.

2. “History of the Reformation,” from page 27 to 55.

3. “Home Studies in Chemistry and Physics,” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

4. Sunday Readings for April 12, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Third Week_ (ending April 22).—1. “Chemistry,” chapter XXIII.

2. “History of the Reformation,” from page 55 to 88.

3. “Easy Lessons in Animal Biology,” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

4. Readings in _Our Alma Mater_.

5. Sunday Readings for April 19, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Fourth Week_ (ending April 30).—1. “Chemistry,” chapters XXIV, XXV and
XXVI.

2. “History of the Reformation,” from page 88 to 117.

3. “Aristotle,” in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.

4. Readings in _Our Alma Mater_.

5. Sunday Readings for April 26, in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.




PROGRAMS FOR LOCAL CIRCLE WORK.


FIRST WEEK IN APRIL.

1. Essay—Easter.

2. Selection—“All Fool’s Day.” By Addison.

3. A Paper on the Life of Martin Luther.

Music.

4. Fifteen Minutes’ Talk on the Cause of the Present Troubles in the
Soudan.

5. Character Sketch—General Gordon.

6. Debate—Resolved, that dynamite is more productive of evil than good.


SECOND WEEK IN APRIL.

1. Selection—“Martin Luther.” From Robertson’s “History of Charles V.”
Found also in Chambers’s “Cyclopedia of English Literature.”

2. A Paper on the Inquisition.

3. Recitation—“The Prisoner of Chillon.”—By Byron.

4. Character Sketch—John Knox.

Music.

5. Essay—The Vegetation of the Carboniferous Period.

6. A General Talk on Socialism.

7. Critic’s Report.


THIRD WEEK IN APRIL.

1. Essay—The Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

2. Recitation—“Robinson of Leydon.”—By O. W. Holmes.

3. Character Sketch.—William of Orange.

Music.

4. A Paper on Mount Cenis.

5. Selection—“The Chambered Nautilus.” By O. W. Holmes.

6. Conversation on New Books.

7. Questions and Answers for the month in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.


SHAKSPERE DAY.

Music.

1. Roll call—Quotations from Shakspere.

2. A Paper on the Life and Times of Shakspere.

Music.

3. The Story of “The Tempest.”

4. Recitation—“Perseverance.” Selected from “Troilus and Cressida,” Act
III., scene 3; beginning, “Time hath, my lord, a wallet,” etc.; ending,
“One touch of Nature makes the whole world kin.”

5. Essay—Characteristics of Shakspere’s Women.

Music.

6. Analysis of “Winter’s Tale.”

7. Court scene in “Merchant of Venice,” Act IV., scene 1; beginning, “Is
your name Shylock?” ending with the exit of Shylock.

The plan followed by many Shakspere clubs would afford a fine
entertainment. They assign the characters in any one of the plays (that
of “Julius Cæsar” being exceptionally fitting for an evening of this
kind) to the different members of the circle, who read the parts assigned.

To hold a Shakspere carnival would be a very interesting way in which to
commemorate the day. Let each one come dressed in costume to represent
any one of Shakspere’s characters and personate that character throughout
the evening.




LOCAL CIRCLES.


C. L. S. C. MOTTOES.

“_We Study the Word and the Works of God._”—“_Let us keep our Heavenly
Father in the Midst._”—“_Never be Discouraged._”


C. L. S. C. MEMORIAL DAYS.

1. OPENING DAY—October 1.

2. BRYANT DAY—November 3.

3. SPECIAL SUNDAY—November, second Sunday.

4. MILTON DAY—December 9.

5. COLLEGE DAY—January, last Thursday.

6. SPECIAL SUNDAY—February, second Sunday.

7. FOUNDER’S DAY—February 23.

8. LONGFELLOW DAY—February 27.

9. SHAKSPERE DAY—April 23.

10. ADDISON DAY—May 1.

11. SPECIAL SUNDAY—May, second Sunday.

12. SPECIAL SUNDAY—July, second Sunday.

13. INAUGURATION DAY—August, first Saturday after first Tuesday;
anniversary of C. L. S. C. at Chautauqua.

14. ST. PAUL’S DAY—August, second Saturday after first Tuesday;
anniversary of the dedication of St. Paul’s Grove at Chautauqua.

15. COMMENCEMENT DAY—August, third Tuesday.

16. GARFIELD DAY—September 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

The difficulty of holding a circle together is sometimes very great. Not
a little thorough study of the needs and natures of the members must tax
the leader who would hold a circle which has no interest in its work.
At RICHMOND, MAINE, our friends have experienced this difficulty. A
circle of fifteen was formed in January, 1884, but did not continue its
meetings. The lukewarmness of a few broke the interest of all; but ten
of the members did their reading apart. These ten took matters into their
own hands last fall, and now Richmond has a “Merry Meeting” circle, of
twenty-two members, interested and promising.

NASHUA, NEW HAMPSHIRE, has a Chautauqua circle. It has been in existence
for two years past, with varying fortunes. Last fall, when reorganized
for the season, it consisted of ten ladies, but now numbers fourteen.
Though this number is less than one half that of the last year, the
interest and enthusiasm are much greater. The weekly meetings are
occasions of great interest and instruction. They follow, with frequent
modifications, the program arranged in THE CHAUTAUQUAN, making the roll
call and question box regular features. The only difficulty with which
they meet is that they are all so busy that they can scarcely prepare for
each program. They also derive much pleasure and profit in observing the
memorial days. The circle is called the “Raymond” circle, in honor of the
Rev. B. P. Raymond, president of Lawrence University, Appleton, Wis.,
founder of this branch.

The “Athenian Chautauqua Literary and Scientific Circle” of WEST
ENOSBURGH, VT., has entered upon its first year in the Chautauqua
course. Although in its infancy, it shows a great deal of interest and
enthusiasm. The circle was organized September 29, 1884. The officers
are president, vice president and secretary. The circle began with eight
members and has increased to thirteen. One of the most interesting
exercises of this circle is the pronouncing match, each person being
allowed to try once; if he misses he sits down. The words for the next
match are the names of the sixty-six elements in chemistry.

Our travels through MASSACHUSETTS this month furnish much interesting
circle news. The “Star” circle, in FOXBORO, reorganized in October
with twenty-eight members, which includes all the graduates with one
exception. They believe there in once a C. L. S. C. always a C. L. S.
C. The weekly meetings are reported in the local paper, and more are
inquiring about the work than in previous years. One reason may be
that they are but eighteen miles from the “Hall on the Hill,” which
is in process of erection in South Framingham.——The “Henry M. King”
circle, connected with the Dudley Street church, BOSTON, was organized
in November, and has twenty-five members. Of these the larger part are
gentlemen, not of leisure, but business men, who bring with them into the
bi-weekly meetings the same energy and perseverance that characterize a
successful business enterprise. These are certainly the ones who might
with a good show of reason say: “No time.” But on the contrary they
_have_ time, not only for the regular work, but for the preparation of
papers requiring much time and research.——At NORTH ATTLEBORO the new
“Bryant” circle is four months old, and numbers twenty-six members. They
open the meetings with reading Scripture lessons and singing Chautauqua
songs. Roll call is responded to by quotations from a standard author,
followed by essays, recitations, blackboard exercises, questions,
discussions, etc., as the committee of instruction has arranged. The
secretary writes: “If we are not great, our hopes are.”——“Profit as well
as enjoyment we are getting from our studies,” says a member of the
circle at NORTH WEYMOUTH. This organization is a circle of ’83, and has
had time to thoroughly test the course. They have had recently a pleasant
memorial service, and have been favored with chemical experiments
by a chemist.——Pleasant notes of the work at WEST MADFORD have been
sent us by the secretary: “Through the influence of one sturdy little
lady, six or eight people met together last October and talked up the
feasibility of the C. L. S. C. They elected a president and secretary,
drew up a few by-laws, and are now in good running order. They meet
once in two weeks. Their membership was limited to twenty, which was
quickly reached. The opinion of these members seems to be that this
circle is as good, if not better, than any reported in your magazine.
We all work with a will, cull the best from the programs given for the
local circles, and add original ideas. Each member, in the order of his
enrollment, makes out the program. This gives each one an opportunity
to do his share, as well as to add his own ideas. We think this feature
much superior to the general mode of allowing the ‘chair’ to prepare all
programs.”——AMESBURY has a circle of unusual strength. We have been so
fortunate as to receive a letter which gives an account of a delightful
entertainment held by them in December. Our friend says: “Thinking
perhaps you might like to hear from us once again, we are glad to write
you of our pleasant and prosperous winter of literary work, brought about
by the grand C. L. S. C. movement. Our meetings are held on the second
and fourth Tuesday of each month, the programs comprise essays, music,
readings and conversation, and are social and very delightful, showing
a marked improvement on our ‘feeble beginning’ a year ago. Two new
circles have been formed this winter, one, the ‘Delphic,’ having forty or
more members. On the 18th of December we held our first public meeting
in honor of ‘Our Poet’s’ (Mr. John G. Whittier) birthday, to which we
invited the ‘Delphic’ circle, also the ‘Thursday Evening Club,’ an older
literary society of Amesbury, and other friends, about three hundred in
all. Members from the three circles took part in the program, which had
been carefully prepared. We were greatly pleased to receive from Mr. W.
C. Wilkinson a paper entitled ‘Whittier at the Receipt of Customs,’ which
was read to us by his friend, the Rev. P. S. Evans, of Amesbury. As Mr.
Whittier, owing to a previous engagement, could not be present with us,
resolutions were drawn up and sent to him, as follows:

    “‘DEAR MR. WHITTIER;—The three literary circles, together with
    a goodly company of the citizens of Amesbury as their invited
    guests, are met to celebrate the return of your birthday. We
    have talked together of all that you have done and suffered in
    the cause of freedom and of truth. We have listened to many of
    your words, rendered by living voices. We have looked at your
    ‘counterfeit presentment’ as it has hung before us covered with
    evergreen—our New England laurel. Because you were not with
    us in person, to receive them, we desire to send you our most
    hearty congratulations on the completion of your seventy-seventh
    year. We rejoice that after your “Thirty Years’ War” you have
    been spared to enjoy so many years of peace, and that in the
    prolonged “Indian Summer,” the “Halcyon” days of your life, you
    are receiving a well deserved tribute of reverence and affection.
    We think ourselves happy to have known you, not merely as a poet,
    but as a citizen, a neighbor, and a friend.

    “‘We feel we can not better voice our sentiments than by
    retaliating upon you the words you once so fitly spoke of one who
    has been a co-laborer with you in the cause of humanity—the mild
    “Autocrat of the Breakfast Table.”

        “‘“The world may keep his honored name,
           The wealth of all his varied powers;
           A stronger claim has love than fame,
           And he himself is only ours.”’

    “‘In the name and by the request of three hundred citizens of
    your own village.’

“To which Mr. Whittier responded with the following charming letter:

                               “‘OAK KNOLL, DANVERS, 12 MO., 23, 1884.

    “‘MY DEAR FRIEND:—Thy kind letter in behalf of the literary
    associations of Amesbury and Salisbury has just been received,
    and I hasten to express my thanks for the generous appreciation
    of my life work by “mine own people,” who know the man as well
    as the writer. That I am neither a prophet myself, nor the son
    of a prophet, may account perhaps for the rather remarkable fact
    that I am not without honor in my own country. I scarcely need
    say that among the many kind testimonials of regard which, on
    the occasion of my birthday, have reached me from both sides of
    the water, none have been more welcome than that conveyed in thy
    letter. If the praise awarded me is vastly beyond my due, I am
    none the less grateful for it.

    “‘I know too well my own deficiencies and limitations, but my
    heart is warm with thankfulness to the Divine Providence which
    so early led me to consecrate the ability given me to the cause
    of heaven, freedom, and the welfare of my fellowmen. The measure
    of literary reputation which has come to me is as far beyond my
    expectation as my desert, and I am glad to share the benefit of
    it with my home friends and neighbors. With thanks to thyself
    personally, and to those whom thee represents, I am, very truly,
    thy friend,

                                                “‘JOHN G. WHITTIER.’”

The “Crescent” circle, of WAKEFIELD, grew out of a meeting held last
September, and addressed by Mr. Fairchild, of Malden, in the interest
of the Chautauqua movement. A circle was formed as a result of their
meeting. About twenty members are now recorded on the books, although
more than that proposed at first to join. The meetings are quite
interesting, the programs being varied.——The “Alpha,” of UXBRIDGE, is a
new name on the books. This cutting from a recent letter is suggestive
of their spirit: “We start with six members only, but all are _very_
enthusiastic. We propose to do thorough work. Our object is improvement
and genuine culture. We shall use the best means to bring in others to
reap with us the golden harvest, and not be selfishly content with ‘our
set.’”——There are in FALL RIVER about sixty members of the C. L. S. C.,
but the “Amity” circle is the first organization in the city. It at
present numbers only thirteen members. A larger number certainly ought
to be in the organization. The “Amity” will undoubtedly soon bring them
in.——From PITTSFIELD a friend writes: “I am happy to report to you a
constantly increasing interest in the C. L. S. C. work in Pittsfield.
Our circle reorganized in October for another year’s work. To the
leadership of our efficient president, the Rev. Geo. Skene, we owe our
present prosperity. We have now sixty-four members, twenty-three of
whom belong to Class ’88. We have one graduate, our president, who took
his diploma at Chautauqua last summer. We also have one member of Class
’85, making five classes represented in our circle. Our meetings are
full of interest, and the attendance is excellent, the smallest number
present at any meeting this year being twenty-five. Programs are arranged
by a board of seven managers, who serve for three months. Singing,
prayer, roll call, with responses by quotations and reading of minutes
of last meeting, always form the opening exercises. We have also used
the Chautauqua vesper service, and enjoyed it. Our pastor has had the
Sunday vesper service several times, and we have found it very enjoyable
in both church and circle. We have had, too, experiments in chemistry,
illustrating some of the articles on that subject in THE CHAUTAUQUAN. As
another specialty we have had ‘pronunciation of Greek names,’ conducted
as the old fashioned spelling matches. This proved highly entertaining,
as well as instructive. We have recently changed our name to ‘Bryant
Chautauqua Circle.’ We think it particularly appropriate, as Cummington,
the birthplace of Mr. Bryant, and where he spent much of his life, is
situated only twenty miles from this town. Another circle has been formed
here since November, taking as a president one of the members of our
circle. They have at present thirty members. On Monday evening, February
2d, Dr. Vincent gave a lecture, both circles attending, and after the
lecture a joint reception was given him. It is expected that arrangements
will soon be made for occasionally holding union meetings. Thus the C.
L. S. C. prospers in Pittsfield. We find that here, as elsewhere, the C.
L. S. C. is promoting the best interests of the people.”——For several
years the two or three members of the C. L. S. C. in MARSHFIELD have been
accustomed to meet weekly for reading, study and conversation, but they
never dignified the gathering by the name of a local circle. Within a
few months they have organized under the name of the “Webster” circle,
inasmuch as they are the nearest members of the C. L. S. C. to the home
and burial place of that great statesman. They meet once in three weeks,
and have a membership of eight or ten, including representatives of
nearly every class.

The “Phelps” local circle, of NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT, of the C. L. S. C.,
started in November with five Chautauquans, and now numbers twenty-six,
with a number of others who are reading. So far they have kept very
closely to the Greek part of the course, and in the meetings have had a
number of map exercises, which they find very interesting.——WEST WINSTED,
of the same state, has a year-old circle, from which we have had our
first letter: “Our local circle numbers sixty, thirty of whom are regular
members of the central Circle. Nearly all of these members belong to the
‘Pansy’ class, and are loyal to it. We have never labored under great
difficulties, always having had good meetings. We have a most efficient
lady president, to whom, in a large degree, the success of our circle is
due. Early in the fall of 1883 a few enterprising men and women sent for
the books for the year and commenced reading, hardly daring to hope that
a circle would be formed. Our village is not lacking in literary circles,
having an almost countless number of different kinds, and for this very
reason it seemed that another one would not meet with success, but at the
first call nearly forty responded. We organized our circle that night and
continued the meetings during the year, taking up the work in essays,
questions and readings, and observing, as far as possible, the memorial
days, by appropriate exercises. This year we reorganized in October, and,
if possible, have had more interesting meetings than last year. Some of
our members who have a long distance to walk in order to attend have
proved themselves filled with the Chautauqua enthusiasm by their regular
attendance, whatever the condition of the weather. At our last meeting
we had chemistry for the topic, and devoted the evening to experiments,
having twenty or more, nearly all of which are given in THE CHAUTAUQUAN.
We have had sometimes, in addition to the regular literary work of the
evening, a personation of some author given by a member, the remaining
members guessing the author personated. One feature of our program for
January 20th was a match, similar to an old-fashioned spelling match,
upon the questions on ‘Preparatory Greek Course’ in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for
October and November. From the fact that new members join our ranks
at almost every meeting, we are encouraged in the feeling that though
popularity is not the winning feature, the good ‘Idea’ has taken deep
root.”

A RHODE ISLAND friend writes from WARREN: “To the numerous reports from
local organizations, I am pleased to add a few lines from the ‘Delta’
circle, organized last October, in this part of ‘Little Rhody.’ It
consists of nineteen ‘regular’ and four ‘local’ members, assembling on
the second and fourth Monday evenings of each month. Our president and
vice president are enthusiastic Chautauquans, respectively of the classes
of ’86 and ’87, the remainder belonging to the class of ’88. Our programs
are arranged by ‘the committee of instruction’ during the intermission,
and reported to the circle before its adjournment each evening. In the
arrangement of these great help is rendered by those published in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN. Our memorial days have been pleasantly observed, and we
shall shortly have a Sunday evening vesper service. We also intend to
have a supper, the cooking of which is to be ‘_à la_ CHAUTAUQUAN.’ While
waiting for the Chautauqua songs our president has carefully prepared by
hektograph, for our use, both notes and words of several selected from
his copy, and we are delighted with the harmonies. Should we discover
any new departure that would be helpful to local circles, we shall write
again.”

Almost as numerous reports reach us this month from the “Empire State”
as we received last; several are of circles hitherto unknown to our
columns. The “DeKalb” circle, of BROOKLYN, is one of these. It was
organized in the fall of 1883, with fifteen members. Since that time the
membership has increased to twenty-six.——At BATAVIA a local circle was
formed in October last, and consists of about fifty members. These are
mostly beginners in the Chautauqua course, with a few who will finish
next year. They have done some good work in the way of essays, readings
and experiments, and hope to do more. The work upon Greece has been made
particularly interesting, from the fact that the leader, the Rev. C.
A. Johnson, has described so faithfully many of these landmarks of the
past as seen by him in recent years.——In October, 1884, a new C. L. S.
C. was organized at WHITESTOWN. It is called the “Hestia” circle, and
has fifteen enthusiastic members, all ladies. At one meeting leaders are
appointed to conduct the exercises on the various readings at the next
meeting, having as many different leaders as there are different subjects
in the readings for the week. The leaders are appointed in alphabetical
order, so each member is required to lead in some exercise as often as
once in every three or four weeks.——The “Lakeside” circle, of FAIR HAVEN,
is to be counted “one of us.” Many readers have been at Lakeside, but the
circle is a new organization. Thus far the work has been, most of it,
on the Greek course; they take the questions in THE CHAUTAUQUAN, have
essays on the leading characters, selections, questions, discussions,
etc. The president drew for them a large map of Greece, which was a great
help in fixing the position of the different places in their minds—an
admirable plan, which more presidents would do well to follow.——A
delightful circle of seventeen exists in the pleasant city of ROME.
Unfortunately, they have recently lost their president, a gentleman of
scholarly taste, to whom the success of the first two years of their life
was largely due.——At LITTLE GENESEE there is an enthusiastic circle of
sixteen members. At each circle one of the members presents a program
for the next session, every member taking his turn in the order in which
his name stands on the secretary’s book. Although not formally made a
rule, it is understood that no member shall refuse to undertake any work
assigned on the program. Chautauqua songs, roll call, and “Questions and
Answers” from THE CHAUTAUQUAN are the standard features of the programs.
Essays, discussions, select reading, questions, etc., furnish variety,
and conversation is always in order. At the last circle the responses
were to be from “Kitchen Science.” The responses assumed form, as well as
expression, and a bountifully spread table gave opportunity for practical
tests of kitchen science.

At LATROBE, PENNSYLVANIA, a C. L. S. C. was properly organized, and went
earnestly to work October 1, 1884, with twenty-five members. It being the
first Chautauqua circle in the place some difficulties had to be overcome
before getting rightly started. The circle is now under good progress,
and doing a good work. They have enjoyable monthly meetings, where a
regular program is carried out, consisting of readings, recitations,
music, etc. The benefit gained by the members is far beyond expression.
Both old and young are alike profited and pleased with the readings.
October 22, 1884, the circle was called to mourn the sad death of Miss
Alice Newcomer, one of their most beloved members.——A very interesting
variation from the usual response by roll call has been introduced into
a program of the HARRISBURG circle. It is that each person respond by
mentioning some one important event which has occurred in the past month.
This circle sends a very skilfully prepared program.——At BERWICK the C.
L. S. C. pursues the plan of study laid down in THE CHAUTAUQUAN, finding
it admirably adapted to complete the required reading in the given time.
A friend telling of their prosperity says: “We have lost a few members by
removals, and one or two have withdrawn, after a year’s study, but the
backbone and sinew of the circle remain, and the body is growing vigorous
and symmetrical. At the dawn of the Chautauqua year we were compelled
to part with our learned and valued preceptor, Prof. L. H. Bower, who
was called to the Dickinson College Preparatory School. The circle, with
appropriate ceremony, presented him with a copy of ‘Knight’s Illuminated
Pictorial Shakspere,’ in eight volumes, as a token of their appreciation
of his services. His talented brother, Prof. A. V. Bower, was elected to
succeed him as president of the circle, and the change was made without
any friction whatever. We congratulate ourselves upon being members of
the Class of ’86.”

The outlook which a friend from MARYLAND sends of the new circle at
FREDERICK is very encouraging: “Through the energy of a lady of the
Methodist church we have organized a C. L. S. C. local circle under
the name of ‘Mountain City.’ We organized November 24, 1884, with nine
members, elected a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer. We
are glad to say we now have thirteen members, and hope soon to increase
this number. We have enthusiastic meetings every week at the homes of the
members; read in the circle some of THE CHAUTAUQUAN required readings,
and carry out as far as practicable the programs for local circles, and
expect to observe all memorial days.”

We have just received a very encouraging report from the MADISONVILLE,
OHIO, circle which was organized last year. They have twenty-five
members, all of whom take a great interest in the circle. The committee
of instruction, composed of the officers, has a full program prepared
for each meeting. Two ministers of the town belong and take an active
part. Miscellaneous questions have been introduced, and beside a question
on the lesson, each member is required to bring one on outside matters.
All questions remaining unanswered are distributed, to be answered at
the following meeting. There is no doubt that if the interest in the
circle still continues there will be a second circle started in the town
next year.——At DEFIANCE a local circle was organized October 1st, with
a membership of twenty, all of whom belong to the general Circle of
the C. L. S. C. The president is the Rev. B. W. Slagle, pastor of the
Presbyterian church in the town. They have prepared special programs
for the memorial days, which have proved very delightful, as well as
instructive. There is a good prospect of doubling the membership by next
year.

The annual report of the work of Calvary church, DETROIT, MICHIGAN, for
last year, includes an account of the work done by the “Calvary” circle,
a society which has been made a part of the church organization. From
it we learn that the society has thirty-three active members. They have
held twenty-two meetings; the programs have included—essays, 36; select
readings, 28; music—instrumental pieces 21, vocal pieces 17; general
talks, 4; debates, 2. The regular CHAUTAUQUAN review questions have
been taken up at each meeting. There has been a great deal of interest
manifested in the meetings and a disposition on the part of officers and
members to make them a success; every one who has attended them has been
benefited, not only in the improvement of his or her mind, but also in
some degree morally.

INDIANA reports two circles: the “Wide Awakes,” of MOSCOW, a circle
of four, and the “Laconia,” of GUMFIELD. Some five years ago, when
the “Chautauqua wave” was moving westward, it reached Gumfield in a
modified form. Eight persons began taking THE CHAUTAUQUAN, but did
not perfect an organization; only one of the number matriculated and
kept up the required reading. In the fall of 1882 they began the work
vigorously, organizing a promising circle. As time advanced their
influence gradually widened and extended, until this year there are over
twenty enthusiastic Chautauquans enrolled at the Plainfield office. The
“Laconia” meets weekly, and has endeavored to make thoroughness one of
the characteristics of its work. It is composed entirely of housekeepers,
but they feel more than compensated for sacrifice of time by inspiration
received from the reading and study. Most memorial days have been
observed. By this means the public has become interested in the C. L. S.
C., and a similar society has been organized among the young people.

One of the most enthusiastic circles of ILLINOIS is a quartette of
“Irrepressibles,” at NOKOMIO. The circle had the novel experience of
graduating in a body at Chautauqua last August. Now they are working more
vigorously than ever, trying to cover their diplomas with seals.——ELGIN
has four large circles, the result of the “Alpha” circle, an organization
formed in December, 1883, with six members. Last fall this society
increased its numbers to nine, and most zealous has been their work. A
sad loss recently befell them in the death of one of the charter members,
Miss Mary Warde.——The circle at SULLIVAN, was organized in October, with
a membership of eleven—one “Progressive” and ten “Plymouth Rocks.” They
meet once a week at the homes of the members. The president appoints
the members in turn to act as leaders, and the circle is composed
of enthusiastic workers. Seven members visited New Orleans in the
holidays, and two are spending this month in the “Crescent City.”——From
PROPHETSTOWN a friend writes: “We are a modest bouquet of ‘Pansies,’
counting only seven, but we feel the charm of the Chautauqua Idea, and
propose to ‘Neglect not the gift that is in us.’ One of our number, Mrs.
Amelia K. Seely, passed ‘beyond the gates’ December 15, 1884. We sadly
miss her cheery presence and unfailing interest in the work.”——Wednesday,
January 21st, was a “red-letter” day for the Chautauquans of HINSDALE.
Their usual enthusiasm was raised to a high key by the long-looked-for
visit to their suburb of Chancellor Vincent, who made a stop of two hours
on his way to Aurora. He was received by the class, who were out in full
force, at the residence of the secretary. A lunch was served, and the
time was most agreeably and profitably spent in conversation upon topics
of interest connected with the C. L. S. C.

The “Oak Branch” circle was organized at OAKFIELD, WISCONSIN, in
November. There are only seven members, and all are busy people, but they
are zealous and interested in the work, and thankful that they may enjoy
the benefits of the C. L. S. C. They meet once in two weeks, their circle
being conducted similarly to others which have been reported in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN.

The “Centenary” local circle, of MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA, writes us: “Our
city boasts no less than twelve circles, but Centenary, the pioneer
circle, still lives, and while our members are about one half what they
were when ours was the only one in the city, we are going on quietly and
promptly with all our work, and expect to furnish ten graduates for the
class of ’85. We have our cottage engaged for the coming Assembly at
Chautauqua, and hope to send a good delegation next summer. We have some
eight or nine members of the class of ’88, and several representatives of
classes of ’86 and ’87.”——At SPRING VALLEY, a circle of seventeen members
organized last fall, the president being from the class of ’84, but the
members from ’88. The interest in the circle is decidedly increasing.

The friends of THE CHAUTAUQUAN in IOWA have been unusually kind this
month. The following brief clippings from their letters give an excellent
outlook on the work there: “A circle was organized at AFTON, in October
last, consisting of eleven regular and fifteen local members. Although
nearly a month behind in organizing, we intend continuing our society
through July, so as to be able to commence the next year at the regular
time. In making out our program for local circle work we usually
follow the one given in THE CHAUTAUQUAN, and find it a great help, but
occasionally vary our exercises to adapt it to peculiar circumstances.
The average attendance is good, and most of the members seem to take
quite an interest. We hope the society will prove of lasting benefit to
each member.”——“Through the energetic efforts of our village doctor,
there was started last October a C. L. S. C. circle at LE GRAND, and
we feel worthy of mention in your columns. The circle consists of
eleven members of the great Circle, and four or five local members. We
appoint a new teacher for each book. We are learning much, and very much
enjoy the circles. We have chosen for our name ‘Philohellemon.’”——“The
‘Ladies’ Chautauqua Reading Circle,’ of SIOUX CITY, IOWA, has seventeen
members. We organized in October, 1884. Our society is full of earnest
enthusiasm. We meet once a week, following with slight variations the
programs suggested in THE CHAUTAUQUAN. Chemistry is a favorite study,
made specially interesting by the fact that a gentleman familiar with the
subject gives us lectures with illustrative experiments.”——The “Kelly
Humboldt” circle, of HUMBOLDT, was reorganized last fall with renewed
energy and vigor. About fourteen new members were admitted. “Our circle
being now so large (numbering about twenty-six) as to almost require
dividing, next season we intend organizing one in the adjoining town,
just half a mile from here; then those living in that vicinity can
withdraw from our circle to their own, leaving room for more to join
us. To say that we enjoy our study, would be saying but very little; we
can hardly wait for Monday evening to come, so anxious are we to meet
and discuss the topics prepared for us. The programs arranged in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN are a great help to us, although we vary them a little,
generally opening by prayer and music; then, as a sentiment, we each
give a current event of the week. We observe all the memorial days,
and are now making extensive preparations to hold a public meeting in
the church on Longfellow’s day. So that we may not be confused with
the other ‘Humboldt’ circle, we have, in honor of the originator, Miss
Mary Kelly, named our circle the ‘Kelly Humboldt’ C. L. S. C.”——WAPELLO
has the “Qui Vive” circle, which enjoys the work. It was organized in
September, 1884, and is composed almost entirely of members of the class
of ’88.——In a recent letter from BURLINGTON, we find some entertaining
news from still another Iowa friend: “You always have something in the
local circle column from Iowa. You know Iowa has two great staples, corn
and Chautauquans, and we think you would surely be glad to hear of our
flourishing circle, as well as others of the thousands of Chautauquans.
Our circle was organized for the year’s work on Garfield day. We have the
best circle we ever had, and are conceited enough to think there are no
better ones anywhere. Our president is a busy lawyer. Indeed, our circle
is composed of the busiest people in the town. We meet _regularly_ and
_promptly_ every Monday evening. Burlington is a city of seven hills.
Then you understand what regular meetings are here, for the circle is
comprehensive and takes in all the hills. Our chemistry lessons are
taught by a practicing physician who is a thorough chemist and teaches
intelligently and enthusiastically. We have the willing coöperation of
many of the educated people of the city, and when necessary for either
our own advancement, or more perfect instruction on a topic, we find
them ready to give us an address or essay. Our most enthusiastic members
are graduates of colleges, or advanced academies. We recognize each
memorial day. One of our daily papers freely makes any announcement we
have to make, and aids us all it can. I can not undertake to tell you the
good our circle is doing for us individually. Some of us, deprived of
early advantages, can not be too thankful for the C. L. S. C. It is an
influence for good that enters into our everyday life, and overbalances
and counteracts some of the _other_ influences that every soul must
encounter.”

With an excellent program of a regular meeting has come to us a notice
of a circle at HATBORO, TENNESSEE. The secretary says: “With great
pleasure I report a local circle in our little town. We started with
two members; we now enroll thirteen. We all are deeply interested,
and think the Chautauqua Idea a grand one. We call ourselves ‘Golden
Flower’ (Chrysanthemum) local circle, and our badges are clusters of
chrysanthemums.”

From GREENVILLE, SOUTH CAROLINA, come very cheering reports: “Our
circle was organized in the fall of 1883, and we are therefore of the
‘Pansy’ order. We have twelve members, six young ladies and six young
men. Most of the members are college graduates, and take the course to
keep bright in their studies. We adhere, with occasional changes, to the
following order of business: First, roll call and reading of minutes;
second, examination of question box, in which each member is required to
deposit at least three questions, bearing directly on the subjects for
the time in the regular course; third, an essay; fourth, reading by two
members appointed by the president; fifth, twenty minutes allowed for
informal discussion of the lessons. We of course celebrate the memorial
days with appropriate ceremonies. Some additional interest is given by
having some extra literary entertainment. A Dickens party we had recently
was very enjoyable. The book we selected was ‘Our Mutual Friend.’ Each
member represented one of the leading characters in the book. Besides
we acted several scenes, which added much to the enjoyment. We are all
enthusiastic in our interest in Chautauqua, and fully determined to
finish the course.”

At ATLANTA, GEORGIA, there is a circle of fifteen in West End, the
largest suburb of Atlanta. The Rev. H. C. Crumley, a pastor of the city,
deserves the credit of founding this organization.

A very kindly and graceful courtesy has been extended to those
Chautauquans visiting New Orleans, by the “Longfellow” circle, of that
city. It is an invitation prettily framed, which has been hung in the
Chautauqua alcove. The placard reads:

                               C. L. S. C.

                                GREETING
                OF THE LONGFELLOW CIRCLE OF NEW ORLEANS.

    _To any and all Fellow-Chautauquans who may be visiting The
    World’s Industrial and Cotton Centennial Exposition, we offer a
    cordial invitation to attend the meetings of our Local Circle,
    which are held every Tuesday afternoon, at five o’clock, at No.
    393 South Rampart Street, corner of Erato Street._

    _Also, we extend a like invitation to all Resident Chautauquans
    to join our Circle, wishing to awaken renewed interest in the
    Great Movement._

    O. F. GROAT, Secretary.
    J. HASAM, Cor. Sec’y.
    K. L. RIGGS, President.

    NEW ORLEANS, January 26, 1885.

A very encouraging report of the circle at EUREKA SPRINGS, ARKANSAS, has
reached us: “We organized the Eureka Springs Chautauqua Literary and
Scientific Circle October 1st, 1884. Our circle has about thirty members,
half of whom are reading the books. We follow the programs given in THE
CHAUTAUQUAN. A great many spectators attend. Everybody is interested
in our circle. We are talking of establishing a lecture course at this
place for the summer months, probably in July, in the interest of the
Chautauqua Circle. We always have between 4,000 and 6,000 people here,
in the summer many more. We have very suitable grounds, near the purest
water in the place. Our town is easy of access from Missouri and Kansas,
as well as from other parts of this State. So far as known, we are the
only organized Chautauquans in this State. Probably many persons are
reading the course at different places, but we know of no circle.”

From CLARKSVILLE, MISSOURI, a lady writes: “This Pansy bed by the ‘Father
of Waters’ has much for which to be thankful: Fifteen earnest workers
compose our number. We are all teachers and scholars, by turns. We
attempt as much thoroughness as practicable in the readings, brought out
by recitations and conversation. We carry out some parts of the programs
in THE CHAUTAUQUAN. Some of the Pansies hope to be transplanted for a
time to Chautauqua in ’87.”

OTTAWA, KANSAS, circle was organized in time for the October work, with
a membership of fourteen. “Our circle has increased, until now we are
twenty-eight in number. Our meetings, held twice a month, are both
pleasant and profitable, each member faithfully doing his part. We
respond to roll call by quotations or class mottoes. We find the programs
in THE CHAUTAUQUAN quite beneficial. The essays, recitations and music
form a pleasing variety. We adopted the question match, also the question
box, and find these not only amusing but profitable. This month we will
try some of the chemical experiments in connection with a lecture. We are
all looking forward to the Sunday-school Assembly, which meets here in
June, and to the meetings of the circle conducted by the Rev. Hurlbut.
The spirit of the C. L. S. C. is spreading, and we hope to report a large
circle to you next year.”

A friend writes from SEATTLE, WASHINGTON TERRITORY: “I notice in your
January number a communication from Mr. K. A. Burnell, in which he
states that at Seattle and Tacoma he found but a single reader and one
family reading the Chautauqua course, a statement from which one might
infer that he was indeed so much under the ‘shadow of Mount Tacoma’ as
to obscure his vision. There are at Seattle as many as forty readers,
at least, who have been pursuing the Chautauqua course of study since
October last. There are three regularly organized circles in this place,
holding weekly meetings, and a general semi-monthly meeting in which
the members of all the circles join. One of the circles, named ‘Alki,’
has a membership of sixteen. This circle has the honor and advantage
of numbering among its members a noted linguist and scientist in the
person of Dr. John C. Sundberg. Considerable interest is being awakened
throughout the whole of the Puget Sound country in the Chautauqua
readings, and it would not be surprising if, in another year, the regular
Chautauquans in this section of country are numbered by hundreds.”

The “Washakie” circle, of EVANSTON, WYOMING, was organized on the 10th
of last October. The names of twenty-six members have been enrolled.
Starting late, they were behind with their studies until lately,
consequently the program for each week as laid down in THE CHAUTAUQUAN
was not followed. The meetings, however, have been very interesting.
The leaders appointed for the different subjects on each evening came
well prepared. Essays on Milton, Burns, and others, have been read.
Prof. Halleck, of the public schools, has delivered short lectures on
the scientific subjects. Prof. Capen has given experiments in chemistry.
Music, and recitations from the classic authors by a fine elocutionist,
have rendered the meetings more entertaining. The enthusiasm has grown
with the year.

The first circle that was regularly organized in PORTLAND, OREGON,
was that established by the Y. M. C. A., last October. This circle is
composed of about twenty members. The other two circles which have joined
the class of ’88 are those connected with the Taylor Street and Grace
Methodist Episcopal Churches. The latter was organized during the month
of December, and is composed of about twenty-five members, who seem to be
now deeply interested in their work. The former is the largest circle in
the State, composed of about forty active and progressive young men and
women, who are now deeply interested in their studies, and a notable fact
of this circle is that there is no restraint in thought by the members,
as is often the case where freedom of opinion is withheld, thus repelling
the progress of the meeting. The able secretary of their circle deserves
great credit for the time and trouble he has exercised performing that
office, and volunteering to assume all responsibility with regard to
books, dues, and pamphlets. The Rev. G. W. Chandler, the efficient
president, is the originator of this circle. Their efforts and untiring
energies have made this circle most interesting, and have brought into
it some of the best scholars in the State. By perseverance and thorough
study, with the watchword “Forward,” they are determined to ever press
onward and upward in this grand work, and receive their reward.




THE C. L. S. C. CLASSES.


CLASS OF 1885.—“THE INVINCIBLES.”

“_Press on, reaching after those things which are before._”

OFFICERS.

    _President_—J. B. Underwood, Meriden, Conn.

    _Vice President_—C. M. Nichols, Springfield, Ohio.

    _Treasurer_—Miss Carrie Hart, Aurora, Ind.

    _Secretary_—Miss M. M. Canfield, Washington, D. C.

    _Executive Committee_—Officers of the class.

    Class badges may be procured of either President or Treasurer.

The members of the Chautauqua circles have now a third of a year only
in which to finish their readings and fill out their papers for the
current year. So far as we have been able to learn, a much larger number
of persons have been pursuing the C. L. S. C. course this year than
have been in the ranks during any previous corresponding period. Those
connected with journalism, in looking over their exchanges, rarely pick
up a local paper that does not have some reference to the doings of a
local Chautauqua circle. Then it has been discovered that those who read
the Chautauqua books and periodicals have been led to go beyond the
lines, and to search for intellectual treasures in “pastures new”—in
books, reviews, public journals of character and excellence, and, also,
to seek association with people of culture. Indeed, it is pleasantly and
encouragingly apparent that the Chautauqua system is becoming, from month
to month, broader, deeper, more far-reaching in its wholesome and really
powerful influence, in promoting moral as well as intellectual culture.

The members of the Class of 1885 should bear these facts in mind, and
accept the special degree of responsibility involved. Let this class be
not only the best, but the largest that has ever passed within the Golden
Gate on Commencement day! Why should it not be three thousand strong? If
we begin now, in April, to make our plans and preparations, perhaps we
can all “get there,” and present a solid phalanx of honest, thorough,
intelligent and aggressive Chautauquans, marching toward and through
the Gate and into the Hall, with banners and songs, that will promise
largely and grandly for the moral and mental improvement of thousands of
communities throughout the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

“What would be the result if we report to Miss Canfield our intentions to
be at Chautauqua to receive our diplomas, and something should happen to
prevent?”

The only result would be that those who expected you would be as sadly
disappointed as you would be in not being able to come. The fact that you
intended to come and were detained by good cause would be accepted, and
you would “stand excused,” and would receive your diploma in good time.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISSOURI.—As one of the “Invincibles,” I would add my testimony with
others of Class ’85 as having received pleasure and benefit beyond
computation in pursuing the C. L. S. C. course. I commenced alone, but
after a few months succeeded in organizing a circle for ’86, which keeps
up a large membership, persistent and thorough in study, with rigid class
drill; also remembrance of memorial days.

       *       *       *       *       *

PENNSYLVANIA.—What a well-spring of joy is the C. L. S. C. in the homes
of those who have not enjoyed the advantages of a liberal education! The
students born of this great movement are rising up all over this great
land with blessings for the founder of this happy Circle. I am reading
alone, as there are no members near me, but at some little distance I
have interested some bright young friends of mine in the work, and I am
glad to know that they are so much pleased with it.


CLASS OF 1886.—“THE PROGRESSIVES.”

“_We study for light, to bless with light._”

CLASS ORGANIZATION.

    _President_—The Rev. B. P. Snow, Biddeford, Maine.

    _Vice Presidents_—The Rev. J. C. Whitley, Salisbury, Maryland;
    Mr. L. F. Houghton, Peoria, Illinois; Mr. Walter Y. Morgan,
    Cleveland, Ohio; Mrs. Delia Browne, Louisville, Kentucky; Miss
    Florence Finch, Palestine, Texas.

    _Secretary_—The Rev. W. L. Austin, New Albany, Ind.

The new badge, bearing the motto and emblem of the class, is now ready
to be sent out. The design meets hearty approval. The cost, including
postage, will be 15 cents. For badges, address the president or the
secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *

The New England branch of the class will have superior headquarters at
the Framingham Assembly in July. This important section of ’86 have plans
and arrangements in view that will insure a most pleasant and successful
class gathering at the Assembly.


CLASS OF 1887.—“THE PANSIES.”

“_Neglect not the gift that is in thee._”

OFFICERS.

    _President_—The Rev. Frank Russell, Mansfield, Ohio.

    _Western Secretary_—K. A. Burnell, Esq., 150 Madison Street,
    Chicago, Ill.

    _Eastern Secretary_—J. A. Steven, M.D., 164 High Street,
    Hartford, Conn.

    _Treasurer_—Either Secretary, from either of whom badges may be
    procured.

    _Executive Committee_—The officers of the class.

    Class paper may be procured from Mr. Henry Hart, Atlanta, Ga.

The attention of the members of ’87 is called to the letter by Mrs. Alden
in the March number of THE CHAUTAUQUAN, page 353.

       *       *       *       *       *

President Russell had charge of the Sunday-school Normal Department
at the Florida Chautauqua, Lake de Funiak, and is one of the Board of
Managers.

At Milton, Mass., recently, the representatives of the Class of ’87 had a
table at a church fair and cleared over $100.

It is our painful duty to record the death of two members of the Class
of 1887: Miss Mary Dayton, of Binghamton, N. Y., and Mrs. Lou L. Dunn,
of Bonham, Texas. The deepest sympathy not only of the class, but of all
members of the C. L. S. C. is with the sorrowing friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO NEW ENGLAND ’87S.—The second mid-year reunion of New England ’87s will
be held on Friday, April 3d, in Union Congregational Chapel, Stewart
Street, Providence, R. I. The business meeting will be held at half-past
one o’clock p. m.; the literary and musical entertainment at two o’clock.
A social reunion will precede and follow the regular exercises. Will
all New England members of ’87 please make a special effort to attend
this reunion? Providence Chautauquans are enthusiastic, and will
doubtless strive to make this meeting thoroughly enjoyable. Let us, by
our presence, show our appreciation of their efforts. Our Providence
classmates have kindly offered to meet at the station any strangers who
will communicate the hour of their arrival to Miss Nellie F. Crocker, 6
Kepler Street, Providence.


CLASS OF 1888.—“THE PLYMOUTH ROCKS.”

“_Let us be seen by our deeds._”

CLASS ORGANIZATION.

    _President_—The Rev. A. E. Dunning, D.D., Boston, Mass.

    _Vice Presidents_—Prof. W. N. Ellis, 108 Gates Avenue, Brooklyn,
    N. Y.; the Rev. Wm. G. Roberts, Bellevue, Ohio.

    _Secretary_—Miss M. E. Taylor, Cleveland, Ohio.

    _Treasurer_—Miss M. E. Taylor, Cleveland, Ohio.

    All items for this column should be sent, in condensed form, to
    the Rev. C. C. McLean, St. Augustine, Florida.

The “Chautauqua Quartette,” Avon, Indiana, organized December 5, 1884,
writes: “We are four country girls, living two to three miles apart, but
hold weekly meetings, alternately, at our homes.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In Harlem, N. Y., is a class of seven, organized October 1, 1884. The
secretary writes: “Each member in turn takes charge, assigning lessons
and questioning the class.” In addition to the required study they take
some prominent author, giving biography and quoting from works.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Portland, Maine, we learn that they have a large and interesting
circle, meeting semi-monthly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Castalian,” of Philadelphia, ten members, was organized October,
1884. This circle thinks too many members make each other timid, and
therefore advocates many circles of few members. They are fortunate in
having a president who makes chemical experiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

A flourishing circle of fifty members was organized in Batavia, New York,
October, 1884.

The Rev. J. D. Gillilan, of Toocle, Utah, writes that “here among the
Mormons a class of three is formed; one of the number was a Mormon
when he joined the circle, but has since united himself with the M. E.
Church.” There is a flourishing circle in Salt Lake City.

       *       *       *       *       *

The “Wilkesbarre” circle, of Wilkesbarre, Pa., was organized October,
1884, with sixty members. This circle meets every alternate week, each
member responding to roll call with a quotation from the “readings.” A
physician makes fine experiments in chemistry.

       *       *       *       *       *

A circle has been organized in Topeka, Kan., with thirty members. The
secretary says: “Most of us are busy girls, figuring as teachers, office
and store clerks, but find time to take the reading course thoroughly,
and hope to graduate with the 88s.”

       *       *       *       *       *

KANSAS.—“I am well pleased with our class motto and name. I am a sculptor
by profession and wish a higher aim, a sculptor of life, for I have
caught that angel vision. I am pursuing my studies with energy and
enthusiasm, and life to me is more pleasant since I have taken up the
course. Whenever I feel vexed and comfortless I only need to read over
Chancellor Vincent’s articles in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for encouragement.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Buffalo, Pa., a friend says that “_all_ dislike the Class name, and
desire it changed.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Toronto, Canada, raises a protesting voice against our name, saying, “I
am well aware of the fact that the name stands on history’s page as a
synonym for grand and noble qualities, but I am forced nevertheless to
object to it on account of its ‘fowl’ association. Could we not have a
name _unwinged_, _unplumed_, and of no marketable value.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the ’88s, who is reading alone, tells us, “In the study of the
past four months I have received more instruction and enjoyment than in
any amount of the general reading done in the same number of years.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“Vincent” circle, of Portland, Maine, sends us an interesting program of
a meeting held January 16th. A most exquisite Plymouth Rock engraving
graces its first page.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Longfellow” circle, of Eastern Promontory, Portland, Maine, sends us
their constitution and by-laws, including the names of its 103 members.

       *       *       *       *       *

KANSAS.—I am pursuing the course alone, and feel that I need the stimulus
of outside aid and correspondence. Since my school days were over my
reading has been of too miscellaneous a character to result in the profit
it should have done. I am enjoying the Greek History and the Preparatory
Course very much. My husband has been brushing up his knowledge of the
Greek language, and comes to my assistance occasionally, so it is a
source of profit to him as well. Even my eleven-year-old boy has caught
the spirit, and begs me to mark all the battles for him to read, and is
learning the Greek alphabet. I am pleased with the name of our class—“The
Plymouth Rocks.” My ancestors were among those that landed on the bleak
old Rock, and I know something of the sturdy perseverance and uprightness
of their character. I can only hope that the “mantle” of those old
pilgrims will fall upon us as “Plymouth Rocks,” and that, like them, we
may grow strong in wisdom and goodness.




QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.

BY A. M. MARTIN,

General Secretary C. L. S. C.


I.—SEVENTY-FIVE QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON “SHORT HISTORY OF THE
REFORMATION.”

1. Q. What is the Reformation? A. It is that great religious and
intellectual revolution which marks the boundary line between the Middle
Ages and the Modern Period.

2. Q. What was the first aim of the reformers, and which proved a total
failure? A. The purification of the church within itself, and by its own
servants.

3. Q. What was the next step, and one which succeeded? A. To withdraw
from the fold, and establish an independent confession, and a separate
ecclesiastical structure.

4. Q. Who planted the first seeds of Protestantism in France? A. The
Paris reformers.

5. Q. Who were three prominent Paris reformers? A. D’Ailly, Gerson, and
Clémanges.

6. Q. What was the most obvious cause of the failure of the Paris
theologians? A. They never withdrew from the Roman Catholic Church, or
took steps to establish a separate ecclesiastical organization.

7. Q. How did the Mystics of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
arise? A. As a spiritual reaction against the supremacy of the scholastic
philosophy.

8. Q. What was the central scene and native country of the most notable
reformatory Mystics? A. Germany.

9. Q. What four names are prominent among the early Mystics of Germany?
A. Eckart, Ruysbroek, Suso, and Tauler.

10. Q. Who were the two most notable members of the school of St. Victor?
A. Hugo and Richard.

11. Q. What was the chief of important general movements, without
connection with prominent characters, in progress to hasten the approach
of reform? A. In the field of intellectual progress, was the revival of
literature, which took the name of Humanism.

12. Q. In this revival, what were the studies, as distinguished from the
theological themes which had long held sway in all the universities and
learned circles of Europe? A. They were purely human and literary.

13. Q. Who were three prominent champions of the new Humanism? A. John
Reuchlin, of Germany, Erasmus, of Rotterdam, and Thomas More, of England.

14. Q. What three councils were formal acknowledgments, on the part
of the Roman Catholic Church, of the evils within its pale, and the
necessity of relief from them? A. The councils of Pisa, Kostnitz, and
Basel.

15. Q. With what bitter controversy did the fourteenth century open? A. A
controversy between the church and the leading civil rulers. It was the
old question of authority—whether pope or king was the supreme head.

16. Q. Why was the Avignon papacy popularly called by the Romanists
“The Babylonian Captivity?” A. From the light in which it was held as
an ecclesiastical calamity, and from its continuance of nearly seventy
years—from 1309 to 1377.

17. Q. Although the three councils failed of their prime object, what
fact did they reveal to the world? A. The fact that no prospect for
reform could exist in any new council.

18. Q. What way was it now clear was the only one open for improvement?
A. The independence of the individual reformer.

19. Q. What now became the theater for the Reformation? A. Central
Germany.

20. Q. Who responded to the universal aspiration for a leader to guide
into new and safe paths? A. Martin Luther.

21. Q. When and where was Luther born? A. In Eisleben, Saxony, November
11, 1483.

22. Q. What wealthy lady befriended Luther in youth, and gave him the
advantages of an excellent teacher? A. Ursula Cotta.

23. Q. After finishing his course at the University of Erfurt, what did
Luther then do? A. He bade the world farewell, and in 1505 entered the
Augustinian cloister as a monk.

24. Q. In 1508 to what place was Luther called as professor? A. To
Wittenberg.

25. Q. After two years in Wittenberg to what city did he make a visit? A.
Rome.

26. Q. What effect did this visit have upon Luther? A. He took with him,
when he left Rome, an abhorrence of the superstition and immorality of
the church at its fountainhead, which never left him.

27. Q. In what bill of charges did Luther subsequently arraign the
church? A. His ninety-five theses, directed principally against the sale
of indulgences.

28. Q. In an “Address to the Nobles of the German People” what did Luther
declare which led to his excommunication by the pope? A. That the time
had come when Germany ought to cast off allegiance to Rome, to start out
on an independent religious and national life, and take care of its own
interests.

29. Q. Before what body was Luther summoned, where his doctrines were
condemned, and the sentence of ban and double ban pronounced against him?
A. The Diet of Worms.

30. Q. To what place was Luther taken for safety after leaving Worms? A.
To the Wartburg Castle, where he remained for eight months.

31. Q. About how many separate writings appeared from the pen of Luther?
A. About one hundred and twenty, among them a translation of the Bible.

32. Q. To whom did Luther commit the task of formulating a systematic
treatment of doctrine? A. To his nearest friend, Melancthon.

33. Q. Of what do the annals of literature and theology not furnish
a more beautiful illustration than we find in the case of Luther and
Melancthon? A. Of the manner in which a great work can be performed by
the combined action of two men.

34. Q. To what were the labors of Melancthon directed, in the great
cause of reform? A. To the improvement of the methods of study in the
university of Wittenberg. He urged the students to the fountain-heads
of truth, and placed before them the Bible as the only source of real
knowledge.

35. Q. What five princes of Saxony were devoted friends of the new
movement for the liberation of the conscience? A. George, Maurice,
Frederick the Wise, John, and John Frederick.

36. Q. Who was the leader of the new movement in Switzerland? A. Ulric
Zwingli.

37. Q. Into what did the religious conflict in the eastern cantons of
Switzerland grow? A. Into an appeal to arms, that resulted in civil war.

38. Q. What followed the battle of Cappel, where Zwingli was killed? A.
The peace of Cappel, which declared that each canton should decide its
religion for itself.

39. Q. What name is most prominent in connection with the Reformation in
French Switzerland? A. John Calvin.

40. Q. What work did Calvin publish in 1536, which became the doctrinal
standard for all the Reformed Churches of the Continent and Great
Britain? A. “The Institutes of the Christian Religion.”

41. Q. By what great reformer was the work, left unfinished by Calvin at
his death, taken up? A. Beza.

42. Q. In the history of the Reformation, what honor belongs to
England? A. That of having discovered the need of a universal religious
regeneration in Europe.

43. Q. In whom did the beginnings of reform in England center? A.
Wyckliffe, who was born about 1324.

44. Q. What were Wyckliffe’s greatest services to the coming Reformation?
A. First, his translation of the New Testament, and afterward the whole
Bible, into English.

45. Q. What was a striking feature of the English Reformation, from the
outside? A. Its political character.

46. Q. What three names are prominent in the first period of the English
Reformation? A. Colet, Sir Thomas More, and Cranmer.

47. Q. What was the most powerful single agency in bringing about the
English Reformation? A. The publication of the Bible in the language of
the people.

48. Q. What followed the ascension of Mary to the throne of England? A.
A violent persecution of the Protestants, during which, it is estimated,
about eight hundred persons were burned at the stake.

49. Q. What faith did Elizabeth, the successor of Mary, recognize as
national? A. Protestantism.

50. Q. From what sect did the puritan Pilgrims of America come? A. The
Brownist sect.

51. Q. Who was the first Protestant leader in Scotland? A. Patrick
Hamilton. He suffered martyrdom.

52. Q. Who was the natural successor to Hamilton? A. John Knox. By the
time of his death the triumph of the Scotch Reformation was complete.

53. Q. What was the chief aim of the Brothers of the Common Life, a
society of the Netherlands, founded in 1384? A. To improve the morals of
the people, and looked intently upon a thorough reform.

54. Q. What preparation was there for the Reformation in the Netherlands?
A. In no land was there such a complete and popular preparation for the
Reformation as in the Netherlands.

55. Q. What character did the Reformation assume in the Netherlands? A. A
political character.

56. Q. What order against all sympathy with the Protestant cause was
made binding upon the Netherlands? A. The Edict of Worms.

57. Q. Who, of Rotterdam, belongs to the front rank of reformers? A.
Erasmus.

58. Q. How alone was Erasmus important as a Reformer? A. As a profound
and versatile scholar.

59. Q. What is one of the most unpleasant chapters in the history of the
Reformation? A. The unfraternal relationship between Erasmus and Luther.

60. Q. From what did the real danger to the French Protestants come?
A. From a firm alliance between the authorities at Rome and the French
throne.

61. Q. What were the Protestants in France called? A. Huguenots.

62. Q. What great massacre of the Protestants took place in France on the
24th of August, 1572? A. The Massacre of St. Bartholomew.

63. Q. By whom were the Italians prepared to give hearty credence to the
new doctrines of the Reformation? A. Savonarola.

64. Q. What causes led to the failure of the Reformation in the Spanish
Peninsula? A. Protestantism was largely a measure of scholars and
thinkers, while the persistent energy of the Spanish authorities,
reinforced from Rome, made thorough work of suppression.

65. Q. In what was the groundwork of Protestantism in the three
Scandinavian countries—Sweden, Denmark, and Norway—already laid? A. In
the dissatisfaction of the people with the prevailing order of civil and
ecclesiastical government.

66. Q. Into what two Scandinavian countries was the Reformation
introduced and formally adopted? A. Sweden and Norway.

67. Q. Who was the great reformer of Bohemia? A. John Huss.

68. Q. As what did his followers afterward become known, under
Zinzendorf? A. As the United Brethren.

69. Q. What was the political effect of the Reformation? A. To elevate
the people to a thirst for liberty, and a higher and purer citizenship.

70. Q. Of what did the Reformation become the mother? A. Of republics.

71. Q. To what does the American Union owe a large measure of its
genesis? A. To the European struggle for reform.

72. Q. What was one of not the least benefits conferred upon the world by
the Reformation? A. The promotion of learning.

73. Q. What sprang up throughout Germany, as an immediate fruit of the
Reformation? A. Universities.

74. Q. By what celebration have the memories of the Reformation been
recently renewed? A. By the celebration on November 11, 1883, of the four
hundredth anniversary of the birth of Luther.

75. Q. How was the day observed? A. With becoming festivities in all the
Protestant countries of the world.


II.—TWENTY-FIVE QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON “CHEMISTRY,” FROM PAGE 157 TO
THE END OF THE BOOK.

76. Q. What are some of the most important uses of borax? A. In the
manufacture of porcelain, and in other of the industrial arts, and as a
remedial agency in medicine.

77. Q. In addition to the well known substances sodium and oxygen, what
element does borax contain? A. A special and peculiar element, called
boron.

78. Q. What are two of the most important sources of borax? A. Borax
Lake, in California, and the borax lagos in Tuscany.

79. Q. What element constitutes about eighty per cent. of our atmospheric
air? A. Nitrogen.

80. Q. As a simple and uncombined substance, by what is nitrogen
characterized? A. By extreme inactivity. It does not burn; it does not
support combustion; it can not be made to enter into chemical union with
other substances, except by specially devised and circuitous processes.

81. Q. Of what is nitrogen a constituent? A. Of a very large number of
compounds, which are themselves often characterized by a high degree of
activity.

82. Q. What are two important compounds of nitrogen? A. Ammonia gas and
nitric acid.

83. Q. In addition to oxygen and nitrogen what are some of the other
substances always present in atmospheric air? A. Vapor of water, carbon
di-oxide, and ammonia gas; minute quantities of a vast multitude of other
gaseous substances; and it is likewise charged most of the time with
still more minute quantities of solid dust materials of various kinds.

84. Q. To what do the principal explosives owe their activity to a very
large degree? A. To the presence of nitrogen in them.

85. Q. What are the four explosives of chief importance? A. Gunpowder,
the fulminates, gun cotton, and nitro-glycerine.

86. Q. What are the three principal constituents of gunpowder? A.
Potassic nitrate, charcoal, and sulphur.

87. Q. Why is phosphorus a most interesting chemical element? A. Because
of its exceptional chemical properties, the very important part it plays
in the chemistry of animal and vegetable life, and its employment in the
friction match.

88. Q. In what country is the manufacture of friction matches carried on
to a very large extent? A. In Sweden; and that country, it is now stated,
produces about seventy-five per cent. of all the matches made in the
world.

89. Q. What is probably the most familiar and representative form of
carbon? A. That known as charcoal.

90. Q. How is lamp-black produced? A. It is a product of the imperfect
combustion of substances like oil, tar, resin, and the like, which are
very rich in carbon.

91. Q. What are two well known compounds of carbon? A. Anthracite coal
and bituminous coal.

92. Q. Of what origin do both of these combustibles, when carefully
studied, show distinct evidences? A. Of their vegetable origin.

93. Q. What is the diamond? A. It is nearly pure carbon, crystallized.

94. Q. What are some of the other natural forms in which carbon is found
in large quantities? A. In petroleum, marble, and limestone.

95. Q. When combined with oxygen alone, what two compounds only does
carbon form? A. Carbon mon-oxide and carbon di-oxide.

96. Q. What is the material on which the manufacture of illuminating gas
is based? A. Bituminous coal.

97. Q. In the distillation of coal for the manufacture of gas, what three
distinct classes of substances are produced? A. Solids, which are left
in the retorts; liquids, which are condensed in the various coolers; and
gases, which pass on to the gas holder.

98. Q. What coloring matters are obtained from the liquids produced by
these processes? A. Alzorine, affording Turkey red and other colors, and
the well known analine colors.

99. Q. To what quantity does silicon exist in our globe? A. In a quantity
equal to about one fourth its entire weight, including its atmospheres
and its oceans.

100. Q. What is the principal earthy matter of our planet? A. The
compound of silicon and oxygen, existing either alone in the form of
sand, quartz crystal, and similar minerals, or else in combination with
other well known abundant earth materials, such as oxides of calcium,
magnesium, and aluminum.




EDITOR’S OUTLOOK.


PUBLIC MEN IN LITERATURE.

Until recently Americans have had good grounds for complaining that
their public servants were almost a minus quantity in literature. The
complaint had an especially sharp edge in view of the fact that at an
earlier period our Washington, Jefferson, Hamilton, Adams, and others,
had been among the foremost writers of the country; and it was still
further aggravated by the contrast we seemed to present to France,
England, and Germany, where a public man is usually also a literary man.
The rule in France is that an eminent politician is an author, and the
most distinguished statesmen and princes have written books. Even Louis
Napoleon wrote a book on Cæsar, and one of the best accounts of our late
war is the stately volumes of Count de Paris. In England, the rule is the
same. The queen herself takes pride in the books she has produced. John
Bright is almost alone in having no literary tastes, but his speeches
will long survive in the volumes they will fill. Disraeli and Gladstone,
Bulwer and Macaulay, Fawcett and Dilke, are only a few contemporary names
in along list of distinguished statesmen who have excelled as writers
for periodicals and as producers of books. In this country, from about
1830 to 1880, our public men wrote little. Benton’s “Thirty Years,”
Webster’s speeches, and Sumner’s orations, and some other less famous
works, do indeed redeem the half century; but when we have said all that
can be said in praise of exceptions, the rule seems to have been that an
American politician was not a writer, and a phrase of contempt attributed
to an eminent Senator expresses the feelings of our politicians against
“them literary fellers” in a form which is full of a significance from
which we prefer to turn away our ears. Too many of our public men have
despised literature, and justified literature in returning the sentiment
with interest.

We are entering upon a happier period. The American statesman is
returning to authorship. It is a wholesome change. Mr. Blaine’s history
will occur to many readers as an illustration. It is hardly less
noteworthy that his late associate on the Republican ticket has written
for THE CHAUTAUQUAN able papers on a public question which is a living
issue. A very long list might be made of public men who are in good
fame as writers. The witty S. S. Cox will at once occur to all our
memories, and another eminent Democrat is said to be writing a history
of his times. General Grant finds relief from the terrible strain of his
financial misfortunes in writing the history of his battles. We have
employed some of our most gifted authors as diplomats; as, for example,
Motley, the historian, James Russell Lowell, the poet and literary
critic, and George P. Marsh, the man of universal knowledge; but it may,
probably will, come to pass that some of their stamp will more and more
appear in our public life at home. We have kept poets, philosophers, and
novelists alive by giving them clerkships in Custom Houses. Nathaniel
Hawthorne, Howells, “Ik Marvel” (Donald G. Mitchell), and others, rose
to the dignity of consulships. Francis Lieber was tolerated in a Custom
House clerkship in New York. We are probably coming to the time when such
men may be members of Congress and shape the legislation of the country.
Literary men are usually the most practical of men; that they are
dreamers of impossibilities is the strangest of our popular delusions. A
few exceptions have been carelessly considered as making the rule for the
class. The sort of practicality—tempered by philosophy—which the literary
man brings to affairs is what our public life most needs. All clean
knowledge is a light where it abides, and the value of unclean knowledge
(such as some practical politicians boast themselves in), is a forlorn
minus quantity.

The advantages to be anticipated from the increase of the literary spirit
in our public men are too numerous to be here set forth in detail. A
few suggestions must suffice for our present purpose. In the first
place, public men are experts, and have therefore valuable knowledge to
impart. We are all well aware that General Grant knows important things
about his battles which other men do not know. It is equally true that
any clerk in a department, or any member of Congress has an intimate
acquaintance with many concernments of considerable moment. A man who has
served ten years in Congress could instruct and please us all if he had
the art of describing the methods of law making. It is not a pleasant
fact that the writing of a book on “Congressional Government,” which
is at once philosophical and entertaining, should have been left to a
college professor; nor is it pleasant to feel that the author of this
book, Professor Woodrow Wilson, is probably the last man whom Baltimore
will think of sending to Congress. The men who see the meaning of
things and connect them with principles, and align them with historical
precedents, are needed in Congress to give it dignity and character. In
short, we ought to send our best men to Congress, and we are approaching
an era when “best men” will generally be possessed of literary tastes
and habits. Our public life is rich in materials for useful books and
entertaining novels. Most of these materials lie neglected because we
send inferior men to our public work. Another distinct advantage will be
found in the preservation of many bright men whom we send to Congress
from rusting out of intellectual brightness and becoming mere political
workers. The majority of men sent to Congress are college men; they have
had some literary tastes and habits. They have often been journalists.
The public opinion which hedges them in converts them into office hunters
and office peddlers, and consumes their lives in routine and political
anxiety, to the detriment of all generous and aspiring manhood. The man
whose brain work, in periodicals and books, will secure his position
before his constituents, is a man saved.

The change which is going on is mainly the work of the enterprising
managers of periodicals. Most good literary work in our day first
reaches the public in periodicals. Much excellent work is found only in
periodicals. The editors have discovered that there is valuable matter
to be had by encouraging public men to write. Our articles by General
Logan, for example, contain a view of a great question which is best
seen in all its aspects by a public man who has seen all sides of it in
a Congressional committee. Many similar articles have in recent years
appeared in literary periodicals. An invitation to present his views to
the public through such a periodical as THE CHAUTAUQUAN is a challenge
to candor and a stimulus to thoroughness. The work done educates the
statesman while it informs the people. It creates an intelligent sympathy
between public servants and those whom they serve. It carries on that
form of education in which light and wisdom are put into the first place,
while turgid bombast and self-seeking buncombe are rendered odious to the
people whom they have deceived.


THE DECLINE OF SPIRITUALITY IN THE CHURCH.

Among the unpleasant reflections which the reading of Bishop Hurst’s
“History of the Reformation” will be apt to awaken in many minds is
that there has been a great decline in the spirituality of the church.
In those days religious earnestness was at its maximum; we seem to be
passing through a period when it is at a minimum. How far the seeming is
accurate, it may not be easy to determine; but appearances are against
the modern church. All our religious services lack in spirituality.
The lack is in the sermon, the song, the prayer. Family religion has
_apparently_ little of the intense power of the former days. The
conversation of Christians is less frequently on religious subjects.
We are carefully weeding out of familiar speech the old references to
Providence, Death and Judgment. We fall into silence when one among us
introduces such themes. Religious feeling and expression have disappeared
_from the surface_ of our life in a most astonishing way. We are not
made, the unconverted are not made, to feel the force and warmth of
religious conviction. The sermons are logical, literary and cold; if
there be warmth, it seems to be rather intellectual than religious. The
more able religious editors complain that they can not get written for
them articles which are at once readable and spiritual; while other
editors condemn any articles of that type as savoring of a “dreary
religiosity;” and others say that the expression of religious experience
has “hopelessly gone into the keeping of cranks and weak-headed and
morally-unsound persons.” One man says: “I can imagine nothing sweeter
to hear than religious experience ought to be; but when I listen to it
I hear either out-worn phrases or senseless fanaticism; and these have
been driven from the respectable churches and are monopolized by ignorant
egotists in the out-of-the-way corners of the country.”

A partial explanation of the facts lies in the statement just quoted. But
it is very partial. Why should fanatical zeal kill genuine earnestness?
If we think and feel earnestly in religion, why do we not talk of what
is burning in our hearts, as the fathers did, in language of our own?
A round of set phrases does denote vacancy of spirit, but the earnest
spirit is not banished from our heart by the formalism of another’s
speech. It may be pleaded for us that we are in a transition state;
that the Reformation did develop a form of earnestness, and that our
earnestness can not work in that harness and is reverently silent because
appropriate speech is wanting. But why do not hundreds of ministers
who have all gifts of intellect utter spiritual thought and emotion?
Why are they forever dealing rather with opinions than facts of the
spiritual life? We ask such questions in no censorious spirit; they
are pressed home to many anxious hearts, and the wonder grows whether
modern Christianity is tongueless respecting its experience because it
is backslidden and even skeptical. We could frame, as has often been
done, explanations; but we still doubt whether they really explain. The
spiritual activity is of all inner motions the one least likely to lose
all power to express itself.

It is true that a vast body of believers have the spirit of giving
and of work. They make noble offerings, they teach the children in
Sunday-schools, they make sacrifices of time and ease and money to carry
on churches. In these things no former generation had so glorious a
record. It is probably true that this vast body of believers contains
as large a proportion as any Reformation body of persons who would die
for their faith. It can not be said of such a body of persons that faith
is not in it. Making all allowances for conventionality and religious
fashion, there remains proof enough that the modern church believes. Nor
can we doubt its spiritual poverty. It is poor in the divine life. This
state of things can not last. We are in a condition where faith must fail
if love does not come to the rescue. The greatest of all revivals may
be at the door. The church wants nothing but vital godliness—experience
of divine things. It has so much of zeal, benevolence, self-sacrifice,
philanthropy, that we can not so much as hint at despair. Is it possible
that some of our philanthropies are too consuming and exhaust us? If we
will stop to think and take account of ourselves, we shall probably find
that we lack spirituality because we do not want it. That discovery may
be the one thing needed to arouse us to strenuous spiritual endeavor.


THE SHAKSPEREAN ANNIVERSARY.

The fourth century of Shakspere will be remembered either as the century
of Shaksperean skepticism or as the one in which the play-actor was
stripped of Bacon’s clothes and reduced to his proper condition of
play-actor. That we can so much as entertain this latter thought proves
that the skepticism has made considerable progress. We do not believe
that Bacon wrote the Shaksperean plays; but we are obliged to pay to
those who do believe it such respect as is paid to Strauss with his
theory that Jesus is a mythical person. Another Shaksperean year is
completed on the 23d of April, and its most significant event is an
increase of skeptics. We are doubtless to have a thorough sifting of the
facts and a large debate. No lover of the great dramas need regret the
discussion. It will provoke the study of them and enlarge their fame.
They are the great dramas of the world. No others equal them in breadth
and fervor. Whatever stimulates the study of them must be useful to the
higher forms of literature. One way of looking at the subject of the
authorship of these plays is to regard the question as of no absolute
importance. The plays are what they are, whoever wrote them; just as the
Homeric poetry does not lose a line through the Homeric skepticism. It
is an audacious thing to attack Shakspere as a wearer of another man’s
clothes, after three centuries of his renown. He lived in the public eye.
All London knew him. Some envied and sneered, but none doubted him until
some three hundred years after his birth; if there were doubts they were
so feeble that nothing came of them. Is it the function of the press and
the reporter—making great and small seem alike—which has made Shaksperean
skepticism almost respectable, if not entirely so? Whatever be the cause,
“the news” spreads that Bacon wrote our Shaksperean works, and the debate
is growing into bulk, if not into a serious concernment. We are not a bit
touched with the skepticism; it seems to us unreasonable, beyond ordinary
measure in unreason; and yet we must recognize the growth of the new
theory of the authorship of our glorious drama.

The change next to the foregoing in importance which marks the fourth
Shaksperean century is the new way in which the great mass of his
admirers come to know and enjoy him. He has passed from the stage to the
study, the parlor, the school-room. He is acted a little; he is read
a great deal. In his first and second centuries he was known almost
exclusively through the stage; in his third, the stage and the book
divided about equally the office of making him known; in the fourth,
Shaksperean acting has become insignificant in comparison with the
general reading and teaching of Shakspere. His works are coming to be
studied in all high schools, academies and colleges. Shakspere is in
nearly all libraries, be they large or small. One may almost say that he
is at home in nearly every house where English is read. There is hardly
a town in the country which does not boast at least one well-established
“Shakspere Club.” Year after year the members meet weekly to read and
talk over the merits of the one writer who never tires them. The scholars
of all lands know him in the printed page; all the great tongues have
books of criticism in which he occupies a conspicuous place. One view
of this transition from the stage to the study and the school is that
Shakspere was always too large for the theater. It was in the largest
sense impossible to act his plays. All acting narrowed and misrepresented
him. The larger field of the book is his proper home. He gains by the
liberty and healthfulness of the modern environment. The two changes
which we note will bear on each other. Too many persons are coming to
know what and how Shakspere wrote to permit any star-chamber of criticism
to settle the authorship of these plays in darkness and secrecy; the
power to form a judgment is being created in the minds of the great jury
whose verdict will probably kill off the Shaksperean skepticism. We
do not believe it will survive to 1964, the end of Shakspere’s fourth
century.


ART IN THE UNITED STATES.

If it is _possible_ for this nation to become artistic in tastes and
habits, we shall not fail. There is no branch of special education more
enthusiastically advocated and patronized. Of course the end in view will
require more advocacy and more patronage—a great deal more—but we are
doing so much that the necessary more will doubtless be done. It should
be remembered too, that if blood tells in the matter of art culture we
have no lack of blood drawn from the artistic nations. Flemings, Germans,
Italians, Spaniards, and even Greeks, come to New York in large numbers;
and if Anglo-Saxon blood were condemned as unartistic by inevitable
natural incapacity, we should still be able to produce great artists in
abundance—if method, zeal, and patronage could do this thing. We will not
prophesy; let us wait and see. It is understood, of course, that much,
perhaps most of our art, is industrial. We need to educate a large corps
of designers for useful goods, which are also ornamental; and this type
of artist is so well rewarded when he displays inventive faculty that we
are likely to surpass all other peoples in this department of work. It
is not easy to separate completely in our thinking this branch of art
from that which aims only at artistic pleasure. A design for goods may
be perfect art, and satisfy all the requirements of the æsthetic sense.
But it is obvious that decorative art is very close to industrial art in
nature and purpose. And the purpose has always been condemned by high
art, for it looks straight at the sale of the goods at good prices.

It is complained every year in New York, when the art exhibitions come
on for criticism, that the pecuniary motive for work, and the avidity of
artists for good sales, depress the imagination of the lovers of good
work. In substance, then, our trouble as to art—that we are a commercial
race—seems to get into the schools and infect their atmosphere. The evil
is not that success is rewarded; but that success is not possible to an
artist who thinks always of his reward. Art, like religion, requires
a spirit of self-renunciation. Success in art is not possible to one
who consumes his energy in thinking about the sale of his pictures. To
become rich by art one must be first willing to starve to death in the
service of art truth. We are not demanding such sacrifices; we are only
suggesting that without the spirit of them the pure art of this country
will not attain the eminence which our enthusiasm seeks to reach.

“Sordid treatment” of themes is inevitable in the sordid atmosphere
which, we are told, is breathed in all our circles of art. Besides,
the museums are founded by good natured people who are poor guides and
directors and yet must control, because they are patrons. One art journal
declares that enough energy has in the last five years been expended in
behalf of art to have given it a firm establishment. It adds that most
of this energy has been wasted. Art students and art teachers and art
institutions and publications multiply, but they do not give us high
art. We read this complaint and recall the story of the oil-king in
western Pennsylvania who ordered the teacher of his daughter to “buy her
a capacity, without regard to expense.” If art comes to us to stay it
will come by a slow change of thought, feeling, and aspiration. It is
probable that this change has begun; let us hope that it will ripen to a
gracious and mellowed maturity. The art-life will find ample room in our
hospitable civilization, if it can acquire the courage to live its own
life and escape being a parasite on the robust body of our commercial
life.




EDITOR’S NOTE-BOOK.


The force of the “Chautauqua Idea” is not abating; on the contrary it
works its way into new homes and distant fields—for instance, we have the
C. L. S. C. Class of 1888, which commenced to form last July, and now
numbers about 20,000 members. The “Florida Chautauqua,” in Florida, is a
new plant, and now our C. L. S. C. friends in Canada are raising a fund
of $50,000 with which to purchase and furnish grounds near Niagara Falls,
for an Assembly after the Chautauqua fashion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many prominent Chautauqua workers are at the Florida Chautauqua now in
session at Lake de Funiak. Among them are the Rev. Frank Russell, Mrs. G.
R. Alden (Pansy), the Rev. A. A. Wright, Dean of the Chautauqua School of
Theology, Prof. W. D. Bridge, Prof. W. F. Sherwin, Mrs. Juvia C. Hull,
the Rev. S. G. Smith, D.D., the Meigs-Underhill Combination, Prof. C.
E. Bolton, Mrs. Emily Huntington Miller, Dr. O. P. Fitzgerald, Prof.
R. L. Cumnock, Wallace Bruce, Hon. John N. Stearns, Col. G. W. Bain,
Mrs. Emma P. Ewing, Hon. Lewis Miller, etc. Many prominent lecturers,
singers and readers as yet not known publicly at Chautauqua, are at this
Southern Chautauqua, or on the program for the closing week. Dr. Gillet,
in preparing the royal feast of four weeks’ continuance, has subsidized
the country generally for his purposes, and all prominent denominations
are tributary thereto. Nearly or quite all the departments (save the C.
S. L.), known at Chautauqua, are in successful operation. The Assembly
already takes high rank in design and desire, and professors, lecturers,
readers, singers, helpers, are among the very best. No Assembly in the
land starts off with a more brilliant outlook, or with such strong
financial backing.

       *       *       *       *       *

In our December issue we called attention to the effort being made to
establish an Assembly in Canada, at Niagara. The plan is developing
very satisfactorily. The proposition involves the acquirement from
the Dominion Government of the piece of land known as Paradise Grove,
containing about eighty acres, situated upon the bank of the Niagara
River just outside the town of Niagara. The company which holds the lease
has signified its willingness to consent to a transfer. Toronto is also
thoroughly aroused to the importance of the movement, so much so that at
a very largely attended public meeting called in February to discuss the
matter the citizens pledged themselves almost unanimously to give a bonus
of ten thousand dollars to the company. In addition to this promises of
stock subscriptions have been made of at least as much more. It is easy
to see that, if carried out, this project will prove a great boon to the
old town. Already a large number of persons on both sides of the line
have signified their intention to erect cottages and make it their summer
home.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Chautauqua Circle has just added a new and important branch to the
many into which it is already divided. This is an art “circle,” to be
called the Chautauqua Society of Fine Arts, in which it is proposed to
give lessons in drawing and painting by correspondence. Every branch of
art will be taught, from elementary drawing to oil-painting. The plan is
a thoroughly practical one, and will be carried out in the best interests
of the fine arts. Mr. Frank Fowler has been appointed director, and
Messrs. R. Swain Gifford, Thomas Moran and Will H. Low will act as a
committee of award. The course of study will extend over two years, at
the end of which time diplomas will be given and prizes awarded for the
best work in the different classes. The membership fee is fifty cents a
year. Application for circulars and further information should be made to
Miss K. F. Kimball, Plainfield, N. J.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the fall of Khartoum, the death of General Gordon, the Irish
dynamiteurs and their explosions in London, together with the land
troubles in Ireland, a growing dissatisfaction with the Gladstone
ministry, and the threatening aspect of Russia, England has enough of
perplexing questions on hand to keep her Queen, Ministry and Parliament
employed for an indefinite period of time. To be an English politician
to-day is to have unrivaled opportunities for strong and vigorous action.
Apropos of the Soudan trouble our readers will find the article by Dr.
Wheeler, on England and Islam, in this impression, both spirited and
profitable reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

Roller skating is now claiming the attention of, first, physicians, who
seem to be divided in their verdict as to the injurious physical effects
of the exercise; second, of clergymen and laymen in the churches, who
object to the “rink” on account of the associations, quite as much as
the doctors do to the skating; third, of economists. In a railroad car
bound west recently, we overheard a conversation between two cattle
drovers on the “Roller Rink,” one of whom held up a paper named the
_Rink and Roller_, the organ of the new sport. These two men discussed
the financial side of “roller skating,” one insisting thus: “A boy will
chop wood for seventy-five cents a day, or work at the bench for that
amount, and then spend fifty cents in the evening for himself and girl
to attend the rink; they keep it up; what’s the good; it is a craze.”
Rinks are being built in all our towns and cities, but it will come to an
end like every craze. Some will be injured physically—perhaps some will
date a moral lapse to an unfortunate acquaintance made in the promiscuous
company; while all who go will spend their money. _What is the profit?_

       *       *       *       *       *

The venerable Mr. George Bancroft, having passed his eightieth birthday,
still preserves his physical vigor and looks like one of the patriarchs
of Washington. His mind is active and retains its strength, though now
enjoying a much needed respite from literary work. Mr. Bancroft has
finished his “History of the United States,” which has been a long and
laborious task. Some new historian must appear, who can live in the midst
of political changes, and like this great man, preserve an impartial
judgment, as a historian, to continue Bancroft’s standard history of the
United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

The closing act of President Arthur’s term of office was one of simple
justice to a worthy man. The following note explains it all:

    TO THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES—I nominate Ulysses S. Grant,
    formerly General Commanding the armies of the United States, to
    be General on the retired list of the army, with full pay of such
    rank.

                                                     CHESTER A. ARTHUR.

    Executive Mansion, March 4, 1885.

Congress had passed an act which made it possible that General Grant
could be placed on the retired list. The Senate by a unanimous vote
confirmed the President’s nomination.

       *       *       *       *       *

The number of books and periodicals supported on a given subject, is
a good sign of its interest to the public. Following this indication
we conclude that the public interest in sports and amusements is fully
double what it was a year ago. A tabulated statement of the publications
of 1884, compared with the books issued in 1883, gives the works on
sports in the two years as twenty-two in 1883 to fifty-one in 1884. This
suggestive comparison is but one of many signs that we are awakening to
the absolute necessity of healthful exercise, if we would lead useful
lives ourselves, and would propagate a sturdy race.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every summer many ladies and gentlemen engaged in educational work make
a vacation tour to the Old World. Those having such intentions for the
coming summer will perhaps accept a few words of advice. In order to
economize your time and derive the full benefit of your trip abroad, the
best thing to be done is to join a party, the management of which is
in the hands of an experienced traveler. The question naturally arises,
Where is there a party formed in which we will find most advantages for
the money expended? We do not hesitate in saying that we can recommend no
better than Professor de Potter’s parties, organized each year in Albany,
New York, and which have the reputation of being ably conducted.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is going on in the newspapers just now a very suggestive contest
over the spelling of a word. Shall it be dynami_teur_ or _ter_? Both
forms have reliable followings, though no reasons have been advanced for
either termination. The word is a good example of several interesting
features of word-making. It illustrates how each new development in
history requires a vocabulary, and how the vocabulary is formed from the
facts involved. Further, the difference in the termination shows how
each word must have its period of instability before usage selects the
form which shall be permanent. This Irish agitation has, by the way,
introduced several new words into the language.

       *       *       *       *       *

We Americans believe very firmly in ourselves. But sometimes we can not
help wondering if this vigorous, athletic government of ours, and these
growing institutions, seem to others a success. It will be gratifying to
read Mr. Matthew Arnold’s opinion of us: “A people homogeneous, a people
which had to constitute itself in a modern age, an epoch of expansion,
and which has given to itself institutions entirely fitted for such an
age and epoch, and which suit it perfectly—a people not in danger of war
from without, not in danger of revolution from within—such is the people
of the United States. The political and social problem we must surely
allow that they solve successfully.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Last year women were for the first time admitted to the Oxford University
examinations. Since they have been allowed to hear certain college
lectures, and are now finally admitted to the classes. It is a surprising
concession, but it is the course of the future. Women in England have
proven conclusively their ability to cope with university studies.
They have zealously and quietly improved each added liberty. This last
recognition comes as the inevitable effect of a law which works through
all human affairs, viz.: a demand creates a supply.

       *       *       *       *       *

President Arthur closed his term of service with the confidence and
respect of the American people. He performed the difficult task of
filling the highest office in the government with prudence and ability,
when, in fact, he was not the choice of the people for the place, but it
fell to his lot in the order of a mysterious providence. Among the Vice
Presidents who have succeeded to the presidency Chester A. Arthur will
be honored in history as a wise statesman, faithful to the people whom
he served. President Cleveland’s administration is the dawn of a new
political era in the country, but we believe that he will make a safe
President.

       *       *       *       *       *

There has been recently organized in New York State a State Forestry
Association. President White, of Cornell University, has accepted the
presidency. The society proposes to make a vigorous effort to arouse the
people to the necessity of laws which shall preserve their forests from
the lawless destruction which has robbed thousands upon thousands of
acres in the Adirondacks of their wealth of timber. Such a society is,
without doubt, the only means by which a proper sentiment can be aroused.
The cause of the wholesale depredations has been lack of thought. As one
of the lumbermen put it: “It all comes to this—it was because there was
nobody to think about it, or do anything about it. We were all busy, and
all to blame. But I could do nothing alone, and my neighbor could do
nothing alone, and there was nobody to set us to work together on a plan
to have things better; nobody to represent the common object. Why did not
you come along to talk to us about it years and years ago?”

       *       *       *       *       *

A look through a railroad guide shows a list of names which are a sad
criticism on our refinement. Think of going down to posterity as born in
such a place as You Bet, Red Hot, Fair Play, Muddy Creek, Looking Glass,
Lone Star, or Saw Tooth. These undignified, ill-sounding names are very
common, and in the new portion of the country it seems to be a matter
of pride to invent absurd names. A gentleman who had the misfortune to
reside in a town which bore one of these unmelodious names recently
said to us: “I am actually ashamed to register myself when traveling,
as from ‘Goose Creek,’ and for years I have had my mail sent to a town
three miles away rather than endure the sight of that odious name on my
letters.” There are ways of changing these names, and in the interest of
good taste it should be done.

       *       *       *       *       *

In spite of the difficulties in his way, the Rev. Sheldon Jackson has
succeeded in getting into his Industrial Training School for Indian Boys
and Girls at Sitka, Alaska. Not the least of these difficulties has been
getting lumber for the building. Here is the story as he writes us:
“Since coming here last August, I sent a crew of three Indians in a canoe
a round trip of 400 miles along the coast, with a letter to a saw mill.
The trees were felled, the logs were sawed up, a schooner chartered to
bring the lumber, and in due time 100,000 feet of lumber was rafted from
the schooner on the beach, through the surf, carried on men’s shoulders
to the building site, a three story building 130x50 feet in size erected,
and so far completed that we were able to move into it the first week
in January. I have also in the same time organized a church of seventy
members, of whom sixty are natives, received on confession of faith and
baptism. These converts are largely the fruit of the work of Mr. Austin,
one of our teachers.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rev. H. M. Bacon, D.D., pastor of the Central Congregational Church,
Toledo, Ohio, in a recent article on “Our English Tongue,” in which he
quotes Richard Grant White’s statement in THE CHAUTAUQUAN for December,
that “This modern English, which is the youngest, is also the greatest
language ever spoken,” mentions several valuable confirmations of this
opinion. Among them is the tribute of Jacob Grimm, the learned German
lexicographer, who says: “In wealth, good sense, and closeness of
structure, no other language at this day spoken, not even our German,
deserves to be compared to it” (the English). He also calls attention
to similar opinions expressed by the late Baron Humboldt, and by Guizot,
and recalls the fact that once when the Academy of Berlin offered a prize
for the best essay on a comparison of fourteen of the ancient and modern
tongues, the prize was awarded to a writer who had given the first place
to the English.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 23d of February the Washington Monument was formally dedicated at
Washington, D. C. Thirty-six years have elapsed since its corner stone
was laid. Of the Senate which attended the ceremonies on that occasion
but nine are still living, and since that date the most trying years of
our national life have been passed. Though the delays in completing the
work have been annoying, now that it is complete, it is gratifying to
know that the monument is in every way worthy of its object. Indeed, we
have no hesitancy in pronouncing it the most beautiful structure in the
nation’s capital. An obelisk of light gray stone, at a distance it looks
like a clearly defined cloud lying against the sky. Its great height (555
feet) is not realized, so perfect is the proportion. The location of the
monument has been criticised. It stands on a Government reservation,
adjacent to the Potomac River, and directly facing the Capitol. The land
is low, and many believe it was a serious mistake not to have placed the
obelisk on Capitol Hill. We can not agree with them. The advantage of
having the monument on public grounds, where the view of the entire shaft
will never be obstructed, is much greater than a higher location with an
obstructed view would have been. Then, too, this site was one approved
by Washington himself for a monument which, in 1783, the Continental
Congress voted to be erected to him. Of course “going to the top” is,
and will be, one of the chief features of sight seeing in Washington.
Every half hour the steam elevator in the monument carries a crowded
load to the top, allowing them ten minutes for looking around before the
descent. The stairway is not yet open to the public, and even if it were
most people would hesitate before undertaking to mount its 900 steps. The
interior of the shaft is lighted by incandescent electric lights. Not the
least interesting feature of the monument is the number of marble tablets
presented by different states and institutions, and which are being
inserted in the inside walls. Several of these have considerable artistic
and historic value.




C. L. S. C. NOTES ON REQUIRED READINGS FOR APRIL.


SHORT HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.

There is so much reading on the Reformation, and it is so well known and
easily accessible that it seems almost unnecessary to give a list of
supplementary readings. But among so many books it is hard to choose, so
we append the names of a few, thinking we may perhaps help some to decide
what to read. In order to enjoy this little “History of the Reformation”
in the required course, one ought to read many larger ones. “History
of the Reformation.” By G. P. Fisher. $3.00; D’Aubigne’s “History of
the Reformation;” Burnet’s “Reformation in England;” “History of the
Christian Church.” By W. W. Blackburn. $2.50; Motley’s “Rise of the Dutch
Republic.” $6.00; “Protestantism.” By De Quincy. “Short Studies.” By J.
A. Froude. “History of the Rise of the Huguenots.” By Henry M. Baird.
$3.50; “John Knox.” By Thomas McCrie. $2.00; “Martin Luther and his
Work.” By J. H. Treadwell. $1.00; “The Massacre of St. Bartholomew.” By
Henry White. $1.75; “Schönberg-Cotta Family.” By Mrs. Charles. $1.00;
“The Martyrs of Spain.” By Mrs. Charles. $1.00; “Savonarola.” By W.
R. Clarke. $1.50; “Romola.” By George Eliot. (Treats of the times of
Savonarola); “Christians and Moors of Spain.” By Miss Yonge. $1.25.

P. 3.—“Council of Constance.” A council of the Roman Catholic Church,
opened in 1414, and closed in 1418. In its earlier sessions the doctrines
of Wycliffe were examined and condemned. John Huss was also condemned and
executed, as was Jerome, of Prague. The council was called to consider
measures to remedy the division arising in the church from the long
residence of the popes at Avignon, and the consequent desire on the part
of the French for a national church. See page 89 in the “Short History.”

“Julian, the Apostate.” (331-363.) A Roman emperor, the nephew of
Constantine the Great. Immediately upon his accession he openly avowed
his abandonment of Christianity, but he published an edict which granted
perfect liberty to all sects and all religions. He, however, excluded
Christians from civil and military offices, and compelled them to
contribute toward sustaining pagan temples. He permitted the Jews to
rebuild their temple at Jerusalem, and published a large volume against
Christianity.

P. 4.—“Medici,” māˈde-che. A distinguished Florentine family appearing in
history since the close of the thirteenth century.

P. 5.—“d’Ailly,” dāˈye; “John Chartier Gerson,” shär-te-ā zhair-soⁿᵍ.

P. 6.—“Nicholas Clémanges,” clā-manj; “Gallican Church.” The name given
to the Catholic Church in France.

“Father Hyacinthe.” Charles Loyson, a French pulpit orator, born in
1827. At the age of twenty-two he was ordained a priest. He was
highly educated. Suspicions as to his doctrines were awakened, and he
was summoned to appear before the pope, but cleared himself. Shortly
after some speeches of his gave offense, and he was ordered to change
his manner or be quiet, but he paid no heed. He was soon forbidden to
preach, and threatened with excommunication. In 1869 he visited America,
where he was warmly welcomed by many Protestants, but he declared he
had no intention of leaving the Catholic Church. He protested against
the doctrine of the pope’s infallibility, and defended the right of the
clergy to marry. In 1870, on his return to France, the pope relieved him
of his monastic vows, and he became a secular priest. In 1872 he was
married to an American lady. He is now pastor of a church in Paris, a
sort of independent Catholic church.

P. 7.—“Huguenots,” hūˈgē-nots. The name applied to the French Reformers.
Its origin is uncertain, some asserting that it was derived from one of
the gates of the city of Tours, named Hugons, where the Protestants held
their first assemblies. Others say it came from the name of their first
leader, Hugues.

P. 8.—“Dominican Order.” An order founded by St. Dominic, in 1216; “John
Ruysbroek,” roisˈbrek.

P. 12.—“Wittenberg,” vitˈten-bairg. A town in Prussia, in which there
is an immense bronze statue of Luther, and not far from it one of
Melancthon. It is the seat of a great university.

“St. Victor.” A monastery in Paris.

P. 13.—“Origen.” (185-253.) One of the fathers of the church, noted for
his unwearied diligence and life of self-denial. For two years, during
the persecution under Maximin, he lay concealed in a friend’s house, and
here wrote his “Hexapla.” In the Decian persecution he was imprisoned and
subjected to extreme torture. Many of his valuable writings have been
lost.

“Alexandrian school.” A name applied to the philosophers of Alexandria in
the second century. It aimed to harmonize all philosophy and all religion.

P. 14.—“Thomas à Kempis. (1379-1471.) A German writer, a prior in the
monastery of Mount St. Agnes.

“Kaisersheim,” kīˈzers-hīmeˌ; “Rheinfeld,” rīneˈfelt; “Pfaffenheim,”
päfˈfen-hime.

P. 17.—“Boccaccio,” bok-katˈcho. (1313-1375.) An Italian novelist, and
friend of Petrarch; “Chrysoloras,” kris-o-loˈras.

P. 18.—“Pa-læ-olˈo-gus;” “Bes-sāˈri-on.”

P. 19.—“Argyropylus,” ar-ghe-ropˈoo-los; “Lasˈca-ris;” “Chalkondylas,”
kal-konˈde-las; “Gemistus Pletho,” je-misˈtus pleˈtho; “Moschopylus,”
mos-kopˈy-lus; “Gasperinus,” gäs-pä-reeˈnus; “Aurispa,” ow-rēsˈpä;
“Poggius,” pojˈus; “Perothes,” perˈō-tēs; “Politianus,” po-lishˈā-nus.

P. 20.—“Hierarch.” One who rules or has authority in sacred things.

P. 21.—“Vulgate Bible.” One of the oldest Latin versions of the
Scriptures. So called from its common use in the church. The Catholic
Church claims this to be the only authentic translation.

“Guizot,” gēˌzōˈ. (1787-1874.) A French historian.

“Reuchlin,” roikˈlin. (1455-1522.)

P. 23.—“Bordeaux,” bor-dōˈ; “Avignon,” ă-vē-nyoⁿᵍ.

P. 27.—“Eisleben,” iceˈla-ben.

P. 28.—“Eisenach,” īˈzen-näk.

P. 30.—“Scala Santa,” sacred staircase. A staircase in the church and
palace of the Lateran, so called because Christ was said to have ascended
and descended it. This magnificent building was used as the residence of
the popes, from 312 till their removal to Avignon in 1309. The staircase,
according to tradition, belonged to the house of Pilate, and was brought
to Rome by the mother of Constantine. It is composed of twenty-eight
marble steps, which have been covered by order of the popes with a
casing of wood. The wood has several times had to be replaced, having
been worn through by the knees of ascending pilgrims. This staircase was
preserved from the fire which destroyed the building in 1308. The Lateran
was rebuilt, to be again burned in 1360. It was restored in 1364, and
completely modernized in 1559. This church has always been the cathedral
of the bishops of Rome, and takes precedence of all other churches in the
Catholic world.

P. 32.—“Schlosskirche,” schlusˈkeer-ka. The church belonging to a castle;
“Mos-celˈla-nus.”

P. 33.—“Bull.” An edict of the pope, sent to the churches over which he
is head, containing some decree or decision.

“Hapsburg.” Originally a castle in Switzerland. It gave its name to the
imperial house of Austria.

P. 35.—“Frederick the Wise.” Frederick III., elector of Saxony.

P. 37.—“Zwickaw,” tswikˈkow. A city in Saxony.

P. 43.—“Augsburg Confession.” The first Protestant confession of faith.

“Convention at Smalcald,” smälˈkält. A confederation of the Protestants
held in 1531, in which they were secretly aided by England and France.

P. 45.—“Melancthon,” me-lankˈthon; “Pforzheim,” pfortsˈhime;
“Tüˈbing-en;” “Œcolampadius,” ĕkˌo-lăm-pāˈdĭ-us.

“Terence.” (B. C. 195-159.) A Roman comic poet.

P. 50.—“Ulrich von Hutten,” oolˈrik fon hootˈen; “Si-kingˈen;” “Cranach,”
kräˈnäk.

P. 51.—“Zwingle,” tswinˈgle.

P. 52.—“Wittenbach,” vitˈten-bäk; “Glarus,” gläˈroos. A canton of
Switzerland; “Einsiedeln,” īneˈze-deln.

P. 53.—“Mariolatry,” mā-rí-olˈa-try. The worship of the Virgin Mary.

P. 54.—“Helvetic Confession.” This differed materially from the Lutheran
only in holding that Christ was not bodily present in the eucharist.

P. 57.—“Viret,” vē-rā; “Froment,” frō-moⁿᵍ; “Farel,” fä-rel.

P. 58.—“Bourges,” boorzh; “Angoulême,” aⁿᵍ-goo-laim.

“Psychopannychia,” sī-kō-pan-nikˈi-a.

P. 59.—“Tillet,” til-lā; “Martianus Lucanius,” mar-she-āˈnus lu-caˈni-us;
“Courault,” coo-rō.

P. 61.—“Neuenburg,” noiˈen-boorg. A town in Germany.

P. 62.—“Bucer,” booˈtser. (1491-1551.)

P. 64.—“Lausanne,” lō-zanˈ.

P. 66.—“Archbishop of Canterbury.” This archbishop is the primate or
ruling officer in the national Church of England, the first peer of the
realm, and member of the privy council. It is he who places the crown
upon the king.

P. 67.—“Lambeth Palace.” The town residence of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. It stands on the Thames River, and is surrounded by gardens
twelve acres in extent.

P. 68.—“Ochino,” o-kīˈno; “Fagius,” fäˈge-ŏos; “Anne Boleyn,” ann bulˈlen.

P. 72.—“Froschover,” froshˈo-vair.

P. 78.—“Act of Uniformity.” An act enforcing observance of the English
Church service. Severe penalties were enforced against any one who should
conduct religious service in any other way than that prescribed by the
Book of Common Prayer.

P. 80.—“Cardinal Beatoun,” bēˈtun. Usually written Beaton. (1494-1546.)
A persecutor of the Protestants. On the death of King James, he
conceived the idea of seizing the government, and forged a will of the
king’s, naming himself as successor, but he was prevented from carrying
out his plan and was imprisoned for a time. He was shortly afterward
reëstablished in his ecclesiastical administration. His enemies seeing no
release from his terrible persecutions put him to death.

P. 84.—“Gerard Groot,” jĕ-rardˈ grōt; “Florentius Radewin,”
flo-ronˈshe-us räˈde-win; “Herzogenbusch,” hairts-ōˈgen-boosh.

P. 85.—“Yuste,” yoosˈtā.

“Inquisition.” This was a court established for the purpose of examining
and punishing heretics.

P. 87.—Luther’s doctrine concerning the will was that it has no “positive
ability in the work of salvation, but has the negative ability of ceasing
its resistance under the general influence of the Spirit in the Word and
Sacraments.”

P. 88.—“Momus.” In Greek mythology the god of mockery and censure. He is
represented as raising a mask from his face.

P. 89.—“Vaudois,” vo-dwä.

P. 90.—“Sorbonne,” sor-bun. A school of theology in Paris, founded in
1253, by Robert de Sorbonne, whence its name. The members were divided
into fellows and commoners. The former were selected for their eminent
learning, and took the position of teachers. The commoners were chosen
from among those receiving instruction, after a severe ordeal, and
were supported by the college, but had no voice in its government. They
ceased to be members when they graduated as doctors. No member of any
religious body was allowed to enter this order. The large lecture halls
of the institution were opened free of all charges, to all poor students,
and the professors were directed never to refuse instruction to such.
Students who had money were required to pay regular fees. The school was
without a rival all through the Middle Ages. Its controlling power was
felt everywhere. It was frequently appealed to in disputes between the
civil power and the papacy. It opposed the claims of Henry VIII. for
a divorce from Catharine; condemned the doctrines of Luther and other
reformers, and declared that Henry III. had forfeited his crown. It was
suppressed in 1789, and its buildings are now used by the University of
France.

“Meaux,” mō; “Angers,” âⁿᵍ-zhā; “Poictiers,” pwä-tyā.

P. 91.—“Gallic Confession.” This was essentially Calvinistic in its
import, as were also the system of government and method of discipline
adopted. They were, however, modified somewhat, to suit a church—not like
that at Geneva, in union with the state, but antagonistic to it.

“Bourbons.” This line of kings in France began with Henry IV. Six of his
descendants in direct line occupied the throne after him. The Louises
XIII., XIV., XV., XVI., XVIII., and Charles X. The last representative of
this line was the Count de Chambord, who died in 1883. There is a younger
branch known as the Orleans branch.

“Guises,” gheez. A branch of the ducal family of Loraine, which took a
prominent part in the civil and religious wars in France.

P. 95.—“Sä-vo-nä-roˈlä,” “Brescia,” brāˈsha.

P. 98.—“Chardon de la Rocette,” shar-doⁿᵍ dĕ lä rŏh-shĕt; “Brucioli,”
broo-choˈlee; “Marmochini,” mar-mo-keeˈnee; “Teofilo,” tā-o-feeˈlo.

P. 99.—“Mauricha,” mä-rēˈka; “Della Rovere,” delˈlä rō-vāˈrā; “Cherbina,”
sher-beeˈna; “Gonzago,” gon-zäˈgō; “Ca-rafˈfa;” “Paschali,” pas-caˈlēe.

P. 100.—“Paolo di Colli,” pä-oˈlo dē colˈlee; “Gratarole,” grät-ä-rōˈlee;
“Cor-räˈdo;” “Teglio,” täˈglē-o.

P. 103.—“Vives,” vēˈvace; “Ponce de la Fuente,” pōnˈthā dā lā fwenˈtā;
“Enzinas,” en-zēˈnas; “Valladolid,” väl-yä-dō-leedˈ; “Varelo,” vä-rāˈlo;
“Ægidius,” ē-gidˈē-us.

P. 104.—“Hernandez,” her-nanˈdā; “Boborguez,” bō-borˈgā.

P. 110.—“Cyriace,” si-rēˈä-see.

P. 116.—“Dollinger,” dolˈling-er. A learned Catholic theologian, born at
Bamberg, in 1799. He has published a church history, and several other
works.


CHEMISTRY.

P. 169.—The formula (N₂O₂) shows that two atoms of nitrogen have united
with two atoms of oxygen to form a molecule of nitrogen di-oxide. The
formula Cu (NO₃)₂ shows that one atom of copper has united with two
molecules, each composed of one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of
oxygen, to form one molecule of cupric nitrate. In like manner Fe₂
(NO₃)₆ indicates that two atoms of iron have united with six molecules,
each composed of one atom of nitrogen and three atoms of oxygen, to form
one molecule of ferric nitrate.

P. 173.—“Refractive power” of water. When a ray of light strikes the
surface of a new medium, a portion of it is turned out of its original
course or refracted. This gives rise to some well-known effects. When any
object is placed in water and viewed obliquely it looks to be nearer the
surface than it is, because the light in passing from the denser medium
takes a direction more inclined to the horizontal, and an object always
appears directly in line with the ray of light entering the eye.

P. 178.—“Crécy,” kresˈse. This battle took place August 26, 1346, between
the English under Edward III. and the French under Philip VI. It is said
that Edward had six pieces of artillery. Artillery had probably not been
used in the field before this time.

P. 182.—“Trinˌi-tro-cĕlˈlu-lose.”

P. 185.—“Mont Cenis,” mōⁿᵍ sŭh-nē. This tunnel under the Alps is in
reality some sixteen miles from Mont Cenis, whose name it bears. The
first mine was fired in 1857, and for four years the piercing was done
by hand; the need of a quicker method led to the invention of a machine
drill—a perforating machine worked by compressed air. The work was
carried on by day and night, from both sides of the mountains, until the
two bodies of workmen met, December 26, 1870. The tunnel was opened for
railway travel September 17, 1871. Its length is nearly eight miles, and
the cost of the tunnel was $15,000,000.

“St. Gotˈhard.” This tunnel is also through the Alps. The length is nine
and one fourth miles. Its construction was begun in 1872, and it was
completed in eight years.

P. 189.—“Phosphorus ne-croˈsis.” The latter term is derived from a Greek
word, meaning to make dead, to mortify, and is a disease which attacks
bony tissues, as gangrene effects the soft parts. “The acid fumes
thrown off from phosphorus in the various processes of making matches,
frequently cause among the people employed a terrible disease, which
attacks the teeth and jaws.… Its natural course is to rot the entire jaw
bone away.”

P. 190.—“Al-lŏtˈro-pĭsm.” Dana says allotropism is “the property of
existing in two or more conditions which are distinct in their physical
or chemical relations. Thus, carbon occurs crystallized in octahedron,
and other related forms, in a state of extreme hardness, in the diamond;
it occurs in hexagonal forms, and of little hardness, in black lead; and
again occurs in a third form, with entire softness, in lamp-black and
charcoal. In some cases one of these is peculiarly an active state, and
the others a passive one. Thus, ozone is an active state of oxygen, and
is distinct from ordinary oxygen, which is the element in its passive
state.”

P. 194.—“Chemicking,” kemˈik-ing.

P. 203.—Translation of French sentence: “This last virtue I believe it
still to possess, if the husband is rich enough to buy the jewel which
his wife is ambitious to own.”

P. 217.—“Boussingault,” booˌsănˈgoˌ; Jean Baptiste. A noted French
chemist of this century.




