XVI

OUR VICISSITUDES IN IRAK-ADJEM

Arrived in the Province of Irak we skirted the Demavend range,
traveling from Mazendran to Bestam, where we visited the graves of
Mohammed Aftah, Sheik Bayazid Bestami, and Sheik Ebulhasan Harkani. The
next day we reached Damgan.

That night one of our company called Ramazan the pious, and known as
_Boluk Bashi_,[204] had a dream. Bayazid Bestami with 40 Dervishes
had appeared unto him and had spoken thus: "Let us pray for the safe
return of Mir Sidi Ali." The Sheik, moreover, had written a passport
and sealed it, "that we might not be molested by the way."—This was
his dream, and when I heard of it I rejoiced greatly and thanked God
for his mercy vouchsafed; for this message (from the dead) virtually
saved my life. After visiting the grave of Imam Djafar in Damgan, we
proceeded to Semnan, where we visited the grave of Sheik Ala-ed-Dowleh
Semnani. In this place they tried to draw us into sectarian
controversies, but I restrained my comrades, and reminded them of the
Hadis, which says: "_Ustur zahbak, zahabek in mazhabak_," _i.e._, "hide
thy gold, thine opinions, and thy faith"; and I argued with them,
saying, "Not one of you has traveled more than I have, and experience
has made me wise. A wise man does not heed the words of the vulgar and
the ignorant."

They saw the wisdom of my words, and acted upon my advice.

Before long we came to Rei,[205] where I made pilgrimages to the
graves of Imam Abdul Azim, and of Bibi Shehrbanu, the consort of Imam
Husein. Here I also met Mohammed Khudabend, a son of the Shah's, and
the _Kurdji-bashi_[206] Sevindek Aga. Their presence was accounted for
in this way: Some time ago the Shah had sent Ismail Mirza from Kazvin
to Herat, and had now recalled him to Kazvin. The reason of this was
that certain things which had happened during his rule had come to
light, and by command of the Shah one of the nobles of Kazvin had been
executed, and in like manner, also by order of the Shah, some followers
of Ismail had been put to death. After this the Shah commanded Prince
Mohammed Khudabend to appear before him, and the _Kurdji-bashi_ was
sent to fetch him. I was very pleased to meet the Prince, who assured
me of the unwavering devotion of the Shah to our glorious Padishah.

Journeying from Rei it took us a month and a half (to the end of Safar)
before we reached Kazvin, the capital of Irak.[207]

Upon the Shah being told of our arrival we were none of us allowed to
enter the city, but had to take up our quarters in Sebzeghiran, one of
the neighboring villages, under the protection of Mohammed Bey, the
_Divan Bey_[208] of the Great Vizier Maasum Bey. Presently the _Ishik
Agasi_[209] arrived, who took down our names, and the number of our
horses, and gave his people private instructions to watch us strictly
at night, until further orders.

We were told that the Shah was very angry that we had been allowed to
leave Meshhed without any further inquiry, and that in consequence of
this Kokche Khalipha and Mir Munshi (first secretary) had been deprived
of office. Following up this information, the Kapchadji, Ali Bey, came
to us by order of Yassaul Pir Ali, and said: "The people here have evil
intentions, if you have any ready money about you, give it to me to
keep, and if Providence deliver you out of this plight, I will return
it; if on the other hand evil should befall you it is better that your
riches should fall in the hands of friends than of foes."

But I replied: "People who have wandered so long in foreign parts carry
no cash about them, and they who fear death do not venture so far from
home. I believe in the words of the Koran: 'He who is appointed to die
can not delay the hour, and without God's permission no man can slay.'"

It so happened that the Shah had by this time examined the letters
which had been conveyed to him in a sealed bag, and the ladies who had
traveled with us bore witness that we were poor and harmless folk.
Moreover, I had sent the Shah a quatrian which had found much favor, so
he set us free. The Shah commanded his Vekil,[210] Maasum Bey, to offer
me a banquet, after which he would himself entertain me. Maasum Bey
was also commissioned to give me the glad news, that I was free to go
where I liked, and, as an envoy was shortly to be sent to the Sublime
Porte, I might, if I liked, travel by the way of Azerbaidjan, _i.e._,
by Tebriz and Van. Thereupon I requested that my desire might be made
known to the Shah. I said, "We are not prepared to meet the hardships
of the Van road in the winter time, and we beg to be allowed to travel
by the way of Bagdad"; which request he graciously granted.

On the second day we were invited by the Shah to a banquet, and I
presented my humble offerings. During the feast we conversed upon
poetical and other subjects, and the Shah remarked to his courtiers:
"These men do not look like intriguers; they are only pilgrims and
religious fanatics"—and on the strength of this verdict Kokche Khalipha
and Mir Munshi were reinstated in their office. I received a horse and
two changes of robes, a bale of silk, and several other things; the
two Serdars received each two robes of honor, and my five traveling
companions, each one. Altogether the Shah behaved handsomely to us and
showed a marked respect for the person of his Majesty the Padishah.

One day I was invited to a banquet in the large music-hall, all the
Beys of the royal family being present. To give some idea of the
magnificence here displayed I will only mention that from five hundred
to one thousand _Tumens_[211] had been spent on the decoration of the
hall. There were some hundreds of velvet and silken brocaded carpets,
painted and embroidered in figurative designs; quantities of luxurious
cushions and exquisitely artistic tents, canopies, and sunshades.

Yuzbashi Hasan Bey, one of the Shah's confidants, turned to me and
said: "Is not this indeed a treasure-house?" "It is," I replied, "yet
the wealth of kings is not measured by their gold and silver but by
their military power." This remark silenced him; he did not return to
the subject.

As the envoy had already started for Tebriz I was detained for another
month, during which time the Shah showed me much attention, and I spent
a good deal of my time in his presence. One day he ventured the remark:
"Why were those 300 Janissaries sent from Turkey to assist Borak Khan?"
I answered that these had not been sent to strengthen Borak Khan's
forces, but merely as an escort to the late Sheik Abdullatif, because
it was a well-known fact that the Circassians[212] had killed Baba
Sheik, a son of the holy Ahmed Jesewi, on the road from Astrakhan,
and that that route was therefore made unsafe. If the Padishah had
intended to send military help, not three hundred, but some thousands
of Janissaries, would have gone to Bokhara.

Another time I was drawn into a religious dispute with Mir Ibrahim
Sefevi, one of the Shah's relatives and a sage. The conversation ran as
follows:

 IBRAHIM: "Why do the learned men of Turkey call us unbelievers?"

 I: "It is said that the followers of the Prophet have been insulted by
 your countrymen, and according to the statutes of our religion he who
 insults his superiors is an unbeliever."

 IBRAHIM: "That is what Imam Aazam (Ebn Hanifa) says, but according to
 Imam Shafi this belongs to the pardonable offenses."

 I: "I understand that it is customary with you to accuse Ayesha, the
 wife of the Prophet (may God have mercy upon her), of immorality,
 and as this throws a stigma on the Prophet's name, it is synonymous
 to blasphemy. The people who can do this are in a state of apostasy,
 and their life is forfeited. Their goods can be confiscated and their
 men put in prison. Any one persisting in this unbelief is subject to
 imprisonment, but if they renounce they may, without their wives, with
 or without marriage...."

 IBRAHIM: "I must contradict this. In our eyes also, any one who
 accuses Ayesha of immorality is an unbeliever and a blasphemer and
 contradicts the Koran; because in the Sacred Book God Almighty
 testifies to the virtue of Ayesha. But all the same we can not love
 her because she set herself against Ali."

 I: "How do you explain it that although the Hadis declares that the
 Ulemas are on a level with the prophets of the people of Israel,
 it nevertheless frequently happens that offensive language is used
 against the former?"

 IBRAHIM: "Does the name Ulema not include our Ulemas also?"

 I: "In a facetious way it includes all Ulemas, but beyond this it is
 a well-known fact that it is said of them: 'The flesh of the Ulema is
 poisonous, their odor is sickening, and to eat them is death'; and if
 in spite of this men will insult them, they must pay the penalty both
 in this world and in the next."

To this he could make no reply, and I turned the conversation into
another channel.

The Shah once said to me, "Tell me, since thou hast traveled so much,
which of the cities thou hast visited pleases thee best." And I
replied: "I have indeed seen most of the cities of this world, but I
have found none to compare with Stamboul and Galata."

The Shah allowed this to pass, and continued: "At how many _Tumens_
dost thou estimate the combined income of the Beys and Beylerbeys of
Turkey?" to which I replied: "The Beys and Beylerbeys of Turkey receive
payment according to their rank, but they enjoy besides this generally
a private income. Other princes remunerate their officers in proportion
to the pay of the regiment which they command, but if the pay of the
Beys and other officers in the service of the Emperor of Turkey were
to be based upon this foundation, it would run not into _Tumens_, nor
yet Lakhs,[213] but into _Kulurs_. To give you an example: The payments
made to the Beylerbeys of Rumelia, Anatolia, Egypt, Hungary (Budin,
_i.e._, Ofen), Diarbekir, Bagdad, Yemen, and Algiers, are, each in
themselves, as much as any other prince would lay out on the whole
of his army. This proportion holds good for all the other Beylerbeys
also, and is in strict accordance with the superior standing of our
government. Quite a different system is adopted for the troops under
Khans and Sultans, for there is always an element of uncertainty there;
but in Turkey the army belongs to the Padishah. All Beylerbeys and
officers are his servants, and an Imperial command is law and can not
be trifled with."[214]

On this same occasion some of the officers asked whether the documents
which had been taken from me by Ibrahim Mirza in Meshhed had ever been
placed before the Shah. This question was answered in the affirmative,
but I did not like to pursue the subject, mindful of the saying:
"When evil slumbers, cursed be he who arouses it"—and I turned the
conversation into another channel.

I preferred to plead my cause with another gazel, which the Shah
graciously accepted, and which finally led to the desired result. We
received permission to leave. He wrote a letter expressive of his
unalterable respect and devotion to his Majesty the Padishah, gave me
more presents, and commanded Nazr Bey, a brother of Yuzbashi Hasan Bey,
to accompany me on the journey.

While in Kazvin I made a pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Shahzade
Husein, and in the beginning of Rebiul Evvel I started on my journey to
Bagdad.

Near to Sultani, we passed Abhar, and I stopped to visit the grave of
Pir Hasan, the son of Akhi Avran, then on to Kirkan, where I visited
the grave of Mohammed Demtiz[215], a son of Khodja Ahmed Jesewi, and
from there to Derghezin and Hamadan, in which latter place the graves
of Ain-ul-Kuzat and Pir Ebulalay, the armor-bearers of the Prophet,
were visited. At Saadabad, our next station, I was met by the governor,
who treated me with marked attention.

Then we took our way by Mount Elvend and Nihavend (in Suristan) to
Bisutun, where I visited the grave of Kiazim, and in the village
Weis-ul-karn, the grave of the saint of that name. We then proceeded
to Kasri-Shirin and through Kurdistan to the fortress Zendjir. While
there we were much interested in watching a _Huma_ bird[216] high up
in the sky. This is supposed to be a good omen, and we were therefore
well pleased. Some enlarged upon the good fortune presaged by his
appearance, others spoke of the curious properties of the bird, of whom
Sa'di sings:

    "The _Huma_ is distinguished from all other birds,
    In that he lives on bones, yet is not a bird of prey."

It is a known fact that this bird feeds exclusively on bones. The
legend says that the _Huma_, before demolishing a bone, carries it up
high in the air, and then drops it, with the result that it breaks into
many pieces. He then swoops down upon these, divides them into equal
portions, and devours them. This is the origin of the saying, when
Persian officials, through extortion, obtain more than they can well
digest: "They should follow the example of the _Huma_ bird and divide
their spoils into smaller, equal portions."

Here, at Zendjir, I dismissed Nazr Bey, whom the Shah had given me as
an escort, and after crossing the great river Tokuz Olum[217] we came
to Ban (or Sheri Ban). Toward the end of the same month of Kebiul Sani
we reached Bagdad, where we were most hospitably received by Khizr
Pasha. We did not delay, however, but hurried on to Turkey.


