CHAPTER IX.

 _Genealogy of Jelālu-’d-Dīn, Rūmī._


On his father’s side, the remote ancestor of Jelālu-’d-Dīn, during
Islāmic times, was Abū-Bekr, the dearest and most faithful friend of
Muhammed the Arabian lawgiver, and his successor in the government of
the community of Islām, as the first of the long line of Caliphs.

Like Muhammed himself, Abū-Bekr was of the tribe of Quraysh, which
claims descent, through Ishmael, from Abraham, the chosen Friend of
God, and Father of the faithful. The stem of Abū-Bekr’s branch of the
tribe unites with that of Muhammed in Murra, ancestor to Muhammed in
the seventh degree, and to Abū-Bekr in the sixth.

Abū-Bekr was, furthermore, one of Muhammed’s fathers-in-law, as his
daughter ‘Ā’isha was the Prophet’s only virgin bride.

A son or grandson of Abū-Bekr is said to have been among the Arabian
conquerors of Khurāsān during the caliphate of ‘Uthmān (Osmān), about
A.H. 25 (A.D. 647), and to have settled at Balkh (the capital of the
ancient Bactria), where his family flourished until after the birth of
Jelālu-’d-Dīn.[35]

At an uncertain period subsequent to A.H. 491 (A.D. 1097), a daughter
of one of the Kh’ārezmian kings of Central Asia was given in marriage
to Jelālu-’d-Dīn’s great-great-grandfather, whose name is either not
mentioned by Eflākī, or I have missed it. She gave birth to Jelāl’s
great-grandfather, Ahmed, surnamed El-Khatībī (as being, apparently, a
son or descendant, or a client, of a public preacher, Khatīb).

Nothing more is mentioned of Ahmed by Eflākī, than that he had a son
Huseyn, surnamed Jelālu-’d-Dīn, who married a daughter of a certain
Khurrem-Shāh, King of Khurāsān, and became grandfather, by her, to
the author of the Mesnevī. His son, Muhammed, surnamed Bahā’u-’d-Dīn,
styled Sultānu-’l-‘Ulemā, and commonly known as Bahā’u-’d-Dīn Veled, or
shorter as Bahā Veled, appears also to have married a lady, by whom he
had three children, a daughter and two sons.

Bahā Veled’s eldest child, his daughter, was married off, and remained
at Balkh, when Bahā Veled, his mother, and two sons left it, a year
or so before it was taken and devastated by Jengīz Khān in A.H. 608
(A.D. 1211). His elder son is not again mentioned by Eflākī after
their departure from Balkh. Neither is the mother of his children
once mentioned. But his own mother, the princess, was alive, and was
still with him in about A.D. 1230; after which, she too is not again
mentioned.

Bahā Veled’s youngest child, his most celebrated son Muhammed, surnamed
Jelālu-’d-Dīn, Mevlānā, Khudāvendgār, and Rūmī, the principal personage
of these memoirs, the founder of the order of the Mevlevī dervishes,
and author of the Mesnevī, had four children, three boys and a girl,
by two wives. His eldest son was killed in the broil that caused the
murder of his father’s friend Shemsu-’d-Dīn of Tebrīz. His youngest son
is not taken further notice of; but his daughter was married off to a
local prince, and left Qonya.

His second son, and eventually his successor as Principal or Abbot
of his order, was named Muhammed, and surnamed Bahā’u-’d-Dīn. He is
commonly known as Sultan Veled.

Sultan Veled had six children, a boy and two girls by his wife Fātima,
daughter of Sheykh Ferīdūn the Goldbeater, and three boys, of whom two
were twins, by two slave women. The daughters married well, and all his
sons, or three of them, succeeded him as Abbot, one after the other.
The eldest was Mīr ‘Ārif (Chelebī Emīr ‘Ārif), the second was named
‘Ābid, the third Zāhid, and the fourth Wāhid.

Chelebī Emīr ‘Ārif, the eldest, and Eflākī’s patron, had two sons and
a daughter. His eldest son, Emīr ‘Ālim, surnamed Shāh-zāda, succeeded
eventually to the primacy after his uncles. With him, Eflākī’s memoir
is brought to a close.

Such was the natural line of this dynasty of eminent men. But Eflākī
has also given the links of a spiritual series, through whom the
mysteries of the dervish doctrines were handed down to and in the line
of Jelālu-’d-Dīn.

In the anecdote No. 79, of chapter iii., the account is given of the
manner in which the prophet Muhammed confided those mysteries to his
cousin, son-in-law, and afterwards his fourth successor, as Caliph,
‘Ālī son of Abū-Tālib, the “Victorious Lion of God.”

‘Ālī communicated the mysteries to the Imām Hasan of Basra, who died in
A.H. 110 (A.D. 728); Hasan taught them to Habīb the Persian,[36] who
confided them to Dāwūd of the tribe of Tayyi’,--Et-Tā’ī (mentioned by
D’Herbelot, without a date, as Davud Al Thai; he died A.H. 165, A.D.
781).

Dāwūd transmitted them to Ma’rūf of Kerkh (who died A.H. 200, A.D.
815); he to Sirrī the merchant of damaged goods (Es-Saqatī?; died
A.H. 253, A.D. 867); and he to the great Juneyd (who died in about
A.H. 297--A.D. 909). Juneyd’s spiritual pupil was Shiblī (died A.H.
334, A.D. 945); who taught Abū-‘Amr Muhammed, son of Ibrāhīm Zajjāj
(the Glazier), of Nīshāpūr (who died in A.H. 348--A.D. 959); and his
pupil was Abū-Bekr, son of ‘Abdu-’llāh, of Tūs, the Weaver, who taught
Abū-Ahmed (Muhammed son of Muhammed, El-Gazālī (who died A.H. 504--A.D.
1110)), and he committed those mysteries to Ahmed el-Khatībī, Jelāl’s
great-grandfather, who consigned them to the Imām Sarakhsī (who died in
A.H. 571--A.D. 1175).

Sarakhsī was the spiritual teacher of Jelāl’s father Bahā Veled, who
taught the Seyyid Burhānu-’d-Dīn Termīzī, the instructor of Jelāl. He
again passed on the tradition to Shemsu-’d-Dīn of Tebrīz, the teacher
of Jelāl’s son, Sultan Veled, who himself taught the Emīr ‘Ārif.

At the same time that the mysteries were thus being gradually
transmitted to Jelālu-’d-Dīn and his successors by these links, they
were also being diffused in thousands of other channels, and are at
this day widely diffused over the world of Islām, which daily boasts of
its living saints and their miracles. These latter are perhaps not less
veracious than those continually blazoned forth by the Church of Rome,
and by its Eastern sisters. We, too, have our spiritualists. Credulity
will never forsake mankind and prodigies will never be lacking for the
credulous to place faith in. There is much that is human in man, all
the world over.




                                  THE

                          BOOK OF THE MESNEVĪ

                                  OF

               MEVLĀNĀ JELĀLU-’d-DĪN, MUHAMMED, ER-RŪMĪ,

                               OF QONYA.




PREFACE.


This is the book of the Rhymed Couplets (Mathnawī, Mesnevī). It
contains the roots of the roots of the roots of the (one true) Religion
(of Islām); and treats of the discovery of the mysteries of reunion
and sure knowledge. It is the Grand Jurisprudence of God, the most
glorious Law of the Deity, the most manifest Evidence of the Divine
Being. The refulgence thereof “is like that of a lantern in which is
a lamp”[37] that scatters beams more bright than the morn. It is the
paradise of the heart, with springs and foliage. One of those springs
is “the fount named Salsabīl”[38] by the brethren of this religious
order (of mystical devotees known as the _Mevlevī_ or _Dancing
Dervishes_); but, by saints and the miraculously endowed, it is called
“the Good Station”[39] and “the Best Resting-place.”[40] The just shall
eat and drink therein, and the righteous shall rejoice and be glad
thereof. Like the Egyptian Nile, it is a beverage for the patient, but
a delusion to the people of Pharaoh and to blasphemers; even as God,
whose name be glorified, hath said: “He misleads therewith many, and
He guides therewith many; but He misleads not therewith (any), save
the wicked.”[41] It is a comfort to men’s breasts, an expeller of
cares. It is an exposition of the Qur’ān, an amplification of spiritual
aliments, and a dulcifier of the disposition; written “by the hands
of honorable scribes,”[42] who inscribe thereon the prohibition: “Let
none touch it save the purified.”[43] It is (a revelation) “sent down
(from on high) by the Lord of (all) the worlds,[44] which vanity
approacheth not from before, nor from behind,”[45] which God watches
over and observes, He being “the best as a Preserver,”[46] and “the
Most Compassionate of the merciful ones,”[47] unto whom pertain (many)
titles, His utmost title being God, whose name be exalted.

We have been brief in (stating) this little; for a little is an index
to much, and a mouthful may point out a pond, as a handful may serve as
a sample for a whole threshing-floor, however large.

Thus saith the feeble servant, in need of the mercy of God, whose
name be extolled, Muhammed son of Muhammed son of Huseyn, of (the
city of) Balkh,[48] of whom may God accept it: “I have exerted
myself to enlarge this book of poetry in rhyming couplets, which
contains strange and rare narratives, beautiful sayings, and recondite
indications, a path for the devout, and a garden for the pious, short
in its expressions, numerous in their applications. This have I done
at the instance of my lord and master, my trust, and as the soul in
my body, the moral store of my to-day and my morrow, the Sheykh Hasan
son of Muhammed son of Hasan, commonly known by the appellation of
Akhī-Turk (my brother Turk), a chief of the knowing ones (Gnostics?),
a leader of right direction and sure knowledge, a helper of the human
race, a confidant of men’s hearts and minds, a charge of God among His
creatures, His pure one among His reasoning servants, (a compendium
of) His commandments to His Prophet, of His mysteries with His chosen
one, a key to the treasures of the throne, a custodian of the riches
of the extended earth, a man of excellencies, a sharp sword for the
severance of truth and religion (from falsehood and blasphemy),[49] the
Bāyezīd[50] of the age, the Juneyd[51] of the period, the true friend
son of a true friend son of a true friend, may God be pleased with him
and with them, originally from the town of Urmiyya,[52] and related to
the venerated Sheykh,[53] as he himself expressed it: ‘I was a Kurd
one evening, and was an Arabian in the morning.’[54] May God sanctify
his spirit, and the spirits of his successors! Blessed is such a
predecessor; blessed are such successors! He was descended from a line
on which the sun had cast its lustrous mantle, and personal nobility
such that the stars shed their lights around it. May their courtyard
ever be a centre to which the sons of saints will turn, and a temple
of hopes about which embassies of spotless men will circulate. May it
not cease to be thus while a constellation rises and a sparkling orb
appears above the horizon in the east; so that it may be a thing held
to by those who are possessed of insight, the godly, the spiritual,
the heavenly, the celestial, the men of light, who keep silence and
observe, who are absent though present, who are kings clothed in rags,
the nobles of nations, endowed with virtues, the lights of guidances.
Amen, O Lord of (all) the worlds. And this is a prayer not to be
rejected; for it is a prayer joined in by all the good. And glory be
to God in His unity. And may God pronounce blessings on our lord,
Muhammed, and on his family and kin, the good, the clean!”




                       THE BOOK OF THE MESNEVĪ.


                          IN THE NAME OF GOD,

               THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE VERY-COMPASSIONATE.


                     PROEM. The Reed-Flute.

    From reed-flute[55] hear what tale it tells;
    What plaint it makes of absence’ ills:

    “From jungle-bed since me they tore,
    Men’s, women’s, eyes have wept right sore.
    My breast I tear and rend in twain,
    To give, through sighs, vent to my pain.
    Who’s from his home snatched far away,
    Longs to return some future day.
    I sob and sigh in each retreat,
    Be’t joy or grief for which men meet.                              5
    They fancy they can read my heart;
    Grief’s secrets I to none impart.
    My throes and moans form but one chain,
    Men’s eyes and ears catch not their train.
    Though soul and body be as one,
    Sight of his soul hath no man won.
    A flame’s the flute’s wail; not a breath,
    That flame who feels not, doom him death.
    The flame of love, ’tis, prompts the flute,
    Wine’s ferment, love; its tongue not mute.                        10
    The absent lover’s flute’s no toy;
    Its trills proclaim his grief, his joy.
    Or bane, or cure, the flute is still;
    Content, complaining, as you will.
    It tells its tale of burning grief;
    Recounts how love is mad, in brief.
    The lover lover’s pangs best knows;
    As ear receives tongue’s plaint of woes.
    Through grief, his day is but a dawn;
    Each day of sorrow, torment’s pawn.                               15
    My days are waste; take thou no heed,
    Thou still are left; my joy, indeed.
    Whole seas a fish will never drown;
    A poor man’s day seems all one frown.
    What boot from counsel to a fool?
    Waste not thy words; thy wrath let cool.
    Cast off lust’s bonds; stand free from all.
    Slave not for pelf; be not greed’s thrall.
    Pour rivers into one small gill,
    It can but hold its little fill.                                  20
    The eye’s a vase that’s ne’er content;
    The oyster’s filled ere pearl is sent.[56]
    The heart that’s bleeding from love’s dart,
    From vice of greed is kept apart.
    Then hie thee, love, a welcome guest;—
    Physician thou to soothe my breast.
    Thou cure of pride and shame in me;
    Old Galen’s skill was nought to thee!
    Through love, this earthly frame ascends
    To heaven; a hill, to skip pretends.                              25
    In trance of love, Mount Sinai shakes,
    At God’s descent; ‘and Moses quakes.’[57]
    Found I the friend on whom I dote,
    I’d emulate flute’s dulcet note.
    But from my love, while torn away,
    Unmeaning words alone I say.
    The spring is o’er; the rose is gone;
    The song of Philomel is done.
    His love was all; himself, a note.
    His love, alive; himself, dead mote.                              30
    Who feels not love’s all-quick’ning flame,
    Is like the bird whose wing is lame.
    Can I be quiet, easy, glad,
    When my delight’s away? No! Sad.
    Love bids my plaint all bonds to burst.
    My heart would break, with silence curst.
    A mirror best portrays when bright;
    Begrimed with rust, its gleam grows slight.
    Then wipe such foul alloy away;
    Bright shall it, so, reflect each ray.”                           35

    Thou’st heard what tale the flute can tell;
    Such is my case; sung all too well.


