The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Principles of Aesthetics
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Principles of Aesthetics

Author: De Witt H. Parker


        
Release date: August 1, 2004 [eBook #6366]
                Most recently updated: December 29, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/6366

Credits: Produced by Scott Pfenninger, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






Produced by Scott Pfenninger, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE PRINCIPLES OF AESTHETICS

BY

DEWITT H. PARKER

PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN



PREFACE

This book has grown out of lectures to students at the University of
Michigan and embodies my effort to express to them the nature and
meaning of art. In writing it, I have sought to maintain scientific
accuracy, yet at the same time to preserve freedom of style and
something of the inspiration of the subject. While intended primarily
for students, the book will appeal generally, I hope, to people who
are interested in the intelligent appreciation of art.

My obligations are extensive,--most directly to those whom I have cited
in foot-notes to the text, but also to others whose influence is too
indirect or pervasive to make citation profitable, or too obvious to
make it necessary. For the broader philosophy of art, my debt is
heaviest, I believe, to the artists and philosophers during the period
from Herder to Hegel, who gave to the study its greatest development,
and, among contemporaries, to Croce and Lipps. In addition, I have
drawn freely upon the more special investigations of recent times, but
with the caution desirable in view of the very tentative character of
some of the results. To Mrs. Robert M. Wenley I wish to express my
thanks for her very careful and helpful reading of the page proof.

The appended bibliography is, of course, not intended to be in any
sense adequate, but is offered merely as a guide to further reading;
a complete bibliography would itself demand almost a volume.




CONTENTS

CHAPTER    I. Introduction: Purpose and Method

CHAPTER   II. The Definition of Art

CHAPTER  III. The Intrinsic Value of Art

CHAPTER   IV. The Analysis of the Aesthetic Experience: The Elements of
                the Experience

CHAPTER    V. The Analysis of the Aesthetic Experience: The Structure of
                the Experience

CHAPTER   VI. The Problem of Evil in Aesthetics, and Its Solution
through
                the Tragic, Pathetic, and Comic

CHAPTER  VII. The Standard of Taste

CHAPTER VIII. The Aesthetics of Music

CHAPTER   IX. The Aesthetics of Poetry

