CHAPTER XI

ISRAEL'S HOME-COMING


ISRAEL'S return home was an experience at all points the reverse of his
going abroad. He had seven dollars in the pocket of his waistband on
setting away from Fez, out of the three hundred and more with which he
had started from Tetuan. His men had gone on before him and told their
story. So the people whom he came upon by the way either ignored him or
jeered at him, and not one that on his coming had run to do him honour
now stepped aside that he might pass.

Two days after leaving Fez he came again to Wazzan. Women were going
home from market by the side of their camels, and charcoal-burners were
riding back to the country on the empty burdas of their mules. It
was nigh upon sunset when Israel entered the town, and so exactly
was everything the same that he could almost have tricked himself and
believed that scarce two minutes had passed since he had left it. There
at the fountains were the water-carriers waiting with their water-skins,
and there in the market-place sat the women and children with their
dishes of soup; there were the men by the booths with their pipes ready
charged with keef, and there was the mooddin in the minaret, looking
out over the plain. Everything was the same save one thing, and that
concerned Israel himself. No Grand Shereef stood waiting to exchange
horses with him, and no black guard led him through the town. Footsore
and dirty, covered with dust, and tired, he walked through the
streets alone. And when presently the voice rang out overhead, and the
breathless town broke instantly into bubbles of sounds--the tinkling
of the bells of the water-carriers, the shouts of the children, and the
calls of the men--only one man seemed to see him and know him. This was
an Arab, wearing scarcely enough rags to cover his nakedness, who was
bathing his hot cheeks in water which a water-carrier was pouring into
his hands, and he lifted his glistening face as Israel passed, and
called him “Dog!” and “Jew!” and commanded him to uncover his feet.

Israel slept that night in one of the three squalid fondaks of Wazzan
inhabited by the Jews. His room was a sort of narrow box, in a square
court of many such boxes, with a handful of straw shaken over the earth
floor for a bed. On the doorpost the figure of a hand was painted in
red, and over the lintel there was a rude drawing of a scorpion, with an
imprecation written under it that purported to be from the mouth of
the Prophet Joshua, son of Nun. If the charm kept evil spirits from the
place of Israel's rest, it did not banish good ones. Israel slept in
that poor bed as he had never slept under the purple canopy of his own
chamber, and all night long one angel form seemed to hover over him.
It was Naomi. He could see her clearly. They were together in a little
cottage somewhere. The house was a mean one, but jasmine and marjoram
and pinks and roses grew outside of it, and love grew inside. And Naomi!
How bright were her eyes, for they could see! Yes, and her ears could
hear, and her tongue could speak!

Two days after Israel left Wazzan he was back in the bashalic of Tetuan.
Each night he had dreamt the same dream, and though he knew each morning
when he awoke with a sigh that his dream was only a reflection of his
dead wife's vision, yet he could not help but think of it the long day
through. He tried to remember if he had ever seen the cottage with his
waking eyes, and where he had seen it, and to recall the voice of Naomi
as he had heard it in his dream, that he might know if it was the same
as he used to think he heard when he sat by her in his stolen watches of
the night while she lay asleep. Sometimes when he reflected he thought
he must be growing childish, so foolish was his joy in looking forward
to the night--for he had almost grown in love with it--that he might
dream his dream again.

But it was a dear, delicious folly, for it helped him to bear the
troubles of his journey, and they were neither light nor few. After
passing through El Kasar he had been robbed and stripped both of his
small remaining moneys and the better part of his clothes by a gang of
ruffians who had followed him out of the town. Then a good woman--the
old wife, turned into the servant of a Moor who had married a young
one--had taken pity on his condition and given him a disused Moorish
jellab. His misfortune had not been without its advantage. Being forced
to travel the rest of his way home in the disguise of a Moor, he had
heard himself discussed by his own people when they knew nothing of his
presence. Every evil that had befallen them had been attributed to him.
Ben Aboo, their Basha, was a good, humane man, who was often driven to
do that which his soul abhorred. It was Israel ben Oliel who was their
cruel taxmaster.

When Israel was within a day's journey of Tetuan a terrible scourge fell
upon the country. A plague of locusts came up like a dense cloud from
the direction of the desert, and ate up every leaf and blade of grass
that the scorching sun had left green, so that the plain over which it
had passed was as black and barren as a lava stream. The farmers
were impoverished, and the poorer people made beggars. Even this last
disaster they charged in their despair to Israel, for Allah was now
cursing them for Israel's sake. They were the same people that had
thrust their presents upon him when he was setting out.

At the lonesome hut of the old woman who had offered him a bowl of
buttermilk Israel rested and asked for a drink of water. She gave him
a dish of zummetta--barley roasted like coffee--and inquired if he
was going on to Tetuan. He told her yes, and she asked if his home was
there. And when he answered that it was, she looked at him again, and
said in a moving way, “Then Allah help you, brother.”

“Why me more than another, sister?” said Israel.

“Because it is plain to see that you are a poor man,” said the old
woman. “And that is the sort he is hardest upon.”

Israel faltered and said, “He? Who, mother? Ah, you mean--”

“Who else but Israel the Jew?” said she, and then added, as by a sudden
afterthought, “But they say he is gone at last, and the Sultan has
stripped him. Well, Allah send us some one else soon to set right this
poor Gharb of ours! And what a man for poor men he might have been--so
wise and powerful!”

Israel listened with his head bent down, and, like a moth at the flame,
he could not help but play with the fire that scorched him. “They
tell me,” he said, “that Allah has cursed him with a daughter that has
devils.”

“Blind and dumb, poor soul,” said the old woman; “but Allah has pity for
the afflicted--he is taking her away.”

Israel rose. “Away?”

“She is ill since her father went to Fez.”

“Ill?”

“Yes, I heard so yesterday--dying.”

Israel made one loud cry like the cry of a beast that is slaughtered,
and fled out of the hut. Oh, fool of fools, why had he been dallying
with dreams--billing and cooing with his own fancies--fondling and
nuzzling and coddling them? Let all dreams henceforth be dead and damned
for ever; for only devils out of hell had made them that poor men's
souls might be staked and lost! Oh, why had he not remembered the pale
face of Naomi when he left her, and the silence of her tongue that had
used to laugh? Fool, fool! Why had he ever left her at all?

With such thoughts Israel hurried along, sometimes running at his
utmost velocity, and then stopping dead short; sometimes shouting his
imprecations at the pitch of his voice and beating his fist against the
sharp aloes until it bled, and then whispering to himself in awe.

Would God not hear his prayer? God knew the child was very near and dear
to him, and also that he was a lonely man. “Have pity on a lonely man,
O God!” he whispered. “Let me keep my child; take all else that I have,
everything, no matter what! Only let me keep her--yes, just as she is,
let me have her still! Time was when I asked more of Thee, but now I am
humble, and ask that alone.”

On his knees in a lonesome place, with the fierce sun beating down on
his uncovered head, amid the blackened leaves left by the locust, he
prayed this prayer, and then rose to his feet and ran.

When he got to Tetuan the white city was glistening under the setting
sun. Then he thought of his Moorish jellab, and looked at himself, and
saw that he was returning home like a beggar; and he remembered with
what splendour he had started out. Should he wait for the darkness, and
creep into his house under the cover of it? If the thought had occurred
an hour before he must have scouted it. Better to brave the looks of
every face in Tetuan than be kept back one minute from Naomi. But now
that he was so near he was afraid to go in; and now that he was so soon
to learn the truth he dreaded to hear it. So he walked to and fro on the
heath outside the town, paltering with himself, struggling with himself,
eating out his heart with eagerness, trying to believe that he was
waiting for the night.

The night came at length, and, under a deep-blue sky fast whitening with
thick stars, Israel passed unknown through the Moorish gate, which was
still open, and down the narrow lane to the market square. At the gate
of the Mellah, which was closed, he knocked, and demanded entrance in
the name of the Kaid. The Moorish guards who kept it fell back at sight
of him with looks of consternation.

“Israel!” cried one, and dropped his lantern.

Israel whispered, “Keep your tongue between your teeth!” and hurried on.

At the door of his own house, which was also closed, he knocked again,
but more fearfully. The black woman Habeebah opened it cautiously, and,
seeing his jellab, she clashed it back in his face.

“Habeebah!” he cried, and he knocked once more.

Then Ali came to the door. “What Moorish man are you?” cried Ali,
pushing him back as he pressed forward.

“Ali! Hush! It is I--Israel.”

Then Ali knew him and cried, “God save us! What has happened?”

“What has happened here?” said Israel. “Naomi,” he faltered, “what of
her?”

“Then you have heard?” said Ali. “Thank God, she is now well.”

Israel laughed--his laugh was like a scream.

“More than that--a strange thing has befallen her since you went away,”
 said Ali.

“What?”

“She can hear!”

“It's a lie!” cried Israel, and he raised his hand and struck Ali to
the floor. But at the next minute he was lifting him up and sobbing and
saying, “Forgive me, my brave boy. I was mad, my son; I did not know
what I was doing. But do not torture me. If what you tell me is true,
there is no man so happy under heaven; but if it is false, there is no
fiend in hell need envy me.”

And Ali answered through his tears, “It is true, my father--come and
see.”



