CHAPTER II. A PORTRAIT FROM LIFE


From the manner with which the Latournelles entered the Chalet a
stranger would readily have guessed that they came there every evening.

“Ah, you are here already,” said the notary, perceiving the young banker
Gobenheim, a connection of Gobenheim-Keller, the head of the great
banking house in Paris.

This young man with a livid face--a blonde of the type with black eyes,
whose immovable glance has an indescribable fascination, sober in speech
as in conduct, dressed in black, lean as a consumptive, but nevertheless
vigorously framed--visited the family of his former master and the house
of his cashier less from affection than from self-interest. Here they
played whist at two sous a point; a dress-coat was not required; he
accepted no refreshment except “eau sucree,” and consequently had
no civilities to return. This apparent devotion to the Mignon family
allowed it to be supposed that Gobenheim had a heart; it also released
him from the necessity of going into the society of Havre and incurring
useless expenses, thus upsetting the orderly economy of his domestic
life. This disciple of the golden calf went to bed at half-past ten
o’clock and got up at five in the morning. Moreover, being perfectly
sure of Latournelle’s and Butscha’s discretion, he could talk over
difficult business matters, obtain the advice of the notary gratis,
and get an inkling of the real truth of the gossip of the street. This
stolid gold-glutton (the epithet is Butscha’s) belonged by nature to
the class of substances which chemistry terms absorbents. Ever since the
catastrophe of the house of Mignon, where the Kellers had placed him to
learn the principles of maritime commerce, no one at the Chalet had ever
asked him to do the smallest thing, no matter what; his reply was too
well known. The young fellow looked at Modeste precisely as he would
have looked at a cheap lithograph.

“He’s one of the pistons of the big engine called ‘Commerce,’” said poor
Butscha, whose clever mind made itself felt occasionally by such little
sayings timidly jerked out.

The four Latournelles bowed with the most respectful deference to an
old lady dressed in black velvet, who did not rise from the armchair in
which she was seated, for the reason that both eyes were covered with
the yellow film produced by cataract. Madame Mignon may be sketched in
one sentence. Her august countenance of the mother of a family attracted
instant notice as that of one whose irreproachable life defies the
assaults of destiny, which nevertheless makes her the target of its
arrows and a member of the unnumbered tribe of Niobes. Her blonde wig,
carefully curled and well arranged upon her head, became the cold white
face which resembled that of some burgomaster’s wife painted by Hals or
Mirevelt. The extreme neatness of her dress, the velvet boots, the lace
collar, the shawl evenly folded and put on, all bore testimony to the
solicitous care which Modeste bestowed upon her mother.

When silence was, as the notary had predicted, restored in the pretty
salon, Modeste, sitting beside her mother, for whom she was embroidering
a kerchief, became for an instant the centre of observation. This
curiosity, barely veiled by the commonplace salutations and inquiries
of the visitors, would have revealed even to an indifferent person the
existence of the domestic plot to which Modeste was expected to fall
a victim; but Gobenheim, more than indifferent, noticed nothing, and
proceeded to light the candles on the card-table. The behavior of Dumay
made the whole scene terrifying to Butscha, to the Latournelles, and
above all to Madame Dumay, who knew her husband to be capable of firing
a pistol at Modeste’s lover as coolly as though he were a mad dog.

After dinner that day the cashier had gone to walk followed by two
magnificent Pyrenees hounds, whom he suspected of betraying him, and
therefore left in charge of a farmer, a former tenant of Monsieur
Mignon. On his return, just before the arrival of the Latournelles,
he had taken his pistols from his bed’s head and placed them on the
chimney-piece, concealing this action from Modeste. The young girl took
no notice whatever of these preparations, singular as they were.

Though short, thick-set, pockmarked, and speaking always in a low voice
as if listening to himself, this Breton, a former lieutenant in the
Guard, showed the evidence of such resolution, such sang-froid on his
face that throughout life, even in the army, no one had ever ventured
to trifle with him. His little eyes, of a calm blue, were like bits of
steel. His ways, the look on his face, his speech, his carriage, were
all in keeping with the short name of Dumay. His physical strength,
well-known to every one, put him above all danger of attack. He was able
to kill a man with a blow of his fist, and had performed that feat at
Bautzen, where he found himself, unarmed, face to face with a Saxon
at the rear of his company. At the present moment the usually firm
yet gentle expression of the man’s face had risen to a sort of tragic
sublimity; his lips were pale as the rest of his face, indicating a
tumult within him mastered by his Breton will; a slight sweat, which
every one noticed and guessed to be cold, moistened his brow. The notary
knew but too well that these signs might result in a drama before the
criminal courts. In fact the cashier was playing a part in connection
with Modeste Mignon, which involved to his mind sentiments of honor and
loyalty of far greater importance than mere social laws; and his present
conduct proceeded from one of those compacts which, in case disaster
came of it, could be judged only in a higher court than one of earth.
The majority of dramas lie really in the ideas which we make to
ourselves about things. Events which seem to us dramatic are nothing
more than subjects which our souls convert into tragedy or comedy
according to the bent of our characters.

Madame Latournelle and Madame Dumay, who were appointed to watch
Modeste, had a certain assumed stiffness of demeanor and a quiver in
their voices, which the suspected party did not notice, so absorbed
was she in her embroidery. Modeste laid each thread of cotton with a
precision that would have made an ordinary workwoman desperate. Her face
expressed the pleasure she took in the smooth petals of the flower
she was working. The dwarf, seated between his mistress and Gobenheim,
restrained his emotion, trying to find means to approach Modeste and
whisper a word of warning in her ear.

By taking a position in front of Madame Mignon, Madame Latournelle, with
the diabolical intelligence of conscientious duty, had isolated Modeste.
Madame Mignon, whose blindness always made her silent, was even paler
than usual, showing plainly that she was aware of the test to which
her daughter was about to be subjected. Perhaps at the last moment she
revolted from the stratagem, necessary as it might seem to her. Hence
her silence; she was weeping inwardly. Exupere, the spring of the
trap, was wholly ignorant of the piece in which he was to play a
part. Gobenheim, by reason of his character, remained in a state of
indifference equal to that displayed by Modeste. To a spectator who
understood the situation, this contrast between the ignorance of some
and the palpitating interest of others would have seemed quite poetic.
Nowadays romance-writers arrange such effects; and it is quite within
their province to do so, for nature in all ages takes the liberty to be
stronger than they. In this instance, as you will see, nature, social
nature, which is a second nature within nature, amused herself by making
truth more interesting than fiction; just as mountain torrents describe
curves which are beyond the skill of painters to convey, and accomplish
giant deeds in displacing or smoothing stones which are the wonder of
architects and sculptors.

It was eight o’clock. At that season twilight was still shedding its
last gleams; there was not a cloud in the sky; the balmy air caressed
the earth, the flowers gave forth their fragrance, the steps of
pedestrians turning homeward sounded along the gravelly road, the sea
shone like a mirror, and there was so little wind that the wax candles
upon the card-tables sent up a steady flame, although the windows were
wide open. This salon, this evening, this dwelling--what a frame for the
portrait of the young girl whom these persons were now studying with the
profound attention of a painter in presence of the Margharita Doni, one
of the glories of the Pitti palace. Modeste,--blossom enclosed, like
that of Catullus,--was she worth all these precautions?

You have seen the cage; behold the bird! Just twenty years of age,
slender and delicate as the sirens which English designers invent for
their “Books of Beauty,” Modeste was, like her mother before her, the
captivating embodiment of a grace too little understood in France, where
we choose to call it sentimentality, but which among German women is
the poetry of the heart coming to the surface of the being and spending
itself--in affectations if the owner is silly, in divine charms of
manner if she is “spirituelle” and intelligent. Remarkable for her pale
golden hair, Modeste belonged to the type of woman called, perhaps in
memory of Eve, the celestial blonde; whose satiny skin is like a silk
paper applied to the flesh, shuddering at the winter of a cold look,
expanding in the sunshine of a loving glance,--teaching the hand to be
jealous of the eye. Beneath her hair, which was soft and feathery and
worn in many curls, the brow, which might have been traced by a compass
so pure was its modelling, shone forth discreet, calm to placidity,
and yet luminous with thought: when and where could another be found so
transparently clear or more exquisitely smooth? It seemed, like a pearl,
to have its orient. The eyes, of a blue verging on gray and limpid
as the eyes of a child, had all the mischief, all the innocence of
childhood, and they harmonized well with the arch of the eyebrows,
faintly indicated by lines like those made with a brush on Chinese
faces. This candor of the soul was still further evidenced around the
eyes, in their corners, and about the temples, by pearly tints threaded
with blue, the special privilege of these delicate complexions. The
face, whose oval Raphael so often gave to his Madonnas, was remarkable
for the sober and virginal tone of the cheeks, soft as a Bengal rose,
upon which the long lashes of the diaphanous eyelids cast shadows that
were mingled with light. The throat, bending as she worked, too delicate
perhaps, and of milky whiteness, recalled those vanishing lines that
Leonardo loved. A few little blemishes here and there, like the patches
of the eighteenth century, proved that Modeste was indeed a child of
earth, and not a creation dreamed of in Italy by the angelic school. Her
lips, delicate yet full, were slightly mocking and somewhat sensuous;
the waist, which was supple and yet not fragile, had no terrors for
maternity, like those of girls who seek beauty by the fatal pressure of
a corset. Steel and dimity and lacings defined but did not create the
serpentine lines of the elegant figure, graceful as that of a young
poplar swaying in the wind.

A pearl-gray dress with crimson trimmings, made with a long waist,
modestly outlined the bust and covered the shoulders, still rather thin,
with a chemisette which left nothing to view but the first curves of
the throat where it joined the shoulders. From the aspect of the young
girl’s face, at once ethereal and intelligent, where the delicacy of a
Greek nose with its rosy nostrils and firm modelling marked something
positive and defined; where the poetry enthroned upon an almost mystic
brow seemed belied at times by the pleasure-loving expression of the
mouth; where candor claimed the depths profound and varied of the
eye, and disputed them with a spirit of irony that was trained and
educated,--from all these signs an observer would have felt that this
young girl, with the keen, alert ear that waked at every sound, with
a nostril open to catch the fragrance of the celestial flower of the
Ideal, was destined to be the battle-ground of a struggle between
the poesies of the dawn and the labors of the day; between fancy
and reality, the spirit and the life. Modeste was a pure young girl,
inquisitive after knowledge, understanding her destiny, and filled with
chastity,--the Virgin of Spain rather than the Madonna of Raphael.

She raised her head when she heard Dumay say to Exupere, “Come here,
young man.” Seeing them together in the corner of the salon she supposed
they were talking of some commission in Paris. Then she looked at
the friends who surrounded her, as if surprised by their silence, and
exclaimed in her natural manner, “Why are you not playing?”--with a
glance at the green table which the imposing Madame Latournelle called
the “altar.”

“Yes, let us play,” said Dumay, having sent off Exupere.

“Sit there, Butscha,” said Madame Latournelle, separating the head-clerk
from the group around Madame Mignon and her daughter by the whole width
of the table.

“And you, come over here,” said Dumay to his wife, making her sit close
by him.

Madame Dumay, a little American about thirty-six years of age, wiped her
eyes furtively; she adored Modeste, and feared a catastrophe.

“You are not very lively this evening,” remarked Modeste.

“We are playing,” said Gobenheim, sorting his cards.

No matter how interesting this situation may appear, it can be made
still more so by explaining Dumay’s position towards Modeste. If the
brevity of this explanation makes it seem rather dry, the reader must
pardon its dryness in view of our desire to get through with these
preliminaries as speedily as possible, and the necessity of relating the
main circumstances which govern all dramas.




