CHAPTER III. PRELIMINARIES


Jean Francois Bernard Dumay, born at Vannes, started as a soldier for
the army of Italy in 1799. His father, president of the revolutionary
tribunal of that town, had displayed so much energy in his office
that the place had become too hot to hold the son when the parent, a
pettifogging lawyer, perished on the scaffold after the ninth Thermidor.
On the death of his mother, who died of the grief this catastrophe
occasioned, Jean sold all that he possessed and rushed to Italy at the
age of twenty-two, at the very moment when our armies were beginning to
yield. On the way he met a young man in the department of Var, who
for reasons analogous to his own was in search of glory, believing a
battle-field less perilous than his own Provence. Charles Mignon, the
last scion of an ancient family, which gave its name to a street in
Paris and to a mansion built by Cardinal Mignon, had a shrewd and
calculating father, whose one idea was to save his feudal estate of La
Bastie in the Comtat from the claws of the Revolution. Like all timid
folk of that day, the Comte de La Bastie, now citizen Mignon, found it
more wholesome to cut off other people’s heads than to let his own be
cut off. The sham terrorist disappeared after the 9th Thermidor, and was
then inscribed on the list of emigres. The estate of La Bastie was sold;
the towers and bastions of the old castle were pulled down, and citizen
Mignon was soon after discovered at Orleans and put to death with his
wife and all his children except Charles, whom he had sent to find a
refuge for the family in the Upper Alps.

Horrorstruck at the news, Charles waited for better times in a valley of
Mont Genevra; and there he remained till 1799, subsisting on a few
louis which his father had put into his hand at starting. Finally,
when twenty-three years of age, and without other fortune than his fine
presence and that southern beauty which, when it reaches perfection,
may be called sublime (of which Antinous, the favorite of Adrian, is the
type), Charles resolved to wager his Provencal audacity--taking it, like
many another youth, for a vocation--on the red cloth of war. On his
way to the base of the army at Nice he met the Breton. The pair became
intimate, partly from the contrasts in their characters; they drank from
the same cup at the wayside torrents, broke the same biscuit, and were
both made sergeants at the peace which followed the battle of Marengo.

When the war recommenced, Charles Mignon was promoted into the cavalry
and lost sight of his comrade. In 1812 the last of the Mignon de La
Bastie was an officer of the Legion of honor and major of a regiment
of cavalry. Taken prisoner by the Russians he was sent, like so
many others, to Siberia. He made the journey in company with another
prisoner, a poor lieutenant, in whom he recognized his old friend Jean
Dumay, brave, neglected, undecorated, unhappy, like a million of other
woollen epaulets, rank and file--that canvas of men on which
Napoleon painted the picture of the Empire. While in Siberia, the
lieutenant-colonel, to kill time, taught writing and arithmetic to the
Breton, whose early education had seemed a useless waste of time to Pere
Scevola. Charles found in the old comrade of his marching days one of
those rare hearts into which a man can pour his griefs while telling his
joys.

The young Provencal had met the fate which attends all handsome
bachelors. In 1804, at Frankfort on the Main, he was adored by Bettina
Wallenrod, only daughter of a banker, and he married her with all the
more enthusiasm because she was rich and a noted beauty, while he was
only a lieutenant with no prospects but the extremely problematical
future of a soldier of fortune of that day. Old Wallenrod, a decayed
German baron (there is always a baron in a German bank) delighted to
know that the handsome lieutenant was the sole representative of the
Mignon de La Bastie, approved the love of the blonde Bettina, whose
beauty an artist (at that time there really was one in Frankfort) had
lately painted as an ideal head of Germany. Wallenrod invested enough
money in the French funds to give his daughter thirty thousand francs a
year, and settled it on his anticipated grandsons, naming them counts of
La Bastie-Wallenrod. This “dot” made only a small hole in his cash-box,
the value of money being then very low. But the Empire, pursuing a
policy often attempted by other debtors, rarely paid its dividends; and
Charles was rather alarmed at this investment, having less faith than
his father-in-law in the imperial eagle. The phenomenon of belief, or of
admiration which is ephemeral belief, is not so easily maintained when
in close quarters with the idol. The mechanic distrusts the machine
which the traveller admires; and the officers of the army might be
called the stokers of the Napoleonic engine,--if, indeed, they were not
its fuel.

However, the Baron Wallenrod-Tustall-Bartenstild promised to come if
necessary to the help of the household. Charles loved Bettina Wallenrod
as much as she loved him, and that is saying a good deal; but when a
Provencal is moved to enthusiasm all his feelings and attachments are
genuine and natural. And how could he fail to adore that blonde beauty,
escaping, as it were, from the canvas of Durer, gifted with an angelic
nature and endowed with Frankfort wealth? The pair had four children, of
whom only two daughters survived at the time when he poured his griefs
into the Breton’s heart. Dumay loved these little ones without having
seen them, solely through the sympathy so well described by Charlet,
which makes a soldier the father of every child. The eldest, named
Bettina Caroline, was born in 1805; the other, Marie Modeste, in 1808.
The unfortunate lieutenant-colonel, long without tidings of these
cherished darlings, was sent, at the peace of 1814, across Russia
and Prussia on foot, accompanied by the lieutenant. No difference of
epaulets could count between the two friends, who reached Frankfort just
as Napoleon was disembarking at Cannes.

Charles found his wife in Frankfort, in mourning for her father, who had
always idolized her and tried to keep a smile upon her lips, even by
his dying bed. Old Wallenrod was unable to survive the disasters of the
Empire. At seventy years of age he speculated in cottons, relying on the
genius of Napoleon without comprehending that genius is quite as often
beyond as at the bottom of current events. The old man had purchased
nearly as many bales of cotton as the Emperor had lost men during his
magnificent campaign in France. “I tie in goddon,” said the father to
the daughter, a father of the Goriot type, striving to quiet a grief
which distressed him. “I owe no mann anything--” and he died, still
trying to speak to his daughter in the language that she loved.

Thankful to have saved his wife and daughters from the general
wreck, Charles Mignon returned to Paris, where the Emperor made him
lieutenant-colonel in the cuirassiers of the Guard and commander of the
Legion of honor. The colonel dreamed of being count and general
after the first victory. Alas! that hope was quenched in the blood of
Waterloo. The colonel, slightly wounded, retired to the Loire, and left
Tours before the disbandment of the army.

In the spring of 1816 Charles sold his wife’s property out of the funds
to the amount of nearly four hundred thousand francs, intending to seek
his fortune in America, and abandon his own country where persecution
was beginning to lay a heavy hand on the soldiers of Napoleon. He went
to Havre accompanied by Dumay, whose life he had saved at Waterloo
by taking him on the crupper of his saddle in the hurly-burly of the
retreat. Dumay shared the opinions and the anxieties of his colonel; the
poor fellow idolized the two little girls and followed Charles like
a spaniel. The latter, confident that the habit of obedience, the
discipline of subordination, and the honesty and affection of the
lieutenant would make him a useful as well as a faithful retainer,
proposed to take him with him in a civil capacity. Dumay was only too
happy to be adopted into the family, to which he resolved to cling like
the mistletoe to an oak.

While waiting for an opportunity to embark, at the same time making
choice of a ship and reflecting on the chances offered by the various
ports for which they sailed, the colonel heard much talk about the
brilliant future which the peace seemed to promise to Havre. As he
listened to these conversations among the merchants, he foresaw the
means of fortune, and without loss of time he set about making himself
the owner of landed property, a banker, and a shipping-merchant. He
bought land and houses in the town, and despatched a vessel to New York
freighted with silks purchased in Lyons at reduced prices. He sent Dumay
on the ship as his agent; and when the latter returned, after making a
double profit by the sale of the silks and the purchase of cottons at
a low valuation, he found the colonel installed with his family in
the handsomest house in the rue Royale, and studying the principles of
banking with the prodigious activity and intelligence of a native of
Provence.

This double operation of Dumay’s was worth a fortune to the house of
Mignon. The colonel purchased the villa at Ingouville and rewarded his
agent with the gift of a modest little house in the rue Royale. The
poor toiler had brought back from New York, together with his cottons,
a pretty little wife, attracted it would seem by his French nature. Miss
Grummer was worth about four thousand dollars (twenty thousand francs),
which sum Dumay placed with his colonel, to whom he now became an alter
ego. In a short time he learned to keep his patron’s books, a science
which, to use his own expression, pertains to the sergeant-majors of
commerce. The simple-hearted soldier, whom fortune had forgotten for
twenty years, thought himself the happiest man in the world as the owner
of the little house (which his master’s liberality had furnished), with
twelve hundred francs a year from money in the funds, and a salary of
three thousand six hundred. Never in his dreams had Lieutenant Dumay
hoped for a situation so good as this; but greater still was the
satisfaction he derived from the knowledge that his lucky enterprise had
been the pivot of good fortune to the richest commercial house in Havre.

Madame Dumay, a rather pretty little American, had the misfortune to
lose all her children at their birth; and her last confinement was so
disastrous as to deprive her of the hope of any other. She therefore
attached herself to the two little Mignons, whom Dumay himself loved,
or would have loved, even better than his own children had they lived.
Madame Dumay, whose parents were farmers accustomed to a life of
economy, was quite satisfied to receive only two thousand four hundred
francs of her own and her household expenses; so that every year Dumay
laid by two thousand and some extra hundreds with the house of Mignon.
When the yearly accounts were made up the colonel always added something
to this little store by way of acknowledging the cashier’s services,
until in 1824 the latter had a credit of fifty-eight thousand francs. In
was then that Charles Mignon, Comte de La Bastie, a title he never used,
crowned his cashier with the final happiness of residing at the Chalet,
where at the time when this story begins Madame Mignon and her daughter
were living in obscurity.

The deplorable state of Madame Mignon’s health was caused in part by the
catastrophe to which the absence of her husband was due. Grief had taken
three years to break down the docile German woman; but it was a grief
that gnawed at her heart like a worm at the core of a sound fruit. It
is easy to reckon up its obvious causes. Two children, dying in infancy,
had a double grave in a soul that could never forget. The exile of her
husband to Siberia was to such a woman a daily death. The failure of
the rich house of Wallenrod, and the death of her father, leaving his
coffers empty, was to Bettina, then uncertain about the fate of her
husband, a terrible blow. The joy of Charles’s return came near killing
the tender German flower. After that the second fall of the Empire and
the proposed expatriation acted on her feelings like a renewed attack
of the same fever. At last, however, after ten years of continual
prosperity, the comforts of her house, which was the finest in Havre,
the dinners, balls, and fetes of a prosperous merchant, the splendors of
the villa Mignon, the unbounded respect and consideration enjoyed by her
husband, his absolute affection, giving her an unrivalled love in return
for her single-minded love for him,--all these things brought the woman
back to life. At the moment when her doubts and fears at last left her,
when she could look forward to the bright evening of her stormy life, a
hidden catastrophe, buried in the heart of the family, and of which we
shall presently make mention, came as the precursor of renewed trials.

In January, 1826, on the day when Havre had unanimously chosen Charles
Mignon as its deputy, three letters, arriving from New York, Paris, and
London, fell with the destruction of a hammer upon the crystal palace
of his prosperity. In an instant ruin like a vulture swooped down upon
their happiness, just as the cold fell in 1812 upon the grand army in
Russia. One night sufficed Charles Mignon to decide upon his course,
and he spent it in settling his accounts with Dumay. All he owned, not
excepting his furniture, would just suffice to pay his creditors.

“Havre shall never see me doing nothing,” said the colonel to the
lieutenant. “Dumay, I take your sixty thousand francs at six per cent.”

“Three, my colonel.”

“At nothing, then,” cried Mignon, peremptorily; “you shall have your
share in the profits of what I now undertake. The ‘Modeste,’ which is no
longer mine, sails to-morrow, and I sail in her. I commit to you my wife
and daughter. I shall not write. No news must be taken as good news.”

Dumay, always subordinate, asked no questions of his colonel. “I think,”
 he said to Latournelle with a knowing little glance, “that my colonel
has a plan laid out.”

The following day at dawn he accompanied his master on board the
“Modeste” bound for Constantinople. There, on the poop of the vessel,
the Breton said to the Provencal,--

“What are your last commands, my colonel?”

“That no man shall enter the Chalet,” cried the father with strong
emotion. “Dumay, guard my last child as though you were a bull-dog.
Death to the man who seduces another daughter! Fear nothing, not even
the scaffold--I will be with you.”

“My colonel, go in peace. I understand you. You shall find Mademoiselle
Mignon on your return such as you now give her to me, or I shall be
dead. You know me, and you know your Pyrenees hounds. No man shall reach
your daughter. Forgive me for troubling you with words.”

The two soldiers clasped arms like men who had learned to understand
each other in the solitudes of Siberia.

On the same day the Havre “Courier” published the following terrible,
simple, energetic, and honorable notice:--

  “The house of Charles Mignon suspends payment. But the
  undersigned, assignees of the estate, undertake to pay all
  liabilities. On and after this date, holders of notes may obtain
  the usual discount. The sale of the landed estates will fully
  cover all current indebtedness.

  “This notice is issued for the honor of the house, and to prevent
  any disturbance in the money-market of this town.

  “Monsieur Charles Mignon sailed this morning on the ‘Modeste’ for
  Asia Minor, leaving full powers with the undersigned to sell his
  whole property, both landed and personal.

    “DUMAY, assignee of the Bank accounts,
    LATOURNELLE, notary, assignee of the city and villa property,
    GOBENHEIM, assignee of the commercial property.”

Latournelle owed his prosperity to the kindness of Monsieur Mignon,
who lent him one hundred thousand francs in 1817 to buy the finest law
practice in Havre. The poor man, who had no pecuniary means, was nearly
forty years of age and saw no prospect of being other than head-clerk
for the rest of his days. He was the only man in Havre whose devotion
could be compared with Dumay’s. As for Gobenheim, he profited by the
liquidation to get a part of Monsieur Mignon’s business, which lifted
his own little bank into prominence.

While unanimous regrets for the disaster were expressed in
counting-rooms, on the wharves, and in private houses, where praises of
a man so irreproachable, honorable, and beneficent filled every mouth,
Latournelle and Dumay, silent and active as ants, sold land, turned
property into money, paid the debts, and settled up everything.
Vilquin showed a good deal of generosity in purchasing the villa, the
town-house, and a farm; and Latournelle made the most of his liberality
by getting a good price out of him. Society wished to show civilities to
Madame and Mademoiselle Mignon; but they had already obeyed the father’s
last wishes and taken refuge in the Chalet, where they went on the very
morning of his departure, the exact hour of which had been concealed
from them. Not to be shaken in his resolution by his grief at parting,
the brave man said farewell to his wife and daughter while they slept.
Three hundred visiting cards were left at the house. A fortnight later,
just as Charles had predicted, complete forgetfulness settled down upon
the Chalet, and proved to these women the wisdom and dignity of his
command.

Dumay sent agents to represent his master in New York, Paris, and
London, and followed up the assignments of the three banking-houses
whose failure had caused the ruin of the Havre house, thus realizing
five hundred thousand francs between 1826 and 1828, an eighth of
Charles’s whole fortune; then, according to the latter’s directions
given on the night of his departure, he sent that sum to New York
through the house of Mongenod to the credit of Monsieur Charles Mignon.
All this was done with military obedience, except in a matter of
withholding thirty thousand francs for the personal expenses of Madame
and Mademoiselle Mignon as the colonel had ordered him to do, but
which Dumay did not do. The Breton sold his own little house for twenty
thousand francs, which sum he gave to Madame Mignon, believing that the
more capital he sent to his colonel the sooner the latter would return.

“He might perish for the want of thirty thousand francs,” Dumay remarked
to Latournelle, who bought the little house at its full value, where an
apartment was always kept ready for the inhabitants of the Chalet.




