CHAPTER XX. THE POET DOES HIS EXERCISES

This visit of the great surgeon was the event of the day, and it left a
luminous trace in Modeste’s soul. The young enthusiast ardently admired
the man whose life belonged to others, and in whom the habit of studying
physical suffering had destroyed the manifestations of egoism. That
evening, when Gobenheim, the Latournelles, and Butscha, Canalis,
Ernest, and the Duc d’Herouville were gathered in the salon, they all
congratulated the Mignon family on the hopes which Desplein encouraged.
The conversation, in which the Modeste of her letters was once more in
the ascendant, turned naturally on the man whose genius, unfortunately
for his fame, was appreciable only by the faculty and men of science.
Gobenheim contributed a phrase which is the sacred chrism of genius as
interpreted in these days by public economists and bankers,--

“He makes a mint of money.”

“They say he is very grasping,” added Canalis.

The praises which Modeste showered on Desplein had annoyed the poet.
Vanity acts like a woman,--they both think they are defrauded when love
or praise is bestowed on others. Voltaire was jealous of the wit of a
roue whom Paris admired for two days; and even a duchess takes offence
at a look bestowed upon her maid. The avarice excited by these two
sentiments is such that a fraction of them given to the poor is thought
robbery.

“Do you think, monsieur,” said Modeste, smiling, “that we should judge
genius by ordinary standards?”

“Perhaps we ought first of all to define the man of genius,” replied
Canalis. “One of the conditions of genius is invention,--invention of a
form, a system, a force. Napoleon was an inventor, apart from his other
conditions of genius. He invented his method of making war. Walter Scott
is an inventor, Linnaeus is an inventor, Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire and
Cuvier are inventors. Such men are men of genius of the first rank. They
renew, increase, or modify both science and art. But Desplein is merely
a man whose vast talent consists in properly applying laws already
known; in observing, by means of a natural gift, the limits laid down
for each temperament, and the time appointed by Nature for an operation.
He has not founded, like Hippocrates, the science itself. He has
invented no system, as did Galen, Broussais, and Rasori. He is merely an
executive genius, like Moscheles on the piano, Paganini on the violin,
or Farinelli on his own larynx,--men who have developed enormous
faculties, but who have not created music. You must permit me to
discriminate between Beethoven and la Catalani: to one belongs the
immortal crown of genius and of martyrdom, to the other innumerable
five-franc pieces; one we can pay in coin, but the world remains
throughout all time a debtor to the other. Each day increases our debt
to Moliere, but Baron’s comedies have been overpaid.”

“I think you make the prerogative of ideas too exclusive,” said Ernest
de La Briere, in a quiet and melodious voice, which formed a sudden
contrast to the peremptory tones of the poet, whose flexible organ had
abandoned its caressing notes for the strident and magisterial voice
of the rostrum. “Genius must be estimated according to its utility;
and Parmentier, who brought potatoes into general use, Jacquart, the
inventor of silk looms; Papin, who first discovered the elastic quality
of steam, are men of genius, to whom statues will some day be erected.
They have changed, or they will change in a certain sense, the face of
the State. It is in that sense that Desplein will always be considered
a man of genius by thinkers; they see him attended by a generation of
sufferers whose pains are stifled by his hand.”

That Ernest should give utterance to this opinion was enough to make
Modeste oppose it.

“If that be so, monsieur,” she said, “then the man who could discover a
way to mow wheat without injuring the straw, by a machine that could do
the work of ten men, would be a man of genius.”

“Yes, my daughter,” said Madame Mignon; “and the poor would bless him
for cheaper bread,--he that is blessed by the poor is blessed of God.”

“That is putting utility above art,” said Modeste, shaking her head.

“Without utility what would become of art?” said Charles Mignon. “What
would it rest on? what would it live on? Where would you lodge, and how
would you pay the poet?”

“Oh! my dear papa, such opinions are fearfully flat and antediluvian!
I am not surprised that Gobenheim and Monsieur de La Briere, who are
interested in the solution of social problems should think so; but you,
whose life has been the most useless poetry of the century,--useless
because the blood you shed all over Europe, and the horrible sufferings
exacted by your colossus, did not prevent France from losing ten
departments acquired under the Revolution,--how can _you_ give in to
such excessively pig-tail notions, as the idealists say? It is plain
you’ve just come from China.”

The impertinence of Modeste’s speech was heightened by a little air
of contemptuous disdain which she purposely put on, and which fairly
astounded Madame Mignon, Madame Latournelle, and Dumay. As for Madame
Latournelle, she opened her eyes so wide she no longer saw anything.
Butscha, whose alert attention was comparable to that of a spy, looked
at Monsieur Mignon, expecting to see him flush with sudden and violent
indignation.

“A little more, young lady, and you will be wanting in respect for your
father,” said the colonel, smiling, and noticing Butscha’s look. “See
what it is to spoil one’s children!”

“I am your only child,” she said saucily.

“Child, indeed,” remarked the notary, significantly.

“Monsieur,” said Modeste, turning upon him, “my father is delighted to
have me for his governess; he gave me life and I give him knowledge; he
will soon owe me something.”

“There seems occasion for it,” said Madame Mignon.

“But mademoiselle is right,” said Canalis, rising and standing before
the fireplace in one of the finest attitudes of his collection. “God,
in his providence, has given food and clothing to man, but he has not
directly given him art. He says to man: ‘To live, thou must bow thyself
to earth; to think, thou shalt lift thyself to Me.’ We have as much need
of the life of the soul as of the life of the body,--hence, there are
two utilities. It is true we cannot be shod by books or clothed by
poems. An epic song is not, if you take the utilitarian view, as useful
as the broth of a charity kitchen. The noblest ideas will not sail a
vessel in place of canvas. It is quite true that the cotton-gin gives us
calicoes for thirty sous a yard less than we ever paid before; but that
machine and all other industrial perfections will not breathe the breath
of life into a people, will not tell futurity of a civilization that
once existed. Art, on the contrary, Egyptian, Mexican, Grecian, Roman
art, with their masterpieces--now called useless!--reveal the existence
of races back in the vague immense of time, beyond where the great
intermediary nations, denuded of men of genius, have disappeared,
leaving not a line nor a trace behind them! The works of genius are the
‘summum’ of civilization, and presuppose utility. Surely a pair of boots
are not as agreeable to your eyes as a fine play at the theatre; and you
don’t prefer a windmill to the church of Saint-Ouen, do you? Well then,
nations are imbued with the same feelings as the individual man, and
the man’s cherished desire is to survive himself morally just as he
propagates himself physically. The survival of a people is the work of
its men of genius. At this very moment France is proving, energetically,
the truth of that theory. She is, undoubtedly, excelled by England in
commerce, industry, and navigation, and yet she is, I believe, at the
head of the world,--by reason of her artists, her men of talent, and the
good taste of her products. There is no artist and no superior intellect
that does not come to Paris for a diploma. There is no school of
painting at this moment but that of France; and we shall reign far
longer and perhaps more securely by our books than by our swords. In La
Briere’s system, on the other hand, all that is glorious and lovely must
be suppressed,--woman’s beauty, music, painting, poetry. Society will
not be overthrown, that is true, but, I ask you, who would willingly
accept such a life? All useful things are ugly and forbidding. A kitchen
is indispensable, but you take care not to sit there; you live in the
salon, which you adorn, like this, with superfluous things. Of what
_use_, let me ask you, are these charming wall-paintings, this carved
wood-work? There is nothing beautiful but that which seems to us
useless. We called the sixteenth century the Renascence with admirable
truth of language. That century was the dawn of a new era. Men will
continue to speak of it when all remembrance of anterior centuries had
passed away,--their only merit being that they once existed, like the
million beings who count as the rubbish of a generation.”

“Rubbish! yes, that may be, but my rubbish is dear to me,” said the
Duc d’Herouville, laughing, during the silent pause which followed the
poet’s pompous oration.

“Let me ask,” said Butscha, attacking Canalis, “does art, the sphere in
which, according to you, genius is required to evolve itself, exist at
all? Is it not a splendid lie, a delusion, of the social man? Do I want
a landscape scene of Normandy in my bedroom when I can look out and see
a better one done by God himself? Our dreams make poems more glorious
than Iliads. For an insignificant sum of money I can find at Valogne, at
Carentan, in Provence, at Arles, many a Venus as beautiful as those
of Titian. The police gazette publishes tales, differing somewhat
from those of Walter Scott, but ending tragically with blood, not ink.
Happiness and virtue exist above and beyond both art and genius.”

“Bravo, Butscha!” cried Madame Latournelle.

“What did he say?” asked Canalis of La Briere, failing to gather from
the eyes and attitude of Mademoiselle Mignon the usual signs of artless
admiration.

The contemptuous indifference which Modeste had exhibited toward La
Briere, and above all, her disrespectful speeches to her father, so
depressed the young man that he made no answer to Canalis; his eyes,
fixed sorrowfully on Modeste, were full of deep meditation. The Duc
d’Herouville took up Butscha’s argument and reproduced it with much
intelligence, saying finally that the ecstasies of Saint-Theresa were
far superior to the creations of Lord Byron.

“Oh, Monsieur le duc,” exclaimed Modeste, “hers was a purely personal
poetry, whereas the genius of Lord Byron and Moliere benefit the world.”

“How do you square that opinion with those of Monsieur le baron?” cried
Charles Mignon, quickly. “Now you are insisting that genius must be
useful, and benefit the world as though it were cotton,--but perhaps you
think logic as antediluvian as your poor old father.”

Butscha, La Briere, and Madame Latournelle exchanged glances that were
more than half derisive, and drove Modeste to a pitch of irritation that
kept her silent for a moment.

“Mademoiselle, do not mind them,” said Canalis, smiling upon her, “we
are neither beaten, nor caught in a contradiction. Every work of art,
let it be in literature, music, painting, sculpture, or architecture,
implies a positive social utility, equal to that of all other commercial
products. Art is pre-eminently commerce; presupposes it, in short. An
author pockets ten thousand francs for his book; the making of books
means the manufactory of paper, a foundry, a printing-office, a
bookseller,--in other words, the employment of thousands of men. The
execution of a symphony of Beethoven or an opera by Rossini requires
human arms and machinery and manufactures. The cost of a monument is
an almost brutal case in point. In short, I may say that the works of
genius have an extremely costly basis and are, necessarily, useful to
the workingman.”

Astride of that theme, Canalis spoke for some minutes with a fine luxury
of metaphor, and much inward complacency as to his phrases; but it
happened with him, as with many another great speaker, that he found
himself at last at the point from which the conversation started, and in
full agreement with La Briere without perceiving it.

“I see with much pleasure, my dear baron,” said the little duke, slyly,
“that you will make an admirable constitutional minister.”

“Oh!” said Canalis, with the gesture of a great man, “what is the use
of all these discussions? What do they prove?--the eternal verity of one
axiom: All things are true, all things are false. Moral truths as well
as human beings change their aspect according to their surroundings, to
the point of being actually unrecognizable.”

“Society exists through settled opinions,” said the Duc d’Herouville.

“What laxity!” whispered Madame Latournelle to her husband.

“He is a poet,” said Gobenheim, who overheard her.

Canalis, who was ten leagues above the heads of his audience, and who
may have been right in his last philosophical remark, took the sort
of coldness which now overspread the surrounding faces of a symptom of
provincial ignorance; but seeing that Modeste understood him, he
was content, being wholly unaware that monologue is particularly
disagreeable to country-folk, whose principal desire it is to exhibit
the manner of life and the wit and wisdom of the provinces to Parisians.

“It is long since you have seen the Duchesse de Chaulieu?” asked the
duke, addressing Canalis, as if to change the conversation.

“I left her about six days ago.”

“Is she well?” persisted the duke.

“Perfectly well.”

“Have the kindness to remember me to her when you write.”

“They say she is charming,” remarked Modeste, addressing the duke.

“Monsieur le baron can speak more confidently than I,” replied the grand
equerry.

“More than charming,” said Canalis, making the best of the duke’s
perfidy; “but I am partial, mademoiselle; she has been a friend to me
for the last ten years; I owe all that is good in me to her; she has
saved me from the dangers of the world. Moreover, Monsieur le Duc de
Chaulieu launched me in my present career. Without the influence of that
family the king and the princesses would have forgotten a poor poet
like me; therefore my affection for the duchess must always be full of
gratitude.”

His voice quivered.

“We ought to love the woman who has led you to write those sublime
poems, and who inspires you with such noble feelings,” said Modeste,
quite affected. “Who can think of a poet without a muse!”

“He would be without a heart,” replied Canalis. “He would write barren
verses like Voltaire, who never loved any one but Voltaire.”

“I thought you did me the honor to say, in Paris,” interrupted Dumay,
“that you never felt the sentiments you expressed.”

“The shoe fits, my soldier,” replied the poet, smiling; “but let me tell
you that it is quite possible to have a great deal of feeling both in
the intellectual life and in real life. My good friend here, La Briere,
is madly in love,” continued Canalis, with a fine show of generosity,
looking at Modeste. “I, who certainly love as much as he,--that is, I
think so unless I delude myself,--well, I can give to my love a literary
form in harmony with its character. But I dare not say, mademoiselle,”
 he added, turning to Modeste with too studied a grace, “that to-morrow I
may not be without inspiration.”

Thus the poet triumphed over all obstacles. In honor of his love he
rode a-tilt at the hindrances that were thrown in his way, and Modeste
remained wonder-struck at the Parisian wit that scintillated in his
declamatory discourse, of which she had hitherto known little or
nothing.

“What an acrobat!” whispered Butscha to Latournelle, after listening
to a magnificent tirade on the Catholic religion and the happiness
of having a pious wife,--served up in response to a remark by Madame
Mignon.

Modeste’s eyes were blindfolded as it were; Canalis’s elocution and the
close attention which she was predetermined to pay to him prevented her
from seeing that Butscha was carefully noting the declamation, the want
of simplicity, the emphasis that took the place of feeling, and the
curious incoherencies in the poet’s speech which led the dwarf to make
his rather cruel comment. At certain points of Canalis’s discourse, when
Monsieur Mignon, Dumay, Butscha, and Latournelle wondered at the
man’s utter want of logic, Modeste admired his suppleness, and said to
herself, as she dragged him after her through the labyrinth of fancy,
“He loves me!” Butscha, in common with the other spectators of what
we must call a stage scene, was struck with the radiant defect of all
egoists, which Canalis, like many men accustomed to perorate, allowed to
be too plainly seen. Whether he understood beforehand what the person he
was speaking to meant to say, whether he was not listening, or whether
he had the faculty of listening when he was thinking of something
else, it is certain that Melchior’s face wore an absent-minded look in
conversation, which disconcerted the ideas of others and wounded their
vanity. Not to listen is not merely a want of politeness, it is a mark
of disrespect. Canalis pushed this habit too far; for he often forgot
to answer a speech which required an answer, and passed, without the
ordinary transitions of courtesy, to the subject, whatever it was, that
preoccupied him. Though such impertinence is accepted without protest
from a man of marked distinction, it stirs a leaven of hatred and
vengeance in many hearts; in those of equals it even goes so far as to
destroy a friendship. If by chance Melchior was forced to listen, he
fell into another fault; he merely lent his attention, and never
gave it. Though this may not be so mortifying, it shows a kind of
semi-concession which is almost as unsatisfactory to the hearer and
leaves him dissatisfied. Nothing brings more profit in the commerce
of society than the small change of attention. He that heareth let him
hear, is not only a gospel precept, it is an excellent speculation;
follow it, and all will be forgiven you, even vice. Canalis took a great
deal of trouble in his anxiety to please Modeste; but though he was
compliant enough with her, he fell back into his natural self with the
others.

Modeste, pitiless for the ten martyrs she was making, begged Canalis to
read some of his poems; she wanted, she said, a specimen of his gift for
reading, of which she had heard so much. Canalis took the volume which
she gave him, and cooed (for that is the proper word) a poem which is
generally considered his finest,--an imitation of Moore’s “Loves of the
Angels,” entitled “Vitalis,” which Monsieur and Madame Dumay, Madame
Latournelle, and Gobenheim welcomed with a few yawns.

“If you are a good whist-player, monsieur,” said Gobenheim, flourishing
five cards held like a fan, “I must say I have never met a man as
accomplished as you.”

The remark raised a laugh, for it was the translation of everybody’s
thought.

“I play it sufficiently well to live in the provinces for the rest of my
days,” replied Canalis. “That, I think, is enough, and more than enough
literature and conversation for whist-players,” he added, throwing the
volume impatiently on a table.

This little incident serves to show what dangers environ a drawing-room
hero when he steps, like Canalis, out of his sphere; he is like the
favorite actor of a second-rate audience, whose talent is lost when he
leaves his own boards and steps upon those of an upper-class theatre.




