CHAPTER IV

HOMO-SEXUALITY AND PEDERASTY

The law of Sexual Attraction gives the long-sought-for explanation of
sexual inversion, of sexual inclination towards members of the same sex,
whether or no that be accompanied by aversion from members of the
opposite sex. Without reference to a distinction which I shall deal with
later on, I may say at once that it is exceedingly probable that, in all
cases of sexual inversion, there will be found indications of the
anatomical characters of the other sex. There is no such thing as a
genuine “psycho-sexual hermaphroditism”; the men who are sexually
attracted by men have outward marks of effeminacy, just as women of a
similar disposition to those of their own sex exhibit male characters.
That this should be so is quite intelligible if we admit the close
parallelism between body and mind, and further light is thrown upon it
by the facts explained in the second chapter of this book; the facts as
to the male or female principle not being uniformly present all over the
same body, but distributed in different amounts in different organs. In
all cases of sexual inversion, there is invariably an anatomical
approximation to the opposite sex.

Such a view is directly opposed to that of those who would maintain that
sexual inversion is an acquired character, and one that has superseded
normal sexual impulses. Schrenk-Notzing, Kraepelin, and Féré are amongst
those writers who have urged the view that sexual inversion is an
acquired habit, the result of abstinence from normal intercourse and
particularly induced by example. But what about the first offender? Did
the god Hermaphroditos teach him? It might equally be sought to prove
that the sexual inclination of a normal man for a normal woman was an
unnatural, acquired habit--a habit, as some ancient writers have
suggested, that arose from some accidental discovery of its agreeable
nature. Just as a normal man discovers for himself what a woman is, so
also, in the case of a sexual “invert” the attraction exercised on him
by a person of his own sex is a normal product of his development from
his birth. Naturally the opportunity must come in which the individual
may put in practice his desire for inverted sexuality, but the
opportunity will be taken only when his natural constitution has made
the individual ready for it. That sexual abstinence (to take the second
supposed cause of inversion) should result in anything more than
masturbation may be explained by the supposition that inversion is
acquired, but that it should be coveted and eagerly sought can only
happen when the demand for it is rooted in the constitution. In the same
fashion normal sexual attraction might be said to be an acquired
character, if it could be proved definitely that, to fall in love, a
normal man must first see a woman or a picture of a woman. Those who
assert that sexual inversion is an acquired character, are making a
merely incidental or accessory factor responsible for the whole
constitution of an organism.

There is little reason for saying that sexual inversion is acquired, and
there is just as little for regarding it as inherited from parents or
grandparents. Such an assertion, it is true, has not been made, and
seems contrary to all experience; but it has been suggested that it is
due to a neuropathic diathesis, and that general constitutional weakness
is to be found in the descendants of those who have displayed sexual
inversion. In fact sexual inversion has usually been regarded as
psycho-pathological, as a symptom of degeneration, and those who exhibit
it have been considered as physically unfit. This view, however, is
falling into disrepute, especially as Krafft-Ebing, its principal
champion, abandoned it in the later editions of his work. None the
less, it is not generally recognised that sexual inverts may be
otherwise perfectly healthy, and with regard to other social matters
quite normal. When they have been asked if they would have wished
matters to be different with them in this respect, almost invariably
they answer in the negative.

It is due to the erroneous conceptions that I have mentioned that
homo-sexuality has not been considered in relation with other facts. Let
those who regard sexual inversion as pathological, as a hideous anomaly
of mental development (the view accepted by the populace), or believe it
to be an acquired vice, the result of an execrable seduction, remember
that there exist all transitional stages reaching from the most
masculine male to the most effeminate male and so on to the sexual
invert, the false and true hermaphrodite; and then, on the other side,
successively through the sapphist to the virago and so on until the most
feminine virgin is reached. In the interpretation of this volume, sexual
inverts of both sexes are to be defined as individuals in whom the
factor α (see page 8, chap. i.) is very nearly 0.5 and so is practically
equal to α´; in other words, individuals in whom there is as much
maleness as femaleness, or indeed who, although reckoned as men, may
contain an excess of femaleness, or as women and yet be more male than
female. Because of the want of uniformity in the sexual characters of
the body, it is fairly certain that many individuals have their sex
assigned them on account of the existence of the primary male sexual
characteristic, even although there may be delayed _descensus
testiculorum_, or epi- or hypo-spadism, or, later on, absence of active
spermatozoa, or even, in the case of assignment of the female sex,
absence of the vagina, and thus male avocations (such as compulsory
military service) may come to be assigned to those in whom α is less
than 0.5 and α´ greater than 0.5. The sexual complement of such
individuals really is to be found on their own side of the sexual line,
that is to say, on the side on which they are reckoned, although in
reality they may belong to the other.

Moreover, and this not only supports my view but can be explained only
by it, there are no inverts who are completely sexually inverted. In all
of them there is from the beginning an inclination to both sexes; they
are, in fact, bisexual. It may be that later on they may actively
encourage a slight leaning towards one sex or the other, and so become
practically unisexual either in the normal or in the inverted sense, or
surrounding influence may bring about this result for them. But in such
processes the fundamental bisexuality is never obliterated and may at
any time give evidence of its suppressed presence.

Reference has often been made, and in recent years has increasingly been
made, to the relation between homo-sexuality and the presence of
bisexual rudiments in the embryonic stages of animals and plants. What
is new in my view is that according to it, homo-sexuality cannot be
regarded as an atavism or as due to arrested embryonic development, or
incomplete differentiation of sex; it cannot be regarded as an anomaly
of rare occurrence interpolating itself in customary complete separation
of the sexes. Homo-sexuality is merely the sexual condition of these
intermediate sexual forms that stretch from one ideally sexual condition
to the other sexual condition. In my view all actual organisms have both
homo-sexuality and hetero-sexuality.

That the rudiment of homo-sexuality, in however weak a form, exists in
every human being, corresponding to the greater or smaller development
of the characters of the opposite sex, is proved conclusively from the
fact that in the adolescent stage, while there is still a considerable
amount of undifferentiated sexuality, and before the internal secretions
have exerted their stimulating force, passionate attachments with a
sensual side are the rule amongst boys as well as amongst girls.

A person who retains from that age onwards a marked tendency to
“friendship” with a person of his own sex must have a strong taint of
the other sex in him. Those, however, are still more obviously
intermediate sexual forms, who, after association with both sexes, fail
to have aroused in them the normal passion for the opposite sex, but
still endeavour to maintain confidential, devoted affection with those
of their own sex.

There is no friendship between men that has not an element of sexuality
in it, however little accentuated it may be in the nature of the
friendship, and however painful the idea of the sexual element would be.
But it is enough to remember that there can be no friendship unless
there has been some attraction to draw the men together. Much of the
affection, protection, and nepotism between men is due to the presence
of unsuspected sexual compatibility.

An analogy with the sexual friendship of youth may be traced in the case
of old men, when, for instance, with the involution following old age,
the latent amphisexuality of man appears. This may be the reason why so
many men of fifty years and upwards are guilty of indecency.

Homo-sexuality has been observed amongst animals to a considerable
extent. F. Karsch has made a wide, if not complete, compilation from
other authors. Unfortunately, practically no observations were made as
to the grades of maleness or femaleness to be observed in such cases.
But we may be reasonably certain that the law holds good in the animal
world. If bulls are kept apart from cows for a considerable time,
homo-sexual acts occur amongst them; the most female are the first to
become corrupted, the others later, some perhaps never. (It is amongst
cattle that the greatest number of sexually intermediate forms have been
recorded.) This shows that the tendency was latent in them, but that at
other times the sexual demand was satisfied in normal fashion. Cattle in
captivity behave precisely as prisoners and convicts in these matters.
Animals exhibit not merely onanism (which is known to them as to human
beings), but also homo-sexuality; and this fact, together with the fact
that sexually intermediate forms are known to occur amongst them, I
regard as strong evidence for my law of sexual attraction.

Inverted sexual attraction, then, is no exception to my law of sexual
attraction, but is merely a special case of it. An individual who is
half-man, half-woman, requires as sexual complement a being similarly
equipped with a share of both sexes in order to fulfil the requirements
of the law. This explains the fact that sexual inverts usually associate
only with persons of similar character, and rarely admit to intimacy
those who are normal. The sexual attraction is mutual, and this explains
why sexual inverts so readily recognise each other. This being so, the
normal element in human society has very little idea of the extent to
which homo-sexuality is practised, and when a case becomes public
property, every normal young profligate thinks that he has a right to
condemn such “atrocities.” So recently as the year 1900 a professor of
psychiatry in a German university urged that those who practised
homo-sexuality should be castrated.

The therapeutical remedies which have been used to combat
homo-sexuality, in cases where such treatment has been attempted, are
certainly less radical than the advice of the professor; but they serve
to show only how little the nature of homo-sexuality was understood. The
method used at present is hypnotism, and this can rest only on the
theory that homo-sexuality is an acquired character. By suggesting the
idea of the female form and of normal congress, it is sought to accustom
those under treatment to normal relations. But the acknowledged results
are very few.

The failure is to be expected from our standpoint. The hypnotiser
suggests to the subject the image of a “typical” woman, ignorant of the
innate differences in the subject and unaware that such a type is
naturally repulsive to him. And as the normal typical woman is not his
complement, it is fruitless of the doctor to advise the services of any
casual Venus, however attractive, to complete the cure of a man who has
long shunned normal intercourse. If our formula were used to discover
the complement of the male invert, it would point to the most man-like
woman, the Lesbian or Sapphist type. Probably such is the only type of
woman who would attract the sexual invert or please him. If a cure for
sexual inversion must be sought because it cannot be left to its own
extinction, then this theory offers the following solution. Sexual
inverts must be brought to sexual inverts, from homo-sexualists to
Sapphists, each in their grades. Knowledge of such a solution should
lead to repeal of the ridiculous laws of England, Germany and Austria
directed against homo-sexuality, so far at least as to make the
punishments the lightest possible. In the second part of this book it
will be made clear why both the active and the passive parts in male
homo-sexuality appear disgraceful, although the desire is greater than
in the case of the normal relation of a man and woman. In the abstract
there is no ethical difference between the two.

In spite of all the present-day clamour about the existence of different
rights for different individualities, there is only one law that governs
mankind, just as there is only one logic and not several logics. It is
in opposition to that law, as well as to the theory of punishment
according to which the legal offence, not the moral offence, is
punished, that we forbid the homo-sexualist to carry on his practices
whilst we allow the hetero-sexualist full play, so long as both avoid
open scandal. Speaking from the standpoint of a purer state of humanity
and of a criminal law untainted by the pedagogic idea of punishment as a
deterrent, the only logical and rational method of treatment for sexual
inverts would be to allow them to seek and obtain what they require
where they can, that is to say, amongst other inverts.

My theory appears to me quite incontrovertible and conclusive, and to
afford a complete explanation of the entire set of phenomena. The
exposition, however, must now face a set of facts which appear quite
opposed to it, and which seem absolutely to contradict my reference of
sexual inversion to the existence of sexually intermediate types, and my
explanation of the law governing the attraction of these types for each
other. It is probably the case that my explanation is sufficient for all
female sexual inverts, but it is certainly true that there are men with
very little taint of femaleness about them who yet exert a very strong
influence on members of their own sex, a stronger influence than that of
other men who may have more femaleness--an influence which can be
exerted even on very male men, and an influence which, finally, often
appears to be much greater than the influence any woman can exert on
these men. Albert Moll is justified in saying as follows: “There exist
psycho-sexual hermaphrodites who are attracted by members of both sexes,
but who in the case of each sex appear to care only for the characters
peculiar to that sex; and, on the other hand, there are also
psycho-sexual (?) hermaphrodites who, in the case of each sex, are
attracted, not by the characteristics peculiar to that sex, but by those
which are either sexually indifferent or even antagonistic to the sex in
question.” Upon this distinction depends the difference between the two
sets of phenomena indicated in the title of this chapter--Homo-sexuality
and Pederasty. The distinction may be expressed as follows: The
homo-sexualist is that type of sexual invert who prefers very female men
or very male women, in accordance with the general law of sexual
attraction. The pederast, on the other hand, may be attracted either by
very male men or by very female women, but in the latter case only in so
far as he is not pederastic. Moreover, his inclination for the male sex
is stronger than for the female sex, and is more deeply seated in his
nature. The origin of pederasty is a problem in itself and remains
unsolved by this investigation.


