
  Transcriber’s Notes

  Text printed in italics has been transcribed _between underscores_.
  Small capitals have been replaced with ALL CAPITALS. A caret followed
  by a character represents a superscript character (as in f^t).

  More Transcriber’s Notes may be found at the end of this text.




SEX & CHARACTER




THE GERMAN PRESS

ON “SEX AND CHARACTER.”


_Die Umschau._--“Dr. Otto Weininger’s book is destined to place the
relation of the sexes in a new light. He traces the contrast between man
and woman to a single principle, and makes an attempt to reduce the
spiritual differences of the sexes to a system.”

_Allgemeine Wiener Medizinische Zeitung._--“An extraordinary book, that
called forth the learned criticism of two faculties, and had appeared in
a third edition a few months after its publication, before the
scientific world had been able to pronounce upon it seriously, not to
say finally.... A book that will henceforth be in the hands of every
doctor who has occasion to study the antithetical character of the two
sexes.”

_Der Volkserzieher._--“There is no aspect of modern thought which he
(Weininger) has not touched upon in the course of his investigations, no
recess of the labyrinthine modern soul into which he does not invite us
to glance with him, no question on which he has not touched, or to which
he has not, indeed, offered a solution in accordance with his own
philosophy.”

_Allgemeine Zeitung._--“This book... is a sensational work, both by
reason of its contents and of the tragic fate of its author. Weininger,
as is commonly known, shot himself in the autumn of 1903 at the early
age of twenty-three, in the house in Vienna where Beethoven had died....
But it is the book itself, even more than its author’s individuality,
which is abnormal. It is nothing less than an attempt to construct a
system of sexual characterology on the broadest scientific basis, with
all the resources of the most modern philosophy.”

_Münchener Neueste Nachrichten._--“‘Sex and Character,’ by Dr.
Weininger, has none of the character of a youthful work. The learning
revealed in this book, and indeed its whole conception, are such that we
might take it for the strenuous achievement of a lifetime.”

_Neues Wiener Tageblatt._--“A great philosophical, biological, and
social question is here treated by a gifted and learned author with
perfect freedom and breadth, yet with a seriousness, a wealth of
scientific knowledge, that would ensure the book a place in the front
rank, even were the style less excellent, vivacious, and individual than
it is.”

_Die Wage._--“The author is a brilliant stylist. On every page I find
aphorisms, in which the form fits the thought like a veil of silver. And
these thoughts are no ordinary ones. The writer goes his own way, he
knows secret paths which no man has yet trodden, and he shrinks from no
obstacles. He lets himself down cautiously into the abyss, for he has
determined to sound the deepest depths; from time to time, however, he
looks up from the pit and rejoices in the light of the eternal stars,
even though they lie hid from his mortal vision. He carries his
arguments to their ultimate conclusion. We rebel against these
conclusions, but we admire the uncompromising logic of the thinker.”




  SEX & CHARACTER

  BY
  OTTO WEININGER

  AUTHORISED TRANSLATION FROM THE
  SIXTH GERMAN EDITION

  [Illustration]

  LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
  NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
  1906




  _All rights reserved_

  _Copyright, London: William Heinemann, 1906_

  _Copyright, New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1906_




PUBLISHER’S NOTE


On October 4, 1903, Otto Weininger died by his own hand, at the age of
twenty-three and a half years. There is perhaps in all history no other
instance of a man who had produced a work so mature in its scientific
character, and so original in its philosophical aspect as “Sex and
Character” when he was no more than twenty-one years old. We will not
attempt to decide whether this was the case of a genius, who, instead of
developing his intellectual powers gradually in the course of a
lifetime, concentrated them in one mighty achievement, and then cast off
the worn-out husk of the flesh, or of an unhappy youth, who could no
longer bear the burden of his own ghastly knowledge.

“Sex and Character” is undoubtedly one of those rare books that will be
studied long after its own times, and whose influence will not pass
away, but will penetrate deeper and deeper, compelling amazement and
inviting reflection in steadily expanding circles. It may be noted with
satisfaction that the book is by no means in harmony with contemporary
thought. The discussions, so much in favour nowadays, concerning the
emancipation of women, sexuality, the relation of women to culture, and
so forth, are deprived of their data by this publication; for here, laid
down with all the penetrating acumen of the trained logician, is a
characterisation of sexual types, “M” (the ideal man), and “W” (the
ideal woman), which traces all the much discussed psychological
phenomena back to a final source, and actually gives a definitive
solution to the feminine problem, a solution altogether alien to the
field of inquiry wherein the answer has hitherto been sought. In the
science of characterology, here formulated for the first time, we have a
strenuous scientific achievement of the first importance. All former
psychologies have been the psychology of the male, written by men, and
more or less consciously applicable only to man as distinguished from
humanity. “Woman does not betray her secret,” said Kant, and this has
been true till now. But now she has revealed it--by the voice of a man.
The things women say about themselves have been suggested by men; they
repeat the discoveries, more or less real, which men have made about
them. By a highly original method of analysis, a man has succeeded for
the first time in giving scientific and abstract utterance to that which
only some few great artists have suggested by concrete images hitherto.
Weininger, working out an original system of characterology
(psychological typology) rich in prospective possibilities, undertook
the construction of a universal psychology of woman which penetrates to
the nethermost depths, and is based not only on a vast systematic
mastery of scientific knowledge, but on what can only be described as an
appalling comprehension of the feminine soul in its most secret
recesses. This newly created method embraces the whole domain of human
consciousness; research must be carried out on the lines laid down by
Nature--in three stages, and from three distinct points of view: the
biologico-physiological, the psychologically descriptive, and the
philosophically appreciative. I will not dwell here on the equipment
essential for such a task, the necessary combination of a comprehensive
knowledge of natural history with a minute and exhaustive mastery of
psychological and philosophical science--a combination destined,
perhaps, to prove unique.

The general characterisation of the ideal woman, “W,” is followed by the
construction of individual types, which are finally resolved into two
elemental figures (Platonic conceptions to some extent), the Courtesan
and the Mother. These are differentiated by their pre-occupation with
the sexual act (the main, and in the ultimate sense, sole interest of
“W”), in the first case, as an end in itself, in the second as the
process which results in the possession of a child. The abnormal type,
the hysterical woman, leads up to a masterly psychological (not
physiological) theory of hysteria, which is acutely and convincingly
defined as “the organic mendacity of woman.”

Weininger himself attached the highest importance to the
ethico-philosophical chapters that conclude his work, in which he passes
from the special problem of sexuality to the problems of individual
talent, genius, æsthetics, memory, the _ego_, the Jewish race, and many
others, rising finally to the ultimate logical and moral principles of
judgment. From his most universal standpoint he succeeds in estimating
woman as a part of humanity, and, above all, subjectively. Here he
deliberately comes into sharp conflict with the fashionable tendencies
towards an unscientific monism and its accompanying phenomena,
pan-sexuality and the ethics of species, and characterises very aptly
the customary superficialities of the many non-philosophical modern
apostles, of whom Wilhelm Bölsche and Ellen Key are perhaps the most
representative types. Weininger, in defiance of all reigning fashions,
represents a consolidated dualism, closely related to the eternal
systems of Plato, of Christianity, and of Kant, which finds an original
issue in a bitterly tragic conception of the universe. Richard Wagner
(whom Weininger calls the greatest of human beings after Jesus) gives
artistic expression in his _Parsifal_ to the conception Weininger sets
forth scientifically. It is, in fact, the old doctrine of the divine
life and of redemption to which the whole book, with its array of
detail, is consecrated. In Kundry, Weininger recognises the most
profound conception of woman in all literature. In her redemption by the
spotless Parsifal, the young philosopher sees the way of mankind marked
out; he contrasts with this the programme of the modern feminist
movement, with its superficialities and its lies; and so, in conclusion,
the book returns to the problem, which, in spite of all its wealth of
thought, remains its governing idea: the problem of the sexes and the
possibility of a moral relation between them--a moral relation
fundamentally different from what is commonly understood by the term, of
course. In the two chapters: “The Nature of Woman and her significance
in the Universe,” and “Woman and Mankind,” we drink from a fountain of
the ripest wisdom. A tragic and most unhappy mind reveals itself here,
and no thoughtful man will lay down this book without deep emotion and
admiration; many, indeed, will close it with almost religious
reverence.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE


This book is an attempt to place the relations of Sex in a new and
decisive light. It is an attempt not to collect the greatest possible
number of distinguishing characters, or to arrange into a system all the
results of scientific measuring and experiment, but to refer to a single
principle the whole contrast between man and woman. In this respect the
book differs from all other works on the same subject. It does not
linger over this or that detail, but presses on to its ultimate goal; it
does not heap investigation on investigation, but combines the psychical
differences between the sexes into a system; it deals not with women,
but with woman. It sets out, indeed, from the most common and obvious
facts, but intends to reach a single, concrete principle. This is not
“inductive metaphysics”; it is a gradual approach to the heart of
psychology.

The investigation is not of details, but of principles; it does not
despise the laboratory, although the help of the laboratory, with regard
to the deeper problems, is limited as compared with the results of
introspective analysis. An artist who wishes to represent the female
form can construct a type without actually giving formal proof by a
series of measurements. The artist does not despise experimental
results; on the contrary, he regards it as a duty to gain experience;
but for him the collection of experimental knowledge is merely a
starting-point for self-exploration, and in art self-exploration is
exploration of the world.

The psychology used in this exposition is purely philosophical, although
its characteristic method, justified by the subject, is to set out from
the most trivial details of experience. The task of the philosopher
differs from that of the artist in one important respect. The one deals
in symbols, the other in ideas. Art and philosophy stand to one another
as expression and meaning. The artist has breathed in the world to
breathe it out again; the philosopher has the world outside him and he
has to absorb it.

There is always something pretentious in theory; and the real
meaning--which in a work of art is Nature herself and in a philosophical
system is a much condensed generalisation, a thesis going to the root of
the matter and proving itself--appears to strike against us harshly,
almost offensively. Where my exposition is anti-feminine, and that is
nearly everywhere, men themselves will receive it with little heartiness
or conviction; their sexual egoism makes them prefer to see woman as
they would like to have her, as they would like her to be.

I need not say that I am prepared for the answer women will have to the
judgment I have passed on their sex. My investigation, indeed, turns
against man in the end, and although in a deeper sense than the
advocates of women’s rights could anticipate, assigns to man the
heaviest and most real blame. But this will help me little and is of
such a nature that it cannot in the smallest way rehabilitate me in the
minds of women.

The analysis, however, goes further than the assignment of blame; it
rises beyond simple and superficial phenomena to heights from which
there opens not only a view into the nature of woman and its meaning in
the universe, but also the relation to mankind and to the ultimate and
most lofty problems. A definite relation to the problem of Culture is
attained, and we reach the part to be played by woman in the sphere of
ideal aims. There, also, where the problems of Culture and of Mankind
coincide, I try not merely to explain but to assign values, for, indeed,
in that region explanation and valuation are identical.

To such a wide outlook my investigation was as it were driven, not
deliberately steered, from the outset. The inadequacy of all empirical
psychological philosophy follows directly from empirical psychology
itself. The respect for empirical knowledge will not be injured, but
rather will the meaning of such knowledge be deepened, if man recognises
in phenomena, and it is from phenomena that he sets out, any elements
assuring him that there is something behind phenomena, if he espies the
signs that prove the existence of something higher than phenomena,
something that supports phenomena. We may be assured of such a first
principle, although no living man can reach it. Towards such a principle
this book presses and will not flag.

Within the narrow limits to which as yet the problem of woman and of
woman’s rights has been confined, there has been no place for the
venture to reach so high a goal. None the less the problem is bound
intimately with the deepest riddles of existence. It can be solved,
practically or theoretically, morally or metaphysically, only in
relation to an interpretation of the cosmos.

Comprehension of the universe, or what passes for such, stands in no
opposition to knowledge of details; on the other hand all special
knowledge acquires a deeper meaning because of it. Comprehension of the
universe is self-creative; it cannot arise, although the empirical
knowledge of every age expects it, as a synthesis of however great a sum
of empirical knowledge.

In this book there lie only the germs of a world-scheme, and these are
allied most closely with the conceptions of Plato, Kant and
Christianity. I have been compelled for the most part to fashion for
myself the scientific, psychological, philosophical, logical, ethical
groundwork. I think that at the least I have laid the foundations of
many things into which I could not go fully. I call special attention to
the defects of this part of my work because I attach more importance to
appreciation of what I have tried to say about the deepest and most
general problems than to the interest which will certainly be aroused by
my special investigation of the problem of woman.

The philosophical reader may take it amiss to find a treatment of the
loftiest and ultimate problems coinciding with the investigation of a
special problem of no great dignity; I share with him this distaste. I
may say, however, that I have treated throughout the contrast between
the sexes as the starting-point rather than the goal of my research. The
investigation has yielded a harvest rich in its bearing on the
fundamental problems of logic and their relations to the axioms of
thought, on the theory of æsthetics, of love, and of the beautiful and
the good, and on problems such as individuality and morality and their
relations, on the phenomena of genius, the craving for immortality and
Hebraism. Naturally these comprehensive interrelations aid the special
problem, for, as it is considered from so many points of view, its scope
enlarges. And if in this wider sense it be proved that culture can give
only the smallest hope for the nature of woman, if the final results are
a depreciation, even a negation of womanhood, there will be no attempt
in this to destroy what exists, to humble what has a value of its own.
Horror of my own deed would overtake me were I here only destructive and
had I left only a clean sheet. Perhaps the affirmations in my book are
less articulate, but he that has ears to hear will hear them.

The treatise falls into two parts, the first biological-psychological,
the second logical-philosophical. It may be objected that I should have
done better to make two books, the one treating of purely physical
science, the other introspective. It was necessary to be done with
biology before turning to psychology. The second part treats of certain
psychical problems in a fashion totally different from the method of any
contemporary naturalist, and for that reason I think that the removal of
the first part of the book would have been at some risk to many readers.
Moreover, the first part of the book challenges an attention and
criticism from natural science possible in a few places only in the
second part, which is chiefly introspective. Because the second part
starts from a conception of the universe that is anti-positivistic, many
will think it unscientific (although there is given a strong proof
against Positivism). For the present I must be content with the
conviction that I have rendered its due to Biology, and that I have
established an enduring position for non-biological, non-physiological
psychology.

My investigation may be objected to as in certain points not being
supported by enough proof, but I see little force in such an objection.
For in these matters what can “proof” mean? I am not dealing with
mathematics or with the theory of cognition (except with the latter in
two cases); I am dealing with empirical knowledge, and in that one can
do no more than point to what exists; in this region proof means no more
than the agreement of new experience with old experience, and it is much
the same whether the new phenomena have been produced experimentally by
men, or have come straight from the creative hand of nature. Of such
latter proofs my book contains many.

Finally, I should like to say that my book, if I may be allowed to judge
it, is for the most part not of a quality to be understood and absorbed
at the first glance. I point out this myself, to guide and protect the
reader.

The less I found myself able in both parts of the book (and especially
in the second) to confirm what now passes for knowledge, the more
anxious I have been to point out coincidences where I found myself in
agreement with what has already been known and said.

I have to thank Professor Dr. Laurenz Müllner for the great assistance
he has given me, and Professor Dr. Friedrich Jodl for the kindly
interest he has taken in my work from the beginning. I am specially
indebted to the kind friends who have helped me with correction of the
proofs.




CONTENTS


                                                                  _Page_

  AUTHOR’S PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION                        ix


  FIRST OR PREPARATORY PART

  SEXUAL COMPLEXITY

  INTRODUCTION                                                         1

  On the development of general conceptions -- Male and female --
  Contradictions -- Transitional forms -- Anatomy and natural
  endowment -- Uncertainty of anatomy


  CHAPTER I

  MALES AND FEMALES                                                    5

  Embryonic neutral condition -- Rudiments in the adult -- Degrees
  of “gonochorism” -- Principle of intermediate forms -- Male and
  female -- Need for typical conceptions -- Resumé -- Early
  anticipations


  CHAPTER II

  MALE AND FEMALE PLASMAS                                             11

  Position of sexuality -- Steenstrup’s view adopted -- Sexual
  characters -- Internal secretions -- Idioplasm -- Arrhenoplasm
  -- Thelyplasm -- Variations -- Proofs from the effects of
  castration -- Transplantation and transfusion -- Organotherapy
  -- Individual differences between cells -- Origin of
  intermediate sexual conditions -- Brain -- Excess of male births
  -- Determination of sex -- Comparative pathology


  CHAPTER III

  THE LAWS OF SEXUAL ATTRACTION                                       26

  Sexual preference -- Probability of these being controlled by a
  law -- First formula -- First interpretation -- Proofs --
  Heterostylism -- Interpretation of heterostylism -- Animal
  kingdom -- Further laws -- Second formula -- Chemotaxis --
  Resemblances and differences -- Goethe, “elective affinities” --
  Marriage and free love -- Effects on progeny


  CHAPTER IV

  HOMO-SEXUALITY AND PEDERASTY                                        45

  Homo-sexuals as intermediate forms -- Inborn or acquired,
  healthy or diseased? -- A special instance of the law of
  attraction -- All men have the rudiments of homo-sexuality --
  Friendship and sexuality -- Animals -- Failure of medical
  treatment -- Homo-sexuality, punishment and ethics --
  Distinction between homo-sexuality and pederasty


  CHAPTER V

  THE SCIENCE OF CHARACTER AND THE SCIENCE OF FORM                    53

  Principle of sexually intermediate forms as fundamental
  principle of the psychology of individuals -- Simultaneity or
  periodicity? -- Methods of psychological investigation --
  Examples -- Individualised education -- Conventionalising --
  Parallelism between morphology and characterology -- Physiognomy
  and the principles of psycho-physics -- Method of the doctrine
  of variation -- A new way of stating the problem -- Deductive
  morphology -- Correlation -- Outlook


  CHAPTER VI

  EMANCIPATED WOMEN                                                   64

  The woman question -- Claim for emancipation and maleness --
  Emancipation and homo-sexuality -- Sexual preferences of
  emancipated women -- Physiognomy of emancipated women -- Other
  celebrated women -- Femaleness and emancipation -- Practical
  rules -- Genius essentially male -- Movements of women in
  historical times -- Periodicity -- Biology and the conception of
  history -- Outlook of the woman movement -- Its fundamental
  error


  SECOND OR PRINCIPAL PART

  THE SEXUAL TYPES


  CHAPTER I

  MAN AND WOMAN                                                       79

  Bisexuality and unisexuality -- Man or woman, male or female --
  Fundamental difficulty in characterology -- Experiment, analysis
  of sensation and psychology -- Dilthey -- Conception of
  empirical character -- What is and what is not the object of
  psychology -- Character and individuality -- Problem of
  characterology and the problem of the sexes


  CHAPTER II

  MALE AND FEMALE SEXUALITY                                           85

  The problem of a female psychology -- Man as the interpreter of
  female psychology -- Differences in the sexual impulse -- The
  absorbing and liberating factors -- Intensity and activity --
  Sexual irritability of women -- Larger field of the sexual life
  in woman -- Local differences in the perception of sexuality --
  Local and periodical cessation of male sexuality -- Differences
  in the degrees of consciousness of sexuality


  CHAPTER III

  MALE AND FEMALE CONSCIOUSNESS                                       93

  Sensation and feeling -- Avenarius’ division into “element” and
  “character” -- These inseparable at the earliest stage --
  Process of “clarification” -- Presentiments -- Grades of
  understanding -- Forgetting -- Paths and organisation --
  Conception of “henids” -- The henid as the simplest, psychical
  datum -- Sexual differences in the organisation of the contents
  of the mind -- Sensibility -- Certainty of judgment -- Developed
  consciousness as a male character


  CHAPTER IV

  TALENT AND GENIUS                                                  103

  Genius and talent -- Genius and giftedness -- Methods --
  Comprehension of many men -- What is meant by comprehending men
  -- Great complexity of genius -- Periods in psychic life -- No
  disparagement of famous men -- Understanding and noticing --
  Universal consciousness of genius -- Greatest distance from the
  henid stage -- A higher grade of maleness -- Genius always
  universal -- The female devoid of genius or of hero-worship --
  Giftedness and sex


  CHAPTER V

  TALENT AND MEMORY                                                  114

  Organisation and the power of reproducing thoughts -- Memory of
  experiences a sign of genius -- Remarks and conclusions --
  Remembrance and apperception -- Capacity for comparison and
  acquisition -- Reasons for the masculinity of music, drawing and
  painting -- Degrees of genius -- Relation of genius to ordinary
  men -- Autobiography -- Fixed ideas -- Remembrance of personal
  creations -- Continuous and discontinuance memory -- Continuity
  and piety -- Past and present -- Past and future -- Desire for
  immortality -- Existing psychological explanations -- True
  origin -- Inner development of man until death -- Ontogenetic
  psychology or theoretical biography -- Woman lacking in the
  desire for immortality -- Further extension of relation of
  memory to genius -- Memory and time -- Postulate of timelessness
  -- Value as a timeless quality -- First law of the theory of
  value -- Proofs -- Individuation and duration constituents of
  value -- Desire for immortality a special case -- Desire for
  immortality in genius connected with timelessness, by his
  universal memory and the duration of his creations -- Genius and
  history -- Genius and nations -- Genius and language -- Men of
  action and men of science, not to be called men of genius --
  Philosophers, founders of religion and artists have genius


  CHAPTER VI

  MEMORY, LOGIC AND ETHICS                                           142

  Psychology and “psychologismus” -- Value of memory -- Theory of
  memory -- Doctrines of practice and of association -- Confusion
  with recognition -- Memory peculiar to man -- Moral significance
  -- Lies -- Transition to logic -- Memory and the principle of
  identity -- Memory and the syllogism -- Woman non-logical and
  non-ethical -- Intellectual and moral knowledge -- The
  intelligible ego


  CHAPTER VII

  LOGIC, ETHICS AND THE EGO                                          153

  Critics of the conception of the Ego -- Hume: Lichtenberg, Mach
  -- The ego of Mach and biology -- Individuation and
  individuality -- Logic and ethics as witnesses for the existence
  of the ego -- Logic -- Laws of identity and of contraries --
  Their use and significance -- Logical axioms as the laws of
  essence -- Kant and Fichte -- Freedom of thought and freedom of
  the will -- Ethics -- Relation to logic -- The psychology of the
  Kantian ethics -- Kant and Nietzsche


  CHAPTER VIII

  THE “I” PROBLEM AND GENIUS                                         163

  Characterology and the belief in the “I” -- Awakening of the ego
  -- Jean Paul, Novalis, Schelling -- The awakening of the ego and
  the view of the world -- Self-consciousness and arrogance -- The
  view of the genius to be more highly valued than that of other
  men -- Final statements as to the idea of genius -- The
  personality of the genius as the perfectly-conscious microcosm
  -- The naturally-synthetic activity of genius -- Significant and
  symbolical -- Definition of the genius in relation to ordinary
  men -- Universality as freedom -- Morality or immorality of
  genius? -- Duties towards self and others -- What duty to
  another is -- Criticism of moral sympathy and social ethics --
  Understanding of other men as the one requirement of morality
  and knowledge -- I and thou -- Individualism and universalism --
  Morality only in monads -- The man of greatest genius as the
  most moral man -- Why man is ζωον πολιτικον -- Consciousness and
  morality -- The great criminal -- Genius as duty and submission
  -- Genius and crime -- Genius and insanity -- Man as his own
  creator


  CHAPTER IX

  MALE AND FEMALE PSYCHOLOGY                                         186

  Soullessness of woman -- History of this knowledge -- Woman
  devoid of genius -- No masculine women in the true sense -- The
  unconnectedness of woman’s nature due to her want of an ego --
  Revision of the henid-theory -- Female “thought” -- Idea and
  object -- Freedom of the object -- Idea and judgment -- Nature
  of judgment -- Woman and truth as a criterion of thought --
  Woman and logic -- Woman non-moral, not immoral -- Woman and
  solitude -- Womanly sympathy and modesty -- The ego of women --
  Female vanity -- Lack of true self-appreciation -- Memory for
  compliments -- Introspection and repentance -- Justice and
  jealousy -- Name and individuality -- Radical difference between
  male and female mental life -- Psychology with and without soul
  -- Is psychology a science? -- Soul and psychology -- Problem of
  the influence of the psychical sexual characters of the male or
  the female


  CHAPTER X

  MOTHERHOOD AND PROSTITUTION                                        214

  Special characterology of woman -- Mother and prostitute --
  Relation of two types to the child -- Woman polygamous --
  Analogies between motherhood and sexuality -- Motherhood and the
  race -- Maternal love ethically indifferent -- The prostitute
  careless of the race -- The prostitute, the criminal and the
  conqueror -- Emperor and prostitute -- Motive of the prostitute
  -- Coitus an end in itself -- Coquetry -- The sensations of the
  woman in coitus in relation to the rest of her life -- The
  prostitute as the enemy -- The friend of life and its enemy --
  No prostitution amongst animals -- Its origin a mystery


  CHAPTER XI

  EROTICS AND ÆSTHETICS                                              236

  Women, and the hatred of women -- Erotics and sexuality --
  Platonic love -- The idea of love -- Beauty of women -- Relation
  to sexual impulse -- Love and beauty -- Difference between
  æsthetics, logic and ethics -- Modes of love -- Projection
  phenomena -- Beauty and morality -- Nature and ethics -- Natural
  and artistic beauty -- Sexual love as guilt -- Hate, love and
  morality -- Creation of the devil -- Love and sympathy -- Love
  and shyness -- Love and vanity -- Love of woman as a means to an
  end -- Relation between the child and love, the child and
  sexuality -- Love and murder -- Madonna-worship -- Madonna, a
  male idea, without basis in womanhood -- Woman sexual, not
  erotic -- Sense of beauty in women -- How man acts on woman --
  The fate of the woman -- Why man loves woman


  CHAPTER XII

  THE NATURE OF WOMAN AND HER SIGNIFICANCE IN THE UNIVERSE           252

  Meaning of womanhood -- Instinct for pairing or matchmaking --
  Man, and matchmaking -- High valuation of coitus -- Individual
  sexual impulse, a special case -- Womanhood as pairing or
  universal sexuality -- Organic falseness of woman -- Hysteria --
  Difference between man and beast, woman and man -- The higher
  and lower life -- Birth and death -- Freedom and happiness --
  Happiness and man -- Happiness and woman -- Woman and the
  problem of existence -- Non-existence of woman -- Male and
  female friendship -- Pairing identical with womanhood -- Why
  women must be regarded as human -- Contrast between subject --
  Object, matter, form, man, woman -- Meaning of henids --
  Formation of woman by man -- Significance of woman in the
  universe -- Man as something, woman as nothing -- Psychological
  problem of the fear of woman -- Womanhood and crime -- Creation
  of woman by man’s crime -- Woman as his own sexuality accepted
  by man -- Woman as the guilt of man -- What man’s love of woman
  is, in its deepest significance


  CHAPTER XIII

  JUDAISM                                                            301

  Differences amongst men -- Intermediate forms and racial
  anthropology -- Comparison of Judaism and femaleness -- Judaism
  as an idea -- Antisemitism -- Richard Wagner -- Similarities
  between Jews and women -- Judaism in science -- The Jew not a
  monad -- The Jew and the Englishman -- Nature of humour --
  Humour and satire -- The Jewess -- Deepest significance of
  Judaism -- Want of faith -- The Jew not non-mystical, yet
  impious -- Want of earnestness, and pride -- The Jew as opposed
  to the hero -- Judaism and Christianity -- Origin of
  Christianity -- Problem of the founders of religion -- Christ as
  the conqueror of the Judaism in Himself -- The founders of
  religions as the greatest of men -- Conquest of inherent Judaism
  necessary for all founders of religion -- Judaism and the
  present time -- Judaism, femaleness, culture and humanity


  CHAPTER XIV

  WOMAN AND MANKIND                                                  331

  The idea of humanity, and woman as the match-maker --
  Goethe-worship -- Womanising of man -- Virginity and purity --
  Male origin of these ideas -- Failure of woman to understand the
  erotic -- Woman’s relation to sexuality -- Coitus and love --
  Woman as the enemy of her own emancipation -- Asceticism immoral
  -- Sexual impulse as a want of respect -- Problem of the Jew --
  Problem of the woman -- Problem of slavery -- Moral relation to
  women -- Man as the opponent of emancipation -- Ethical
  postulates -- Two possibilities -- The problem of women as the
  problem of humanity -- Subjection of women -- Persistence or
  disappearance of the human race -- True ground of the immorality
  of the sexual impulse -- Earthly paternity -- Inclusion of women
  in the conception of humanity -- The mother and the education of
  the human race -- Last questions


  INDEX                                                              351




  FIRST OR PREPARATORY PART

  SEXUAL COMPLEXITY


INTRODUCTION

All thought begins with conceptions to a certain extent generalised, and
thence is developed in two directions. On the one hand, generalisations
become wider and wider, binding together by common properties a larger
and larger number of phenomena, and so embracing a wider field of the
world of facts. On the other hand, thought approaches more closely the
meeting-point of all conceptions, the individual, the concrete complex
unit towards which we approach only by thinking in an ever-narrowing
circle, and by continually being able to add new specific and
differentiating attributes to the general idea, “thing,” or “something.”
It was known that fishes formed a class of the animal kingdom distinct
from mammals, birds, or invertebrates, long before it was recognised on
the one hand that fishes might be bony or cartilaginous, or on the other
that fishes, birds and mammals composed a group differing from the
invertebrates by many common characters.

The self-assertion of the mind over the world of facts in all its
complexity of innumerable resemblances and differences has been compared
with the rule of the struggle for existence among living beings. Our
conceptions stand between us and reality. It is only step by step that
we can control them. As in the case of a madman, we may first have to
throw a net over the whole body so that some limit may be set to his
struggles; and only after the whole has been thus secured, is it
possible to attend to the proper restraint of each limb.

Two general conceptions have come down to us from primitive mankind, and
from the earliest times have held our mental processes in their leash.
Many a time these conceptions have undergone trivial corrections; they
have been sent to the workshop and patched in head and limbs; they have
been lopped and added to, expanded here, contracted there, as when new
needs pierce through and through an old law of suffrage, bursting bond
after bond. None the less, in spite of all amendment and alteration, we
have still to reckon with the primitive conceptions, male and female.

It is true that among those we call women are some who are meagre,
narrow-hipped, angular, muscular, energetic, highly mentalised; there
are “women” with short hair and deep voices, just as there are “men” who
are beardless and gossiping. We know, in fact, that there are unwomanly
women, man-like women, and unmanly, womanish, woman-like men. We assign
sex to human beings from their birth on one character only, and so come
to add contradictory ideas to our conceptions. Such a course is
illogical.

In private conversation or in society, in scientific or general
meetings, we have all taken part in frothy discussions on “Man and
Woman,” or on the “Emancipation of Women.” There is a pitiful monotony
in the fashion according to which, on such occasions, “men” and “women”
have been treated as if, like red and white balls, they were alike in
all respects save colour. In no case has the discussion been confined to
an individual case, and as every one had different individuals in their
mind, a real agreement was impossible. As people meant different things
by the same words, there was a complete disharmony between language and
ideas. Is it really the case that all women and men are marked off
sharply from each other, the women, on the one hand, alike in all
points, the men on the other? It is certainly the case that all previous
treatment of the sexual differences, perhaps unconsciously, has implied
this view. And yet nowhere else in nature is there such a yawning
discontinuity. There are transitional forms between the metals and
non-metals, between chemical combinations and mixtures, between animals
and plants, between phanerogams and cryptogams, and between mammals and
birds. It is only in obedience to the most general, practical demand for
a superficial view that we classify, make sharp divisions, pick out a
single tune from the continuous melody of nature. But the old
conceptions of the mind, like the customs of primitive commerce, become
foolish in a new age. From the analogies I have given, the improbability
may henceforward be taken for granted of finding in nature a sharp
cleavage between all that is masculine on the one side and all that is
feminine on the other; or that a living being is so simple in this
respect that it can be put wholly on one side or the other of the line.
Matters are not so clear.

In the controversy as to the woman question, appeal has been made to the
arbitration of anatomy, in the hope that by that aid a line could be
drawn between those characters of males or females that are unalterable
because inborn, and those that are acquired. (It was a strange adventure
to attempt to decide the differences between the natural endowment of
men and women on anatomical results; to suppose that if all other
investigation failed to establish the difference, the matter could be
settled by a few more grains of brain-weight on the one side.) However,
the answer of the anatomists is clear enough, whether it refer to the
brain or to any other portion of the body; absolute sexual distinctions
between all men on the one side and all women on the other do not exist.
Although the skeleton of the hand of most men is different from that of
most women yet the sex cannot be determined with certainty either from
the skeleton or from an isolated part with its muscles, tendons, skin,
blood and nerves. The same is true of the chest, sacrum or skull. And
what are we to say of the pelvis, that part of the skeleton in which, if
anywhere, striking sexual differences exist? It is almost universally
believed that in the one case the pelvis is adapted for the act of
parturition, in the other case is not so adapted. And yet the character
of the pelvis cannot be taken as an absolute criterion of sex. There are
to be found, and the wayfarer knows this as well as the anatomist, many
women with narrow male-like pelves and many men with the broad pelves
of women. Are we then to make nothing of sexual differences? That would
imply, almost, that we could not distinguish between men and women.

From what quarter are we to seek help in our problem? The old doctrine
is insufficient, and yet we cannot make shift without it. If the
received ideas do not suffice, it must be our task to seek out new and
better guides.


CHAPTER I

“MALES” AND “FEMALES”

In the widest treatment of most living things, a blunt separation of
them into males or females no longer suffices for the known facts. The
limitations of these conceptions have been felt more or less by many
writers. The first purpose of this work is to make this point clear.

I agree with other authors who, in a recent treatment of the facts
connected with this subject, have taken as a starting-point what has
been established by embryology regarding the existence in human beings,
plants, and animals of an embryonic stage neutral as regards sex.

In the case of a human embryo of less than five weeks, for instance, the
sex to which it would afterwards belong cannot be recognised. In the
fifth week of fœtal life processes begin which, by the end of the fifth
month of pregnancy, have turned the genital rudiments, at first alike in
the sexes, into one sex and have determined the sex of the whole
organism. The details of these processes need not be described more
fully here. It can be shown that however distinctly unisexual an adult
plant, animal or human being may be, there is always a certain
persistence of the bisexual character, never a complete disappearance of
the characters of the undeveloped sex. Sexual differentiation, in fact,
is never complete. All the peculiarities of the male sex may be present
in the female in some form, however weakly developed; and so also the
sexual characteristics of the woman persist in the man, although perhaps
they are not so completely rudimentary. The characters of the other sex
occur in the one sex in a vestigial form. Thus, in the case of human
beings, in which our interest is greatest, to take an example, it will
be found that the most womanly woman has a growth of colourless hair,
known as “lanugo” in the position of the male beard; and in the most
manly man there are developed under the skin of the breast masses of
glandular tissue connected with the nipples. This condition of things
has been minutely investigated in the true genital organs and ducts, the
region called the “urino-genital tract,” and in each sex there has been
found a complete but rudimentary set of parallels to the organs of the
other sex.

These embryological conclusions can be brought into relation with
another set of facts. Haeckel has used the word “gonochorism” for the
separation of the sexes, and in different classes and groups of
creatures different degrees of gonochorism may be noted. Different kinds
of animals and plants may be distinguished by the extent to which the
characters of one sex are rudimentary in the other. The most extreme
case of sexual differentiation, the sharpest gonochorism, occurs in
sexual dimorphism, that is to say, in that condition of affairs in which
(as for instance in some water-fleas) the males and females of the same
species differ as much or even more from each other as the members of
different species, or genera. There is not so sharply marked gonochorism
amongst vertebrates as in the case of crustacea or insects. Amongst the
former there does not exist a distinction between males and females so
complete as to reach sexual dimorphism. A condition much more frequent
amongst them is the occurrence of forms intermediate in regard to sex,
what is called abnormal hermaphroditism; whilst in certain fishes
hermaphroditism is the normal condition.

I must point out here that it must not be assumed that there exist only
extreme males with scanty remnants of the female condition, extreme
females with traces of the male, hermaphrodite or transitional forms,
and wide gaps between these conditions. I am dealing specially with
human beings, but what I have to say of them might be applied, with
more or less modification, to nearly all creatures in which sexual
reproduction takes place.

Amongst human beings the state of the case is as follows: There exist
all sorts of intermediate conditions between male and female--sexual
transitional forms. In physical inquiries an “ideal gas” is assumed,
that is to say, a gas, the behaviour of which follows the law of
Boyle-Gay-Lussac exactly, although, in fact, no such gas exists, and
laws are deduced from this so that the deviations from the ideal laws
may be established in the case of actually existing gases. In the same
fashion we may suppose the existence of an ideal man, M, and of an ideal
woman, W, as sexual types although these types do not actually exist.
Such types not only can be constructed, but must be constructed. As in
art so in science, the real purpose is to reach the type, the Platonic
Idea. The science of physics investigates the behaviour of bodies that
are absolutely rigid or absolutely elastic, in the full knowledge that
neither the one nor the other actually exists. The intermediate
conditions actually existing between the two absolute states of matter
serve merely as a starting-point for investigation of the “types” and in
the practical application of the theory are treated as mixtures and
exhaustively analysed. So also there exist only the intermediate stages
between absolute males and females, the absolute conditions never
presenting themselves.

Let it be noted clearly that I am discussing the existence not merely of
embryonic sexual neutrality, but of a permanent bisexual condition. Nor
am I taking into consideration merely those intermediate sexual
conditions, those bodily or psychical hermaphrodites upon which, up to
the present, attention has been concentrated. In another respect my
conception is new. Until now, in dealing with sexual intermediates, only
hermaphrodites were considered; as if, to use a physical analogy, there
were in between the two extremes a single group of intermediate forms,
and not an intervening tract equally beset with stages in different
degrees of transition.

The fact is that males and females are like two substances combined in
different proportions, but with either element never wholly missing. We
find, so to speak, never either a man or a woman, but only the male
condition and the female condition. Any individual, “A” or “B,” is never
to be designated merely as a man or a woman, but by a formula showing
that it is a composite of male and female characters in different
proportions, for instance, as follows:

      { α M        { β W
  A = {        B = {
      { α´W        { β´M

always remembering that each of the factors α, α´, β, β´ must be greater
than 0 and less than unity.

Further proofs of the validity of this conception are numerous, and I
have already given, in the preface, a few of the most general. We may
recall the existence of “men” with female pelves and female breasts,
with narrow waists, overgrowth of the hair of the head; or of “women”
with small hips and flat breasts, with deep bass voices and beards (the
presence of hair on the chin is more common than is supposed, as women
naturally are at pains to remove it; I am not speaking of the special
growth that often appears on the faces of women who have reached middle
age). All such peculiarities, many of them coinciding in the same
individuals, are well known to doctors and anatomists, although their
general significance has not been understood.

One of the most striking proofs of the view that I have been unfolding
is presented by the great range of numerical variation to be found where
sexual characters have been measured either by the same or by different
anthropological or anatomical workers. The figures obtained by measuring
female characters do not begin where those got from males leave off, but
the two sets overlap. The more obvious this uncertainty in the theory of
sexual intermediate forms may be, the more is it to be deplored in the
interests of true science. Anatomists and anthropologists of the
ordinary type have by no means striven against the scientific
representation of the sexual types, but as for the most part they
regarded measurements as the best indications, they were overwhelmed
with the number of exceptions, and thus, so far, measurement has brought
only vague and indefinite results.

The course of statistical science, which marks off our industrial age
from earlier times, although perhaps on account of its distant relation
to mathematics it has been regarded as specially scientific, has in
reality hindered the progress of knowledge. It has dealt with averages,
not with types. It has not been recognised that in pure, as opposed to
applied, science it is the type that must be studied. And so those who
are concerned with the type must turn their backs on the methods and
conclusions of current morphology and physiology. The real measurements
and investigations of details have yet to be made. Those that now exist
are inapplicable to true science.

Knowledge must be obtained of male and female by means of a right
construction of the ideal man and the ideal woman, using the word ideal
in the sense of typical, excluding judgment as to value. When these
types have been recognised and built up we shall be in a position to
consider individual cases, and their analysis as mixtures in different
proportions will be neither difficult not fruitless.

I shall now give a summary of the contents of this chapter. Living
beings cannot be described bluntly as of one sex or the other. The real
world from the point of view of sex may be regarded as swaying between
two points, no actual individual being at either point, but somewhere
between the two. The task of science is to define the position of any
individual between these two points. The absolute conditions at the two
extremes are not metaphysical abstractions above or outside the world of
experience, but their construction is necessary as a philosophical and
practical mode of describing the actual world.

A presentiment of this bisexuality of life (derived from the actual
absence of complete sexual differentiation) is very old. Traces of it
may be found in Chinese myths, but it became active in Greek thought. We
may recall the mythical personification of bisexuality in the
Hermaphroditos, the narrative of Aristophanes in the Platonic dialogue,
or in later times the suggestion of a Gnostic sect (Theophites) that
primitive man was a “man-woman.”


