CHAPTER V

THE SCIENCE OF CHARACTER AND THE SCIENCE OF FORM

In view of the admitted close correspondence between matter and mind, we
may expect to find that the conception of sexually intermediate forms,
if applied to mental facts, will yield a rich crop of results. The
existence of a female mental type and a male mental type can readily be
imagined (and the quest of these types has been made by many
investigators), but such perfect types never occur as actual
individuals, simply because in the mind, as in the body, all sorts of
sexually intermediate conditions exist. My conception will also be of
great service in helping us to discriminate between the different mental
qualities, and to throw some light into what has always been a dark
corner for psychologists--the differences between different individuals.
A great step will be made if we are able to supply graded categories for
the mental diathesis of individuals; if it shall cease to be scientific
to say that the character of an individual is merely male or female; but
if we can make a measured judgment and say that such and such an one is
so many parts male and so many parts female. Which element in any
particular individual has done, said, or thought this or the other? By
making the answer to such a question possible, we shall have done much
towards the definite description of the individual, and the new method
will determine the direction of future investigation. The knowledge of
the past, which set out from conceptions which were really confused
averages, has been equally far from reaching the broadest truths as from
searching out the most intimate detailed knowledge. This failure of
past methods gives us hope that the principle of sexually intermediate
forms may serve as the foundation of a scientific study of character and
justifies the attempt to make of it an illuminating principle for the
psychology of individual differences. Its application to the science of
character, which, so far, has been in the hands of merely literary
authors, and is from the scientific point of view an untouched field, is
to be greeted more warmly as it is capable of being used quantitatively,
so that we venture to estimate the percentage of maleness and femaleness
which an individual possesses even in the mental qualities. The answer
to this question is not given even if we know the exact anatomical
position of an organism on the scale stretching from male to female,
although as a matter of fact congruity between bodily and mental
sexuality is more common than incongruity. But we must remember what was
stated in chap. ii. as to the uneven distribution of sexuality over the
body.

The proportion of the male to the female principle in the same human
being must not be assumed to be a constant quantity. An important new
conclusion must be taken into account, a conclusion which is necessary
to the right application of the principle which clears up in a striking
fashion earlier psychological work. The fact is that every human being
varies or oscillates between the maleness and the femaleness of his
constitution. In some cases these oscillations are abnormally large, in
other cases so small as to escape observation, but they are always
present, and when they are great they may even reveal themselves in the
outward aspect of the body. Like the variations in the magnetism of the
earth, these sexual oscillations are either regular or irregular. The
regular forms are sometimes minute; for instance, many men feel more
male at night. The large and regular oscillations correspond to the
great divisions of organic life to which attention is only now being
directed, and they may throw light upon many puzzling phenomena. The
irregular oscillations probably depend chiefly upon the environment, as
for instance on the sexuality of surrounding human beings. They may
help to explain some curious points in the psychology of a crowd which
have not yet received sufficient attention.

In short, bi-sexuality cannot be properly observed in a single moment,
but must be studied through successive periods of time. This
time-element in psychological differences of sexuality may be regularly
periodic or not. The swing towards one pole of sexuality may be greater
than the following swing to the other side. Although theoretically
possible, it seems to be extremely rare for the swing to the male side
to be exactly equal to the swing towards the female side.

It may be admitted in principle, before proceeding to detailed
investigation, that the conception of sexually intermediate forms makes
possible a more accurate description of individual characters in so far
as it aids in determining the proportion of male and female in each
individual, and of measuring the oscillations to each side of which any
individual is capable. A point of method must be decided at once, as
upon it depends the course the investigation will pursue. Are we to
begin by an empirical investigation of the almost innumerable
intermediate conditions in mental sexuality, or are we to set out with
the abstract sexual types, the ideal psychological man and woman, and
then investigate deductively how far such ideal pictures correspond with
concrete cases? The former method is that which the development of
psychological knowledge has pursued; ideals have been derived from
facts, sexual types constructed from observation of the manifold
complexity of nature; it would be inductive and analytic. The latter
mode, deductive and synthetic, is more in accordance with formal logic.

I have been unwilling to pursue the second method as fully as is
possible, because every one can apply for himself to concrete facts the
two well-defined extreme types; once it is understood that actual
individuals are mixtures of the types, it is simple to apply theory to
practice, and the actual pursuit of detailed cases would involve much
repetition and bring little theoretical advantage. The second method,
however, is impracticable. The collection of the long series of details
from which the inductions would be made would simply weary the reader.

In the first or biological part of my work, I give little attention to
the extreme types, but devote myself to the fullest investigation of the
intermediate stages. In the second part, I shall endeavour to make as
full a psychological analysis as possible of the characters of the male
and female types, and will touch only lightly on concrete instances.

I shall first mention, without laying too much stress on them, some of
the more obvious mental characteristics of the intermediate conditions.

Womanish men are usually extremely anxious to marry, at least (I mention
this to prevent misconception) if a sufficiently brilliant opportunity
offers itself. When it is possible, they nearly always marry whilst they
are still quite young. It is especially gratifying to them to get as
wives famous women, artists or poets, or singers and actresses.

Womanish men are physically lazier than other men in proportion to the
degree of their womanishness. There are “men” who go out walking with
the sole object of displaying their faces like the faces of women,
hoping that they will be admired, after which they return contentedly
home. The ancient “Narcissus” was a prototype of such persons. These
people are naturally fastidious about the dressing of their hair, their
apparel, shoes, and linen; they are concerned as to their personal
appearance at all times, and about the minutest details of their toilet.
They are conscious of every glance thrown on them by other men, and
because of the female element in them, they are coquettish in gait and
demeanour. Viragoes, on the other hand, frequently are careless about
their toilet, and even about the personal care of their bodies; they
take less time in dressing than many womanish men. The dandyism of men
on the one hand, and much of what is called the emancipation of women,
are due to the increase in the numbers of these epicene creatures, and
not merely to a passing fashion.

Indeed, if one inquires why anything becomes the fashion it will be
found that there is a true cause for it.

The more femaleness a woman possesses the less will she understand a
man, and the sexual characters of a man will have the greater influence
on her. This is more than a mere application of the law of sexual
attraction, as I have already stated it. So also the more manly a man is
the less will he understand women, but the more readily be influenced by
them as women. Those men who claim to understand women are themselves
very nearly women. Womanish men often know how to treat women much
better than manly men. Manly men, except in most rare cases, learn how
to deal with women only after long experience, and even then most
imperfectly.

Although I have been touching here in a most superficial way on what are
no more than tertiary sexual characters, I wish to point out an
application of my conclusions to pedagogy. I am convinced that the more
these views are understood the more certainly will they lead to an
individual treatment in education. At the present time shoemakers, who
make shoes to measure, deal more rationally with individuals than our
teachers and schoolmasters in their application of moral principles. At
present the sexually intermediate forms of individuals (especially on
the female side) are treated exactly as if they were good examples of
the ideal male or female types. There is wanted an “orthopædic”
treatment of the soul instead of the torture caused by the application
of ready-made conventional shapes. The present system stamps out much
that is original, uproots much that is truly natural, and distorts much
into artificial and unnatural forms.

From time immemorial there have been only two systems of education; one
for those who come into the world designated by one set of characters as
males, and another for those who are similarly assumed to be females.
Almost at once the “boys” and the “girls” are dressed differently, learn
to play different games, go through different courses of instruction,
the girls being put to stitching and so forth. The intermediate
individuals are placed at a great disadvantage. And yet the instincts
natural to their condition reveal themselves quickly enough, often even
before puberty. There are boys who like to play with dolls, who learn to
knit and sew with their sisters, and who are pleased to be given girls’
names. There are girls who delight in the noisier sports of their
brothers, and who make chums and playmates of them. After puberty, there
is a still stronger display of the innate differences. Manlike women
wear their hair short, affect manly dress, study, drink, smoke, are fond
of mountaineering, or devote themselves passionately to sport. Womanish
men grow their hair long, wear corsets, are experts in the toilet
devices of women, and show the greatest readiness to become friendly and
intimate with them, preferring their society to that of men.

Later on, the different laws and customs to which the so-called sexes
are subjected press them as by a vice into distinctive moulds. The
proposals which should follow from my conclusions will encounter more
passive resistance, I fear, in the case of girls than in that of boys. I
must here contradict, in the most positive fashion, a dogma that is
authoritatively and widely maintained at the present time, the idea that
all women are alike, that no individuals exist amongst women. It is true
that amongst those individuals whose constitutions lie nearer the female
side than the male side, the differences and possibilities are not so
great as amongst those on the male side; the greater variability of
males is true not only for the human race but for the living world, and
is related to the principles established by Darwin. None the less, there
are plenty of differences amongst women. The psychological origin of
this common error depends chiefly on a fact that I explained in chap.
iii., the fact that every man in his life becomes intimate only with a
group of women defined by his own constitution, and so naturally he
finds them much alike. For the same reason, and in the same way, one may
often hear a woman say that all men are alike. And the narrow uniform
view about men, displayed by most of the leaders of the women’s rights
movement depends on precisely the same cause.

It is clear that the principle of the existence of innumerable
individual proportions of the male and female principles is a basis of
the study of character which must be applied in any rational scheme of
pedagogy.

The science of character must be associated with some form of psychology
that takes into account some theory of the real existence of mental
phenomena in the same fashion that anatomy is related to physiology. And
so it is necessary, quite apart from theoretical reasons, to attempt to
pursue a psychology of individual differences. This attempt will be
readily enough followed by those who believe in the parallelism between
mind and matter, for they will see in psychology no more than the
physiology of the central nervous system, and will readily admit that
the science of character must be a sister of morphology. As a matter of
fact there is great hope that in future characterology and morphology
will each greatly help the other. The principle of sexually intermediate
forms, and still more the parallelism between characterology and
morphology in the widest application, make us look forward to the time
when physiognomy will take its honourable place amongst the sciences, a
place which so many have attempted to gain for it but as yet
unsuccessfully.

The problem of physiognomy is the problem of the relation between the
static mental forces and the static bodily forces, just as the problem
of physiological psychology deals with the dynamic aspect of the same
relations. It is a great error in method, and in fact, to treat the
study of physiognomy, because of its difficulty, as impracticable. And
yet this is the attitude of contemporary scientific circles,
unconsciously perhaps rather than consciously, but occasionally becoming
obvious as for instance in the case of the attempt of von Möbius to
pursue the work of Gall with regard to the physiognomy of those with a
natural aptitude for mathematics. If it be possible, and many have shown
that it is possible, to judge correctly much of the character of an
individual merely from the examination of his external appearance,
without the aid of cross-examination or guessing, it cannot be
impossible to reduce such modes of observation to an exact method. There
is little more required than an exact study of the expression of the
characteristic emotions and the tracking (to use a rough analogy) of the
routes of the cables passing to the speech centres.

None the less it will be long before official science ceases to regard
the study of physiognomy as illegitimate. Although people will still
believe in the parallelism of mind and body, they will continue to treat
the physiognomist as as much of a charlatan as until quite recently the
hypnotist was thought to be. None the less, all mankind at least
unconsciously, and intelligent persons consciously, will continue to be
physiognomists, people will continue to judge character from the nose,
although they will not admit the existence of a science of physiognomy,
and the portraits of celebrated men and of murderers will continue to
interest every one.

I am inclined to believe that the assumption of a universally acquired
correspondence between mind and body may be a hitherto neglected
fundamental function of our mind. It is certainly the case that every
one believes in physiognomy and actually practises it. The principle of
the existence of a definite relation between mind and body must be
accepted as an illuminating axiom for psychological research, and it
will be for religion and metaphysics to work out the details of a
relationship which must be accepted as existing.

Whether or no the science of character can be linked with morphology, it
will be valuable not only to these sciences but to physiognomy if we can
penetrate a little deeper into the confusion that now reigns in order to
find if wrong methods have not been responsible for it. I hope that the
attempt I am about to make will lead some little way into the labyrinth,
and will prove to be of general application.

Some men are fond of dogs and detest cats; others are devoted to cats
and dislike dogs. Inquiring minds have delighted to ask in such cases,
Why are cats attractive to one person, dogs to another? Why?

I do not think that this is the most fruitful way of stating the
problem. I believe it to be more important to ask in what other respects
lovers of dogs and of cats differ from one another. The habit, where one
difference has been detected, of seeking for the associated differences,
will prove extremely useful not only to pure morphology and to the
science of character, but ultimately to physiognomy, the meeting-point
of the two sciences. Aristotle pointed out long ago that many
characteristics of animals do not vary independently of each other.
Later on Cuvier, in particular, but also Geoffrey St. Hilaire and Darwin
made a special study of these “correlations.” Occasionally the
association of the characters is easy to understand on obvious
utilitarian principles; where for instance the alimentary canal is
adapted to the digestion of flesh, the jaws and body must be adapted for
the capture of the prey. But association such as that between ruminant
stomachs and the presence of cloven hoofs and of horns in the male, or
of immunity to certain poisons with particular colouring of the hair, or
among domestic pigeons of short bills with small feet, of long bills
with large feet, or in cats of deafness with white fur and blue
eyes--such are extremely difficult to refer to a single purpose.

I do not in the least mean to assert that science must be content with
no more than the mere discovery of correlations. Such a position would
be little better than that of a person who was satisfied by finding out
that the placing of a penny in the slot of a particular automatic
machine always was followed by the release of a box of matches. It would
be making resignation the leading principle of metaphysics. We shall get
a good deal further by such correlations, as, for instance, that of long
hair and normal ovaries; but these are within the sphere of physiology,
not of morphology. Probably the goal of an ideal morphology could be
reached best not by deductions from an attempted synthesis of
observations on all the animals that creep on the land or swim in the
sea (in the fashion of collectors of postage stamps), but by a complete
study of a few organisms. Cuvier by a kind of guess-work used to
reconstruct an entire animal from a single bone: full knowledge would
enable us to do this in a complete, definite, qualitative and
quantitative fashion. When such a knowledge has been attained, each
single character will at once define and limit for us the possibilities
of the other characters. Such a true and logical extension of the
principle of correlation in morphology is really an application of the
theory of functions to the living world. It would not exclude the study
of causation, but limit it to its proper sphere. No doubt the “causes”
of the correlations of organisms must be sought for in the idioplasm.

The possibility of applying the principle of correlated variation to
psychology depends on differential psychology, the study of
psychological variation. I believe, moreover, that a combination of
study of the anatomical “habit,” and the mental characteristics will
lead to a statical psycho-physics, a true science of physiognomy. The
rule of investigation in all the three sciences will have to be that the
question is posed as follows; given that two organisms are known to
differ in one respect, in what other respects are they different? This
will be the golden rule of discovery, and, following it, we shall no
longer lose ourselves hopelessly in the dark maze that surrounds the
answer to the question “Why?” As soon as we are informed as to one
difference, we must diligently seek out the others, and the mere putting
of the question in this form will directly bring about many discoveries.

The conscious pursuit of this rule of investigation will be particularly
valuable in dealing with problems of the mind. Mental actions are not
co-existent in the sense of physical characters, and it has been only by
accidental and fortunate chances, when the phenomena have presented
themselves in rapid succession in an individual, that discoveries of
correlation in mental phenomena have been noticed. The correlated mental
phenomena may be very different in kind, and it is only when we know
what we are after and deliberately seek for them that we shall be able
to transcend the special difficulties of the kind of material we are
investigating, and so secure for psychology what is comparatively simple
in anatomy.


