CHAPTER VI

EMANCIPATED WOMEN

As an immediate application of the attempt to establish the principle of
intermediate sexual forms by means of a differential psychology, we must
now come to the question which it is the special object of this book to
answer, theoretically and practically, I mean the woman question,
theoretically so far as it is not a matter of ethnology and national
economics, and practically in so far as it is not merely a matter of law
and domestic economy, that is to say, of social science in the widest
sense. The answer which this chapter is about to give must not be
considered as final or as exhaustive. It is rather a necessary
preliminary investigation, and does not go beyond deductions from the
principles that I have established. It will deal with the exploration of
individual cases and will not attempt to found on these any laws of
general significance. The practical indications that it will give are
not moral maxims that could or would guide the future; they are no more
than technical rules abstracted from past cases. The idea of male and
female types will not be discussed here; that is reserved for the second
part of my book. This preliminary investigation will deal with only
those charactero-logical conclusions from the principle of sexually
intermediate forms that are of significance in the woman question.

The general direction of the investigation is easy to understand from
what has already been stated. A woman’s demand for emancipation and her
qualification for it are in direct proportion to the amount of maleness
in her. The idea of emancipation, however, is many-sided, and its
indefiniteness is increased by its association with many practical
customs which have nothing to do with the theory of emancipation. By the
term emancipation of a woman I imply neither her mastery at home nor her
subjection of her husband. I have not in mind the courage which enables
her to go freely by night or by day unaccompanied in public places, or
the disregard of social rules which prohibit bachelor women from
receiving visits from men, or discussing or listening to discussions of
sexual matters. I exclude from my view the desire for economic
independence, the becoming fit for positions in technical schools,
universities and conservatoires or teachers’ institutes. And there may
be many other similar movements associated with the word emancipation
which I do not intend to deal with. Emancipation, as I mean to discuss
it, is not the wish for an outward equality with man, but what is of
real importance in the woman question, the deep-seated craving to
acquire man’s character, to attain his mental and moral freedom, to
reach his real interests and his creative power. I maintain that the
real female element has neither the desire nor the capacity for
emancipation in this sense. All those who are striving for this real
emancipation, all women who are truly famous and are of conspicuous
mental ability, to the first glance of an expert reveal some of the
anatomical characters of the male, some external bodily resemblance to a
man. Those so-called “women” who have been held up to admiration in the
past and present, by the advocates of woman’s rights, as examples of
what women can do, have almost invariably been what I have described as
sexually intermediate forms. The very first of the historical examples,
Sappho herself, has been handed down to us as an example of the sexual
invert, and from her name has been derived the accepted terms for
perverted sexual relations between women. The contents of the second and
third chapter thus at once become important with regard to the woman
question. The characterological material at our disposal with regard to
celebrated and emancipated women is too vague to serve as the
foundation of any satisfactory theory. What is wanted is some principle
which would enable us to determine at what point between male and female
such individuals were placed. My law of sexual affinity is such a
principle. Its application to the facts of homo-sexuality showed that
the woman who attracts and is attracted by other women is herself half
male. Interpreting the historical evidence at our disposal in the light
of this principle, we find that the degree of emancipation and the
proportion of maleness in the composition of a woman are practically
identical. Sappho was only the forerunner of a long line of famous women
who were either homo-sexually or bisexually inclined. Classical scholars
have defended Sappho warmly against the implication that there was
anything more than mere friendship in her relations with her own sex, as
if the accusation were necessarily degrading. In the second part of my
book, however, I shall show reasons in favour of the possibility that
homo-sexuality is a higher form than hetero-sexuality. For the present,
it is enough to say that homo-sexuality in a woman is the outcome of her
masculinity and presupposes a higher degree of development. Catherine
II. of Russia, and Queen Christina of Sweden, the highly gifted although
deaf, dumb and blind, Laura Bridgman, George Sand, and a very large
number of highly gifted women and girls concerning whom I myself have
been able to collect information, were partly bisexual, partly
homo-sexual.

I shall now turn to other indications in the case of the large number of
emancipated women regarding whom there is no evidence as to
homo-sexuality, and I shall show that my attribution of maleness is no
caprice, no egotistical wish of a man to associate all the higher
manifestations of intelligence with the male sex. Just as homo-sexual or
bisexual women reveal their maleness by their preference either for
women or for womanish men, so hetero-sexual women display maleness in
their choice of a male partner who is not preponderatingly male. The
most famous of George Sand’s many affairs were those with de Musset, the
most effeminate and sentimental poet, and with Chopin, who might be
described almost as the only female musician, so effeminate are his
compositions.[5] Vittoria Colonna is less known because of her own
poetic compositions than because of the infatuation for her shown by
Michael Angelo, whose earlier friendships had been with youths. The
authoress, Daniel Stern, was the mistress of Franz Liszt, whose life and
compositions were extremely effeminate, and who had a dubious friendship
with Wagner, the interpretation of which was made plain by his later
devotion to King Ludwig II. of Bavaria. Madame de Staal, whose work on
Germany is probably the greatest book ever produced by a woman, is
supposed to have been intimate with August Wilhelm Schlegel, who was a
homo-sexualist, and who had been tutor to her children. At certain
periods of his life, the face of the husband of Clara Schumann might
have been taken as that of a woman, and a good deal of his music,
although certainly not all, was effeminate.

  [5] Chopin’s portraits show his effeminacy plainly. Merimée describes
  George Sand as being as thin as a nail. At the first meeting of the
  two, the lady behaved like a man, and the man like a girl. He blushed
  when she looked at him and began to pay him compliments in her bass
  voice.

When there is no evidence as to the sexual relations of famous women, we
can still obtain important conclusions from the details of their
personal appearance. Such data support my general proposition.

George Eliot had a broad, massive forehead; her movements, like her
expression, were quick and decided, and lacked all womanly grace. The
face of Lavinia Fontana was intellectual and decided, very rarely
charming; whilst that of Rachel Ruysch was almost wholly masculine. The
biography of that original poetess, Annette von Droste-Hülshoff, speaks
of her wiry, unwomanly frame, and of her face as being masculine, and
recalling that of Dante. The authoress and mathematician, Sonia
Kowalevska, like Sappho, had an abnormally scanty growth of hair, still
less than is the fashion amongst the poetesses and female students of
the present day. It would be a serious omission to forget Rosa Bonheur,
the very distinguished painter; and it would be difficult to point to a
single female trait in her appearance or character. The notorious Madame
Blavatsky is extremely masculine in her appearance.

I might refer to many other emancipated women at present well known to
the public, consideration of whom has provided me with much material for
the support of my proposition that the true female element, the abstract
“woman,” has nothing to do with emancipation. There is some historical
justification for the saying “the longer the hair the smaller the
brain,” but the reservations made in chap. ii. must be taken into
account.

It is only the male element in emancipated women that craves for
emancipation.

There is, then, a stronger reason than has generally been supposed for
the familiar assumption of male pseudonyms by women writers. Their
choice is a mode of giving expression to the inherent maleness they
feel; and this is still more marked in the case of those who, like
George Sand, have a preference for male attire and masculine pursuits.
The motive for choosing a man’s name springs from the feeling that it
corresponds with their own character much more than from any desire for
increased notice from the public. As a matter of fact, up to the
present, partly owing to interest in the sex question, women’s writings
have aroused more interest, _ceteris paribus_, than those of men; and,
owing to the issues involved, have always received a fuller
consideration and, if there were any justification, a greater meed of
praise than has been accorded to a man’s work of equal merit. At the
present time especially many women have attained celebrity by work
which, if it had been produced by a man, would have passed almost
unnoticed. Let us pause and examine this more closely.

If we attempt to apply a standard taken from the names of men who are of
acknowledged value in philosophy, science, literature and art, to the
long list of women who have achieved some kind of fame, there will at
once be a miserable collapse. Judged in this way, it is difficult to
grant any real degree of merit to women like Angelica Kaufmann or Madame
Lebrun, Fernan Caballero or Hroswitha von Gandersheim, Mary Somerville
or George Egerton, Elizabeth Barrett Browning or Sophie Germain, Anna
Maria Schurmann or Sybilla Merian. I will not speak of names (such as
that of Droste-Hülshoff) formerly so over-rated in the annals of
feminism, nor will I refer to the measure of fame claimed for or by
living women. It is enough to make the general statement that there is
not a single woman in the history of thought, not even the most manlike,
who can be truthfully compared with men of fifth or sixth-rate genius,
for instance with Rückert as a poet, Van Dyck as a painter, or
Scheirmacher as a philosopher. If we eliminate hysterical
visionaries,[6] such as the Sybils, the Priestesses of Delphi,
Bourignon, Kettenberg, Jeanne de la Mothe Guyon, Joanna Southcote, Beate
Sturmin, St. Teresa, there still remain cases like that of Marie
Bashkirtseff. So far as I can remember from her portrait, she at least
seemed to be quite womanly in face and figure, although her forehead was
rather masculine. But to any one who studies her pictures in the Salle
des Etrangers in the Luxemburg Gallery in Paris, and compares them with
those of her adored master, Bastien Lepage, it is plain that she simply
had assimilated the style of the latter, as in Goethe’s “Elective
Affinities” Ottilie acquired the handwriting of Eduard.

  [6] Hysteria is the principal cause of much of the intellectual
  activity of many of the women above mentioned. But the usual view,
  that these cases are pathological, is too limited an interpretation,
  as I shall show in the second part of this work.

There remain the interesting and not infrequent cases where the talent
of a clever family seems to reach its maximum in a female member of the
family. But it is only talent that is transmitted in this way, not
genius. Margarethe van Eyck and Sabina von Steinbach form the best
illustrations of the kind of artists who, according to Ernst Guhl, an
author with a great admiration for women-workers, “have been undoubtedly
influenced in their choice of an artistic calling by their fathers,
mothers, or brothers. In other words, they found their incentive in
their own families. There are two or three hundred of such cases on
record, and probably many hundreds more could be added without
exhausting the numbers of similar instances.” In order to give due
weight to these statistics it may be mentioned that Guhl had just been
speaking of “roughly, a thousand names of women artists known to us.”

This concludes my historical review of the emancipated women. It has
justified the assertion that real desire for emancipation and real
fitness for it are the outcome of a woman’s maleness.

The vast majority of women have never paid special attention to art or
to science, and regard such occupations merely as higher branches of
manual labour, or if they profess a certain devotion to such subjects,
it is chiefly as a mode of attracting a particular person or group of
persons of the opposite sex. Apart from these, a close investigation
shows that women really interested in intellectual matters are sexually
intermediate forms.

If it be the case that the desire for freedom and equality with man
occurs only in masculine women, the inductive conclusion follows that
the female principle is not conscious of a necessity for emancipation;
and the argument becomes stronger if we remember that it is based on an
examination of the accounts of individual cases and not on psychical
investigation of an “abstract woman.”

If we now look at the question of emancipation from the point of view of
hygiene (not morality) there is no doubt as to the harm in it. The
undesirability of emancipation lies in the excitement and agitation
involved. It induces women who have no real original capacity but
undoubted imitative powers to attempt to study or write, from various
motives, such as vanity or the desire to attract admirers. Whilst it
cannot be denied that there are a good many women with a real craving
for emancipation and for higher education, these set the fashion and are
followed by a host of others who get up a ridiculous agitation to
convince themselves of the reality of their views. And many otherwise
estimable and worthy wives use the cry to assert themselves against
their husbands, whilst daughters take it as a method of rebelling
against maternal authority. The practical outcome of the whole matter
would be as follows; it being remembered that the issues are too mutable
for the establishment of uniform rules or laws. Let there be the freest
scope given to, and the fewest hindrances put in the way of all women
with masculine dispositions who feel a psychical necessity to devote
themselves to masculine occupations and are physically fit to undertake
them. But the idea of making an emancipation party, of aiming at a
social revolution, must be abandoned. Away with the whole “woman’s
movement,” with its unnaturalness and artificiality and its fundamental
errors.

It is most important to have done with the senseless cry for “full
equality,” for even the malest woman is scarcely more than 50 per cent.
male, and it is only to that male part of her that she owes her special
capacity or whatever importance she may eventually gain. It is absurd to
make comparisons between the few really intellectual women and one’s
average experience of men, and to deduce, as has been done, even the
superiority of the female sex. As Darwin pointed out, the proper
comparison is between the most highly developed individuals of two
stocks. “If two lists,” Darwin wrote in the “Descent of Man,” “were made
of the most eminent men and women in poetry, painting, sculpture,
music--comprising composition and performance, history, science, and
philosophy, with half a dozen names under each subject, the two lists
would not bear comparison.” Moreover, if these lists were carefully
examined it would be seen that the women’s list would prove the
soundness of my theory of the maleness of their genius, and the
comparison would be still less pleasing to the champions of woman’s
rights.

It is frequently urged that it is necessary to create a public feeling
in favour of the full and unchecked mental development of women. Such an
argument overlooks the fact that “emancipation,” the “woman question,”
“women’s rights movements,” are no new things in history, but have
always been with us, although with varying prominence at different times
in history. It also largely exaggerates the difficulties men place in
the way of the mental development of women, especially at the present
time.[7] Furthermore it neglects the fact that at the present time it is
not the true woman who clamours for emancipation, but only the masculine
type of woman, who misconstrues her own character and the motives that
actuate her when she formulates her demands in the name of woman.

  [7] There have been many celebrities amongst men who received
  practically no education--for instance, Robert Burns and Wolfram von
  Eschenbach; but there are no similar cases amongst women to compare
  with them.

As has been the case with every other movement in history, so also it
has been with the contemporary woman’s movement. Its originators were
convinced that it was being put forward for the first time, and that
such a thing had never been thought of before. They maintained that
women had hitherto been held in bondage and enveloped in darkness by
man, and that it was high time for her to assert herself and claim her
natural rights.

But the prototype of this movement, as of other movements, occurred in
the earliest times. Ancient history and mediæval times alike give us
instances of women who, in social relations and intellectual matters,
fought for such emancipation, and of male and female apologists of the
female sex. It is totally erroneous to suggest that hitherto women have
had no opportunity for the undisturbed development of their mental
powers.

Jacob Burckhardt, speaking of the Renaissance, says: “The greatest
possible praise which could be given to the Italian women-celebrities of
the time was to say that they were like men in brains and disposition!”
The virile deeds of women recorded in the epics, especially those of
Boiardo and Ariosto, show the ideal of the time. To call a woman a
“virago” nowadays would be a doubtful compliment, but it originally
meant an honour.

Women were first allowed on the stage in the sixteenth century, and
actresses date from that time. “At that period it was admitted that
women were just as capable as men of embodying the highest possible
artistic ideals.” It was the period when panegyrics on the female sex
were rife; Sir Thomas More claimed for it full equality with the male
sex, and Agrippa von Nettesheim goes so far as to represent women as
superior to men! And yet this was all lost for the fair sex, and the
whole question sank into the oblivion from which the nineteenth century
recalled it.

Is it not very remarkable that the agitation for the emancipation of
women seems to repeat itself at certain intervals in the world’s
history, and lasts for a definite period?

It has been noticed that in the tenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth, and now
again in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the agitation for the
emancipation of women has been more marked, and the woman’s movement
more vigorous than in the intervening periods. It would be premature to
found a hypothesis on the data at our disposal, but the possibility of a
vastly important periodicity must be borne in mind, of regularly
recurring periods in which it may be that there is an excess of
production of hermaphrodite and sexually intermediate forms. Such a
state of affairs is not unknown in the animal kingdom.

According to my interpretation, such a period would be one of minimum
“gonochorism,” cleavage of the sexes; and it would be marked, on the one
hand, by an increased production of male women, and on the other, by a
similar increase in female men. There is strong evidence in favour of
such a periodicity; if it occurs it may be associated with the
“secessionist taste,” which idealised tall, lanky women with flat chests
and narrow hips. The enormous recent increase in a kind of dandified
homo-sexuality may be due to the increasing effeminacy of the age, and
the peculiarities of the Pre-Raphaelite movement may have a similar
explanation.

The existence of such periods in organic life, comparable with stages in
individual life, but extending over several generations, would, if
proved, throw much light on many obscure points in human history,
concerning which the so-called “historical solutions,” and especially
the economic-materialistic views now in vogue have proved so futile. The
history of the world from the biological standpoint has still to be
written; it lies in the future. Here I can do little more than indicate
the direction which future work should take.

Were it proved that at certain periods fewer hermaphrodite beings were
produced, and at certain other periods more, it would appear that the
rising and falling, the periodic occurrence and disappearance of the
woman movement in an unfailing rhythm of ebb and flow, was one of the
expressions of the preponderance of masculine and feminine women with
the concomitant greater or lesser desire for emancipation.

Obviously I do not take into account in relation to the woman question
the large number of womanly women, the wives of the prolific artisan
class whom economic pressure forces to factory or field labour. The
connection between industrial progress and the woman question is much
less close than is usually realised, especially by the Social Democratic
Group. The relation between the mental energy required for intellectual
and for industrial pursuits is even less. France, for instance, although
it can boast three of the most famous women, has never had a successful
woman’s movement, and yet in no other European country are there so many
really businesslike, capable women. The struggle for the material
necessities of life has nothing to do with the struggle for intellectual
development, and a sharp distinction must be made between the two.

The prospects of the movement for intellectual advance on the part of
women are not very promising; but still less promising is another view,
sometimes discussed in the same connection, the view that the human race
is moving towards a complete sexual differentiation, a definite sexual
dimorphism.

The latter view seems to me fundamentally untenable, because in the
higher groups of the animal kingdom there is no evidence for the
increase of sexual dimorphism. Worms and rotifers, many birds and the
mandrills amongst the apes, have more advanced sexual dimorphism than
man. On the view that such an increased sexual dimorphism were to be
expected, the necessity for emancipation would gradually disappear as
mankind became separated into the completely male and the completely
female. On the other hand, the view that there will be periodical
resurrections of the woman’s movement would reduce the whole affair to
ridiculous impotence, making it only an ephemeral phase in the history
of mankind.

A complete obliteration will be the fate of any emancipation movement
which attempts to place the whole sex in a new relation to society, and
to see in man its perpetual oppressor. A corps of Amazons might be
formed, but as time went on the material for the corps would cease to
occur. The history of the woman movement during the Renaissance and its
complete disappearance contains a lesson for the advocates of women’s
rights. Real intellectual freedom cannot be attained by an agitated
mass; it must be fought for by the individual. Who is the enemy? What
are the retarding influences?

The greatest, the one enemy of the emancipation of women is woman
herself. It is left to the second part of my work to prove this.




  SECOND OR PRINCIPAL PART

  THE SEXUAL TYPES


