CHAPTER XII

THE NATURE OF WOMAN AND HER SIGNIFICANCE IN THE UNIVERSE

  “Erst Mann und Weib zusammen
  Machen den Menschen aus.”--KANT.

The further we go in the analysis of woman’s claim to esteem the more we
must deny her of what is lofty and noble, great and beautiful. As this
chapter is about to take the deciding and most extreme step in that
direction, I should like to make a few remarks as to my position. The
last thing I wish to advocate is the Asiatic standpoint with regard to
the treatment of women. Those who have carefully followed my remarks as
to the injustice that all forms of sexuality and erotics visit on woman
will surely see that this work is not meant to plead for the harem. But
it is quite possible to desire the legal equality of men and women
without believing in their moral and intellectual equality, just as in
condemning to the utmost any harshness in the male treatment of the
female sex, one does not overlook the tremendous, cosmic, contrast and
organic differences between them. There are no men in whom there is no
trace of the transcendent, who are altogether bad; and there is no woman
of whom that could truly be said. However degraded a man may be, he is
immeasurably above the most superior woman, so much so that comparison
and classification of the two are impossible; but even so, no one has
any right to denounce or defame woman, however inferior she must be
considered. A true adjustment of the claims for legal equality can be
undertaken on no other basis than the recognition of a complete,
deep-seated polar opposition of the sexes. I trust that I may escape
confusion of my views as to woman with the superficial doctrine of P. J.
Möbius--a doctrine only interesting as a brave reaction against the
general tendency. Women are not “physiologically weak-minded,” and I
cannot share the view that women of conspicuous ability are to be
regarded as morbid specimens.

From a moral point of view one should only be glad to recognise in these
women (who are always more masculine than the rest) the exact opposite
of degeneration, that is to say, it must be acknowledged that they have
made a step forward and gained a victory over themselves; from the
biological standpoint they are just as little or as much phenomena of
degeneration as are womanish men (unethically considered). Intermediate
sexual forms are normal, not pathological phenomena, in all classes of
organisms, and their appearance is no proof of physical decadence.

Woman is neither high-minded nor low-minded, strong-minded nor
weak-minded. She is the opposite of all these. Mind cannot be predicated
of her at all; she is mindless. That, however, does not imply
weak-mindedness in the ordinary sense of the term, the absence of the
capacity to “get her bearings” in ordinary everyday life. Cunning,
calculation, “cleverness,” are much more usual and constant in the woman
than in the man, if there be a personal selfish end in view. A woman is
never so stupid as a man can be.

But has woman no meaning at all? Has she no general purpose in the
scheme of the world? Has she not a destiny; and, in spite of all her
senselessness and emptiness, a significance in the universe?

Has she a mission, or is her existence an accident and an absurdity?

In order to understand her meaning, it is necessary to start from a
phenomenon which, although old and well recognised, has never received
its proper meed of consideration. It is from nothing more nor less than
the phenomenon of _match-making_ from which we may be able to infer
most correctly the real nature of woman.

Its analysis shows it to be the force which brings together and helps
forward two people in their knowledge of one another, which helps them
to a sexual union, whether in the form of marriage or not. This desire
to bring about an understanding between two people is possessed by all
women from their earliest childhood; the very youngest girls are always
ready to act as messengers for their sisters’ lovers. And if the
instinct of match-making can be indulged in only after the particular
woman in question has brought about her own consummation in marriage, it
is none the less present before that time, and the only things which are
at work against it are her jealousy of her contemporaries, and her
anxiety about their chances with regard to her lover, until she has
finally secured him by reason of her money, her social position, and so
forth.

As soon as women have got rid of their own case by their own marriage,
they hasten to help the sons and daughters of their acquaintances to
marry. The fact that older women, in whom the desire for sexual
satisfaction has died out, are such match-makers is so fully recognised
that the idea has wrongly spread that they are the only real
match-makers.

They urge not only women but men to marry, a man’s own mother often
being the most active and persistent advocate of his marriage. It is the
desire and purpose of every mother to see her son married, without any
thought of his individual taste; a wish which some have been blind
enough to regard as another charm in maternal love, of which such a poor
account was given in an earlier chapter. It is possible that many
mothers may hope that their sons should obtain permanent happiness
through marriage, however unfit they may be for it; but undoubtedly this
hope is absent with the majority, and in any case it is the match-making
instinct, the sheer objection to bachelordom, which is the strongest
motive of all.

It is clear that women obey a purely instinctive, inherent impulse,
when they try to get their daughters married.

It is certainly not for logical, and only in a small degree for material
reasons, that they go to such lengths to attain their ends, and it is
certainly not because of any desire expressed by their daughters (very
often it is in direct opposition to the girl’s choice); and since the
match-making instinct is not confined to the members of a woman’s own
family, it is impossible to speak of it as being part of the
“altruistic” or “moral” attitude of maternal love; although most women
if they were charged with match-making projects would undoubtedly answer
“that it is their duty to think of the future welfare of their dear
children.”

A mother makes no difference in arranging a marriage for her own
daughter and for any other girl, and is just as glad to do it for the
latter if it does not interfere with the interests of her own family; it
is the same thing, match-making throughout, and there is no
psychological difference in making a match for her own daughter and
doing the same thing for a stranger. I would even go so far as to say
that a mother is not inconsolable if a stranger, however common and
undesirable, desires and seduces her daughter.

The attitude of one sex to certain traits of the other can often be
applied as a criterion as to how far certain peculiarities of character
are exclusively the property of the one sex or are shared by the other.
So far, we have had to deny to women many characters which they would
gladly claim, but which are exclusively masculine; in match-making,
however, we have a characteristic which is really and exclusively
feminine, the exceptions being either in the case of very womanish men
or else special instances which will be fully dealt with later on, in
chap. xiii. Every real man will have nothing to do with this instinct in
his wife, even when his own daughters, whom he would gladly see settled
in life, are concerned; he dislikes and despises the whole business, and
leaves it entirely to his wife, as being altogether in her province.
This is a striking instance of a purely feminine psychical
characteristic, being not only unattractive to a man, but even
repulsive to him when he is aware of it: while the male characteristics
in themselves are sufficient to please the female, man has to denude
woman of hers before he can love her.

But the match-making instinct exerts a much deeper and more important
influence on the nature of woman than can be gathered from the little I
have said on this subject. I wish now to draw attention to woman’s
attitude at a play: she is always waiting to see if the hero and
heroine, the lovers in the piece, will quarrel. This is nothing but
match-making, and psychologically does not differ a hair from it: it is
the ever present desire to see the man and woman united. But that is not
all; the tremendous excitement with which women await the crucial point
in a decent or indecent book is due to nothing less than the desire to
see the sexual union of the principal characters, and is coupled with an
actual excitation at the thought, and positive appreciation of the force
which is behind sexual union. It is not possible to state this formally
and logically, the only thing is to try and understand how it is that
the two things are psychologically one with women. The mother’s
excitement on her daughter’s wedding-day is of the same quality as that
engendered by reading a story by Prévost, or Sudermann’s “Katzensteg.”
It is quite true that men are very interested by novels which end in
sexual union, but in quite a different way from women; they thoroughly
appreciate the sexual act in imagination, but they do not follow the
gradual approach of the two people concerned from the very beginning;
and their interest does not grow, as woman’s does, in constant
proportion to the reciprocal value which the two people have for one
another.

The breathless pleasure with which the various obstacles are overcome,
the feeling of disappointment at each thwarting of the sexual purpose,
is altogether womanish and unmanly; but it is always present with woman.
She is continually on the watch for sexual developments, whether in real
life or in literature. Has no one ever wondered why women are so keen
and “disinterested” about bringing other men and women together? The
satisfaction they derive from it arises from a personal stimulus at the
thought of the sexual union of others.

But the full extent to which match-making influences the point of view
of all women is not yet fully grasped. On a summer evening when lovers
may be seen in dark corners of public places, or on the seats and banks
round about, it is always the women who wilfully and curiously try to
see what is happening, whilst men who have to pass that way do so
unwillingly, looking the other way, because of a sense of intrusion.
Just in the same way it is women who turn in the streets to look at
nearly every couple they meet, and gaze after them. This espionage and
turning round are none the less “match-making,” because they are
sub-conscious acts. If a man does not want to see a thing he turns his
back on it, and does not look round; but women are glad to see two
people in love with one another, and take pleasure in surprising them in
their love-making, because of their innate and super-personal desire
that sexual union should occur.

But man, as was seen much further back, only cares for that which has a
positive value. A woman when she sees two lovers together is always
awaiting developments, that is to say, she expects, anticipates, hopes,
and desires an outcome. I know an elderly married woman who listened
expectantly at the door for some time, when a servant of hers had
allowed her sweetheart to come into her room, before she walked in and
gave her notice.

The idea of union is always eagerly grasped and never repelled whatever
form it may take (even where animals are concerned).[18] She experiences
no disgust at the nauseating details of the subject, and makes no
attempt to think of anything pleasanter. This accounts for a great deal
of what is so apparently mysterious in the psychic life of woman. Her
wish for the activity of her own sexual life is her strongest impulse,
but it is only a special case of her deep, her only vital interest, the
interest that sexual unions shall take place; the wish that as much of
it as possible shall occur, in all cases, places, and times.

  [18] The one apparent exception to this rule is fully discussed in
  this chapter.

This universal desire may either be concentrated on the act itself or on
the (possible) child; in the first case, the woman is of the prostitute
type and participates merely for the sake of the act; in the second, she
is of the mother type, but not merely with the idea of bearing children
herself; she desires that every marriage she knows of or has helped to
bring about should be fruitful, and the nearer she is to the absolute
mother the more conspicuous is this idea; the real mother is also the
real grandmother (even if she remains a virgin; Johann Tesman’s
marvellous portrayal of “Tante Jule” in Ibsen’s “Hedda Gabler” is an
example of what I mean). Every real mother has the same purpose, that of
helping on matrimony; she is the mother of all mankind; she welcomes
every pregnancy.

The prostitute does not want other women to be with child, but to be
prostitutes like herself.

A woman’s relations with married men show how she subordinates her own
sexuality to her match-making instinct, the latter being the dominant
power.

Woman objects more strongly to bachelordom than anything else, because
she is altogether a match-maker, and this makes her try to get men to
marry; but if a man is already married she at once loses most of her
interest in him, however much she liked him before. If the woman herself
is already married, that is to say, when each man she meets is not a
possible solution to her own fate, one would not imagine that a married
man would find less favour with her because he was married than when he
was a bachelor if the woman herself is unfaithful; but women seldom
carry on an intrigue with another woman’s husband, except when they wish
to triumph over her by making him neglect her. This shows that the
disposition of woman is towards the fact of pairing; when men are
already paired she seldom attempts to make them unfaithful, for the fact
of their being paired has satisfied her instinct.

This match-making is the most common characteristic of the human female;
the wish to become a mother-in-law is much more general than even the
desire to become a mother, the intensity and extent of which is usually
over-rated.

My readers may possibly not understand the emphasis I have laid on a
phenomenon which is usually looked upon as amusing as it is disgusting;
and it may be thought that I have given undue importance to it.

But let us see why I have done so. Match-making is essentially the
phenomenon of all others which gives us the key to the nature of woman,
and we must not, as has always been the case, merely acknowledge the
fact and pass on, but we should try to analyse and explain it. One of
our commonest phrases runs: “Every woman is a bit of a match-maker.”

But we must remember that in this, and nothing else, lies the actual
essence of woman. After mature consideration of the most varied types of
women and with due regard to the special classes besides those which I
have discussed, I am of opinion that the only positively general female
characteristic is that of match-making, that is, her uniform willingness
to further the idea of sexual union.

Any definition of the nature of woman which goes no further than to
declare that she has the strong instinct for her own union would be too
narrow; any definition that would link her instincts to the child or to
the husband, or to both, would be too wide. The most general and
comprehensive statement of the nature of woman is that it is completely
adapted and disposed for the special mission of aiding and abetting the
bodily union of the sexes. All women are match-makers, and this property
of the woman to be the advocate of the idea of pairing is the only one
which is found in women of all ages, in young girls, in adults, and in
the aged. The old woman is no longer interested in her own union, but
she devotes herself to the pairing of others. This habit of the old
woman is nothing new, it is only the continuance of her enduring
instinct surviving the complications that were caused when her personal
interests came into conflict with her general desire; it is the now
unselfish pursuit of the impersonal idea.

It is convenient to recapitulate at this point what my investigation has
shown as to the sexuality of women. I have shown that woman is engrossed
exclusively by sexuality, not intermittently, but throughout her life;
that her whole being, bodily and mental, is nothing but sexuality
itself. I added, moreover, that she was so constituted that her whole
body and being continually were in sexual relations with her
environment, and that just as the sexual organs were the centre of woman
physically, so the sexual idea was the centre of her mental nature. The
idea of pairing is the only conception which has positive worth for
women. The woman is the bearer of the thought of the continuity of the
species. The high value which she attaches to the idea of pairing is not
selfish and individual, it is super-individual, and, if I may be
forgiven the desecration of the phrase, it is the transcendental
function of woman. And just as femaleness is no more than the embodiment
of the idea of pairing, so is it sexuality in the abstract. Pairing is
the supreme good for the woman; she seeks to effect it always and
everywhere. Her personal sexuality is only a special case of this
universal, generalised, impersonal instinct.

The effort of woman to realise this idea of pairing is so fundamentally
opposed to that conception of innocence and purity, the higher virginity
which man’s erotic nature has demanded from women, that not all his
erotic incense would have obscured her real nature but for one factor. I
have now to explain this factor which has veiled from man the true
nature of woman, and which in itself is one of the deepest problems of
woman, I mean her absolute duplicity. Her pairing instinct and her
duplicity, the latter so great as to conceal even from woman herself
what is the real essence of her nature, must be explained together.

All that may have seemed like clear gain is now again called into
question. Self-observation was found lacking in women, and yet there
certainly are women who observe very closely all that happens to them.
They were denied the love of truth, and yet one knows many women who
would not tell a lie for anything. It has been said that they are
lacking in consciousness of guilt; but there are many women who reproach
themselves bitterly for most trifling matters, besides “penitents” who
mortify their flesh. Modesty was left to man, but what is to be said of
the womanly modesty, that bashfulness, which, according to Hamerling,
only women have? Is there no foundation for the way in which the idea
has grown and found such acceptance? And then again: Can religion be
absent, in spite of so many “professing” women? Are we to exclude all
women from the moral purity, all the womanly virtues, which poets and
historians have ascribed to her? Are we to say that woman is merely
sexual, that sexuality only receives its proper due from her when it is
so well known that women are shocked at the slightest allusion to sexual
matters, that instead of giving way to it they are often irritated and
disgusted at the idea of impurity, and quite often detest sexual union
for themselves and regard it just as many men do?

It is, of course, manifest that one and the same point is bound up in
all these antitheses, and on the answer given to them depends the final
and decisive judgment on woman. And it is clear that if only one single
female creature were really asexual, or could be shown to have a real
relationship to the idea of personal moral worth, everything that I have
said about woman, its general value as psychically characteristic of the
sex, would be irretrievably demolished, and the whole position which
this book has taken up would be shattered at one blow.

These apparently contradictory phenomena must be satisfactorily
explained, and it must be shown that what is at the bottom of it all and
makes it seem so equivocal arises from the very nature of woman which I
have been trying to explain all along.

In order to understand these fallacious contradictions one must first of
all remember the tremendous “accessibility,” to use another word, the
“impressionability,” of women. Their extraordinary aptitude for anything
new, and their easy acceptance of other people’s views have not yet been
sufficiently emphasised in this book.

As a rule, the woman adapts herself to the man, his views become hers,
his likes and dislikes are shared by her, every word he says is an
incentive to her, and the stronger his sexual influence on her the more
this is so. Woman does not perceive that this influence which man has on
her causes her to deviate from the line of her own development; she does
not look upon it as a sort of unwarrantable intrusion; she does not try
to shake off what is really an invasion of her private life; she is not
ashamed of being receptive; on the contrary, she is really pleased when
she can be so, and prefers man to mould her mentally. She rejoices in
being dependent, and her expectations from man resolve themselves into
the moment when she may be perfectly passive.

But it is not only from her lover (although she would like that best),
but also from her father and mother, uncles and aunts, brothers and
sisters, near relations and distant acquaintances, that a woman takes
what she thinks and believes, being only too glad to get her opinions
“ready made.”

It is not only inexperienced girls but even elderly and married women
who copy each other in everything, from the nice new dress or pretty
coiffure down to the places where they get their things, and the very
recipes by which they cook.

And it never seems to occur to them that they are doing something
derogatory on their part, as it ought to do if they possessed an
individuality of their own and strove to work out their own salvation. A
woman’s thoughts and actions have no definite, independent relations to
things in themselves; they are not the result of the reaction of her
individuality to the world. They accept what is imposed on them gladly,
and adhere to it with the greatest firmness. That is why woman is so
intolerant when there has been a breach of conventional laws. I must
quote an amusing instance, bearing on this side of woman’s character,
from Herbert Spencer. It is the custom in various tribes of Indians in
North and South America for the men to hunt and fight and leave all the
laborious and menial tasks to their wives. The Dakotan women are so
imbued with the idea of the reasonableness and fitness of this
arrangement that, instead of feeling injured by it, the greatest insult
that one of these women can offer to another would be implied in some
such words as follows: “You disgraceful creature.... I saw your husband
carrying home wood for the fires. What was his wife doing that he had to
demean himself by doing woman’s work?”

The extraordinary way in which woman can be influenced by external
agencies is similar in its nature to her suggestibility, which is far
greater and more general than man’s; they are both in accordance with
woman’s desire to play the passive and never the active part in the
sexual act and all that leads to it.[19]

  [19] The quiescent, inactive, large egg-cells are sought out by the
  mobile, active, and slender spermatozoa.

It is the universal passivity of woman’s nature which makes her accept
and assume man’s valuations of things, although these are utterly at
variance with her nature. The way in which woman can be impregnated with
the masculine point of view, the saturation of her innermost thoughts
with a foreign element, her false recognition of morality, which cannot
be called hypocrisy because it does not conceal anything anti-moral, her
assumption and practise of things which in themselves are not in her
realm, are all very well if the woman does not try to use her own
judgment, and they succeed in keeping up the fiction of her superior
morality. Complications first arise when these acquired valuations come
into collision with the only inborn, genuine, and universally feminine
valuation, the supreme value she sets on pairing.

Woman’s acceptance of pairing as the supreme good is quite unconscious
on her part. As she has no sense of individuality she has nothing to
contrast with pairing; and so, unlike man, she cannot realise its
significance, or even notice the presence in herself of this instinct.

No woman knows, or ever has known, or ever will know, what she does when
she enters into association with man. Femaleness is identical with
pairing, and a woman would have to get outside herself in order to see
and understand that she pairs. Thus it is that the deepest desire of
woman, all that she means, and all that she is, remain unrecognised by
her. There is nothing, then, to prevent the male negative valuation of
pairing overshadowing the female positive valuation of it in the
consciousness of the woman. The susceptibility of woman is so great that
she can even act in opposition to what she is, to the one thing on which
she really sets a positive value!

But the imposture which she enacts when she allows herself to be
incorporated with man’s opinions of sexuality and shamelessness, even of
the imposture itself, and when she uses the masculine standard for her
actions, is such a colossal fraud that she is never conscious of it; she
has acquired a second nature, without even guessing that it is not her
real one; she takes herself seriously, believes she is something and
that she believes in something; she is convinced of the sincerity and
originality of her moralisings and opinions; the lie is as deeply rooted
as that; it is organic. I cannot do better than speak of the ontological
untruthfulness of woman.

Wolfram von Eschenbach says of his hero:

        “... So keusch und rein
  Ruht’ er bei seiner Königin,
  Dass kein Genügen fänd’ darin
  So manches Weib beim lieben Mann.
  Dass doch so manche in Gedanken
  Zur Üppigkeit will überschwanken,
  Die sonst sich spröde zeigen kann!
  Vor Fremden züchtig sie erscheinen,
  Doch ist des Herzens tiefstes Meinen
  Das Widerspiel vom äussern Schein.”

Wolfram indicates clearly enough what is at the bottom of woman’s
heart, but he does not say all that is to be said. Women deceive
themselves as well as others on this point. One cannot artificially
suppress and supplant one’s real nature, the physical as well as the
other side, without something happening. The hygienic penalty that must
be paid for woman’s denial of her real nature is hysteria.

Of all the neurotic and psychic phenomena, those of hysteria are the
most fascinating for psychologists; they represent a far more difficult
and, therefore, a more interesting study than those observed in
melancholia or in simple paranoia.

The majority of psychiatrists have a distrust of psychological analyses
which it is not easy for them to shake off; every statement of
pathological alteration of tissues or intoxication by certain means is
for them _a limine_ credible; it is only in psychical matters that they
refuse to recognise a primary cause. But since no reason has so far been
given why psychical phenomena should be of importance secondary to
physical phenomena, it is quite justifiable to disregard such
prejudices.

It is quite possible--there is nothing to prevent it being so--that a
very great deal, perhaps everything, may depend on the proper
interpretation of the “psychical mechanism” of hysteria. That this is so
is proved by the fact that the few conclusions of any value with
reference to hysteria so far discovered have been arrived at in this
way; the investigations carried out by Pierre Janet, Oskar Vogt, and
particularly by J. Breuer and S. Freud, show what I mean. All good work
on hysteria will undoubtedly follow the lines these men have worked on;
that is to say, by investigation of the psychological processes which
led up to the disease.

I believe myself that what may be called a psychological sexual
traumatism is at the root of hysteria. The typical picture of a
hysterical case is not very different from the following: A woman has
always accepted the male views on sexual matters; they are in reality
totally foreign to her nature, and sometime, by some chance, out of the
conflict between what her nature asserts to be true and what she has
always accepted as true and believed to be true, there comes what may be
called a “wounding of the mind.” It is thus possible for the person
affected to declare a sexual desire to be an “extraneous body in her
consciousness,” a sensation which she _thinks_ she detests, but which in
reality has its origin in her own nature. The tremendous intensity with
which she endeavours to suppress the desire (and which only serves to
increase it) so that she may the more vehemently and indignantly reject
the thought--these are the alternations which are seen in hysteria. And
the chronic untruthfulness of woman becomes acute if the woman has ever
allowed herself to be imbued with man’s ethically negative valuation of
sexuality. It is well known that hysterical women manifest the strongest
suggestibility with men. Hysteria is the organic crisis of the organic
untruthfulness of woman.

I do not deny that there are hysterical men, but these are comparatively
few; and since man’s psychic possibilities are endless, that of becoming
“female” is amongst them, and, therefore, he can be hysterical. There
are undoubtedly many untruthful men, but in them the crisis takes a
different form, man’s untruthfulness being of a different kind and never
so hopeless in character as woman’s.

This examination into the organic untruthfulness of woman, into her
inability to be honest about herself which alone makes it possible for
her to think that she thinks what is really totally opposed to her
nature, appears to me to offer a satisfactory explanation of those
difficulties which the ætiology of hysteria present.

Hysteria shows that untruthfulness, however far it may reach, cannot
suppress everything. By education or environment woman adopts a whole
system of ideas and valuations which are foreign to her, or, rather, has
patiently submitted to have them impressed on her; and it would need a
tremendous shock to get rid of this strongly-rooted psychical
complexity, and to transplant woman to that condition of intellectual
helplessness which is so characteristic of hysteria.

An extraordinary shock suffices to destroy the artificial structure, and
to place woman in the arena to undertake a fight between her
unconscious, oppressed nature, and her certainly conscious but unnatural
mind. The see-sawing which now begins between the two explains the
unusual psychic discontinuity during the hysterical phase, the continual
changes of mood, none of which are subject to the control of a dominant,
central, controlling nucleus of individuality. It is extraordinary how
many contradictions can co-exist in the hysterical. Sometimes they are
highly intelligent and able to judge correctly and keenly oppose
hypnotism and so forth. Then, again, they are excited by most trivial
causes, and are most subject to hypnotic trances. Sometimes they are
abnormally chaste, at other times extremely sensual.

All this is no longer difficult to explain. The absolute sincerity, the
painful love of truth, the avoidance of everything sexual, the careful
judgment, and the strength of will--all these form part of that spurious
personality which woman in her passivity has taken upon herself to
exhibit to herself and to the world at large. Everything that belongs to
her original temperament and her real sense form that “other self,” that
“unconscious mind” which can delight in obscurities and which is so open
to suggestion.

It has been endeavoured to show that in what is known as the “duplex”
and “multiplex personality,” the “double conscience,” the “dual ego,”
lies one of the strongest arguments against the belief in the soul. As a
matter of fact, these phenomena are the very reasons why we ought to
believe in a soul. The “dividing up of the personality” is only possible
when there never has been a personality, as with woman. All the
celebrated cases which Janet has described in his book, “L’Automatisme
Psychologique,” concern women, not in a single instance man. It is only
woman who, minus soul or an intelligible ego, has not the power to
become conscious of what is in her; who cannot throw the light of truth
on her inmost self; who can by her completely passive inundation by a
consciousness belonging to another, allow what is in her own nature to
be suppressed by an extraneous element; who can display the hysterical
phenomena described by Janet. Hysteria is the bankruptcy of this
superficial sham self which has been put on, and the woman becomes for
the time being a _tabula rasa_, whilst the working in her of her own
genuine nature appears to her as something coming from without. This
apparent “secondary personality,” this “foreign body in the
consciousness,” this false self, is, in reality, the true female nature,
sexuality itself appearing, and a proper understanding of this fact, and
of the complications that must ensue from the ebbings and flowings of
the false, supposed to be true, and the true supposed to be false, lie
at the root of the most difficult phenomena of hysteria.

Woman’s incapacity for truth--which I hold to be consequent on her lack
of free will with regard to the truth, in accordance with Kant’s
“Indeterminism”--conditions her falsity. Any one who has had anything to
do with women knows how often they give offhand quite patently untrue
reasons for what they have said or done, under the momentary necessity
of answering a question. It is, however, hysterical subjects who are
most careful to avoid unveracity (in a most marked and premeditated way
before strangers); but however paradoxical it may sound it is exactly in
this that their untruthfulness lies! They do not know that this desire
for truth has come to them from outside and is no part of their real
nature.

They have slavishly accepted the postulate of morality, and, therefore,
wish to show at every opportunity, like a good servant, how faithfully
they follow instructions.

It is always suspicious when a man is frequently spoken of as
exceptionally trustworthy: he must have gone out of his way to let
people know it, and it would be safe to wager that in reality he is a
rogue. No confidence must be placed in the genuineness of hysterical
morality, which doctors (no doubt in good faith) often emphasise by
remarks as to the high moral position of their patients.

I repeat: hysterical patients do not consciously simulate. It can only
be made clear to them by suggestion that they actually have been
simulating, and all the “confessions” of the dissimulation can only be
explained in the same way. Otherwise they believe in their own natural
honesty and morality. Neither are the various things which torture them
imaginary; it is much more likely that in the fact that they feel them,
and that the symptoms first disappear with what Breuer calls “catharsis”
(the successive bringing to their consciousness of the true causes of
their illness by hypnotism), lies the proof of their organic
untruthfulness.

The self-accusations which hysterical people are so full of are nothing
but unconscious dissimulation. The sense of guilt, which is equally
poignant in great and most trifling things, cannot be genuine; if the
hysterical self-torturers possessed a standard of morality for
themselves and others they would not be so indiscriminate in their
self-accusations, and not cast as much blame on themselves for a slight
error as for real wrong-doing.

The most distinguishing character of the unconscious untruthfulness of
their self-reproaches is their habit of telling others how wicked they
are, what terrible things they have done, and then they ask if they (the
hysterical) are not hopelessly abandoned sort of people. No one who
really feels remorse could talk in such a way. The fallacy of
representing the hysterical as being eminently moral is one which even
Breuer and Freud have shared. The hysterical simply become imbued with
moral ideas which are foreign to them in their normal state. They
subordinate themselves to this code, they cease to prove things for
themselves, they no longer exercise their own judgment.

Probably these hysterical subjects approach more closely than any other
natures to the moral ideal of the social and utilitarian ethics which
regard a lie as moral if it is for the good of society or of the race.
Hysterical women realise that ideal ontogenetically inasmuch as their
standard of morality comes from without, not from within, and
practically as they appear to act most readily from altruistic motives.
For them duty towards others is not merely a special application of duty
towards oneself.

The untruthfulness of the hysterical is proportional to their belief in
their own accuracy. From their complete inability to attain personal
truth, to be honest about themselves--the hysterical never think for
themselves, they want other people to think about them, they want to
arouse the interest of others--it follows that the hysterical are the
best mediums for hypnotic purposes. But any one who allows him or
herself to be hypnotised is doing the most immoral thing possible. It is
yielding to complete slavery; it is a renunciation of the will and
consciousness; it means allowing another person to do what he likes with
the subject. Hypnosis shows how all possibility of truth depends upon
the wish to be truthful, but it must be the real wish of the person
concerned: when a hypnotised person is told to do something, he does it
when he comes out of the trance, and if asked his reasons will give a
plausible motive on the spot, not only before others, but he will
justify his action to himself by quite fanciful reasons. In this we
have, so to speak, an experimental proof of Kant’s “Ethical Code.”

All women can be hypnotised and like being hypnotised, but this
proclivity is exaggerated in hysterical women. Even the memory of
definite events in their life can be destroyed by the mere suggestion of
the hypnotiser. Breuer’s experiments on hypnotised patients show clearly
that the consciousness of guilt in them is not deeply seated, as
otherwise it could not be got rid of at the mere suggestion of the
hypnotiser. But the sham conviction of responsibility, so readily
exhibited by women of hysterical constitution, rapidly disappears at the
moment when nature, the sexual impulse, appears to drive through the
superficial restraints. In the hysterical paroxysm what happens is that
the woman, while no longer believing it altogether herself, asseverates
more and more loudly: “I do not want that at all, some one not really me
is forcing it on me, but I do not want it at all.” Every stimulation
from outside will now be brought into relation with that demand, which
as she partly believes, is being forced on her, but which, in reality,
corresponds with the deepest wish of her nature. That is why women in a
hysterical attack are so easily seduced. The “attitudes passionelles” of
the hysterical are merely passionate repudiations of sexual desire,
which are loud merely because they are not real, and are more plaintive
than at other times because the danger is greater. It is easy to
understand why the sexual experiences of the time preceding puberty play
so large a part in acute hysteria. The influence of extraneous moral
views can be imposed comparatively easily on the child, as they have
little to overcome in the almost unawakened state of the sexual
inclinations. But, later on, the suppressed, although not wholly
vanquished, nature lays hold of these old experiences, reinterprets them
in the light of the new contents of consciousness, and the crisis takes
place. The different forms that the paroxysms assume and their shifting
nature are due very largely to the fact that the subject does not admit
the true cause, the presence of a sexual desire, any consciousness of it
being attributed by her to some extraneous influence, some self that is
not her “real self.”

Medical observation or interpretation of hysteria is wrong; it allows
itself to be deceived by the patients, who in turn deceive themselves.
It is not the rejecting ego but the rejected which is the true and
original nature of the hysterical patients, however much they pretend to
themselves and others that it is foreign to them.

If the rejecting ego were really their natural ego they could act in
opposition to the disturbing element which they say is foreign to them,
and be fully conscious of it, and differentiate and recognise it in
their memory. But the fraud is evident, because the rejecting ego is
only borrowed, and they lack the courage to look their own desire in the
face, although something seems to say that it is the real, inborn, and
only powerful one they have. Even the desire itself has no real
identity, for it is not seated in a real individual, and, as it is
suppressed, leaps, so to speak, from one part of the body to the other.
It may be that my attempt at an explanation will be thought fanciful,
but at least it appears to be true that the various forms of hysteria
are one and the same thing. This one thing is what the hysterical
patient will not admit is part of her, although it is what is pressing
on her. If she were able to ascribe it to herself and criticise it in
the way in which she admits trivial matters of another kind, she would
be in a measure outside and above her own experiences. The frantic rage
of hysterical women at what they say is imposed on them by some strange
will, whilst it in reality is their own will, shows that they are just
as much under the domination of sexuality as are non-hysterical women,
are just as subject to their destiny and incapable of averting it, since
they, too, are without any intelligible, free ego.

But it may be asked, with reason, why all women are not hysterical,
since all women are liars? This brings us to a necessary inquiry as to
the hysterical constitution. If my theory has been on the right lines,
it ought to be able to give an answer in accordance with facts.
According to it, the hysterical woman is one who has passively accepted
in entirety the masculine and conventional valuations instead of
allowing her own mental character its proper play. The woman who is not
to be led is the antithesis of the hysterical woman. I must not delay
over this point; it really belongs to special female characterology. The
hysterical woman is hysterical because she is servile; mentally she is
identical with the maid-servant. Her opposite (who does not really
exist) is the shrewish dame. So that women may be subdivided into the
maid who serves, and the woman who commands.[20]

  [20] We may find the analogy to this in men: there are masculine
  “servants” who are so by nature, and there is the masculine form of
  the shrew--_e.g._, the policeman. It is a noticeable fact that a
  policeman usually finds his sexual complement in the housemaid.

The servant is born and not made, and there are many women in good
circumstances who are “born servants,” although they never need to put
their rightful position to the test! The servant and the mistress are a
sort of “complete woman” when considered as a “whole.”[21]

  [21] A real dame would never dream of asking her husband what she was
  to do, what she is to give him for dinner, &c.; the hysterical woman,
  on the contrary, is always lacking in ideas, and wants suggestions
  from others. This is a rough way of indicating the two types.

The consequences of this theory are fully borne out by experience. The
Xanthippe is the woman who has the least resemblance to the hysterical
type. She vents her spleen (which is really the outcome of unsatisfied
sexual desires) on others, whereas the hysterical woman visits hers on
herself. The “shrew” detests other women, the “servant” detests herself.
The drudge weeps out her woes alone, without really feeling
lonely--loneliness is identical with morality, and a condition which
implies true duality or manifoldness; the shrew hates to be alone
because she must have some one to scold, whilst hysterical women vent
their passion on themselves. The shrew lies openly and boldly but
without knowing it, because it is her nature to think herself always in
the right, and she insults those who contradict her. The servant submits
wonderingly to the demands made of her which are so foreign to her
nature: the hypocrisy of this pliant acquiescence is apparent in her
hysterical attacks when the conflict with her own sexual emotions
begins. It is because of this receptivity and susceptibility that
hysteria and the hysterical type of woman are so leniently dealt with:
it is this type, and not the shrewish type, that will be cited in
opposition to my views.[22]

  [22] It is the “yielding type” and not the virago type of woman that
  men think capable of love. Such a woman’s love is only the mental
  sense of satisfaction aroused by the maleness of some particular man,
  and, therefore, it is only possible with the hysterical; it has
  nothing to do with her individual power of loving, and can have
  nothing to do with it. The bashfulness of woman is also due to her
  “obsession” by one man; this also causes her neglect of all other men.

Untruthfulness, organic untruthfulness, characterises both types, and
accordingly all women. It is quite wrong to say that women lie. That
would imply that they sometimes speak the truth. Sincerity, _pro foro
interno et externo_, is the virtue of all others of which women are
absolutely incapable, which is impossible for them!

The point I am urging is that woman is never genuine at any period of
her life, not even when she, in hysteria, slavishly accepts the aspect
of truth laid on her by another, and apparently speaks in accordance
with those demands.

A woman can laugh, cry, blush, or even look wicked at will: the shrew,
when she has some object in view; the “maid,” when she has to make a
decision for herself. Men have not the organic and physiological
qualifications for such dissimulation.

If we are able to show that the supposed love of truth in these types of
woman is no more than their natural hypocrisy in a mask, it is only to
be expected that all the other qualities for which woman has been
praised will suffer under analysis. Her modesty, her self-respect, and
her religious fervour are loudly acclaimed. Womanly modesty, none the
less, is nothing but prudery, _i.e._, an extravagant denial and
rejection of her natural immodesty. Whenever a woman evinces any trace
of what could really be called modesty, hysteria is certainly answerable
for it. The woman who is absolutely unhysterical and not to be
influenced, _i.e._, the absolute shrew, will not be ashamed of any
reproaches her husband may shower on her, however just; incipient
hysteria is present when a woman blushes under her husband’s direct
censure; but hysteria in its most marked form is present when a woman
blushes when she is quite alone: it is only then that she may be said to
be fully impregnated with the masculine standard of values.

The women who most nearly approximate to what has been called sexual
anæsthesia or frigidity are always hysterical, as Paul Solliers, with
whom I entirely agree, discovered. Sexual anæsthesia is merely one of
the many hysterical, that is to say, unreal, simulated forms of
anæsthesia. Oskar Vogt, in particular (and general observation has
confirmed him), proved that such anæsthesia does not involve a real
lack of sensation, but is simply due to an inhibition which keeps
certain sensations in check, and excludes them from the consciousness.

If the anæsthetised arm of a hypnotised subject is pricked a certain
number of times, and the medium is told to say how many times he has
been pricked, he is able to do so, although otherwise he would not have
perceived them. So also with sexual frigidity; it is an order given by
the controlling force of the super-imposed asexual ideas; but this, like
all other forms of anæsthesia, can be counteracted by a sufficiently
strong “order.”

The repulsion to sexuality in general shown by the hysterical woman
corresponds in its nature with her insensibility to sexual matters in
her own case. Such a repulsion, an intense disinclination for everything
sexual, is really present in many women, and this may be urged as an
exception to my generalisation as to the universality in woman of the
match-making tendency. But women who are made ill by discovering two
people in sexual intercourse are always hysterical. In this we have a
special justification of the theory which holds match-making to be the
true nature of woman, and which looks upon her own sexuality as merely a
special case of it. A woman may be made hysterical not only by a sexual
suggestion to herself which she outwardly resists whilst inwardly
assenting to it, but may be just as much so by the sight of two people
in sexual intercourse, for, though she thinks the matter has no value
for her, her inborn assent to it forces itself through all outward and
artificial barriers, and overcomes the super-imposed and incorporated
method of thought in which she usually lives. That is to say, she feels
herself involved in the sexual union of others.

Something similar takes place in the hysterical “consciousness of
guilt,” which has already been spoken about. The absolute shrew never
feels herself really in the wrong; the woman who is slightly hysterical
only feels so in the presence of men; the woman who is thoroughly
hysterical feels it in the presence of the particular man who dominates
her. One cannot prove the existence of a sense of guilt in woman by the
mortifications to which “devotees” and “penitents” subject themselves.
It is these extreme cases of self-discipline which make one suspicious.
Doing penance proves, in most cases, that the doer has not overcome his
fault, that the sense of guilt has not really entered consciousness; it
appears really to be much rather an attempt to force repentance from the
outside, to make up for not really feeling it.

The difference between the conviction of guilt in hysterical women and
in men, and the origin of the self-reproaches of the former, are of some
importance. When the hysterical woman realises that she has done or
thought something immoral, she tries to rectify it by some code which
she seeks to obey and to substitute in her mind in place of the immoral
thought. She does not really get rid of the thought which is too deeply
rooted in her nature; she does not really face it, try to understand it,
and so purge herself of it. She simply, from point to point, case by
case, tries to adhere to the moral code without ever transforming
herself, reforming her idea. The moral character in the woman is
elaborated bit by bit; in the male right conduct comes from moral
character. The vow remodels the whole man; the change takes place in the
only possible way, from within outwards, and leads to a real morality
which is not only a justification by works. The morality of the woman is
merely superficial and is not real morality.

The current opinion that woman is religious is equally erroneous. Female
mysticism, when it is anything more than mere superstition, is either
thinly veiled sexuality (the identification of the Deity and the lover
has been frequently discussed, as, for instance, in Maupassant’s
“Bel-Ami,” or in Hauptmann’s “Hannele’s Himmelfahrt”) as in numberless
spiritualists and theosophists, or it is a mere passive and unconscious
acceptance of man’s religious views which are clung to the more firmly
because of woman’s natural disinclination for them. The lover is readily
transformed into a Saviour; very readily (as is well known to be the
case with many nuns) the Saviour becomes the lover. All the great women
visionaries known to history were hysterical; the most famous, Santa
Teresa, was not misnamed “the patron saint of hysteria.” At any rate, if
woman’s religiousness were genuine, and if it proceeded from her own
nature, she would have done something great in the religious world; but
she never has done anything of any importance. I should like to put
shortly what I take to be the difference between the masculine and
feminine creeds; man’s religion consists in a supreme belief in himself,
woman’s in a supreme belief in other people.

There is left to consider the self-respect which is often described as
being so highly developed in the hysterical. That it is only man’s
self-respect which has been so thoroughly forced into woman, is clear
from its nature and the way it shows itself, as Vogt, who extended and
verified experiments first made by Freud, discovered from self-respect
under hypnotism. The extraneous masculine will creates by its influence
a “self-respecting” subject in the hypnotised woman by inducing a
limitation of the field of the unhypnotised state. Apart from
suggestion, in the ordinary life of the hysterical it is only the man
with whom they are “impregnated” who is respected in them. Any knowledge
of human nature which women have comes from their absorption of the
right sort of man. In the paroxysms of hysteria this artificial
self-respect disappears with the revolt of oppressed nature.

This is quite parallel to the clairvoyance of hysterical mediums, which
is undoubted, but has as little to do with “occult” spiritism as the
ordinary hypnotic phenomena. Just as Vogt’s patients made strenuous
efforts to observe themselves carefully under the powerful will of the
suggestor, the clairvoyante, under the influence of the dominating voice
of the man who is imposing his will on her, is capable of telepathic
performances, and at his command can, blindfolded, read communications
held by people unknown to her at a great distance away; this I saw
happen at München under circumstances which precluded any chance of
fraud.

In woman there are not strong passions opposed to the desire for the
good and true as is the case with man. The masculine will has more power
over woman than over the man himself; it can realise something in women
which, in his own case, has to encounter too many obstacles. He himself
has to battle with an anti-moral and anti-logical opposition in himself.
The masculine will can obtain such power over woman’s mind that he makes
her, in a sense, clairvoyant, and breaks down her limitations of
mentality.

Thus it comes about that woman is more telepathic than man, can appear
more innocent, and can accomplish more as a “seer,” and it is only when
she becomes a medium, _i.e._, the object, that she realises in herself
most easily and surely the masculine will for the good and true. Wala
can be made to understand, but not until Dotan subdues her. She meets
him half-way, for her one desire is to be conquered.

The subject of hysteria, so far as the purposes of this book are
concerned, is now exhausted.

The women who are uniformly quoted as proofs of female morality are
always of the hysterical type, and it is the very observance of
morality, in doing things according to the moral law as if this moral
law were a law of their personality instead of being only an acquired
habit, that the unreality, the immorality of this morality is shown.

The hysterical diathesis is an absurd imitation of the masculine mind, a
parody of free will which woman parades at the very moment when she is
most under a masculine influence.

Woman is not a free agent; she is altogether subject to her desire to be
under man’s influence, herself and all others: she is under the sway of
the phallus, and irretrievably succumbs to her destiny, even if it leads
to actively developed sexuality. At the most a woman can reach an
indistinct feeling of her un-freedom, a cloudy idea of the possibility
of controlling her destiny--manifestly only a flickering spark of the
free, intelligible subject, the scanty remains of inherited maleness in
her, which, by contrast, gives her even this slight comprehension. It is
also impossible for a woman to have a clear idea of her destiny, or of
the forces within her: it is only he who is free who can discern fate,
because he is not chained by necessity; part of his personality, at
least, places him in the position of spectator and a combatant outside
his own fate and makes him so far superior to it. One of the most
conclusive proofs of human freedom is contained in the fact that man has
been able to create the idea of causality. Women consider themselves
most free when they are most bound; and they are not troubled by the
passions, because they are simply the embodiment of them. It is only a
man who can talk of the “dira necessitas” within him; it is only he
could have created the idea of destiny, because it is only he who, in
addition to the empirical, conditioned existence, possesses a free,
intelligible ego.

As I have shown, woman can reach no more than a vague half-consciousness
of the fact that she is a conditioned being, and so she is unable to
overcome the sexuality that binds her. Hysteria is the only attempt on
her part to overcome it, and, as I have shown, it is not a genuine
attempt. The hysteria itself is what the hysterical woman tries to
resist, and the falsity of this effort against slavery is the measure of
its hopelessness. The most notable examples of the sex (I have in mind
Hebbel’s Judith and Wagner’s Kundry) may feel that is because they wish
it that servitude is a necessity for them, but this realisation does not
give them power to resist it; at the last moment they will kiss the man
who ravishes them, and succumb with pleasure to those whom they have
been resisting violently. It is as if woman were under a curse. At times
she feels the weight of it, but she never flees from it. Her shrieks and
ravings are not really genuine, and she succumbs to her fate at the
moment when it has seemed most repulsive to her.

After a long analysis, then, it has been found that there is no
exception to the complete absence in women of any true, inalienable
relation to worth. Even what is covered by such current terms as
“womanly love,” “womanly virtue,” “womanly devoutness,” “womanly
modesty,” has failed to invalidate my conclusions. I have maintained my
ground in face of the strongest opposition, even including that which
comes from woman’s hysterical imitations of the male morality.

Woman, the normal receptive woman of whom I am speaking, is impregnated
by the man not only physically (and I set down the astonishing mental
alteration in women after marriage to a physical phenomenon akin to
telegony), but at every age of her life, by man’s consciousness and by
man’s social arrangements. Thus it comes about that although woman lacks
all the characters of the male sex, she can assume them so cleverly and
so slavishly that it is possible to make mistakes such as the idea of
the higher morality of women.

But this astounding receptivity of woman is not isolated, and must be
brought into practical and theoretical connection with the other
positive and negative characteristics of woman.

What has the match-making instinct in woman to do with her plasticity?
What connection is there between her untruthfulness and her sexuality?
How does it come about that there is such a strange mixture of all these
things in woman?

This brings us to ask the reason why women can assimilate everything.
Whence does she derive the falsity which makes it possible for her to
prefer to believe only what others have told her, to have only what they
(choose to) give her, to be merely what they make her?

In order to give the right answer to these questions we must turn once
more, for the last time, from the actual point. It was found that the
power of recognition which animals possess, and which is the psychical
equivalent of universal organic response to repeated stimuli, was
curiously like and unlike human memory; both signify an equally lasting
influence of an impression which was limited to a definite period; but
memory is differentiated from mere passive recognition by its power of
actively reproducing the past.

Later on, it was seen that mere individuation, the characteristic of all
organic differentiation, and individuality, man’s possession, are
different. And finally it was found that it was necessary to distinguish
carefully between love, peculiar to man, and the sexual instinct, shared
by the animals. The two are allied inasmuch as they are both efforts at
immortality.

The desire for worth was referred to as a human character, absent in the
animals where there is only a desire for satisfaction. The two are
analogous, and yet fundamentally different. Pleasure is craved; worth is
what we feel we ought to crave. The two have been confused, with the
worst results for psychology and ethics. There has been a similar
confusion between personality and persons, between recognition and
memory, sexuality and love.

All these antitheses have been continually confused, and, what is even
more striking, almost always by men with the same views and theories,
and with the same object--that of trying to obliterate the difference
between man and the lower animals.

There are other less known distinctions which have been equally
neglected. Limited consciousness is an animal trait; the active power of
noticing is a purely human one. It is evident that there is something in
common in the two facts, but still they are very different. Desire, or
impulse, and will are nearly always spoken of as if they were identical.
The former is common to all living creatures, but man has, in addition,
a will, which is free, and no factor of psychology, because it is the
foundation of all psychological experiences. The identification of
impulse and will is not solely due to Darwin; it occurred also in
Schopenhauer’s conception of the will, which was sometimes biological,
sometimes purely philosophical.

I may group the two sets of factors as follows:

  Common to men and animals,  Limited to mankind, and in
  fundamentally organic.      particular to the males of
                              mankind.

  Individuation.              Individuality.

  Recognition.                Memory.

  Pleasure.                   Sense of worth or value.

  Sexual desire.              Love.

  Limitation of the field of  Faculty of “taking
  consciousness.              notice.”

  Impulse.                    Will.

The series shows that man possesses not only each character which is
found in all living things, but also an analogous and higher character
peculiar to himself. The old tendency at once to identify the two series
and to contrast them seems to show the existence of something binding
together the two series, and at the same time separating them. One may
recall in this connection the Buddhistic conception of there being in
man a superstructure added to the characters of lower existences. It is
as if man possessed all the properties of the beasts, with, in each
case, some special quality added. What is this that has been added? How
far does it resemble, and in what respects does it differ from, the more
primitive set?

The terms in the left-hand row are fundamental characteristics of all
animal and vegetable life. All such life is individual life, not the
life of undivided masses; it manifests itself as the impulse to satisfy
needs, as sexual impulse for the purpose of reproduction. Individuality,
memory, will, love, are those qualities of a second life, which,
although related to organic life to a certain extent, are _toto cœlo_
different from it.

This brings us face to face with the religious idea of the eternal,
higher, _new_ life, and especially with the Christian form of it.

As well as a share in organic life, man shares another life, the ζωη
αιωνιος of the New Dispensation. Just as all earthly life is sustained
by earthly food, this other life requires spiritual sustenance
(symbolised in the communion service). The birth and death of the former
have their counterparts in the latter--the moral re-birth of man, the
“regeneration”--and the end: the final loss of the soul through error or
crime. The one is determined from without by the bonds of natural
causation; the other is ruled by the moral imperative from within. The
one is limited and confined to a definite purpose; the other is
unlimited, eternal and moral. The characters which are in the left row
are common to all forms of lower life; those in the right-hand column
are the corresponding presages of eternal life, manifestations of a
higher existence in which man, and only man, has a share. The perpetual
intermingling and the fresh complications which arise between the higher
and lower natures are the making of all history of the human mind; this
is the plot of the history of the universe.

It is possible that some may perceive in this second life something
which in man might have been derived from the other lower characters;
such a possibility dismiss at once.

A clearer grasp of this sensuous, impressionable lower life will make it
clear that, as I have explained in earlier chapters, the case is
reversed; the lower life is merely a projection of the higher on the
world of the senses, a reflection of it in the sphere of necessity, as a
degradation of it, or its Fall. And the great problem is how the
eternal, lofty idea came to be bound with earth. This problem is the
guilt of the world. My investigation is now on the threshold of what
cannot be investigated; of a problem that so far no one has dared to
answer, and that never will be answered by any human being. It is the
riddle of the universe and of life; the binding of the unlimited in the
bonds of space, of the eternal in time, of the spirit in matter. It is
the relation of freedom to necessity, of something to nothing, of God to
the devil. The dualism of the world is beyond comprehension; it is the
plot of the story of man’s Fall, the primitive riddle. It is the binding
of eternal life in a perishable being, of the innocent in the guilty.

But it is evident that neither I nor any other man can understand this.
I can understand sin only when I cease to commit it, and the moment I
understand it I cease to commit it. So also I can never comprehend life
while I am still alive. There is no moment of my life when I am not
bound down by this sham existence, and it must be impossible for me to
understand the bond until I am free from it. When I understand a thing I
am already outside it; I cannot comprehend my sinfulness while I am
still sinful.

As the absolute female has no trace of individuality and will, no sense
of worth or of love, she can have no part in the higher, transcendental
life. The intelligible, hyperempirical existence of the male transcends
matter, space, and time. He is certainly mortal, but he is immortal as
well. And so he has the power to choose between the two, between the
life which is lost with death and the life to which death is only a
stepping-stone. The deepest will of man is towards this perfect,
timeless existence; he is compact of the desire for immortality. That
the woman has no craving for perpetual life is too apparent; there is
nothing in her of that eternal which man tries to interpose and must
interpose between his real self and his projected, empirical self. Some
sort of relation to the idea of supreme value, to the idea of the
absolute, that perfect freedom which he has not yet attained, because he
is bound by necessity, but which he can attain because mind is superior
to matter; such a relation to the purpose of things generally, or to the
divine, every man has. And although his life on earth is accompanied by
separation and detachment from the absolute, his mind is always longing
to be free from the taint of original sin.

Just as the love of his parents was not pure in purpose, but sought more
or less a physical embodiment, the son, who is the outcome of that love,
will possess his share of mortal life as well as of eternal: we are
horrified at the thought of death, we fight against it, cling to this
mortal life, and prove from that that we were anxious to be born as we
were born, and that we still desire to be born of this world.

But since every male has a relation to the idea of the highest value,
and would be incomplete without it, no male is really ever happy. It is
only women who are happy. No man is happy, because he has a relation to
freedom, and yet during his earthly life he is always bound in some way.
None but a perfectly passive being, such as the absolute female, or a
universally active being, like the divine, can be happy. Happiness is
the sense of perfect consummation, and this feeling a man can never
have; but there are women who fancy themselves perfect. The male always
has problems behind him and efforts before him: all problems originate
in the past; the future is the sphere for efforts. Time has no
objective, no meaning, for woman; no woman questions herself as to the
reason of her existence; and yet the sole purpose of time is to give
expression to the fact that this life can and must mean something.

Happiness for the male! That would imply wholly independent activity,
complete freedom; he is always bound, although not with the heaviest
bonds, and his sense of guilt increases the further he is removed from
the idea of freedom.

Mortal life is a calamity, and must remain so whilst mankind is a
passive victim of sensation; so long as he remains not form, but merely
the matter on which form is impressed. Every man, however, has some
glimmer of higher things; the genius most certainly and most directly.
This trace of light, however, does not come from his perceptions; so far
as he is ruled by these, man is merely a passive victim of surrounding
things. His spontaneity, his freedom, come from his power of judging as
to values, and his highest approach to absolute spontaneity and freedom
comes from love and from artistic or philosophical creation. Through
these he obtains some faint sense of what happiness might be.

Woman can really never be quite unhappy, for happiness is an empty word
for her, a word created by unhappy men. Women never mind letting others
see their unhappiness, as it is not real; behind it there lies no
consciousness of guilt, no sense of the sin of the world.

The last and absolute proof of the thoroughly negative character of
woman’s life, of her complete want of a higher existence, is derived
from the way in which women commit suicide.

Such suicides are accompanied practically always by thoughts of other
people, what they will think, how they will mourn over them, how
grieved--or angry--they will be. Every woman is convinced that her
unhappiness is undeserved at the time she kills herself; she pities
herself exceedingly with the sort of self-compassion which is only a
“weeping with others when they weep.”

How is it possible for a woman to look upon her unhappiness as personal
when she possesses no idea of a destiny? The most appallingly decisive
proof of the emptiness and nullity of women is that they never once
succeed in knowing the problem of their own lives, and death leaves them
ignorant of it, because they are unable to realise the higher life of
personality.

I am now ready to answer the question which I put forward as the chief
object of this portion of my book, the question as to the significance
of the male and female in the universe. Women have no existence and no
essence; they are not, they are nothing. Mankind occurs as male or
female, as something or nothing. Woman has no share in ontological
reality, no relation to the thing-in-itself, which, in the deepest
interpretation, is the absolute, is God. Man in his highest form, the
genius, has such a relation, and for him the absolute is either the
conception of the highest worth of existence, in which case he is a
philosopher; or it is the wonderful fairyland of dreams, the kingdom of
absolute beauty, and then he is an artist. But both views mean the same.
Woman has no relation to the idea, she neither affirms nor denies it;
she is neither moral nor anti-moral; mathematically speaking, she has no
sign; she is purposeless, neither good nor bad, neither angel nor devil,
never egoistical (and therefore has often been said to be altruistic);
she is as non-moral as she is non-logical. But all existence is moral
and logical existence. So woman has no existence.

Woman is untruthful. An animal has just as little metaphysical reality
as the actual woman, but it cannot speak, and consequently it does not
lie. In order to speak the truth one must _be_ something; truth is
dependent on an existence, and only that can have a relation to an
existence which is in itself something. Man desires truth all the time;
that is to say, he all along desires only to be something. The
cognition-impulse is in the end identical with the desire for
immortality. Any one who objects to a statement without ever having
realised it; any one who gives outward acquiescence without the inner
affirmation, such persons, like woman, have no real existence and must
of necessity lie. So that woman always lies, even if, objectively, she
speaks the truth.

Woman is the great emissary of pairing. The living units of the lower
forms of life are individuals, organisms; the living units of the higher
forms of life are individualities, souls, monads, “meta-organisms,” a
term which Hellenbach uses and which is not without point.

Each monad, however, is differentiated from every other monad, and is as
distinct from it as only two things can be. Monads have no windows, but,
instead, have the universe in themselves. Man as monad, as a potential
or actual individuality, that is, as having genius, has in addition
differentiation and distinction, individuation and discrimination; the
simple undifferentiated unit is exclusively female. Each monad creates
for itself a detached entity, a whole; but it looks upon every other ego
as a perfect totality also, and never intrudes upon it. Man has limits,
and accepts them and desires them; woman, who does not recognise her own
entity, is not in a position to regard or perceive the privacy of those
around her, and neither respects, nor honours, nor leaves it alone: as
there is no such thing as one-ness for her there can be no plurality,
only an indistinct state of fusion with others. Because there is no “I”
in woman she cannot grasp the “thou”; according to her perception the I
and thou are just a pair, an undifferentiated one; this makes it
possible for woman to bring people together, to match-make. The object
of her love is that of her sympathy--the community, the blending of
everything.[23]

  [23] All individuality is an enemy of the community. This is seen most
  markedly in men of genius, but it is just the same with regard to the
  sexes.

Woman has no limits to her ego which could be broken through, and which
she would have to guard.

The chief difference between man’s and woman’s friendship is referable
to this fact. Man’s friendship is an attempt to see eye to eye with
those who individually and collectively are striving after the same
idea; woman’s friendship is a combination for the purpose of
match-making. It is the only kind of intimate and unreserved intercourse
possible between women, when they are not merely anxious to meet each
other for the purpose of gossiping or discussing every day affairs.[24]

  [24] Men’s friendships avoid breaking down their friends’ personal
  reserve. Women expect intimacy from their friends.

If, for instance, one of two girls or women is much prettier than the
other, the plainer of the two experiences a certain sexual satisfaction
at the admiration which the other receives. The principal condition of
all friendship between women is the exclusion of rivalry; every woman
compares herself physically with every woman she gets to know. In cases
where one is more beautiful than the other, the plainer of the two will
idolise the other, because, though neither of them is in the least
conscious of it, the next best thing to her own sexual satisfaction for
the one is the success of the other; it is always the same; woman
participates in every sexual union. The completely impersonal existence
of women, as well as the super-individual nature of their sexuality,
clearly shows match-making to be the fundamental trait of their beings.

The least that even the ugliest woman demands, and from which she
derives a certain amount of pleasure, is that any one of her sex should
be admired and desired.

It follows from the absorbing and absorbable nature of woman’s life
that women can never feel really jealous. However ignoble jealousy and
the spirit of revenge may be, they both contain an element of greatness,
of which women, whether for good or evil, are incapable. In jealousy
there lies a despairing claim to an assumed right, and the idea of
justice is out of woman’s reach. But that is not the chief reason why a
woman can never be really jealous of any man. If a man, even if he were
the man she was madly in love with, were sitting in the next room making
love to another woman, the thoughts that would be aroused in her breast
would be so sexually exciting that they would leave no room for
jealousy. To a man, such a scene, if he knew of it, would be absolutely
repulsive, and it would be nauseous to him to be near it; woman would
feverishly follow each detail, or she would become hysterical if it
dawned on her what she was doing.

A man is never really affected by the idea of the pairing of others: he
is outside and above any such circumstance which has no meaning for him;
a woman, however, would be scarcely responsible for her interest in the
process, she would be in a state of feverish excitement and as if
spellbound by the thought of her proximity to it.

A man’s interest in his fellow men, who are problems for him, may extend
to their sexual affairs; but the curiosity which is specially for these
things is peculiar to woman, whether with regard to men or women. It is
the love affairs of a man which, from first to last, interest women; and
a man is only intellectually mysterious and charming to a woman so long
as she is not clear as to these.

From all this it is again manifest that femaleness and match-making are
identical; even a superficial study of the case would have resulted in
the same conclusions. But I had a much wider purpose, and I hope I have
clearly shown the connection between woman positive as match-maker, and
woman negative as utterly lacking in the higher life. Woman has but one
idea, an idea she cannot be conscious of, as it is her sole idea, and
that is absolutely opposed to the spiritual idea. Whether as a mother
seeking reputable matrimony, or the Bacchante of the Venusberg, whether
she wishes to be the foundress of a family, or is content to be lost in
the maze of pleasure-seekers, she always is in relation to the general
idea of the race as a whole of which she is an inseparable part, and she
follows the instinct which most of all makes for community.

She, as the missionary of union, must be a creature without limits or
individuality. I have prolonged this side of my investigation because
its important result has been omitted from all earlier characterology.

At this stage it well may be asked if women are really to be considered
human beings at all, or if my theory does not unite them with plants and
animals? For, according to the theory, women, just as little as plants
and animals, have any real existence, any relation to the intelligible
whole. Man alone is a microcosm, a mirror of the universe.

In Ibsen’s “Little Eyolf” there is a beautiful and apposite passage.

“Rita. ‘After all, we are only human beings.’

“Allmers. ‘But we have some kinship with the sky and the sea, Rita.’

“Rita. ‘You, perhaps; not me.’”

Woman, according to the poet, according to Buddha, and in my
interpretation, has no relation to the all, to the world whole, to God.
Is she then human, or an animal, or a plant?

Anatomists will find the question ridiculous, and will at once dismiss
the philosophy which could lead up to such a possibility. For them woman
is the female of _Homo sapiens_, differentiated from all other living
beings, and occupying the same position with regard to the human male
that the females of other species occupy with regard to their males. And
he will not allow the philosopher to say, “What has the anatomist to do
with me? Let him mind his own business.”

As a matter of fact, women are sisters of the flowers, and are in close
relationship with the animals. Many of their sexual perversities and
affections for animals (Pasiphäe myth and Leda myth) indicate this. But
they are human beings. Even the absolute woman, whom we think of as
without any trace of intelligible ego, is still the complement of man.
And there is no doubt that the fact of the special sexual and erotic
completion of the human male by the human female, even if it is not the
moral phenomenon which advocates of marriage would have us believe, is
still of tremendous importance to the woman problem. Animals are mere
individuals; women are persons, although they are not personalities.

An appearance of discriminative power, though not the reality, language,
though not conversation, memory, though it has no continuity or unity of
consciousness--must all be granted to them.

They possess counterfeits of everything masculine, and thus are subject
to those transformations which the defenders of womanliness are so fond
of quoting. The result of this is a sort of amphi-sexuality of many
ideas (honour, shame, love, imagination, fear, sensibility, and so on),
which have both a masculine and feminine significance.

There now remains to discuss the real meaning of the contrast between
the sexes.

The parts played by the male and female principles in the animal and
vegetable kingdoms are not now under consideration; we are dealing
solely with humanity.

That such principles of maleness and femaleness must be accepted as
theoretical conceptions, and not as metaphysical ideas, was the point of
this investigation from the beginning. The whole object of the book has
been to settle the question, in man at least, of the really important
differences between man and woman, quite apart from the mere
physiological-sexual differentiation. Furthermore, the view which sees
nothing more in the fact of the dualism of the sexes than an arrangement
for physiological division of labour--an idea for which, I believe, the
zoologist, Milne-Edwards, is responsible--appears, according to this
work, quite untenable; and it is useless to waste time discussing such a
superficial and intellectually complacent view.

Darwinism, indeed, is responsible for making popular the view that
sexually differentiated organisms have been derived from earlier stages
in which there was no sexual dimorphism; but long before Darwin, Gustav
Theodor Fechner had already shown that the sexes could not be supposed
to have arisen from an undifferentiated stage by any principle such as
division of labour, adaptation to the struggle for existence, and so
forth.

The ideas “man” and “woman” cannot be investigated separately; their
significance can be found out only by placing them side by side and
contrasting them. The key to their natures must be found in their
relations to each other. In attempting to discover the nature of erotics
I went a little way into this subject. The relation of man to woman is
simply that of subject to object. Woman seeks her consummation as the
object. She is the plaything of husband or child, and, however we may
try to hide it, she is anxious to be nothing but such a chattel.

No one misunderstands so thoroughly what a woman wants as he who tries
to find out what is passing within her, endeavouring to share her
feelings and hopes, her experiences and her real nature.

Woman does not wish to be treated as an active agent; she wants to
remain always and throughout--this is just her womanhood--purely
passive, to feel herself under another’s will. She demands only to be
desired physically, to be taken possession of, like a new property.

Just as mere sensation only attains reality when it is apprehended,
_i.e._, when it becomes objective, so a woman is brought to a sense of
her existence only by her husband or children--by these as subjects to
whom she is the object--so obtaining the gift of an existence.

The contrast between the subject and the object in the theory of
knowledge corresponds ontologically to the contrast between form and
matter. It is no more than a translation of this distinction from the
theory of experience to metaphysics. Matter, which in itself is
absolutely unindividualised and so can assume any form, of itself has
no definite and lasting qualities, and has as little essence as mere
perception, the matter of experience, has in itself any existence. If
the Platonic conception is followed out, it will be apparent that that
great thinker asserted to be nothing what the ordinary Philistine
regards as the highest form of reality. According to Plato, the negation
of existence is no other than matter. Form is the only real existence.
Aristotle carried the Platonic conception into the regions of biology.
For Plato form is the parent and creator of all reality. For Aristotle,
in the sexual process the male principle is the active, formative agent,
the female principle the passive matter on which the form is impressed.
In my view, the significance of woman in humanity is explained by the
Platonic and Aristotelian conception. Woman is the material on which man
acts. Man as the microcosm is compounded of the lower and higher life.
Woman is matter, is nothing. This knowledge gives us the keystone to our
structure, and it makes everything clear that was indistinct, it gives
things a coherent form. Woman’s sexual part depends on contact; it is
the absorbing and not the liberating impulse. It coincides with this,
that the keenest sense woman has, and the only one she has more highly
developed than man, is the sense of touch. The eye and the ear lead to
the unlimited and give glimpses of infinity; the sense of touch
necessitates physical limitations to our own actions: one is affected by
what one feels; it is the eminently sordid sense, and suited to the
physical requirements of an earth-bound being.

Man is form, woman is matter: if that is so it must find expression in
the relations between their respective psychic experiences.

The summing up of the connected nature of man’s mental life, as opposed
to the inarticulate and chaotic condition of woman’s, illustrates the
above antithesis of form and matter.

Matter needs to be formed: and thus woman demands that man should clear
her confusion of thought, give meaning to her henid ideas. Women are
matter, which can assume any shape. Those experiments which ascribe to
girls a better memory for learning by rote than boys are explained in
this way: they are due to the nullity and inanity of women, who can be
saturated with anything and everything, whilst man only retains what has
an interest for him, forgetting all else.

This accounts for what has been called woman’s submissiveness, the way
she is influenced by the opinions of others, her suggestibility, the way
in which man moulds her formless nature. Woman is nothing; therefore,
and only therefore, she can become everything, whilst man can only
remain what he is. A man can make what he likes of a woman: the most a
woman can do is to help a man to achieve what he wants.

A man’s real nature is never altered by education: woman, on the other
hand, by external influences, can be taught to suppress her most
characteristic self, the real value she sets on sexuality.

Woman can appear everything and deny everything, but in reality she is
never anything.

Women have neither this nor that characteristic; their peculiarity
consists in having no characteristics at all; the complexity and
terrible mystery about women come to this; it is this which makes them
above and beyond man’s understanding--man, who always wants to get to
the heart of things.

It may be said, even by those who may wish to agree with the foregoing
arguments, that they have not indicated what man really is. Has he any
special male characteristics, like match-making and want of character in
women? Is there a definite idea of what man is, as there is of woman,
and can this idea be similarly formulated?

Here is the answer: The idea of maleness consists in the fact of an
individuality, of an essential monad, and is covered by it. Each monad,
however, is as different as possible from every other monad, and
therefore cannot be classified in one comprehensive idea common to many
other monads. Man is the microcosm; he contains all kinds of
possibilities. This must not be confused with the universal
susceptibility of woman who becomes all without _being_ anything, whilst
man is all, as much or as little, according to his gifts, as he will.
Man contains woman, for he contains matter, and he can allow this part
of his nature to develop itself, _i.e._, to thrive and enervate him; or
he can recognise and fight against it--so that he, and he alone, can get
at the truth about woman. But woman cannot develop except through man.

The meaning of man and woman is first arrived at when we examine their
mutual sexual and erotic relations. Woman’s deepest desire is to be
formed by man, and so to receive her being. Woman desires that man
should impart opinions to her quite different to those she held before,
she is content to let herself be turned by him from what she had till
then thought right. She wishes to be taken to pieces as a whole, so that
he may build her up again.

Woman is first created by man’s will--he dominates her and changes her
whole being (hypnotism). Here is the explanation of the relation of the
psychical to the physical in man and woman. Man assumes a reciprocal
action of body and mind, in the sense rather that the dominant mind
creates the body, than that the mind merely projects itself on
phenomena, whilst the woman accepts both mental and psychical phenomena
empirically. None the less, even in the woman there is some reciprocal
action. However, whilst in the man, as Schopenhauer truly taught, the
human being is his own creation, his own will makes and re-makes the
body, the woman is bodily influenced and changed by an alien will
(suggestion).

Man not only forms himself, but woman also--a far easier matter. The
myths of the book of Genesis and other cosmogonies, which teach that
woman was created out of man, are nearer the truth than the biological
theories of descent, according to which males have been evolved from
females.

We have now to come to the question left open in chap. ix., as to how
woman, who is herself without soul or will, is yet able to realise to
what extent a man may be endowed with them; and we may now endeavour to
answer it. Of this one must be certain, that what woman notices, that
for which she has a sense, is not the special nature of man, but only
the general fact and possibly the grade of his maleness. It is quite
erroneous to suppose that woman has an innate capacity to understand the
individuality of a man. The lover, who is so easily fooled by the
unconscious simulation of a deeper comprehension on the part of his
sweetheart, may believe that he understands himself through a girl; but
those who are less easily satisfied cannot help seeing that women only
possess a sense of the fact not of the individuality of the soul, only
for the formal general fact, not for the differentiation of the
personality. In order to perceive and apperceive the special form,
matter must not itself be formless; woman’s relation to man, however, is
nothing but that of matter to form, and her comprehension of him nothing
but willingness to be as much formed as possible by him; the instinct of
those without existence for existence. Furthermore, this “comprehension”
is not theoretical, it is not sympathetic, it is only a desire to be
sympathetic; it is importunate and egoistical. Woman has no relation to
man and no sense of man, but only for maleness; and if she is to be
considered as more sexual than man, this greater claim is nothing but
the intense desire for the fullest and most definite formation, it is
the demand for the greatest possible quantity of existence.

And, finally, match-making is nothing else than this. The sexuality of
women is super-individual, because they are not limited, formed,
individualised entities, in the higher sense of the word.

The supremest moment in a woman’s life, when her original nature, her
natural desire manifests itself, is that in which her own sexual union
takes place. She embraces the man passionately and presses him to her;
it is the greatest joy of passivity, stronger even than the contented
feeling of a hypnotised person, the desire of matter which has just been
formed, and wishes to keep that form for ever. That is why a woman is so
grateful to her possessor, even if the gratitude is limited to the
moment, as in the case of prostitutes with no memory, or, if it lasts
longer, as in the case of more highly differentiated women.

This endless striving of the poor to attach themselves to riches, the
altogether formless and therefore super-individual striving of the
inarticulate to obtain form by contact, to keep it indefinitely and so
gain an existence, is the deepest motive in pairing.

Pairing is only possible because woman is not a monad, and has no sense
of individuality; it is the endless striving of nothing to be something.

It is thus that the duality of man and woman has gradually developed
into complete dualism, to the dualism of the higher and lower lives, of
subject and object, of form and matter, something and nothing. All
metaphysical, all transcendental existence is logical and moral
existence; woman is non-logical and non-moral. She has no dislike for
what is logical and moral, she is not anti-logical, she is not
anti-moral. She is not the negation, she is, rather, nothing. She is
neither the affirmation nor the denial. A man has in himself the
possibility of being the absolute something or the absolute nothing, and
therefore his actions are directed towards the one or the other; woman
does not sin, for she herself is the sin which is a possibility in man.

The abstract male is the image of God, the absolute something; the
female, and the female element in the male, is the symbol of nothing;
that is the significance of the woman in the universe, and in this way
male and female complete and condition one another. Woman has a meaning
and a function in the universe as the opposite of man; and as the human
male surpasses the animal male, so the human female surpasses the female
of zoology. It is not that limited existence and limited negation (as in
the animal kingdom) are at war in humanity; what there stand in
opposition are unlimited existence and unlimited negation. And so male
and female make up humanity.

The meaning of woman is to be meaningless. She represents negation, the
opposite pole from the Godhead, the other possibility of humanity. And
so nothing is so despicable as a man become female, and such a person
will be regarded as the supreme criminal even by himself. And so also is
to be explained the deepest fear of man; the fear of the woman, which is
the fear of unconsciousness, the alluring abyss of annihilation.

An old woman manifests once for all what woman really is. The beauty of
woman, as may be experimentally proved, is only created by love of a
man; a woman becomes more beautiful when a man loves her because she is
passively responding to the will which is in her lover; however deep
this may sound, it is only a matter of everyday experience.

All the qualities of woman depend on her non-existence, on her want of
character; because she has no true, permanent, but only a mortal life,
in her character as the advocate of pairing she furthers the sexual part
of life, and is fundamentally transformed by and susceptible to the man
who has a physical influence over her.

Thus the three fundamental characters of woman with which this chapter
has dealt come together in the conception of her as the non-existent.
Her instability and untruthfulness are only negative deductions from the
premiss of her non-existence. Her only positive character, the
conception of her as the pairing agent, comes from it by a simple
process of analysis. The nature of woman is no more than pairing, no
more than super-individual sexuality.

If we turn to the table of the two kinds of life given earlier in this
chapter, it will be apparent that every inclination from the higher to
the lower is a crime against oneself. Immorality is the will towards
negation, the craving to change the formed into the formless, the wish
for destruction. And from this comes the intimate relation between
femaleness and crime. There is a close relation between the immoral and
the non-moral. It is only when man accepts his own sexuality, denies the
absolute in him, turns to the lower, that he gives woman existence. The
acceptance of the Phallus is immoral. It has always been thought of as
hateful; it has been the image of Satan, and Dante made it the central
pillar of hell.

Thus comes about the domination of the male sexuality over the female.
It is only when man is sexual that woman has existence and meaning.

Her existence is bound up with the Phallus, and so that is her supreme
lord and welcome master.

Sex, in the form of man, is woman’s fate; the Don Juan is the only type
of man who has complete power over her.

The curse, which was said to be heavy on woman, is the evil will of man:
nothing is only a tool in the hand of the will for nothing. The early
Fathers expressed it pathetically when they called woman the handmaid of
the devil. For matter in itself is nothing, it can only obtain existence
through form. The fall of “form” is the corruption that takes place when
form endeavours to relapse into the formless. When man became sexual he
formed woman. That woman is at all has happened simply because man has
accepted his sexuality. Woman is merely the result of this affirmation;
she is sexuality itself. Woman’s existence is dependent on man; when
man, as man, in contradistinction to woman, is sexual, he is giving
woman form, calling her into existence. Therefore woman’s one object
must be to keep man sexual. She desires man as Phallus, and for this she
is the advocate of pairing. She is incapable of making use of any
creature except as a means to an end, the end being pairing; and she has
but one purpose, that of continuing the guilt of man, for she would
disappear the moment man had overcome his sexuality.

Man created woman, and will always create her afresh, as long as he is
sexual. Just as he gives woman consciousness, so he gives her existence.
Woman is the sin of man.

He tries to pay the debt by love. Here we have the explanation of what
seemed like an obscure myth at the end of the previous chapter. Now we
see what was hidden in it: that woman is nothing before man’s fall, nor
without it; that he does not rob her of anything she had before. The
crime man has committed in creating woman, and still commits in
assenting to her purpose, he excuses to woman by his eroticism.

Whence otherwise would come the generosity of love, which can never be
satisfied by giving? How is it that love is so anxious to endow woman
with a soul, and not any other creature? Whence comes it that a child
cannot love until love coincides with sexuality, the stage of puberty,
with the repeated forming of woman, with the renewing of sin? Woman is
nothing but man’s expression and projection of his own sexuality. Every
man creates himself a woman, in which he embodies himself and his own
guilt.

But woman is not herself guilty; she is made so by the guilt of others,
and everything for which woman is blamed should be laid at man’s door.

Love strives to cover guilt, instead of conquering it; it elevates woman
instead of nullifying her. The “something” folds the “nothing” in its
arms, and thinks thus to free the universe of negation and drown all
objections; whereas the nothing would only disappear if the something
put it away.

Since man’s hatred for woman is not conscious hatred of his own
sexuality, his love is his most intense effort to save woman as woman,
instead of desiring to nullify her in himself. And the consciousness of
guilt comes from the fact that the object of guilt is coveted instead of
being annihilated.

Woman alone, then, is guilt; and is so through man’s fault. And if
femaleness signifies pairing, it is only because all guilt endeavours to
increase its circle. What woman, always unconsciously, accomplishes, she
does because she cannot help it; it is her reason for being, her whole
nature. She is only a part of man, his other, ineradicable, his lower
part. So matter appears to be as inexplicable a riddle as form; woman as
unending as man, negation as eternal as existence; but this eternity is
only the eternity of guilt.


