CHAPTER II

MALE AND FEMALE PLASMAS

The first thing expected of a book like this, the avowed object of which
is a complete revision of facts hitherto accepted, is that it should
expound a new and satisfactory account of the anatomical and
physiological characters of the sexual types. Quite apart from the
abstract question as to whether the complete survey of a subject so
enormous is not beyond the powers of one individual, I must at once
disclaim any intention of making the attempt. I do not pretend to have
made sufficient independent investigations in a field so wide, nor do I
think such a review necessary for the purpose of this book. Nor is it
necessary to give a compilation of the results set out by other authors,
for Havelock Ellis has already done this very well. Were I to attempt to
reach the sexual types by means of the probable inferences drawn from
his collected results, my work would be a mere hypothesis and science
might have been spared a new book. The arguments in this chapter,
therefore, will be of a rather formal and general nature; they will
relate to biological principles, but to a certain extent will lay stress
on the need for a closer investigation of certain definite points, work
which must be left to the future, but which may be rendered more easy by
my indications.

Those who know little of Biology may scan this section hastily, and yet
run little risk of failing to understand what follows.

The doctrine of the existence of different degrees of masculinity and
femininity may be treated, in the first place, on purely anatomical
lines. Not only the anatomical form, but the anatomical position of
male and female characters must be discussed. The examples already given
of sexual differences in other parts of the body showed that sexuality
is not limited to the genital organs and glands. But where are the
limits to be placed? Do they not reach beyond the primary and secondary
sexual characters? In other words, where does sex display itself, and
where is it without influence?

Many points came to light in the last decade, which bring fresh support
to a theory first put forward in 1840, but which at the time found
little support since it appeared to be in direct opposition to facts
held as established alike by the author of the theory and by his
opponents. The theory in question, first suggested by the zoologist J.
J. S. Steenstrup, of Copenhagen, but since supported by many others, is
that sexual characters are present in every part of the body.

Ellis has collected the results of investigations on almost every tissue
of the body, which serve to show the universal presence of sexual
differences. It is plain that there is a striking difference in the
coloration of the typical male and female. This fact establishes the
existence of sexual differences in the skin (cutis) and in the
blood-vessels, and also in the bulk of the colouring-matter in the blood
and in the number of red corpuscles to the cubic centimetre of the blood
fluid. Bischoff and Rudinger have proved the existence of sexual
differences in brain weight, and more recently Justus and Alice Gaule
have obtained a similar result with regard to such vegetative organs as
the liver, lungs and spleen. In fact, all parts of a woman, although in
different degrees in different zones, have a sexual stimulus for the
male organism, and similarly all parts of the male have their effect on
the female.

The direct logical inference may be drawn, and is supported by abundant
facts, that every cell in the body is sexually characteristic and has
its definite sexual significance. I may now add to the principle already
laid down in this book, of the universal presence of sexually
intermediate conditions, that these conditions may present different
degrees of development. Such a conception of the existence of different
degrees of development in sexuality makes it easy to understand cases of
false hermaphroditism or even of the true hermaphroditism, which, since
the time of Steenstrup, has been established for so many plants and
animals, although not certainly in the case of man. Steenstrup wrote:
“If the sex of an animal has its seat only in the genital organs, then
one might think it possible for an animal really to be bisexual, if it
had at the same time two sets of sexual organs. But sex is not limited
to one region, it manifests itself not merely by the presence of certain
organs; it pervades the whole being and shows itself in every point. In
a male body, everything down to the smallest part is male, however much
it may resemble the corresponding female part, and so also in the female
the smallest part is female. The presence of male and female sexual
organs in the same body would make the body bisexual only if both sexes
ruled the whole body and made themselves manifest in every point, and
such a condition, as the manifestations of the sexes are opposing
forces, would result simply in the negation of sex in the body in
question.” If, however, the principle of the existence of innumerable
sexually transitional conditions be extended to all the cells of the
body, and empirical knowledge supports such a view, Steenstrup’s
difficulty is resolved, and hermaphroditism no longer appears to be
unnatural. There may be conceived for every cell all conditions, from
complete masculinity through all stages of diminishing masculinity to
its complete absence and the consequent presence of complete femininity.
Whether we are to think of these gradations in the scale of sexual
differentiation as depending on two real substances united in different
proportions, or as a single kind of protoplasm modified in different
ways (as, for instance, by different spatial dispositions of its
molecules), it were wiser not to guess. The first conception is
difficult to apply physiologically; it is extremely difficult to imagine
that two sets of conditions should be able to produce the essential
physiological similarities of two bodies, one with a male and the other
a female diathesis. The second view recalls too vividly certain
unfortunate speculations on heredity. Perhaps both views are equally far
from the truth. At present empirical knowledge does not enable us to say
wherein the masculinity or the femininity of a cell really lies, or to
define the histological, molecular or chemical differences which
distinguish every cell of a male from every cell of a female. Without
anticipating any discovery of the future (it is plain already, however,
that the specific phenomena of living matter are not going to be
referred to chemistry and physics), it may be taken for granted that
individual cells possess sexuality in different degrees quite apart from
the sexuality of the whole body. Womanish men usually have the skin
softer, and in them the cells of the male organs have a lessened power
of division upon which depends directly the poorer development of the
male macroscopic characters.

The distribution of sexual characters affords an important proof of the
appearance of sexuality in different degrees. Such characters (at least
in the animal kingdom) may be arranged according to the strength of
their exciting influence on the opposite sex. To avoid confusion, I
shall make use of John Hunter’s terms for classifying sexual characters.
The primordial sexual characters are the male and female genital glands
(testes and epididymis, ovaries and epoophoron); the primary sexual
characters are the internal appendages of the sexual glands (vasa
deferentia vesiculæ seminales, oviducts and uterus), which may have
sexual characters quite distinct from those of the glands and the
external sexual organs, according to which alone the sex of human beings
is reckoned at birth (sometimes quite erroneously, as I shall show) and
their consequent fate in life decided. After the primary, come all those
sexual characters not directly necessary to reproduction. Such secondary
sexual characters are best defined as those which begin to appear at
puberty, and which cannot be developed except under the influence on the
system of the internal secretions of the genital glands. Examples of
these are the beards in men, the luxuriant growth of hair in women, the
development of the mammary glands, the character of the voice. As a
convenient mode of treatment, and for practical rather than theoretical
reasons, certain inherited characters, such as the development of
muscular strength or of mental obstinacy may be reckoned as tertiary
sexual characters. Under the designation “quaternary sexual characters”
may be placed such accessories as relative social position, difference
in habit, mode of livelihood, the smoking and drinking habit in man, and
the domestic duties of women. All these characters possess a potent and
direct sexual influence, and in my opinion often may be reckoned with
the tertiary characters or even with the secondary. This classification
of sexual characters must not be taken as implying a definite chain of
sequence, nor must it be assumed that the mental sexual characters
either determine the bodily characters or are determined by them in some
causal nexus. The classification relates only to the strength of the
exciting influence on the other sex, to the order in time in which this
influence is exerted, and to the degree of certainty with which the
extent of the influence may be predicted.

Study of secondary sexual characters is bound up with consideration of
the effect of internal secretions of the genital glands on general
metabolism. The relation of this influence or its absence (as in the
case of artificially castrated animals) has been traced out in the
degree of development of the secondary characters. The internal
secretions, however, undoubtedly have an influence on all the cells of
the body. This is clearly shown by the changes which occur at puberty in
all parts of the body, and not only in the seats of the secondary sexual
characters. As a matter of fact, the internal secretions of all the
glands must be regarded as affecting all the tissues.

The internal secretions of the genital glands must be regarded as
completing the sexuality of the individual. Every cell must be
considered as possessing an original sexuality, to which the influence
of the internal secretion in sufficient quantity is the final
determining condition under the influence of which the cell acquires its
final determinate character as male or female.

The genital glands are the organs in which the sex of the individual is
most obvious, and in the component cells of which it is most
conspicuously visible. At the same time it must be noted that the
distinguishing characters of the species, race and family to which an
organism belongs are also best marked in the genital cells. Just as
Steenstrup, on the one hand, was right in teaching that sex extends all
over the body and is not confined to the genital organs, so, on the
other hand, Naegeli, de Vries, Oskar Hertwig and others have propounded
the important theory, and supported it by weighty arguments, that every
cell in a multi-cellular organism possesses a combination of the
characters of its species and race, but that these characters are, as it
were, specially condensed in the sexual cells. Probably this view of the
case will come to be accepted by all investigators, since every living
being owes its origin to the cleavage and multiplication of a single
cell.

Many phenomena, amongst which may be noticed specially experiments on
the regeneration of lost parts and investigations into the chemical
differences between the corresponding tissues of nearly allied animals,
have led the investigators to whom I have just referred to conceive the
existence of an “Idioplasm,” which is the bearer of the specific
characters, and which exists in all the cells of a multi-cellular
animal, quite apart from the purposes of reproduction. In a similar
fashion I have been led to the conception of an “Arrhenoplasm” (male
plasm) and a “Thelyplasm” (female plasm) as the two modes in which the
idioplasm of every bisexual organism may appear, and which are to be
considered, because of reasons which I shall explain, as ideal
conditions between which the actual conditions always lie. Actually
existing protoplasm is to be thought of as moving from an ideal
arrhenoplasm through a real or imaginary indifferent condition (true
hermaphroditism) towards a protoplasm that approaches, but never
actually reaches, an ideal thelyplasm. This conception brings to a point
what I have been trying to say. I apologise for the new terms, but they
are more than devices to call attention to a new idea.

The proof that every single organ, and further, that every single cell
possesses a sexuality lying somewhere between arrhenoplasm and
thelyplasm, and further, that every cell received an original sexual
endowment definite in kind and degree, is to be found in the fact that
even in the same organism the different cells do not always possess
their sexuality identical in kind and degree. In fact each cell of a
body neither contains the same proportion of M and W nor is at the same
approximation to arrhenoplasm or thelyplasm; similar cells of the same
body may indeed lie on different sides of the sexually neutral point.
If, instead of writing “masculinity” and “femininity” at length, we
choose signs to express these, and without any malicious intention
choose the positive sign (+) for M and the negative (-) for W, then our
proposition may be expressed as follows: The sexuality of the different
cells of the same organism differs not only in absolute quantity but is
to be expressed by a different sign. There are many men with a poor
growth of beard and a weak muscular development who are otherwise
typically males; and so also many women with badly developed breasts are
otherwise typically womanly. There are womanish men with strong beards
and masculine women with abnormally short hair who none the less possess
well-developed breasts and broad pelves. I know several men who have the
upper part of the thigh of a female with a normally male under part, and
some with the right hip of a male and the left of a female. In most
cases these local variations of the sexual character affect both sides
of the body, although of course it is only in ideal bodies that there is
complete symmetry about the middle line. The degree to which sexuality
displays itself, however, as, for instance, in the growth of hair, is
very often unsymmetrical. This want of uniformity (and the sexual
manifestations never show complete uniformity) can hardly depend on
differences of the internal secretion; for the blood goes to all the
organs, having in it the same amount of the internal secretion; although
different organs may receive different quantities of blood, in all
normal cases its quality and quantity being proportioned to the needs of
the part.

Were we not to assume as the cause of these variations the presence of a
sexual determinant generally different in every cell but stable from its
earliest embryonic development, then it would be simple to describe the
sexuality of any individual by estimating how far its sexual glands
conformed to the normal type of its sex, and the facts would be much
simpler than they really are. Sexuality, however, cannot be regarded as
occurring in an imaginary normal quantity distributed equally all over
an individual so that the sexual character of any cell would be a
measure of the sexual characters of any other cells. Whilst, as an
exception, there may occur wide differences in the sexual characters of
different cells or organs of the same body, still as a rule there is the
same specific sexuality for all the cells. In fact it may be taken as
certain that an approximation to a complete uniformity of sexual
character over the whole body is much more common than the tendency to
any considerable divergences amongst the different organs or still more
amongst the different cells. How far these possible variations may go
can be determined only by the investigation of individual cases.

There is a popular view, dating back to Aristotle and supported by many
doctors and zoologists, that the castration of an animal is followed by
the sudden appearance of the characters of the other sex; if the gelding
of a male were to bring about the appearance of female characteristics
then doubt would be thrown on the existence in every cell of a
primordial sexuality independent of the genital glands. The most recent
experimental results of Sellheim and Foges, however, have shown that the
type of a gelded male is distinct from the female type, that gelding
does not induce the feminine character. It is better to avoid too
far-reaching and radical conclusions on this matter; it may be that a
second latent gland of the other sex may awake into activity and
sexually dominate the deteriorating organism after the removal or
atrophy of the normal gland. There are many cases (too readily
interpreted as instances of complete assumption of the male character)
in which after the involution of the female sexual glands at the
climacteric the secondary sexual characters of the male are acquired.
Instances of this are the beard of the human grandam, the occasional
appearance of short antlers in old does, or of a cock’s plumage in an
old hen. But such changes are practically never seen except in
association with senile decay or with operative interference.

In the case of certain crustacean parasites of fish, however (the genera
_Cymothoa_, _Anilocra_ and _Nerocila_ of the family _Cymothoidæ_), the
changes I have just mentioned are part of the normal life history. These
creatures are hermaphrodites of a peculiar kind; the male and female
organs co-exist in them but are not functional at the same period. A
sort of protandry exists; each individual exercises first the functions
of a male and afterwards those of the female. During the time of their
activity as males they possess ordinary male reproductive organs which
are cast off when the female genital ducts and brood organs develop.
That similar conditions may exist in man has been shown by those cases
of “eviratio” and “effeminatio” which the sexual pathology of the old
age of men has brought to light. So also we cannot deny altogether the
actual occurrence of a certain degree of effeminacy when the crucial
operation of extirpation of the human testes has been performed.[1] On
the other hand, the fact that the relation is not universal or
inevitable, that the castration of an individual does not certainly
result in the appearance of the characters of the other sex, may be
taken as a proof that it is necessary to assume the original presence
throughout the body of cells determined by arrhenoplasm or thelyplasm.

  [1] So also in the opposite case; it cannot be wholly denied that
  ovariotomy is followed by the appearance of masculine characters.

The possession by every cell of primitive sexuality on which the
secretion of the sexual glands has little effect might be shown further
by consideration of the effects of grafting male genital glands on
female organisms. For such an experiment to be accurate it would be
necessary that the animal from which the testis was to be transplanted
should be as near akin as possible to the female on which the testis was
to be grafted, as, for instance, in the case of a brother and sister;
the idioplasm of the two should be as alike as possible. In this
experiment much would depend on limiting the conditions of the
experiment as much as possible so that the results would not be confused
by conflicting factors. Experiments made in Vienna have shown that when
an exchange of the ovaries has been made between unrelated female
animals (chosen at random) the atrophy of the ovaries follows, but that
there is no failure of the secondary sexual characters (_e.g._,
degeneration of the mammæ). Moreover, when the genital glands of an
animal are removed from their natural position and grafted in a new
position in the same animal (so that it still retains its own tissues)
the full development of the secondary sexual characters goes on
precisely as if there had been no interference, at least in cases where
the operation is successful. The failure of the transplantation of
ovaries from one animal to another may be due to the absence of family
relationship between the tissues; the influence of the idioplasm
probably is of primary importance.

These experiments closely resemble those made in the transfusion of
alien blood. It is a practical rule with surgeons that when a dangerous
loss of blood has to be made good, the blood required for transfusion
must be obtained from an individual not only of the same species and
family, but also of the same sex as that of the patient. The parallel
between transfusion and transplantation is at once evident. If I am
correct in my views, when surgeons seek to transfuse blood, instead of
being content with injections of normal salt solution they must take
the blood not merely from one of the same species, family and sex, but
of a similar degree of masculinity or femininity.

Experiments on transfusion not only lend support to my belief in the
existence of sex characters in the blood corpuscles, but they furnish
additional explanations of the failure of experiments in grafting
ovaries or testis on individuals of the opposite sex. The internal
secretions of the genital glands are operative only in their appropriate
environment of arrhenoplasm or thelyplasm.

In this connection, I may say a word as to the curative value of
organotherapy. Although, as I have shown to be the case, the
transplantation of freshly extirpated genital glands into subjects of
the opposite sex has no effect, it does not follow that the injection of
the ovarian secretion into the blood of a male might not have a most
injurious effect. On the other hand, the principle of organotherapy has
been opposed on the ground that organic preparations procured from
non-allied species could not possibly be expected to yield good results.
It is more than likely that the medical exponents of organotherapy have
lost many valuable discoveries in healing because of their neglect of
the biological theory of idioplasm.

The theory of an idioplasm, the presence of which gives the specific
race characters to those tissues and cells which have lost the
reproductive faculty, is by no means generally accepted. But at the
least all must admit that the race characters are collected in the
genital glands, and that if experiments with extracts from these are to
provide more than a good tonic, the nearest possible relationship
between the animals experimented upon must be observed. Parallel
experiments might be made as to the effect of transplantation of the
genital glands and injections of their extracts on two castrated cocks
of the same strain. For instance, the effects of the transplantation of
the testes of one of them into any other part of its own body or
peritoneal cavity or into any similar part of the other cock might be
compared with the effects of intravenous injection of testis extract of
the one on the other. Such parallel investigations would also increase
our knowledge as to the most suitable media and quantities of the
extracts. It is also to be desired, from the theoretical point of view,
that knowledge may be gained as to whether the internal secretion of the
genital glands enters into chemical union with the protoplasm of the
cells or whether it acts as a physiological stimulus independent of the
quantity supplied. So far we know nothing that would enable us to come
to a definite opinion on this point.

The limited influence of the internal secretions of the sexual glands in
forming the sexual characters must be realised to warrant the theory of
a primary, generally slight, difference in each cell, but still
determinate sexual influence.[2] If the existence of distinct
graduations of these primary characteristics in all the cells and
tissues can be recognised, there follow many important and far-reaching
conclusions. The individual egg-cells and spermatozoa may be found to
possess different degrees of maleness and femaleness, not only in
different individuals, but in the ovaries and testes of the same
individual, especially at different times; for instance, the spermatozoa
differ in size and activity. We are still quite ignorant on these
matters, as no one has worked on the requisite lines.

  [2] The existence of sexual distinctions before puberty shows that the
  power of the internal secretions of the sexual glands does not account
  for everything.

It is extremely interesting to recall in this connection that many times
different investigators have observed in the testes of amphibia not only
the different stages in the development of spermatozoa, but mature eggs.
This interpretation of the observations was at first disputed, and it
was suggested that the presence of unusually large cells in the tubes of
the testes had given rise to the error, but the matter has now been
fully confirmed. Moreover, in these Amphibia, sexually intermediate
conditions are very common, and this should lead us to be careful in
making statements as to the uniform presence of arrhenoplasm or
thelyplasm in a body. The methods of assigning sex to a new-born infant
seem most unsatisfactory in the light of these facts. If the child is
observed to possess a male organ, even although there may be complete
epi- or hypo-spadism, or a double failure of descent of the testes, it
is at once described as a boy and is henceforth treated as one, although
in other parts of the body, for instance in the brain, the sexual
determinant may be much nearer thelyplasm than arrhenoplasm. The sooner
a more exact method of sex discrimination is insisted upon the better.

As a result of these long inductions and deductions we may rest assured
that all the cells possess a definite primary sexual determinant which
must not be assumed to be alike or nearly alike throughout the same
body. Every cell, every cell-complex, and every organ have their
distinctive indices on the scale between thelyplasm and arrhenoplasm.
For the exact definition of the sex, an estimation of the indices over
the whole body would be necessary. I should be content to bear the blame
of all the theoretical and practical errors in this book did I believe
myself to have made the working out of a single case possible.

Differences in the primary sexual determinants, together with the
varying internal secretions (which differ in quantity and quality in
different individuals) produce the phenomena of sexually intermediate
forms. Arrhenoplasm and thelyplasm, in their countless modifications,
are the microscopic agencies which, in co-operation with the internal
secretions, give rise to the macroscopic differences cited in the last
chapter.

If the correctness of the conclusions so far stated may be assumed, the
necessity is at once evident for a whole series of anatomical,
physiological, histological and histo-chemical investigations into those
differences between male and female types, in the structure and function
of the individual organs by which the dowers of arrhenoplasm and
thelyplasm express themselves in the tissues. The knowledge we possess
at the present time on these matters comes from the study of averages,
but averages fail to satisfy the modern statistician, and their
scientific value is very small. Investigations into the sex-differences
in the weight of the brain, for instance, have so far proved very
little, probably because no care was taken to choose typical conditions,
the assignment of sex being dependent on baptismal certificates or on
superficial glances at the outward appearance. As if every “John” or
“Mary” were representative of their sexes because they had been dubbed
“male” and “female!” It would have been well, even if exact
physiological data were thought unnecessary, at least to make certain as
to a few facts as to the general condition of the body, which might
serve as guides to the male or female condition, such as, for instance,
the distance between the great trochanters, the iliac spines, and so
forth, for a sexual harmony in the different parts of the body is
certainly more common than great sexual divergence.

This source of error, the careless acceptance of sexually intermediate
forms as representative subjects for measurement, has maimed other
investigations and seriously retarded the attainment of genuine and
useful results. Those, for instance, who wish to speculate about the
cause of the superfluity of male births have to reckon with this source
of error. In a special way this carelessness will revenge itself on
those who are investigating the ultimate causes that determine sex.
Until the exact degree of maleness or femaleness of all the living
individuals of the group on which he is working can be determined, the
investigator will have reason to distrust both his methods and his
hypotheses. If he classify sexually intermediate forms, for instance,
according to their external appearance, as has been done hitherto, he
will come across cases which fuller investigation would show to be on
the wrong side of his results, whilst other instances, apparently on the
wrong side, would right themselves. Without the conception of an ideal
male and an ideal female, he lacks a standard according to which to
estimate his real cases, and he gropes forward to a superficial and
doubtful conclusion. Maupas, for instance, who made experiments on the
determination of sex in _Hydatina senta_, a Rotifer, found that there
was always an experimental error of from three to five per cent. At low
temperatures the production of females was expected, but always about
the above proportion of males appeared; so also at the higher
temperatures a similar proportion of females appeared. It is probable
that this error was due to sexually intermediate stages, arrhenoplasmic
females at the high temperature, thelyplasmic males at the low
temperature. Where the problem is more complicated, as in the case of
cattle, to say nothing of human beings, the process of investigation
will yield still less harmonious results, and the correction of the
interpretation which will have to be made by allowing for the
disturbance due to the existence of sexually intermediate forms will be
much more difficult.

The study of comparative pathology of the sexual types is as necessary
as their morphology, physiology and development. In this region of
inquiry as elsewhere, statistics would yield certain results. Diseases
manifestly much more abundant in one sex might be described as peculiar
to or idiopathic of thelyplasm or arrhenoplasm. Myxœdema, for instance,
is idiopathic of the female, hydrocele of the male.

But no statistics, however numerous and accurate, can be regarded as
avoiding a source of theoretical error until it has been shown from the
nature of any particular affection dealt with that it is in
indissoluble, functional relation with maleness or femaleness. The
theory of such associated diseases must supply a reason why they occur
almost exclusively in the one sex, that is to say, in the phrase of this
treatise, why they are thelyplasmic or arrhenoplasmic.


