CHAPTER I

MAN AND WOMAN

  “All that a man does is physiognomical of him.”

  CARLYLE.

A free field for the investigation of the actual contrasts between the
sexes is gained when we recognise that male and female, man and woman,
must be considered only as types, and that the existing individuals,
upon whose qualities there has been so much controversy, are mixtures of
the types in different proportions. Sexually intermediate forms, which
are the only actually existing individuals, were dealt with in a more or
less schematic fashion in the first part of this book. Consideration of
the general biological application of my theory was entered upon there;
but now I have to make mankind the special subject of my investigation,
and to show the defects of the results gained by the method of
introspective analysis, as these results must be qualified by the
universal existence of sexually intermediate conditions. In plants and
animals the presence of hermaphroditism is an undisputed fact; but in
them it appears more to be the juxtaposition of the male and female
genital glands in the same individual than an actual fusion of the two
sexes, more the co-existence of the two extremes than a quite neutral
condition. In the case of human beings, however, it appears to be
psychologically true that an individual, at least at one and the same
moment, is always either man or woman. This is in harmony with the fact
that each individual, whether superficially regarded as male or female,
at once can recognise his sexual complement in another individual
“woman” or “man.”[8] This uni-sexuality is demonstrated by the fact, the
theoretical value of which can hardly be over-estimated, that, in the
relations of two homo-sexual men one always plays the physical and
psychical roll of the man, and in cases of prolonged intercourse retains
his male first-name, or takes one, whilst the other, who plays the part
of the woman, either assumes a woman’s name or calls himself by it,
or--and this is sufficiently characteristic--receives it from the
former.

  [8] I once heard a bi-sexual man exclaim, when he saw a bi-sexual
  actress with a slight tendency to a beard, a deep sonorous voice, and
  very little hair on her head, “There is a fine woman.” “Woman” means
  something different for every man or for every poet, and yet it is
  always the same, the sexual complement of their own constitution.

In the same way, in the sexual relations of two women, one always plays
the male and the other the female part, a fact of deepest significance.
Here we encounter, in a most unexpected fashion, the fundamental
relationship between the male and female elements. In spite of all
sexually intermediate conditions, human beings are always one of two
things, either male or female. There is a deep truth underlying the old
empirical sexual duality, and this must not be neglected, even although
in concrete cases there is not a necessary harmony in the anatomical and
morphological conditions. To realise this is to make a great step
forward and to advance towards most important results. In this way we
reach a conception of a real “being.” The task of the rest of this book
is to set forth the significance of this “existence.” As, however, this
existence is bound up with the most difficult side of characterology, it
will be well, before setting out on our adventurous task, to attempt
some preliminary orientation.

The obstacles in the way of characterological investigation are very
great, if only on account of the complexity of the material. Often and
often it happens that when the path through the jungle appears to have
been cleared, it is lost again in impenetrable thickets, and it seems
impossible to recover it. But the greatest difficulty is that when the
systematic method of setting out the complex material has been proceeded
with and seems about to lead to good results, then at once objections of
the most serious kind arise and almost forbid the attempt to make types.
With regard to the differences between the sexes, for instance, the most
useful theory that has been put forward is the existence of a kind of
polarity, two extremes separated by a multitude of intermediate
conditions. The characterological differences appear to follow this rule
in a fashion not dissimilar to the suggestion of the Pythagorean,
Alcmæon of Kroton, and recalling the recent chemical resurrection of
Schelling’s “Natur-philosophie.”

But even if we are able to determine the exact point occupied by an
individual on the line between two extremes, and multiply this
determination by discovering it for a great many characters, would this
complex system of co-ordinate lines really give us a conception of the
individual? Would it not be a relapse to the dogmatic scepticism of Mach
and Hume, were we to expect that an analysis could be a full description
of the human individual? And in a fashion it would be a sort of
Weismannistic doctrine of particulate determinants, a mosaic psychology.

This brings us in a new way directly against the old, over-ripe problem.
Is there in a man a single and simple existence, and, if so, in what
relation does that stand to the complex psychical phenomena? Has man,
indeed, a soul? It is easy to understand why there has never been a
science of character. The object of such a science, the character
itself, is problematical. The problem of all metaphysics and theories of
knowledge, the fundamental problem of psychology, is also the problem of
characterology. At the least, characterology will have to take into
account the theory of knowledge itself with regard to its postulates,
claims, and objects, and will have to attempt to obtain information as
to all the differences in the nature of men.

This unlimited science of character will be something more than the
“psychology of individual differences,” the renewed insistence upon
which as a goal of science we owe to L. William Stern; it will be more
than a sort of polity of the motor and sensory reactions of the
individual, and in so far will not sink so low as the usual “results” of
the modern experimental psychologists, which, indeed, are little more
than statistics of physical experiments. It will hope to retain some
kind of contact with the actualities of the soul which the modern school
of psychology seems to have forgotten, and will not have to fear that it
will have to offer to ardent students of psychology no more than
profound studies of words of one syllable, or of the results on the mind
of small doses of caffein. It is a lamentable testimony to the
insufficiency of modern psychology that distinguished men of science,
who have not been content with the study of perception and association,
have yet had to hand over to poetry the explanation of such fundamental
facts as heroism and self-sacrifice.

No science will become shallow so quickly as psychology if it deserts
philosophy. Its separation from philosophy is the true cause of its
impotency. Psychology will have to discover that the doctrine of
sensations is practically useless to it. The empirical psychologists of
to-day, in their search for the development of character, begin with
investigation of touch and the common sensations. But the analysis of
sensations is simply a part of the physiology of sense, and any attempt
to bring it into relation with the real problems of psychology must
fail.

It is a misfortune of the scientific psychology of the day that it has
been influenced so deeply by two physicists, Fechner and von Helmholtz,
with the result that it has failed to recognise that only the external
and not the internal world can be reconstructed from sensations. The two
most intelligent of the empirical psychologists of recent times, William
James and R. Avenarius, have felt almost instinctively that psychology
cannot really rest upon sensations of the skin and muscles, although,
indeed, all modern psychology does depend upon study of sensations.
Dilthey did not lay enough stress on his argument that existing
psychology does nothing towards problems that are eminently
psychological, such as murder, friendship, loneliness, and so forth. If
anything is to be gained in the future there must be a demand for a
really psychological psychology, and its first battle-cry must be: “Away
with the study of sensations.”

In attempting the broad and deep characterology that I have indicated, I
must set out with a conception of character itself as a unit existence.
As in the fifth chapter of Part I., I tried to show that behind the
fleeting physiological changes there is a permanent morphological form,
so in characterology we must seek the permanent, existing something
through the fleeting changes.

The character, however, is not something seated behind the thoughts and
feelings of the individual, but something revealing itself in every
thought and feeling. “All that a man does is physiognomical of him.”
Just as every cell bears within it the characters of the whole
individual, so every psychical manifestation of a man involves not
merely a few little characteristic traits, but his whole being, of which
at one moment one quality, at another moment another quality, comes into
prominence.

Just as no sensation is ever isolated, but is set in a complete field of
sensation, the world of the Ego, of which now one part and now the
other, stands out more plainly, so the whole man is manifest in every
moment of the psychical life, although, now one side, now the other, is
more visible. This existence, manifest in every moment of the psychical
life, is the object of characterology. By accepting this, there will be
completed for the first time a real psychology, existing psychology, in
manifest contradiction of the meaning of the word, having concerned
itself almost entirely with the motley world, the changing field of
sensations, and overlooked the ruling force of the Ego. The new
psychology would be a doctrine of the whole, and would become fresh and
fertile inasmuch as it would combine the complexity of the subject and
of the object, two spheres which can be separated only in abstraction.
Many disputed points of psychology (perhaps the most important) would
be settled by an application of such characterology, as that would
explain why so many different views have been held on the same subject.
The same psychical process appears from time to time in different
aspects, merely because it takes tone and colouring from the individual
character. And so it well may be that the doctrine of differential
psychology may receive its completion in the domain of general
psychology.

The confusion of characterology with the doctrine of the soul has been a
great misfortune, but because this has occurred in actual history, is no
reason why it should continue. The absolute sceptic differs only in a
word from the absolute dogmatist. The man who dogmatically accepts the
position of absolute phenomenalism, believing it to relieve him of all
the burden of proof that the mere entering on another standpoint would
itself entail, will be ready to dismiss without proof the existence
which characterology posits, and which has nothing to do with a
metaphysical “essence.”

Characterology has to defend itself against two great enemies. The one
assumes that character is something ultimate, and as little the
subject-matter of science as is the art of a painter. The other looks on
the sensations as the only realities, on sensation as the ground-work of
the world of the Ego, and denies the existence of character. What is
left for characterology, the science of character? On the one hand,
there are those who cry, “De individuo nulla scientia,” and “Individuum
est ineffabile”; on the other hand, there are those sworn to science,
who maintain that science has nothing to do with character.

In such a cross-fire, characterology has to take its place, and it may
well be feared that it may share the fate of its sisters and remain a
trivial subject like physiognomy or a diviner’s art like graphology.


