CHAPTER III

THE LAWS OF SEXUAL ATTRACTION

  CARMEN:

  “L’amour est un oiseau rebelle,
  Que nul ne peut apprivoiser:
  Et c’est bien en vain qu’on l’appelle
  S’il lui convient de refuser.
  Rien n’y fait; menace ou prière:
  L’un parle, l’autre se tait;
  Et c’est l’autre que je préfère;
  Il n’a rien dit, mais il me plaît.

         *       *       *       *       *

  L’amour est enfant de Bohême
  Il n’a jamais connu de loi.”

It has been recognised from time immemorial that, in all forms of
sexually differentiated life, there exists an attraction between males
and females, between the male and the female, the object of which is
procreation. But as the male and the female are merely abstract
conceptions which never appear in the real world, we cannot speak of
sexual attraction as a simple attempt of the masculine and the feminine
to come together. The theory which I am developing must take into
account all the facts of sexual relations if it is to be complete;
indeed, if it is to be accepted instead of the older views, it must give
a better interpretation of all these sexual phenomena. My recognition of
the fact that M and F (maleness and femaleness) are distributed in the
living world in every possible proportion has led me to the discovery of
an unknown natural law, of a law not yet suspected by any philosopher, a
law of sexual attraction. As observations on human beings first led me
to my results, I shall begin with this side of the subject.

Every one possesses a definite, individual taste of his own with regard
to the other sex. If we compare the portrait of the women which some
famous man has been known to love, we shall nearly always find that they
are all closely alike, the similarity being most obvious in the contour
(more precisely in the “figure”) or in the face, but on closer
examination being found to extend to the minutest details, _ad unguem_,
to the finger-tips. It is precisely the same with every one else. So,
also, every girl who strongly attracts a man recalls to him the other
girls he has loved before. We see another side of the same phenomenon
when we recall how often we have said of some acquaintance or another,
“I can’t imagine how that type of woman pleases him.” Darwin, in the
“Descent of Man,” collected many instances of the existence of this
individuality of the sexual taste amongst animals, and I shall be able
to show that there are analogous phenomena even amongst plants.

Sexual attraction is nearly always, as in the case of gravitation,
reciprocal. Where there appear to be exceptions to this rule, there is
nearly always evidence of the presence of special influences which have
been capable of preventing the direct action of the special taste, which
is almost always reciprocal, or which have left an unsatisfied craving,
if the direct taste were not allowed its play.

The common saying, “Waiting for Mr. Right,” or statements such as that
“So-and-so are quite unsuitable for one another,” show the existence of
an obscure presentiment of the fact that every man or woman possesses
certain individual peculiarities which qualify or disqualify him or her
for marriage with any particular member of the opposite sex; and that
this man cannot be substituted for that, or this woman for the other
without creating a disharmony.

It is a common personal experience that certain individuals of the
opposite sex are distasteful to us, that others leave us cold; whilst
others again may stimulate us until, at last, some one appears who
seems so desirable that everything in the world is worthless and empty
compared with union with such a one. What are the qualifications of that
person? What are his or her peculiarities? If it really be the case--and
I think it is--that every male type has its female counterpart with
regard to sexual affinity, it looks as if there were some definite law.
What is this law? How does it act? “Like poles repel, unlike attract,”
was what I was told when, already armed with my own answer, I resolutely
importuned different kinds of men for a statement, and submitted
instances to their power of generalisation. The formula, no doubt, is
true in a limited sense and for a certain number of cases. But it is at
once too general and too vague; it would be applied differently by
different persons, and it is incapable of being stated in mathematical
terms.

This book does not claim to state all the laws of sexual affinity, for
there are many; nor does it pretend to be able to tell every one exactly
which individual of the opposite sex will best suit his taste, for that
would imply a complete knowledge of all the laws in question. In this
chapter only one of these laws will be considered--the law which stands
in organic relation to the rest of the book. I am working at a number of
other laws, but the following is that to which I have given most
investigation, and which is most elaborated. In criticising this work,
allowance must be made for the incomplete nature of the material
consequent on the novelty and difficulty of the subject.

Fortunately it is not necessary for me to cite at length either the
facts from which I originally derived this law of sexual affinity or to
set out in detail the evidence I obtained from personal statements. I
asked each of those who helped me, to make out his own case first, and
then to carry out observations in his circle of acquaintances. I have
paid special attention to those cases which have been noticed and
remembered, in which the taste of a friend has not been understood, or
appeared not to be present, or was different from that of the observer.
The minute degree of knowledge of the external form of the human body
which is necessary for the investigation is possessed by every one.

I have come to the law which I shall now formulate by a method the
validity of which I shall now have to prove.

The law runs as follows: “For true sexual union it is necessary that
there come together a complete male (M) and a complete female (F), even
although in different cases the M and F are distributed between the two
individuals in different proportions.”

The law may be expressed otherwise as follows:

If we take μ, any individual regarded in the ordinary way as a male, and
denote his real sexual constitution as Mμ, so many parts really male,
plus Wμ, so many parts really female; if we also take ω, any individual
regarded in the ordinary way as a female, and denote _her_ real sexual
constitution as Wω, so many parts really female, plus Mω, so many parts
really male; then, if there be complete sexual affinity, the greatest
possible sexual attraction between the two individuals, μ and ω,

  (1) Mμ (the truly male part in the “male”) + Mω (the truly male part
  in the “female”) will equal a constant quantity, M, the ideal male;
  and

  (2) Wμ + Wω (the ideal female parts in respectively the “male” and the
  “female”) will equal a second constant quantity, W, the ideal female.

This statement must not be misunderstood. Both formulas refer to one
case, to a single sexual relation, the second following directly from
the first and adding nothing to it, as I set out from the point of view
of an individual possessing just as much femaleness as he lacks of
maleness. Were he completely male, his requisite complement would be a
complete female, and _vice versâ_. If, however, he is composed of a
definite inheritance of maleness, and also an inheritance of femaleness
(which must not be neglected), then, to complete the individual, his
maleness must be completed to make a unit; but so also must his
femaleness be completed.

If, for instance, an individual be composed thus:

    { ³⁄₄ M
  μ { and
    { ¹⁄₄ W,

then the best sexual complement of that individual will be another
compound as follows:

    { ¹⁄₄ M
  ω { and
    { ³⁄₄ W.

It can be seen at once that this view is wider in its reach than the
common statement of the case. That male and female, as sexual types,
attract each other is only one instance of my general law, an instance
in which an imaginary individual,

    { 1 M
  χ {
    { 0 W,

finds its complement in an equally imaginary individual,

    { 0 M
  γ {
    { 1 W.

There can be no hesitation in admitting the existence of definite,
individual sexual preferences, and such an admission carries with it
approval of the necessity of investigating the laws of the preference,
and its relation to the rest of the bodily and mental characters of an
individual. The law, as I have stated it, can encounter no initial sense
of impossibility, and is contrary neither to scientific nor common
experience. But it is not self-evident. It might be that the law, which
cannot yet be regarded as fully worked out, might run as follows:

  Mμ - Mω = a constant;

that is to say, it may be the difference between the degrees of
masculinity and not the sum of the degrees of masculinity that is a
constant quality, so that the most masculine man would stand just as far
removed from his complement (who in this case would lie nearly midway
between masculinity and femininity) as the most feminine man would be
removed from his complement who would be near the extreme of femininity.
Although, as I have said, this is conceivable, it is not borne out by
experience. Recognising that we have to do here with an empirical law,
and trying to observe a wise scientific restraint, we shall do well to
avoid speaking as if there were any “force” pulling the two individuals
together as if they were puppets; the law is no more than the statement
that an identical relation can be made out in each case of maximum
sexual attraction. We are dealing, in fact, with what Ostwald termed an
“invariant” and Avenarius a “multiponible”; and this is the constant sum
formed by the total masculinity and the total femininity in all cases
where a pair of living beings come together with the maximum sexual
attraction.

In this matter we may neglect altogether the so-called æsthetic factor,
the stimulus of beauty. For does it not frequently happen that one man
is completely captivated by a particular woman and raves about her
beauty, whilst another, who is not the sexual complement of the woman in
question, cannot imagine what his friend sees in her to admire. Without
discussing the laws of æsthetics or attempting to gather together
examples of relative values, it may readily be admitted that a man may
consider a woman beautiful who, from the æsthetic standpoint, is not
merely indifferent but actually ugly, that in fact pure æsthetics deal
not with absolute beauty, but merely with conceptions of beauty from
which the sexual factor has been eliminated.

I have myself worked out the law in, at the lowest, many hundred cases,
and I have found that the exceptions were only apparent. Almost every
couple one meets in the street furnishes a new proof. The exceptions
were specially instructive, as they not only suggested but led to the
investigation of other laws of sexuality. I myself made special
investigations in the following way. I obtained a set of photographs of
æsthetically beautiful women of blameless character, each of which was
a good example of some definite proportion of femininity, and I asked a
number of my friends to inspect these and select the most beautiful. The
selection made was invariably that which I had predicted. With other
male friends, who knew on what I was engaged, I set about in another
fashion. They provided me with photographs from amongst which I was to
choose the one I should expect them to think most beautiful. Here, too,
I was uniformly successful. With others, I was able to describe most
accurately their ideal of the opposite sex, independently of any
suggestions unconsciously given by them, often in minuter detail than
they had realised. Sometimes, too, I was able to point out to them, for
the first time, the qualities that repelled them in individuals of the
opposite sex, although for the most part men realise more readily the
characters that repel them than the characters that attract them.

I believe that with a little practice any one could readily acquire and
exercise this art on any circle of friends. A knowledge of other laws of
sexual affinity would be of great importance. A number of special
constants might be taken as tests of the existence of complementary
individuals. For instance, the law might be caricatured so as to require
that the sum of the length of the hairs of any two perfect lovers should
always be the same. But, as I have already shown in chapter ii., this
result is not to be expected, because all the organs of the same body do
not necessarily possess the same degree of maleness or femaleness. Such
heuristic rules would soon multiply and bring the whole subject into
ridicule, and I shall therefore abstain from further suggestions of the
kind.

I do not deny that my exposition of the law is somewhat dogmatical and
lacks confirmation by exact detail. But I am not so anxious to claim
finished results as to incite others to the study, the more so as the
means for scientific investigations are lacking in my own case. But even
if much remains theoretical, I hope that I shall have firmly riveted the
chief beams in my edifice of theory by showing how it explains much
that hitherto has found no explanation, and so shall have, in a fashion,
proved it retrospectively by showing how much it would explain if it
were true.

A most remarkable confirmation of my law may be found in the vegetable
kingdom, in a group of facts hitherto regarded as isolated and to be so
strange as to have no parallel. Every botanist must have guessed already
that I have in mind the phenomena of heterostylism, first discovered by
Persoon, then described by Darwin and named by Hildebrand. Many
Dicotyledons, and a few Monocotyledons, for instance, species of
Primulaceæ and Geraneaceæ and many Rubiaceæ, phanerogams in the flowers
of which both the pollen and the stigma are functional, although only in
cross-fertilisation, so that the flowers are hermaphrodite in structure
but unisexual physiologically, display the peculiarity that in different
individuals the stamens and the stigma have different lengths. The
individuals, all the flowers of which have long styles and therefore
high stigmas and short anthers, are, in my judgment, the more female,
whilst the individuals with short styles and long anthers are more male.
In addition to such dimorphic plants, there are also trimorphic plants,
such as _Lythrum salicaria_, in which the sexual organs display three
forms differing in length. There are not only long-styled and
short-styled forms, but flowers with styles of a medium length.

Although only dimorphism and trimorphism have been recognised in the
books, these conditions do not exhaust the actual complexities of
structure. Darwin himself pointed out that if small differences were
taken into account, no less than five different situations of the
anthers could be distinguished. Alongside such plain cases of
discontinuity, of the separation of the different degrees of maleness
and femaleness in plainly distinct individuals, there are also cases in
which the different degrees grade into each other without breaks in the
series. There are analogous cases of discontinuity in the animal
kingdom, although they have always been thought of as unique and
isolated phenomena, as the parallel with heterostylism had not been
suggested. In several genera of insects, as, for instance, some Earwigs
(_Forficulæ_) and Lamellicorn Beetles (_Lucanus cervus_), the
Stag-beetle (_Dynastes Hercules_), and _Xylotrupes gideon_, there are
some males in which the antennæ, the secondary sexual characters by
which they differ most markedly from the females, are extremely long,
and others in which they are very short. Bateson, who has written most
on this subject, distinguishes the two forms as “high males” and “low
males.” It is true that a continuous series of intermediate forms links
the extreme types, but, none the less, the vast majority of the
individuals are at one extreme or the other. Unfortunately, Bateson did
not investigate the relations between these different types of males and
the females, and so it is not known if there be female types with
special sexual affinity for these male types. Thus these observations
can be taken only as a morphological parallel to heterostylism and not
as cases of the law of complementary sexual attraction.

Heterostylous plants may possibly be the means of establishing my view
that the law of sexual complements holds good for every kind of living
thing. Darwin first, and after him many other investigators have proved
that in heterostylous plants fertilisation has the best results, or,
indeed, may be possible only when the pollen from a macrostylous flower
(a flower with the shortest form of anthers and longest pistil) falls on
the stigma of a microstylous blossom (one where the pistil is the
shortest possible and the stamens at their greatest length), or _vice
versâ_. In other words, if the best result is to be attained by the
cross-fertilisation of a pair of flowers, one flower with a long pistil,
and therefore high degree of femaleness, and short stamens must be mated
with another possessing a correspondingly short pistil, and so, with the
amount of femaleness complementary to the first flower, and with long
stamens complementary to the short stamens of the first flower. In the
case of flowers where there are three pistil lengths, the best results
may be expected when the pollen of one blossom is transmitted to another
blossom in which the stigma is the nearest complement of the stigma of
the flower from which the pollen came; if another combination is made,
either naturally or by artificial fertilisation, then, if a result
follows at all, the seedlings are scanty, dwarfed and sometimes
infertile, much as when hybrids between species are formed.

It is to be noticed that the authors who have discussed heterostylism
are not satisfied with the usual explanation, which is that the insects
which visit the flowers carry the pollen at different relative positions
on their bodies corresponding to the different lengths of the sexual
organs and so produce the wonderful result. Darwin, moreover, admits
that bees carry all sorts of pollen on every part of their bodies; so
that it has still to be made clear how the female organs dusted with two
or three kinds of pollen make their choice of the most suitable. The
supposition of a power of choice, however interesting and wonderful it
is, does not account for the bad results which follow artificial dusting
with the wrong kind of pollen (so-called “illegitimate fertilisation”).
The theory that the stigmas can only make use of, or are capable of
receiving only “legitimate pollen” has been proved by Darwin to be
erroneous, inasmuch as the insects which act as fertilisers certainly
sometimes start various cross-breedings.

The hypothesis that the reason for this selective retention on the part
of individuals is a special quality, deep-seated in the flowers
themselves, seems more probable. We have probably here to do with the
presence, just as in human beings, of a maximum degree of sexual
attraction between individuals, one of which possesses just as much
femaleness as the other possesses maleness, and this is merely another
mode of stating my sexual law. The probability of this interpretation is
increased by the fact that in the short-styled, long-anthered, more male
flowers, the pollen grains are larger and the papillæ on the stigmas are
smaller than the corresponding parts of the long-styled, short-anthered,
more female flowers. Here we have certainly to do with different degrees
of maleness and femaleness. These circumstances supply a strong
corroboration of my law of sexual affinity, that in the vegetable
kingdom as well as in the animal kingdom (I shall return later to this
point) fertilisation has the best results when it occurs between parents
with maximum sexual affinity.[3]

  [3] For special purposes the breeder, whose object frequently is to
  modify natural tendencies, will often disregard this law.

Consideration of sexual aversion affords the readiest proof that the law
holds good throughout the animal kingdom. I should like to suggest here
that it would be extremely interesting to make observations as to
whether the larger, heavier and less active egg-cells exert a special
attraction on the smaller and more active spermatozoa, whilst those
egg-cells with less food-yolk attract more strongly the larger and less
active spermatozoa. It may be the case, as L. Weill has already
suggested in a speculation as to the factors that determine sex, that
there is a correlation between the rates of motion or kinetic energies
of conjugating sexual cells. It has not yet been determined, although
indeed it would be difficult to determine, if the sexual cells, apart
from the streams and eddies of their fluid medium, approach each other
with equal velocities or sometimes display special activity. There is a
wide field for investigation here.

As I have repeatedly remarked, my law is not the only law of sexual
affinity, otherwise, no doubt, it would have been discovered long ago.
Just because so many other actors are bound up with it,[4] because
another, perhaps many other laws sometimes overshadow it, cases of
undisturbed action of sexual affinity are rare. As the necessary
investigations have not yet been finished, I will not speak at length of
such laws, but rather by way of illustration I shall refer to a few
factors which as yet cannot be demonstrated mathematically.

  [4] In speaking of the sexual taste in men and women, one thinks at
  once of the usual but not invariable preference individuals show for a
  particular colour of hair. It would certainly seem as if the reason
  for so strongly marked a preference must lie deep in human nature.

I shall begin with some phenomena which are pretty generally
recognised. Men when quite young, say under twenty, are attracted by
much older women (say those of thirty-five and so on), whilst men of
thirty-five are attracted by women much younger than themselves. So
also, on the other hand, quite young girls (sweet seventeen) generally
prefer much older men, but, later in life, may marry striplings. The
whole subject deserves close attention and is both popular and easily
noticed.

In spite of the necessary limitation of this work to the consideration
of a single law, it will make for exactness if I try to state the
formula in a more definite fashion, without the deceptive element of
simplicity. Even without being able to state in definite quantities the
other factors and the co-operating laws, we may reach a satisfactory
exactness by the use of a variable factor.

The first formula was only an abstract general statement of what is
common to all cases of maximum sexual attraction so far as the sexual
relation is governed by the law. I must now try to find an expression
for the strength of the sexual affinity in any conceivable case, an
expression which on account of its general form, can be used to describe
the relationship between any two living beings, even if these belong to
different species or to the same sex.

If

    { α M          { β W
  χ {       and  γ {
    { α´ W         { β´ M

(where α, α´, β, and β´ are each greater than 0 and less than unity)
define the sexual constitutions of any two living beings between which
there is an attraction, then the strength of the attraction may be
expressed thus:

        K
  A = -----_f^t_
      α - β

where _f^t_ is an empirical or analytical function of the period during
which it is possible for the individuals to act upon one another, what
may be called the “reaction-time”; whilst K is the variable factor in
which we place all the known and unknown laws of sexual affinity, and
which also varies with the degree of specific, racial and family
relationship, and with the health and absence of deformity in the two
individuals, and which, finally, will become smaller as the actual
spacial distance between the two is greater, and which can be determined
in any individual case.

When in this formula α = β A must be infinity; this is the extreme case;
it is sexual attraction as an elemental force, as it has been described
with a weird mastercraft by Lynkeus in the novel “Im Postwagen.” Such
sexual attraction is as much a natural law as the downward growth of a
rootlet towards the earth, or the migration of bacteria to the oxygen at
the edge of a microscopic cover-glass. But it takes some time to grow
accustomed to such a view. I shall refer to this point again.

If α - β has its maximum value, which is when it equals unity, then A =
K. _f^t_.

This would be the extreme case of the action of all the sympathetic and
antipathetic relations between human beings (leaving out of account
social relations in their narrowest sense, which are merely the
safeguards of communities) which are not included in the law of sexual
affinity. As K generally increases with the strength of congenital
relationship, A has a greater value when the individuals are of the same
nationality than when they belong to different nationalities. The value
of _f^t_ is great in this case, and one can investigate its
fluctuations, as, for instance, when two domestic animals of different
species are in association; at first it usually stands for violent
enmity, or fear of each other (and A has a negative value), whilst later
on a friendship may come about.

When K = 0 in the formula

      K . _f^t_
  A = ---------,
        α - β

then A = 0, which means that between two living beings of origin too
remote there may be no trace of sexual attraction.

The provisions of the criminal statute-books, however, in reference to
sodomy and bestiality show plainly that even in the case of very remote
species K has a value greater than nothing. The formula may apply to two
individuals not only not of the same species, but even not of the same
order.

It is a new theory that the union of male and female organisms is no
mere matter of chance, but is guided by a definite law; and the actual
complexities which I have merely suggested show the need for complete
investigation into the mysterious nature of sexual attraction.

The experiments of Wilhelm Pfeffer have shown that the male cells of
many cryptogams are naturally attracted not merely by the female cells,
but also by substances which they have come in contact with under
natural conditions, or which have been introduced to them
experimentally, in the latter case the substances being sometimes of a
kind with which they could not possibly have come in contact, except
under the conditions of experiment. Thus the male cells of ferns are
attracted not only by the malic acid secreted naturally by the
archegonia, but by synthetically prepared malic acid, whilst the male
cells of mosses are attracted either by the natural acid of the female
cells or by acid prepared from cane sugar. A male cell, which, we know
not how, is influenced by the degree of concentration of a solution,
moves towards the most concentrated part of the fluid. Pfeffer named
such movements “chemotactic” and coined the word “chemotropism” to
include these and many other asexual cases of motion stimulated by
chemical bodies. There is much to support the view that the attraction
exercised by females on males which perceive them at a distance by sense
organs is to be regarded as analogous in certain respects with
chemotropism.

It seems highly probable that chemotropism is also the explanation of
the restless and persistent energy with which for days together the
mammalian spermatozoa seek the entrance to the uterus, although the
natural current produced from the mucous membrane of the uterus is from
within outwards. The spermatozoon, in spite of all mechanical and other
hindrances, makes for the egg-cell with an almost incredible certainty.
In this connection we may call to mind the prodigious journeys made by
many fish; salmon travel for months together, practically without taking
any food, from the open sea to the sources of the Rhine, against the
current of the river, in order to spawn in localities that are safe and
well provided with food.

I have recently been looking at the beautiful sketches which P.
Falkenberg has made of the processes of fertilisation in some of the
Mediterranean seaweeds. When we speak of the lines of force between the
opposite poles of magnets we are dealing with a force no more natural
than that which irresistibly attracts the spermatozoon and the egg-cell.
The chief difference seems to be that in the case of the attraction
between the inorganic substances, strains are set up in the media
between the two poles, whilst in the living matter the forces seem
confined to the organisms themselves. According to Falkenberg’s
observations, the spermatozoa, in moving towards the egg-cells, are able
to overcome the force which otherwise would be exercised upon them by a
source of light. The sexual attraction, the chemotactic force, is
stronger than the phototactic force.

When a union has taken place between two individuals who, according to
my formula, are not adapted to each other, if later, the natural
complement of either appears the inclination to desert the makeshift at
once asserts itself in accordance with an inevitable law of nature. A
divorce takes place, as much constitutional, depending on the nature of
things, as when, if iron sulphate and caustic potash are brought
together, the SO₄ ions leave the iron to unite with the potassium. When
in nature an adjustment of such differences of potential is about to
take place, he who would approve or disapprove of the process from the
moral point of view would appear to most to play a ridiculous part.

This is the fundamental idea in Goethe’s “Wahlverwandtschaften”
(Elective Affinities), and in the fourth chapter of the first part of
that work he makes it the subject of a playful introduction which was
full of undreamed of future significance, and the full force of which he
was fated himself to experience in later life. I must confess to being
proud that this book is the first work to take up his ideas. None the
less, it is as little my intention as it was the intention of Goethe to
advocate divorce; I hope only to explain it. There are human motives
which indispose man to divorce and enable him to withstand it. This I
shall discuss later on. The physical side of sex in man is less
completely ruled by natural law than is the case with lower animals. We
get an indication of this in the fact that man is sexual throughout the
year, and that in him there is less trace than even in domestic animals
of the existence of a special spring breeding-season.

The law of sexual affinity is analogous in another respect to a
well-known law of theoretical chemistry, although, indeed, there are
marked differences. The violence of a chemical reaction is proportionate
to the mass of the substances involved, as, for instance, a stronger
acid solution unites with a stronger basic solution with greater
avidity, just as in the case of the union of a pair of living beings
with strong maleness and femaleness. But there is an essential
difference between the living process and the reaction of the lifeless
chemical substances. The living organism is not homogeneous and
isotropic in its composition; it is not divisible into a number of small
parts of identical properties. The difference depends on the principle
of individuality, on the fact that every living thing is an individual,
and that its individuality is essentially structural. And so in the
vital process it is not as in inorganic chemistry; there is no
possibility of a larger proportion forming one compound, a smaller
proportion forming another. The organic chemotropism, moreover, may be
negative. In certain cases the value of A may result in a negative
quantity, that is to say, the sexual attraction may appear in the form
of sexual repulsion. It is true that in purely chemical processes the
same reaction may take place at different rates. Taking, however, the
total failure of some reaction by catalytic interference as the
equivalent of a sexual repulsion, it never happens, according to the
latest investigations at least, that the interference merely induces the
reaction after a longer or shorter interval. On the other hand, it
happens frequently that a compound which is formed at one temperature
breaks up at another temperature. Here the “direction” of the reaction
is a function of the temperature, as, in the vital process, it may be a
function of time.

In the value of the factor “_t_,” the time of reaction, a final analogy
of sexual attraction with chemical processes may be found, if we are
willing to trace the comparison without laying too much stress upon it.
Consider the formula for the rapidity of the reaction, the different
degrees of rapidity with which a sexual attraction between two
individuals is established, and reflect how the value of “A” varies with
the value of “_t_.” However, what Kant termed mathematical vanity must
not tempt us to read into our equations complicated and difficult
processes, the validity of which is uncertain. All that can be implied
is simple enough; sensual desire increases with the time during which
two individuals are in propinquity; if they were shut up together, it
would develop if there were no repulsion, or practically no repulsion
between them, in the fashion of some slow chemical process which takes
much time before its result is visible. Such a case is the confidence
with which it is said of a marriage arranged without love, “Love will
come later; time will bring it.”

It is plain that too much stress must not be laid on the analogy between
sexual affinity and purely chemical processes. None the less, I thought
it illuminating to make the comparison. It is not yet quite clear if the
sexual attraction is to be ranked with the “tropisms,” and the matter
cannot be settled without going beyond mere sexuality to discuss the
general problem of erotics. The phenomena of love require a different
treatment, and I shall return to them in the second part of this book.
None the less, there are analogies that cannot be denied when human
attractions and chemotropism are compared. I may refer as an instance to
the relation between Edward and Ottilie in Goethe’s
“Wahlverwandtschaften.”

Mention of Goethe’s romance leads naturally to a discussion of the
marriage problem, and I may here give a few of the practical inferences
which would seem to follow from the theoretical considerations of this
chapter. It is clear that a natural law, not dissimilar to other natural
laws, exists with regard to sexual attraction; this law shows that,
whilst innumerable gradations of sexuality exist, there always may be
found pairs of beings the members of which are almost perfectly adapted
to one another. So far, marriage has its justification, and, from the
standpoint of biology, free love is condemned. Monogamy, however, is a
more difficult problem, the solution of which involves other
considerations, such as periodicity, to which I shall refer later, and
the change of the sexual taste with advancing years.

A second conclusion may be derived from heterostylism, especially with
reference to the fact that “illegitimate fertilisation” almost
invariably produces less fertile offspring. This leads to the
consideration that amongst other forms of life the strongest and
healthiest offspring will result from unions in which there is the
maximum of sexual suitability. As the old saying has it, “love-children”
turn out to be the finest, strongest, and most vigorous of human beings.
Those who are interested in the improvement of mankind must therefore,
on purely hygienic grounds, oppose the ordinary mercenary marriages of
convenience.

It is more than probable that the law of sexual attraction may yield
useful results when applied to the breeding of animals. More attention
will have to be given to the secondary sexual characters of the animals
which it is proposed to mate. The artificial methods made use of to
secure the serving of mares by stallions unattractive to them do not
always fail, but are followed by indifferent results. Probably an
obvious result of the use of a substituted stallion in impregnating a
mare is the extreme nervousness of the progeny, which must be treated
with bromide and other drugs. So, also, the degeneration of modern Jews
may be traced in part to the fact that amongst them marriages for other
reasons than love are specially common.

Amongst the many fundamental principles established by the careful
observations and experiments of Darwin, and since confirmed by other
investigators, is the fact that both very closely related individuals,
and those whose specific characters are too unlike, have little sexual
attraction for each other, and that if in spite of this sexual union
occurs, the offspring usually die at an early stage or are very feeble,
or are practically infertile. So also, in heterostylous plants
“legitimate fertilisation” brings about more numerous and vigorous seeds
than come from other unions.

It may be said in general that the offspring of those parents which
showed the greatest sexual attraction succeed best.

This rule, which is certainly universal, implies the correctness of a
conclusion which might be drawn from the earlier part of this book. When
a marriage has taken place and children have been produced, these have
gained nothing from the conquest of sexual repulsion by the parents, for
such a conquest could not take place without damage to the mental and
bodily characters of the children that would come of it. It is certain,
however, that many childless marriages have been loveless marriages. The
old idea that the chance of conception is increased where there is a
mutual participation in the sexual act is closely connected with what we
have been considering as to the greater intensity of the sexual
attraction between two complementary individuals.


