letter is about the lamest and most illogical joke in the world.
An atheist and a theist only differ by a single letter; yet theologians
are so subtle as to distinguish definitely between the two.
But though I do not in any case allow that it is idle to be concerned
about theology, as a matter of actual fact these quarrels are not
chiefly concerned about theology.  They are concerned about history.
They are concerned with the things about which the only human sort
of history is concerned; great memories of great men, great battles
for great ideas, the love of brave people for beautiful places,
and the faith by which the dead are alive.  It is quite true that with
this historic sense men inherit heavy responsibilities and revenges,
fury and sorrow and shame.  It is also true that without it men die,
and nobody even digs their graves.

The truth is that these quarrels are rather about patriotism than
about religion, in the sense of theology.  That is, they are just such
heroic passions about the past as we call in the West by the name
of nationalism; but they are conditioned by the extraordinarily
complicated position of the nations, or what corresponds to the nations.
We of the West, if we wish to understand it, must imagine ourselves
as left with all our local loves and family memories unchanged,
but the places affected by them intermingled and tumbled about by some
almost inconceivable convulsion.  We must imagine cities and landscapes
to have turned on some unseen pivots, or been shifted about by some
unseen machinery, so that our nearest was furthest and our remotest
enemy our neighbour.  We must imagine monuments on the wrong sites,
and the antiquities of one county emptied out on top of another.
And we must imagine through all this the thin but tough threads
of tradition everywhere tangled and yet everywhere unbroken.
We must picture a new map made out of the broken fragments of the old map;
and yet with every one remembering the old map and ignoring the new.
In short we must try to imagine, or rather we must try to hope,
that our own memories would be as long and our own loyalties
as steady as the memories and loyalties of the little crowd
in Jerusalem; and hope, or pray, that we could only be as rigid,
as rabid and as bigoted as are these benighted people.
Then perhaps we might preserve all our distinctions of truth
and falsehood in a chaos of time and space.

We have to conceive that the Tomb of Napoleon is in the middle
of Stratford-on-Avon, and that the Nelson Column is erected
on the field of Bannockburn; that Westminster Abbey has taken
wings and flown away to the most romantic situation on the Rhine,
and that the wooden "Victory" is stranded, like the Ark on Ararat,
on the top of the Hill of Tara; that the pilgrims to the shrine
of Lourdes have to look for it in the Island of Runnymede,
and that the only existing German statue of Bismarck is to be found
in the Pantheon at Paris.  This intolerable topsy-turvydom is no
exaggeration of the way in which stories cut across each other and sites
are imposed on each other in the historic chaos of the Holy City.
Now we in the West are very lucky in having our nations normally
distributed into their native lands; so that good patriots can talk
about themselves without perpetually annoying their neighbours.
Some of the pacifists tell us that national frontiers and divisions
are evil because they exasperate us to war.  It would be far truer
to say that national frontiers and divisions keep us at peace.
It would be far truer to say that we can always love each
other so long as we do not see each other.  But the people
of Jerusalem are doomed to have difference without division.
They are driven to set pillar against pillar in the same temple,
while we can set city against city across the plains of the world.
While for us a church rises from its foundations as naturally
as a flower springs from a flower-bed, they have to bless the soil
and curse the stones that stand on it.  While the land we love
is solid under our feet to the earth's centre, they have to see
all they love and hate lying in strata like alternate night and day,
as incompatible and as inseparable.  Their entanglements are tragic,
but they are not trumpery or accidental.  Everything has a meaning;
they are loyal to great names as men are loyal to great nations;
they have differences about which they feel bound to dispute to the death;
but in their death they are not divided.

Jerusalem is a small town of big things; and the average modern
city is a big town full of small things.  All the most important
and interesting powers in history are here gathered within the area
of a quiet village; and if they are not always friends, at least they
are necessarily neighbours.  This is a point of intellectual interest,
and even intensity, that is far too little realised.  It is a matter
of modern complaint that in a place like Jerusalem the Christian
groups do not always regard each other with Christian feelings.
It is said that they fight each other; but at least they meet each other.
In a great industrial city like London or Liverpool, how often do they
even meet each other?  In a large town men live in small cliques,
which are much narrower than classes; but in this small town they
live at least by large contacts, even if they are conflicts.
Nor is it really true, in the daily humours of human life, that they
are only conflicts.  I have heard an eminent English clergyman from
Cambridge bargaining for a brass lamp with a Syrian of the Greek Church,
and asking the advice of a Franciscan friar who was standing smiling
in the same shop.  I have met the same representative of the Church
of England, at a luncheon party with the wildest Zionist Jews,
and with the Grand Mufti, the head of the Moslem religion.
Suppose the same Englishman had been, as he might well have been,
an eloquent and popular vicar in Chelsea or Hampstead.  How often
would he have met a Franciscan or a Zionist?  Not once in a year.
How often would he have met a Moslem or a Greek Syrian?  Not once
in a lifetime.  Even if he were a bigot, he would be bound
in Jerusalem to become a more interesting kind of bigot.
Even if his opinions were narrow, his experiences would be wide.
He is not, as a fact, a bigot, nor, as a fact, are the other
people bigots, but at the worst they could not be unconscious bigots.
They could not live in such uncorrected complacency as is possible
to a larger social set in a larger social system.  They could not
be quite so ignorant as a broad-minded person in a big suburb.
Indeed there is something fine and distinguished about the very delicacy,
and even irony, of their diplomatic relations.  There is something
of chivalry in the courtesy of their armed truce, and it is a great
school of manners that includes such differences in morals.

This is an aspect of the interest of Jerusalem which can easily
be neglected and is not easy to describe.  The normal life
there is intensely exciting, not because the factions fight,
but rather because they do not fight.  Of the abnormal crisis
when they did fight, and the abnormal motives that made them fight,
I shall have something to say later on.  But it was true for a great
part of the time that what was picturesque and thrilling was not
the war but the peace.  The sensation of being in this little town
is rather like that of being at a great international congress.
It is like that moving and glittering social satire, in which
diplomatists can join in a waltz who may soon be joining in a war.
For the religious and political parties have yet another point
in common with separate nations; that even within this narrow
space the complicated curve of their frontiers is really more
or less fixed, and certainly not particularly fluctuating.
Persecution is impossible and conversion is not at all common.
The very able Anglo-Catholic leader, to whom I have already referred,
uttered to me a paradox that was a very practical truth.
He said he felt exasperated with the Christian sects,
not for their fanaticism but for their lack of fanaticism.
He meant their lack of any fervour and even of any hope,
of converting each other to their respective religions.
An Armenian may be quite as proud of the Armenian Church as a Frenchman
of the French nation, yet he may no more expect to make a Moslem an
Armenian than the Frenchman expects to make an Englishman a Frenchman.
If, as we are told, the quarrels could be condemned as merely
theological, this would certainly be the very reverse of logical.
But as I say, we get much nearer to them by calling them national;
and the leaders of the great religions feel much more like
the ambassadors of great nations.  And, as I have also said,
that ambassadorial atmosphere can be best expressed on the word irony,
sometimes a rather tragic irony.  At any tea-party or talk in the street,
between the rival leaders, there is a natural tendency to that sort
of wit which consists in veiled allusion to a very open secret.
Each mail feels that there are heavy forces behind a small point,
as the weight of the fencer is behind the point of the rapier.
And the point can be yet more pointed because the politics of the city,
when I was there, included several men with a taste and talent for such
polished intercourse; including especially two men whose experience
and culture would have been remarkable in any community in the world;
the American Consul and the Military Governor of Jerusalem.

If in cataloguing the strata of the society we take first the topmost
layer of Western officialism, we might indeed find it not inconvenient
to take these two men as representing the chief realities about it.
Dr. Glazebrook, the representative of the United States,
has the less to do with the internal issues of the country; but his
mere presence and history is so strangely picturesque that he might
be put among the first reasons for finding the city interesting.
He is an old man now, for he actually began life as a soldier in the
Southern and Secessionist army, and still keeps alive in every detail,
not merely the virtues but the very gestures of the old Southern
and Secessionist aristocrat.

He afterward became a clergyman of the Episcopalian Church, and served
as a chaplain in the Spanish-American war, then, at an age when most
men have long retired from the most peaceful occupations, he was sent
out by President Wilson to the permanent battlefield of Palestine.
The brilliant services he performed there, in the protection of British
and American subjects, are here chiefly interesting as throwing
a backward light on the unearthly topsy-turvydom of Turkish rule.
There appears in his experiences something in such rule
which we are perhaps apt to forget in a vision of stately
Eastern princes and gallant Eastern warriors, something more
tyrannical even than the dull pigheadedness of Prussianism.
I mean the most atrocious of all tortures, which is called caprice.
It is the thing we feel in the Arabian tales, when no man knows
whether the Sultan is good or bad, and he gives the same Vizier
a thousand pounds or a thousand lashes.  I have heard Dr. Glazebrook
describe a whole day of hideous hesitation, in which fugitives
for whom he pleaded were allowed four times to embark and four
times were brought back again to their prison.  There is something
there dizzy as well as dark, a whirlpool in the very heart of Asia;
and something wilder than our own worst oppressions in the peril
of those men who looked up and saw above all the power of Asiatic arms,
their hopes hanging on a rocking mind like that of a maniac.
The tyrant let them go at last, avowedly out of a simple sentiment
for the white hair of the consul, and the strange respect that many
Moslems feel for the minister of any religion.  Once at least
the trembling rock of barbaric rule nearly fell on him and killed him.
By a sudden movement of lawlessness the Turkish military authorities
sent to him, demanding the English documents left in his custody.
He refused to give them up; and he knew what he was doing.
In standing firm he was not even standing like Nurse Cavell against
organised Prussia under the full criticism of organised Europe.
He was rather standing in a den of brigands, most of whom
had never heard of the international rules they violated.
Finally by another freak of friendliness they left him and his
papers alone; but the old man had to wait many days in doubt,
not knowing what they would do, since they did not know themselves.
I do not know what were his thoughts, or whether they were far from
Palestine and all possibilities that tyranny might return and reign
for ever.  But I have sometimes fancied that, in that ghastly silence,
he may have heard again only the guns of Lee and the last battle
in the Wilderness.

If the mention of the American Consul refers back to the oppression
of the past, the mention of the Military Governor brings back
all the problems of the present.  Here I only sketch these groups
as I first found them in the present; and it must be remembered
that my present is already past.  All this was before the latest
change from military to civil government, but the mere name
of Colonel Storrs raises a question which is rather misunderstood
in relation to that change itself.  Many of our journalists,
especially at the time of the last and worst of the riots,
wrote as if it would be a change from some sort of stiff militarism
to a liberal policy akin to parliamentarism.  I think this a fallacy,
and a fallacy not uncommon in journalism, which is professedly
very much up to date, and actually very much behind the times.
As a fact it is nearly four years behind the times, for it is
thinking in terms of the old small and rigidly professional army.
Colonel Storrs is the very last man to be called militaristic in
the narrow sense; he is a particularly liberal and enlightened type
of the sort of English gentleman who readily served his country in war,
but who is rather particularly fitted to serve her in politics
or literature.  Of course many purely professional soldiers have
liberal and artistic tastes; as General Shea, one of the organisers
of Palestinian victory, has a fine taste in poetry, or Colonel Popham,
then deputy Governor of Jerusalem, an admirable taste in painting.
But while it is sometimes forgotten that many soldiers are men, it is
now still more strange to forget that most men are soldiers.  I fancy
there are now few things more representative than the British Army;
certainly it is much more representative than the British Parliament.
The men I knew, and whom I remember with so much gratitude, working under
General Bols at the seat of government on the Mount of Olives,
were certainly not narrowed by any military professionalism, and had if
anything the mark of quite different professions.  One was a very shrewd
and humorous lawyer employed on legal problems about enemy property,
another was a young schoolmaster, with keen and clear ideas,
or rather ideals, about education for all the races in Palestine.
These men did not cease to be themselves because they were all
dressed in khaki; and if Colonel Storrs recurs first to the memory,
it is not because he had become a colonel in the trade of soldiering,
but because he is the sort of man who could talk equally about
all these other trades and twenty more.  Incidentally, and by way
of example, he can talk about them in about ten languages.
There is a story, which whether or no it be true is very typical,
that one of the Zionist leaders made a patriotic speech in Hebrew,
and broke off short in his recollection of this partially revived
national tongue; whereupon the Governor of Jerusalem finished
his Hebrew speech for him--whether to exactly the same effect
or not it would be impertinent to inquire.  He is a man rather
recalling the eighteenth century aristocrat, with his love of wit
and classical learning; one of that small group of the governing
class that contains his uncle, Harry Cust, and was warmed with
the generous culture of George Wyndham.  It was a purely mechanical
distinction between the military and civil government that would
lend to such figures the stiffness of a drumhead court martial.
And even those who differed with him accused him in practice,
not of militarist lack of sympathy with any of those he ruled,
but rather with too imaginative a sympathy with some of them.
To know these things, however slightly, and then read the English
newspapers afterwards is often amusing enough; but I have only mentioned
the matter because there is a real danger in so crude a differentiation.
It would be a bad thing if a system military in form but representative
in fact gave place to a system representative in form but financial
in fact.  That is what the Arabs and many of the English fear;
and with the mention of that fear we come to the next stratum
after the official.  It must be remembered that I am not at this
stage judging these groups, but merely very rapidly sketching them,
like figures and costumes in the street.

The group standing nearest to the official is that of the Zionists;
who are supposed to have a place at least in our official policy.
Among these also I am happy to have friends; and I may venture to call
the official head of the Zionists an old friend in a matter quite remote
from Zionism.  Dr. Eder, the President of the Zionist Commission,
is a man for whom I conceived a respect long ago when he protested,
as a professional physician, against the subjection of the poor
to medical interference to the destruction of all moral independence.
He criticised with great effect the proposal of legislators to kidnap
anybody else's child whom they chose to suspect of a feeblemindedness
they were themselves too feeble-minded to define.  It was defended,
very characteristically, by a combination of precedent and progress;
and we were told that it only extended the principle of the lunacy laws.
That is to say, it only extended the principle of the lunacy laws
to people whom no sane man would call lunatics.  It is as if they
were to alter the terms of a quarantine law from "lepers"
to "light-haired persons"; and then say blandly that the principle
was the same.  The humour and human sympathy of a Jewish doctor was
very welcome to us when we were accused of being Anti-Semites, and we
afterwards asked Dr. Eder for his own views on the Jewish problem.
We found he was then a very strong Zionist; and this was long before
he had the faintest chance of figuring as a leader of Zionism.
And this accident is important; for it stamps the sincerity of the small
group of original Zionists, who were in favour of this nationalist
ideal when all the international Jewish millionaires were against it.
To my mind the most serious point now against it is that the millionaires
are for it.  But it is enough to note here the reality of the ideal
in men like Dr. Eder and Dr. Weizmann, and doubtless many others.
The only defect that need be noted, as a mere detail of portraiture,
is a certain excessive vigilance and jealousy and pertinacity in
the wrong place, which sometimes makes the genuine Zionists unpopular
with the English, who themselves suffer unpopularity for supporting them.
For though I am called an Anti-Semite, there were really periods of
official impatience when I was almost the only Pro-Semite in the company.
I went about pointing out what was really to be said for Zionism,
to people who were represented by the Arabs as the mere slaves
of the Zionists.

This group of Arab Anti-Semites may be taken next,
but very briefly; for the problem itself belongs to a later page;
and the one thing to be said of it here is very simple.
I never expected it, and even now I do not fully understand it.
But it is the fact that the native Moslems are more Anti-Semitic
than the native Christians.  Both are more or less so; and have formed
a sort of alliance out of the fact.  The banner carried by the mob
bore the Arabic inscription "Moslems and Christians are brothers."
It is as if the little wedge of Zionism had closed up the cracks
of the Crusades.

Of the Christian crowds in that partnership, and the Christian creeds
they are proud to inherit, I have already suggested something;
it is only as well to note that I have put them out of their strict order
in the stratification of history.  It is too often forgotten that in
these countries the Christian culture is older than the Moslem culture.
I for one regret that the old Pax Romana was broken up by the Arabs;
and hold that in the long run there was more life in that Byzantine
decline than in that Semitic revival.  And I will add what I cannot
here develop or defend; that in the long run it is best that the
Pax Romana should return; and that the suzerainty of those lands
at least will have to be Christian, and neither Moslem nor Jewish.
To defend it is to defend a philosophy; but I do hold that there is
in that philosophy, for all the talk of its persecutions in the past,
a possibility of comprehension and many-sided sympathy which is
not in the narrow intensity either of the Moslem or the Jew.
Christianity is really the right angle of that triangle,
and the other two are very acute angles.

But in the meetings that led up to the riots it is the more Moslem
part of the mixed crowds that I chiefly remember; which touches
the same truth that the Christians are the more potentially tolerant.
But many of the Moslem leaders are as dignified and human as many
of the Zionist leaders; the Grand Mufti is a man I cannot imagine
as either insulting anybody, or being conceivably the object of insult.
The Moslem Mayor of Jerusalem was another such figure, belonging also I
believe to one of the Arab aristocratic houses (the Grand Mufti is
a descendant of Mahomet) and I shall not forget his first appearance
at the first of the riotous meetings in which I found myself.
I will give it as the first of two final impressions with which I
will end this chapter, I fear on a note of almost anarchic noise,
the unearthly beating and braying of the Eastern gongs and horns
of two fierce desert faiths against each other.

I first saw from the balcony of the hotel the crowd of riotors come
rolling up the street.  In front of them went two fantastic figures
turning like teetotums in an endless dance and twirling two crooked
and naked scimitars, as the Irish were supposed to twirl shillelaghs.
I thought it a delightful way of opening a political meeting;
and I wished we could do it at home at the General Election.
I wish that instead of the wearisome business of Mr. Bonar Law
taking the chair, and Mr. Lloyd George addressing the meeting,
Mr. Law and Mr. Lloyd George would only hop and caper in front of
a procession, spinning round and round till they were dizzy, and waving
and crossing a pair of umbrellas in a thousand invisible patterns.
But this political announcement or advertisement, though more intelligent
than our own, had, as I could readily believe, another side to it.
I was told that it was often a prelude to ordinary festivals,
such as weddings; and no doubt it remains from some ancient ritual dance
of a religious character.  But I could imagine that it might sometimes
seem to a more rational taste to have too religious a character.
I could imagine that those dancing men might indeed be dancing dervishes,
with their heads going round in a more irrational sense than
their bodies.  I could imagine that at some moments it might suck
the soul into what I have called in metaphor the whirlpool of Asia,
or the whirlwind of a world whipped like a top with a raging monotony;
the cyclone of eternity.  That is not the sort of rhythm nor
the sort of religion by which I myself should hope to save the soul;
but it is intensely interesting to the mind and even the eye, and I
went downstairs and wedged myself into the thick and thronging press.
It surged through the gap by the gate, where men climbed
lamp-posts and roared out speeches, and more especially recited
national poems in rich resounding voices; a really moving effect,
at least for one who could not understand a word that was said.
Feeling had already gone as far as knocking Jews' hats off and other
popular sports, but not as yet on any universal and systematic scale;
I saw a few of the antiquated Jews with wrinkles and ringlets,
peering about here and there; some said as spies or representatives
of the Zionists, to take away the Anti-Semitic colour from the meeting.
But I think this unlikely; especially as it would have been pretty hard
to take it away.  It is more likely, I think, that the archaic Jews
were really not unamused and perhaps not unsympathetic spectators;
for the Zionist problem is complicated by a real quarrel
in the Ghetto about Zionism.  The old religious Jews do not
welcome the new nationalist Jews; it would sometimes be hardly
an exaggeration to say that one party stands for the religion without
the nation, and the other for the nation without the religion.
Just as the old agricultural Arabs hate the Zionists as the
instruments of new Western business grab and sharp practice;
so the old peddling and pedantic but intensely pious Jews hate
the Zionists as the instruments of new Western atheism of free thought.
Only I fear that when the storm breaks, such distinctions
are swept away.

The storm was certainly rising.  Outside the Jaffa Gate the road
runs up steeply and is split in two by the wedge of a high building,
looking as narrow as a tower and projecting like the prow of a ship.
There is something almost theatrical about its position and stage
properties, its one high-curtained window and balcony, with a sort
of pole or flag-staff; for the place is official or rather municipal.
Round it swelled the crowd, with its songs and poems and
passionate rhetoric in a kind of crescendo, and then suddenly
the curtain of the window rose like the curtain of the theatre,
and we saw on that high balcony the red fez and the tall figure
of the Mahometan Mayor of Jerusalem.

I did not understand his Arabic observations; but I know
when a man is calming a mob, and the mob did become calmer.
It was as if a storm swelled in the night and gradually died away
in a grey morning; but there are perpetual mutterings of that storm.
My point for the moment is that the exasperations come chiefly from
the two extremes of the two great Semitic traditions of monotheism;
and certainly not primarily from those poor Eastern Christians
of whose fanaticism we have been taught to make fun.
From time to time there are gleams of the extremities of Eastern
fanaticism which are almost ghastly to Western feeling.
They seem to crack the polish of the dignified leaders of the Arab
aristocracy and the Zionist school of culture, and reveal a
volcanic substance of which only oriental creeds have been made.
One day a wild Jewish proclamation is passed from hand to hand,
denouncing disloyal Jews who refuse the teaching Hebrew; telling doctors
to let them die and hospitals to let them rot, ringing with the old
unmistakable and awful accent that bade men dash their children
against the stones.  Another day the city would be placarded with
posters printed in Damascus, telling the Jews who looked to Palestine
for a national home that they should find it a national cemetery.
And when these cries clash it is like the clash of those two
crooked Eastern swords, that crossed and recrossed and revolved
like blazing wheels, in the vanguard of the marching mob.

I felt the fullest pressure of the problem when I first walked round
the whole of the Haram enclosure, the courts of the old Temple,
where the high muezzin towers now stand at every corner,
and heard the clear voices of the call to prayer.  The sky was
laden with a storm that became the snowstorm; and it was the time
at which the old Jews beat their hands and mourn over what are
believed to be the last stones of the Temple.  There was a movement
in my own mind that was attuned to these things, and impressed by
the strait limits and steep sides of that platform of the mountains;
for the sense of crisis is not only in the intensity of the ideals,
but in the very conditions of the reality, the reality with which this
chapter began.  And the burden of it is the burden of Palestine;
the narrowness of the boundaries and the stratification of the rock.
A voice not of my reason but rather sounding heavily in my heart,
seemed to be repeating sentences like pessimistic proverbs.
There is no place for the Temple of Solomon but on the ruins of
the Mosque of Omar.  There is no place for the nation of the Jews
but in the country of the Arabs.  And these whispers came to me
first not as intellectual conclusions upon the conditions of the case,
of which I should have much more to say and to hope; but rather
as hints of something immediate and menacing and yet mysterious.
I felt almost a momentary impulse to flee from the place, like one
who has received an omen.  For two voices had met in my ears;
and within the same narrow space and in the same dark hour,
electric and yet eclipsed with cloud, I had heard Islam crying
from the turret and Israel wailing at the wall.



