CHAPTER XII. THE WORLD AND GOD.


The world and nature are marvellous in their being, but they are not
“divine”! The formula “_natura sive deus_” is a monstrous misuse of the
word “_deus_,” if we are to use the words in the sense which history has
given to them. God is the Absolute Being, perfect, wholly independent,
resting in Himself, and necessary; nature is entirely contingent and
dependent, and at every point of it we are impelled to ask “Why?” God is
the immeasurable fulness of Being, nature is indeed diverse in the
manifoldness of her productions, but she is nevertheless limited, and her
possibilities are restricted within narrow limits. God is the
unrestrained, and everlasting omnipotence itself, and the perfect wisdom;
nature is indeed mighty enough in the attainment of her ends, but how
often is she obstructed, how often does she fail to reach them, and how
seldom does she do so perfectly and without mistakes? She shows wisdom,
indeed, cunning in her products, subtlety and daintiness, taste and
beauty, all these often in an overwhelming degree, yet just as often she
brings forth what is meaningless, contradictory and mutually hurtful,
traverses her own lines, and bewilders us by the brutality, the
thoughtlessness, and purposelessness, the crookedness, incompleteness, and
distortedness of her operations. And what is true of the world of external
nature is true in a far greater degree of the world of history. Nature is
not a god, but a demigod, says Aristotle. And on this, Pantheism with its
creed, “_natura sive deus_,” makes shipwreck. The words of this _credo_
are either a mere tautology, and “_deus_” is misused as a new name for
nature; or they are false. It is not possible to transfer to nature and
the world all the great ideas and feelings which the religious mind
cherishes under the name of “God.”

On the other hand, nature is really, as Aristotle said, δαιμονία, that is,
strange, mysterious, and marvellous, indicating God, and pointing, all
naturalism and superficial consideration notwithstanding, as we have seen,
to something outside of and beyond itself. Religion demands no more than
this. It does not insist upon finding a solution for all the riddles of
theoretical world-lore. It is not distressed because the course of nature
often seems to our eyes confused, and to our judgment contradictory and
unintelligible at a hundred places and in a hundred respects. On the
contrary, that this is the case is to religion in another aspect a strong
stimulus and corroboration. “The world is an odd fellow; may God soon make
an end of it,” said Luther, and thus gave a crude but truly religious
parallel to the words of Aristotle, ἡ γἀρ φύσις δαιμονία ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θεία,
(Aristot. “De Divin. in Somn.,” c. ii.). It is part of the very essence of
religion, as we have seen, to read in the pages of nature, insufficiency,
illusion, and perplexities, and to be made thereby impatient and desirous
of penetrating to the true nature of things. Religion does not claim to be
directly deducible out of a consideration of nature; it demands only the
right and freedom to interpret the world in its own way. And for this it
is sufficient that this world affords those hints and suggestions for its
convictions that we have seen it does afford. To form clear ideas in
regard to the actual relations of the infinite to the finite, and of God
to the world, and of what religion calls creation, preservation, and
eternal providence, self-revelation in the world and in history, is hardly
the task of religion at all, but rather pertains to our general
speculative instinct, which can only satisfy itself with the help of
imagination. Attempts of this kind have often been made. They are by no
means valueless, for even if no real knowledge can be gained by this
method, we may perhaps get an analogue of it which will help us to
understand existence and phenomena, and to define our position, as well as
to give at least provisional answers to many pressing questions (such, for
instance, as the problem of theodicy).

If we study the world unprejudiced by the naturalistic interpretation, or
having shaken ourselves free from it, we are most powerfully impressed by
one fundamental phenomenon in all existence: it is the fact of evolution.
It challenges attention and interpretation, and analogies quickly reveal
themselves which give something of the same trend to all such
interpretations. From stage to stage existence advances onwards, from the
world of large masses subject only to the laws of mechanics, to the
delicately complex play of the forces of development in growth and other
vital processes. The nature of the forces is revealed in ever higher
expression, and at the same time in ever more closely connected series of
stages. Even between the inorganic and the organic there is an
intermediate stage—crystal formation—which is no longer entirely of the
one, yet not of the other. And in the organic world evolution reveals
itself most clearly of all; from the crudest and simplest it presses
onwards to the most delicate and complex. In the corporeal as in the
psychical, in the whole as in each of its parts, there are ever higher
stages, sometimes far apart, sometimes close together. However we picture
to ourselves the way in which evolution accomplishes itself in time, we
can scarcely describe it without using such expressions as “nature
advances upwards step by step,” “it presses and strives upwards and
unfolds itself stage by stage.”

And it is with us as it was with Plato; we inform the world with a soul,
with a desire and endeavour which continually expresses itself in higher
and higher forms. And it is with us also as with Fichte; we speak of the
will which, unconscious of itself, pours itself forth in unconscious and
lifeless nature, and then on this foundation strives forward, expressing
its activity in ever higher developments, breaking forth in life,
sensation, and desire, and finally coming to itself in conscious existence
and will. The whole world seems to us a being which wills to become,
presses restlessly forward, and passes from the potential to the actual,
realising itself. And the height of its self-realisation is conscious,
willing life.

This outlook is lofty and significant, it supplies a guiding clue by which
the facts of life and nature can be arranged. The religious outlook, too,
when it wishes to indulge in speculation, can make use of this guiding
thread. It will then say: God established the world as “a will to
existence, to consciousness, to spirit.” He established it, not as
complete, but as becoming. He does not build it as a house, but plants it,
like a flower, in the seed, that it may grow, that it may struggle upwards
stage by stage to fuller existence, aspiring with toil and endeavour
towards the height where, in the image of the Creator, as a free and
reasonable spirit capable of personality, it may realise the aim of its
being. Thus the world is _of_ God, that is, its rudiments came from God,
and it is _to_ God, in the purpose of likeness to God. And it is imbued
with the breath of Godhead which moves in it and impels it onwards, with
the logos of the everlasting Zeus of whom Cleanthes sings, with the spirit
of Jehovah whom Isaiah and the Psalmist praise, and whom the poet of the
Creation figuratively paints; the divine breath is in everything that
lives, from grass to flower, from animal to man. But it is implanted as
becoming. And in regard to this, religion can say of the whole world what
it says of man. For man, too, is not given as a finished product, either
as regards the genus or the individual, but as a rudiment, with his
destiny to work out, in historical becoming, by realising what is inherent
in him. We call this freedom. And an adumbration of such freedom, which is
the aim of self-realisation, would help us to penetrate deeply into the
nature of things. Many riddles and apparent contradictions could be fitted
in with this view of things: the unity of the world, and yet the
gradations; the relationship of all living creatures, the unity of all
psychical life, and yet the uniqueness of the rational spirit; causal
concatenation, yet guidance by means of the highest ideas and purposes;
the tentativeness, illogicalness, and ineffectiveness of nature,
unconsciously pressing forward along uncertain paths, yet the directness
and purposefulness of the main lines of evolution in general. This
God-awakened will to be lies at the roots of the mysteries of development
in all living creatures, of the unconscious purposiveness of instinctive
action, of the gradually ascending development of psychical life and its
organ. Operating in crystals and plants purely as a formative impulse and
“entelechy,” it awakes in the bodies of animals more and more as “soul.”
Then it awakes fully in man, and in him, in an entirely new phase of real
free development, it builds itself up to spirit. It resembles a stream
whose waves flow casually and transiently in animal consciousness, and are
soon withdrawn again, to break forth anew at another place, in the
personal spirit, where they attain to permanent indissoluble form, since
they have now at last attained to self-realisation, and fulfilled the
purpose of all cosmic existence, the reflecting of the eternal personality
in the creature. But it is only in human history that what was prepared
for in natural evolution is completed.

The riddle of theodicy thus becomes easier, for what surrounds us in
nature and history has not come direct from the hand of eternal wisdom,
but is in the first place the product of the developing, striving world,
which only gradually and after many mistakes and failures works out what
is inherent in it as eternal idea and aim. We see and blame its mistakes,
for instance in our own human structure. We see the deficiencies in the
historical course of things. But when we find fault we do not see that
evolution and self-realisation and freedom are more worthy of praise than
ready-made existence incapable of independent action.

This principle of development, wherever it is regarded as “world-soul” or
as “will” or as the “unconscious,” is frequently, through pantheism and
the doctrine of immanence, made equivalent with the object of religion,
with God. This is an impossible undertaking. We cannot worship what only
reaches its full development in ourselves. But that we _can_ worship, and
that it is only in the feeling of complete dependence that the full depth
of what is developing within us to conscious life reveals itself, proves
better than anything else that God is above all “World-will.” It was more
than allegory when Plato in Timæus set the “eternal father and creator of
the world” above all soul and psyche. And it was religion that broke
through when Fichte in his little book, “Anweisung zum seeligen Leben,”
set being before becoming, and God above the creatures struggling towards
self-realisation. Religion knows in advance that this is so. And calm
reflection confirms it. All that we have already learnt of the dependence,
conditionedness, and contingent nature of the world is equally true of a
world “evolving itself” out of its potentiality, of a will to existence,
and of an unconscious realising itself. No flower can grow and develop
without being first implicit in the seed. Nothing can attain to
“actuality,” to realisation, that was not potentially implied in the
beginning. But who originated the seed of the world-flower? Who enclosed
within it the “tendencies,” the “rudiments” which realise themselves in
evolution? Invariably “the actual is before the potential” and Being
before Becoming. A world could only become if it were called to become by
an everlasting Being. God planting the world-flower that it might radiate
forth in its blossoms His own image and likeness, is an allegory which may
well symbolise for religion the relation between God and the world. And
thus it is possible to draw the outline of a religious outlook on the
world, into which the results of world-lore could well be fitted. This
frame was constructed by Plato on the basis of a religious study of
things, and after Plato it was first definitely outlined in Fichte’s too
much forgotten but unforgettable books “Bestimmung des Menschen” and
“Anweisung zum seeligen Leben,” and it is thus a new creation of the great
German idealism and its mighty faith. And it is not easy to see why it
should be abandoned, why we should give it up in favour of an irreligious,
semi-naturalistic outlook on the world.

One thing, however, must be kept constantly in mind: even such an
interpretation of the world as this is poetry, not knowledge. There is a
poetry of the will to live, of the unconscious, which is struggling
towards existence, but there is no philosophy. There are only analogies
and hints of what goes on at the foundations of the world. In particular,
the unconscious creative impulse in all living organisms, this “will”
towards form, its relationship with instinct and the relationship of
instinct to conscious psyche, afford us a step-ladder of illustrations,
and an illustration of the step-ladder of the “will towards existence,”
which invite us to overstep the bounds of our knowledge, and indulge in
our imagination. We can say nothing of pre-conscious consciousness and
will, we can at best only make guesses about them. We cannot think
definitely of a general world-will, which wills and aspires in individual
beings; we cannot picture to ourselves the emergence of the individual
“souls” of animals and man from a universal psyche. Imagination plays a
larger part here than clear thinking. And for our present purpose it must
be clearly borne in mind that religion does not require any speculative
construction of theories of the world. But “you shall know that it is your
imagination which creates the world for you.”(108) And if a speculative
construction be desired, it will always be most easily attained along
these lines, and will in this way come nearest to our modern knowledge of
nature. We must remember, too, that the objections which may be urged
against this form of speculation are equally applicable against any other.
For the origin of the individual psyche, the graduated series of its
forms, the development of one after the other, and of that of the child
from that of its parents, are riddles which cannot be solved by any
speculative thinking. Monadology, theories of the pre-existence of the
soul, creationism, or the current traducianism—which to-day, with its
partly or wholly materialistic basis, is just as naïve as the older—all
reveal equal darkness. But the speculation we have hinted at, if it gives
no explanation, at least supplies a framework for many questions which
attract us, and do so even from the point of view of religion: for
instance the collective, diffuse, and almost divisible nature of
consciousness in the lower stages, its increasing and ever more strict
centralisation, the natural relationship of the psychical in man to the
psychical in general, and yet its incommensurability and superiority to
all the world.

But let us once more turn from all the poetical and imaginative
illustrations of the relation of God to the world, which can at best be
only provisional, and only applicable at certain points, to the more
general aspect of the problem. Religion itself consists in this: believing
and experiencing that in time the Eternal, in the finite the Infinite, in
the world God is working, revealing Himself, and that in Him lies the
reason and cause of all being. For this it has names like creation,
providence, self-revelation of God in the world, and it lives by the
mysteries which are indicated under these names. The mysteries themselves
it recognises in vague or naïve forms of conception long before it
attempts any definite formulation. If dogmatics begin with the latter,
some form or other of the stiff and wooden doctrines of _concursus_, of
_influxus ordinarius_ and _extraordinarius_ usually develops with many
other subtleties, which are nothing more than attempts to formulate the
divine influence in finite terms, and to think of it as a force along with
other forces. Two series of causes are usually distinguished; the system
of causes and effects within the world, according to which everything
natural takes place, the “_causæ secundariæ_”; and in addition to these
the divine causality co-operating and influencing the others, ordering
them with gentle and delicate pressure, and guiding them towards their
true end, and which may also reveal itself as “_extraordinaria_” in
miracles and signs. This double operation is regarded as giving rise to
all phenomena, and in it consists guidance, dispensation, providence, and
natural revelation.

This kind of conception is extremely primitive, and is unfavourable to
religion itself, for in it mystery is done away with and arranged
according to rubric, and everything has become quite “simple.” Moreover,
this doctrine has a necessary tendency to turn into the dreaded “Deism.”
According to the deistic view, God made the world in the beginning, and
set the system of natural causes in motion, in such a way that no farther
assistance was given, and everything went on of itself. This theory is
incredibly profane, and strikes God out of the world, and nature, and
history at a single stroke, substituting for Him the course of a
well-arranged system of clockwork. But the former theory is a very
unsatisfactory and doubtful makeshift as compared with that of deism, for
it is impossible to see why, if God arranged these _causæ secundariæ_, He
should have made them so weak and ineffective that they need all these
ingenious _concursus_, _influxus_, _determinationes_, _gubernationes_, and
the like. Both theories are crude fabrications of the dogmatists, and they
have nothing left in them of the piety they were intended to protect, nor
do they become any better in this respect, however many attempts are made
to define them. Religion possesses, without the aid of any stilted and
artificial theories, all the things we have named above, and especially
and most directly the last of them, namely, the experience of the
revelation and communication of the Divine in the great developments and
movements of spiritual and religious history. And it finds its
corroboration and justification and freedom not by way of dogmatics but of
criticism. It is impossible to distinguish artificially two sets of
causes, and to give to the world what is alleged to be of the world, and
to God what is alleged to be of God. But it is permissible to point to the
insufficiency of our causal study in general, and to the limits of our
knowledge. Even when we have established it as a fact that all phenomena
are linked together in a chain of causes we are still far from having
discovered how things actually come to pass. Every qualitative effect and
change is entirely hidden from us as far as the cause of its coming about
and its real and inner nature are concerned. Every effect which in kind or
quantity goes beyond its cause (and we cannot make anything of the domain
of living forms, of the psychical and of history without these), shows us
that we are still only at the surface. Indeed, even mechanical action,
often alleged to be entirely intelligible, such as the transference or
transformation of energy, is, as we have seen, a complete riddle. In
addition, all causality runs its course in time, and therefore partakes of
all the defects and limitations of our views of time. And finally we are
guided by the Kantian antinomy regarding the conditions of what is
“given.” It destroys the charm of the “purely causal” point of view by
showing that this in itself cannot be made complete and is therefore
contradictory. Moreover, in the phenomena of life, and in the fact that
consciousness and will control our corporeal processes, and yet can hardly
be thought of as a cause “co-operating” with other causes, we found an
analogy, if a weak and obscure one, of the relation that a divine
teleology and governing of the world may bear to mundane phenomena. Thus
mystery remains in all its strength and is not replaced by the surrogate
of a too simple and shallow dogmatic theory. In confessing mystery and
resting content with it we are justified by reflection on the nature and
antinomy of our knowledge.

All this is true also of what religion means by creation. In the feeling
of complete humility, in its experience of absolute dependence and
conditionedness, the creature becomes conscious of itself as a creature,
and experiences with full clearness what it means to be a “creature” and
“created.” The dogmatic theory is here again only a surrogate of mystery.
And again critical self-reflection proves a better guide than any theory
of creation, which is quite in its place as a means of expression in
religious discourse and poetry, but is quite insufficient as true
knowledge. That we must but cannot think of this world either as beginning
or as not-beginning is the analogue in knowledge of what religion
experiences in mystery; and that this contingent and conditioned world is
founded in everlasting, necessary, true Being, is the analogue of what
religion possesses and knows through devout feeling, more directly and
clearly than by any thinking, of the relations of God to the world.






FOOTNOTES


    1 This has been urged often enough even by scientific investigators.
      In such cases they have frequently been reproached for dragging
      miracles into nature when they call a halt in face of the
      “underivable” and the “mysterious.” This is a complete
      misunderstanding. With miracles and with the supernatural in the
      historical sense of these words, this mode of regarding nature has
      nothing whatever to do. It would be much more reasonable to maintain
      the converse: that there exists between supernatural ideas and the
      belief in the absolute explicability and rationalisation of nature a
      peculiar mutual relation and attraction. For, if we think out the
      relation clearly, we must see that all real and consistent belief in
      miracles demands as its most effective background the clearest
      possible explicability of nature. It pictures to itself two natures,
      so to speak: nature and supernature, and the latter of these
      interpolates itself into the former in the form of sudden and
      occasional interruptions; that is to say, as miracles. The purpose
      of miracles is to be recognised as such, as events absolutely
      different from the ordinary course of happening. And they are most
      likely thus to be recognised when nature itself is translucent and
      mathematical. Thus we find that supernaturalism quite readily
      accepts, and even insists upon a rationalistic explanation of
      nature. But this is quite incorrect. Nature is not so thoroughly
      rationalised and calculable as such a point of view would have us
      believe.

      The really religious element in belief in miracles is that it, too,
      in its own way, is seeking after mystery, dependence and providence.
      It fails because it naïvely seeks for these in isolated and
      exceptional acts, which have no analogy to other phenomena. It
      regards these as arbitrary acts, and does so because it overlooks or
      underestimates the fact that they have to be reckoned with
      throughout the whole of nature.

    2 Not even after the scholastic manner of regarding eternity as a
      “nunc stans,” a stationary now, an everlasting present. “Present” is
      a moment in our own time, and an “everlasting” present is nonsense.

    3 “Reden über die Religion, an die Gebildeten unter ihren Verächtern.”
      Neu herausgegeben von R. Otto. 1906.

    4 Kgl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1876.

    5 Some of these subsidiary factors are difficult to harmonise with the
      main principle of selection; they endanger it or it endangers them,
      as we shall see when we consider the controversies within the
      Darwinian camp.

    6 H. Friedmann, “Die Konvergenz der Organismen,” Berlin, 1904.

    7 It is somewhat confusing that even Weismann in his most recent work
      professes to give “Lectures on the Theory of Descent,” and in
      reality only assumes it, concerning himself with the Darwinian
      theory in the strict sense. The English translation is more
      correctly entitled “The Evolution Theory.”

_    8 Cf._ Wagner, “Zur gegenwärtigen Lage des Darwinismus.” “Die
      Umschau,” January, 1900.

    9 Eugen Dubois (Military Surgeon of the Dutch Army), “Pithecanthropus
      erectus, a man-like transition-form from Java.” Batavia. 1904.

   10 H. Friedenthal. “Ueber einen experimentellen Nachweis von
      Blutsverwandtschaft.” Archiv. f. Anatomie und Physiologie, 1900, p.
      404.

   11 Jena, 1904. Trans. “The Evolution Theory,” Arnold. London 1904.

   12 A defence of this very confident Darwinian point of view, for the
      benefit of non-scientific readers, will be found in the recent
      “Gemeinverständlichen darwinistischen Vorträgen und Abhandlungen,”
      by Plate, Simroth, Schmidt, and others. See also Ziegler’s “Ueber
      den derzcitigen Stand der Descendenzlehre in der Zoologie.”

   13 “Rassenbildung und Erblichkeit,” Festschrift für Bastian, p. 9.

   14 “Rassenbildung und Erblichkeit,” Festschrift für Bastian, p. 6.

   15 “Sammlung gemeinverständl. Vorträge, hrsg. v. Virchow und
      Holtzendorf,” Heft 96. “Menschen und Affenschädel,” Berlin, 1870.

   16 “Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,” 1882, p. 276.

   17 “Verh. Berlin anthropolog. Gesellschaft iv.” (1872), p. 132. It
      does, however, appear strange to the lay mind that it should have
      been only the pathological subjects of prehistoric times that had
      their remains preserved for our modern study.

_   18 Cf._ “Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,” 1895, pp. 78, 735.

_   19 Cf._ “Rassenbildung und Erblichkeit.” Festschrift für Bastian,
      1895.

   20 See also “Descendenz und Pathologie.” Arch. f. path. Anat. a.
      Physiol., 1886; “Transformation und Abstammung.” Berliner Klin.
      Wochenschrift, 1893.

   21 First edition, Leipzig, 1887. A second edition and an English
      translation have since been published. See especially the discussion
      of the origin and history of species in the second volume.

   22 See English translation of Kerner’s Plant Life.

_   23 Cf._ a criticism of the book from the Darwinian point of view by
      Plate in Biologisches Centralblatt, 1901.

   24 That this points only to the fact of evolution, and not necessarily
      to actual descent, will be seen later on.

   25 First edition, 1899; now in a second edition.

   26 “Genealogie der Urzellen als Lösung des Descendenzproblems” (1872),
      and “Der Darwinismus und die Naturforschung Newtons und Cuviers”
      (1874-1877).

   27 “Eine kritische Darstellung der modernen Entwicklungslehre,” Jena,
      1892.

   28 Compare Darwin’s derivation of fishes from Tunicata because of the
      notochord which occurs in the tunicate larvæ.

   29 See Hertwig’s “Biological Problem of To-day.” London 1896.

   30 The justice of this prophecy has been meanwhile illustrated by the
      recent work of H. Friedmann, “Die Konvergenz der Organismen,”
      Berlin, 1904.

   31 If we wish to, we can even read the “biogenetic law” in Dante. See
      “Purgatory,” p. 26, where the embryo attains successively to the
      plant, animal and human stages:

      “Anima fatta la virtute attiva,
      Qual d’una _pianta_....

      Come fungo marino ...

      Ma come _d’animal_ divenga _fante_.”

      This is, of course, nothing else than Aristotle’s theory of
      evolution, done into terzarima, and corrected by St. Thomas.

      For the latest application of these views, even in relation to the
      “biogenetic fundamental law,” see the finely finished
      “Morpho-genetic Studies” of T. Garbowski (Jena, 1903): “The greater
      part of what is usually referred to the so-called fundamental
      biogenetic law depends on illusion, since all things undeveloped or
      imperfect must bear a greater or less resemblance one to another.”

_   32 I.e._, The occurrence of saltatory, transilient, or discontinuous
      variations or mutations.

_   33 I.e._, The emergence of a distinctively new pattern of
      organisation.

   34 See H. G. Bronn’s Appendix to his translation of Darwin’s “Origin of
      Species.” First German edition.

   35 Finally and comprehensively in the two volumes we have already
      mentioned, “Vorträge über die Deszendenztheorie,” Jena, 1902 (Eng.
      trans., London, 1904). “Natural selection depends essentially upon
      the cumulative augmentation of the most minute useful variations in
      the direction of their utility; only the useful is developed and
      increased, and great effects are brought about slowly through the
      summing up of many very minute steps.... But the philosophical
      significance of natural selection lies in the fact that it shows us
      how to explain the origin of useful, well-adapted structures purely
      by mechanical factors, and without having to fall back upon a
      directive principle.”

   36 If it were not white it would be observed by the seals, which would
      thus avoid being devoured by it. See Weismann, I., p. 70. (English
      edition, p. 65.)

   37 It is almost comical when Weismann, the champion of the purely
      naturalistic outlook, occasionally forgets his rôle altogether, and
      puts in a word for “chance,” or attempts to soften absolute
      predetermination. For if even a single wolf should destroy a stag
      “by chance,” or if a single “id” should “chance” to grow in a manner
      slightly different from that laid down for it by the compelling
      force of preceding and accompanying circumstances, the whole
      Darwinian edifice would be labour lost.

   38 See Darwin, “... chance variations. Unless such occur, natural
      selection can do nothing.”

   39 “Die Darwinsehe Theorie. Gemeinverständliche Vorlesungen über die
      Naturphilosophie der Gegenwart gehalten vor Studierenden aller
      Fakultäten,” Leipzig, 1903. This book is the continuation of the
      author’s “Deszendenztheorie.”

   40 Fleischmann’s book compares favourably with those of other
      naturalists, in that he does not contrast “Moses” and natural
      science, as is customary, but has a deeper knowledge of the modern
      view of Genesis I. than is usually found among naturalists, whether
      of the “positive” or “negative” standpoint.

   41 See also Wolff.

   42 See C.C. Coe, “Nature versus Natural Selection,” London, 1895.
      Perhaps the most comprehensive, many-sided, critical analysis of the
      theory of natural selection. See also Herbert Spencer, “The
      Inadequacy of Natural Selection,” 1893.

   43 Leipzig, 1888, 1897, 1901. In part translated as “Organic
      Evolution.” We are here mainly concerned with Vols. I. and III.
      Later on we shall have to discuss Vol. II.

   44 Wien, 1899.

   45 See Wettstein, “Neolamarckism,” Jena, 1902. See also Demoor,
      Massart, Vandervelde, “L’Evolution régressive en Biologie et
      Sociologie,” Paris, 1897. Bibliothèque scientific internationale,
      vol. lxxxv. This work is on the Lamarckian basis. It is original in
      applying Lamarckian principles to a theory of society.

   46 Two vols., Leipzig, 1901 and 1902.

   47 It remains open to question whether Eimer’s explanation is
      sufficient in all cases, even those of the exaggeratedly deceptive
      copies of leaves or bark, or the colour of the environment. It is
      certainly not the sorry explanation in terms of “Variation and
      Selection,” but that of a spontaneous imitation of the surroundings,
      that forces itself irresistibly upon us in this connection.

   48 Jena, 1892 and 1895.

   49 See Reinke, “Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie,” 1901,
      especially pp. 463 onwards on “Phylogenetisches Bildungspotential.”
      von Wettstein (On direct adaptation), “Neolamarkismus,” Jena, 1902.
      _Cf._ “Wissensch-Beiträge zum 15 Jahresberichte (1902) der Philos.
      Gesellschaft an der Universität zu Wien: Vorträge und Besprechungen
      über die Krisis der Darwinismus.” M. Kassowitz, “Allgemeine
      Biologie,” I. and II., 1899. O. Hertwig, “Entwicklung der Biologie
      im 19. Jahrhundert.” Wiesner, “Elemente der wissenschaftlichen
      Botanik.” (_cf._ especially III. “Biologie der Pflanzen”), and on p.
      288 the summary of propositions which are very similar to those
      formulated later by Korschinsky. (“Auf Grund des den Organismen
      innewohnenden Vervollkommnungstriebes.”)

   50 See the particularly beautiful and suggestive experiments of
      Haberlandt: “Experimentelle Hervorrufung eines neuen Organs.” In
      “Festschrift für Schwendener,” Berlin Borntraeger, 1899.

   51 See “Nature,” 1891, p. 441

   52 See “Nature,” 1891, p. 441.

   53 The variation-increment of the selection theory ought to be a
      differential. But in many cases it is not so. As for instance in
      symmetrical correlated variation, &c. In the struggle for existence
      it is usually not advantages of organisation which are decisive, but
      the chance advantages of situation, though these have no “selective”
      influence. The case of the tapeworm is illustrative.

      His work, “Die organischen Regulationen, Vorbereitungen zu einer
      Theorie des Lebens,” 1901, is a systematic survey of illustrations
      of the “autonomy” of vital processes. In his “Analytischen Theorie
      der organischen Entwicklung,” Leipzig, 1894, his special biological
      (“ontogenetic”) views are still in process of development. But even
      here his sharp rejection of Darwinism is complete (see VI., Par. 3,
      on “the absurd assumption of a contingent character of
      morphogenesis”). It is not for nothing that the book is dedicated to
      Wigand and C. F. von Baer. He says that in regard to development we
      must “picture to ourselves external agents acting as stimuli and
      achieving transformations which have the character, not analysable
      as to its causes, of being adapted to their end, that is, capable of
      life.” Incomplete, but very instructive too, are his discussions on
      the causal and the teleological outlook, the necessity for both, and
      the impossibility of eliminating the latter from the study of
      nature. In a series of subsequent works, Driesch has defined and
      strengthened this position, finally reaching the declaration:
      “Darwin belongs to history, just like that other curiosity of our
      century, the Hegelian philosophy. Both are variations on the theme,
      ‘How to lead a whole generation by the nose!’ ” (“Biolog.
      Zentralbl.” 1896, p. 16). We are concerned with Driesch more
      particularly in Chapter IX.

   54 See Driesch “Kritisches und Polemisches,” Biol. Zentrabl., 1902, p.
      187, Note 2.

   55 “Naturwissenschaftliche Wochenschrift,” xiv., p. 273.

   56 See § 70 and subsequent sections. Take, for instance, the
      sentences:—“Every production of material things and of their forms
      must be interpreted as possible in terms of purely mechanical laws,”
      and the contrast: “Some products of material nature cannot be
      interpreted as possible in terms of purely mechanical laws.”

   57 To Aristotle the “Soul” (ψυχὴ ϕυτική Psyche, phytike) was in the
      first place a purely biological principle. But by means of his
      elastic formula of Potentiality and Actuality he was able to make
      the transition to the psychological with apparent ease. The
      biological is to him in “potentiality” what sensation, impulse,
      imagination are in “realisation.” But the biological and the
      psychological are not related to one another as stages. Growth,
      form, development, &c., cannot be carried over through any
      “actualisatio” into sensation, consciousness and the like.

      An essentially different question is, whether the biological may not
      be not indeed derivable from the psychological—that would be the
      same mistake—but dependent on, and conditioned by it, just as we
      regard the voluntary moving and directing of the body as dependent
      on it. An imaginative interpretation of the world will always take
      this course.

   58 Of course all this still gives us no ground for drawing conclusions
      as to the correctness of the mechanistic theory, but only affords a
      reason for its power of persistence. Indeed, the very fact that, in
      investigating the problem of life, instinct directs us towards
      mechanical interpretations, should give added weight to the other
      fact, that among the ranks of naturalists themselves there
      constantly arise doubts and criticisms of the adequacy of this mode
      of interpretation, and that many of them go over more or less
      completely to the vitalistic point of view.

   59 H. Helmholtz, “Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft, eine physikalische
      Abhandlung,” Berlin, 1847.

   60 Max Verworn, “Die Biogenhypothese,” Jena, 1903. _Cf._ criticisms by
      Czapek in the “Botanische Zeitung,” No. 2, 1903, and by Loeb in the
      “Biologisches Zentralblatt,” 1902.

   61 Berlin, 1900. Edited by R. du Bois-Reymond.

   62 Bütschli, “Untersuchungen über microscopische Schäume und das
      Protoplasma,” Leipzig, 1892. _Cf._ Berthold, “Studien zur
      Protoplasmamechanik.”

   63 Rhumbler, “Zur Mechanik des Gastrulationvorganges ...” in “Archiv.
      f. Entwicklungsmechanik,” Bd. 14.

   64 “Bewegung der lebendigen Substanz.” Jena, 1892.

   65 A short, very attractive description of these mechanical methods,
      and one which appeals particularly to us laymen because of its
      excellent illustrations, is Dreyer’s “Ziele und Wege biologischer
      Forschung” (Jena, 1892), especially the first part, “Die
      Flüssigkeitsmechanik als eine Grundlage der organischen Form- und
      Gerüst-Bildung.” The astonishing and fascinating forms of
      Radiolarian frameworks and “skeletons” (the artistic appreciation of
      which was made possible to a wider public by Haeckel’s “Kunstformen
      der Natur”) are here made the subject of mechanical explanations,
      which are certainly in a high degree plausible.

_   66 Cf._ Roux, “Archiv. fur Entwicklungsmechanik.” The name
      sufficiently indicates the scope.

   67 For a discussion of the difficulties and impossibilities of this
      theory see page 148 above.

   68 “Preformation oder Epigenesis?” Outlines of a theory of the
      development of organisms. Jena, 1894. (Part I. of “Zeit- und
      Streit-fragen der Biologie.”) Translated by P. Chalmers Mitchell,
      “The Biological Problem of To-day.”

   69 In his earlier period. Later he rejects both preformation and
      epigenesis, as mechanical distortions of vital processes.

   70 See also Lotze’s interesting article “Instinct” in the same work.

   71 Part II. of his “Zeit- und Streit-fragen der Biologie.”

   72 Second Edition, 1902.

   73 In Vol. II. p. 139. 1898.

   74 “General Physiology.” Translated by Lee. London. 1899. P. 170.

   75 As a remarkable instance and corroboration of this, we may refer to
      the ever-recurring, instinctive antipathy of deeply religious
      temperaments, from Augustine to Luther and Schleiermacher, to the
      Aristotelian mood and its conception of the world, and their
      sympathy with Plato’s (mostly and especially in their “Platonised”
      expressions). The clear-cut, luminous, conception of the world which
      expresses everything in terms of commensurable concepts is
      thoroughly Aristotelian. But it would be difficult to find a place
      in it for the peculiar element which lies at the root of all true
      devotional feeling, and which makes faith something more than the
      highest “reverence, love and trust.”

   76 “Arch. für pathol. Anatomie und Physiologie,” Bd. VIII. 1855.

   77 Vol. IX., 1856.

   78 The same is true even of crystals, “_omne crystallum e crystallo_.”

_   79 Cf._ “Ueber die Aufgabe der Naturwissenschaft,” Jena, 1876.
      “Naturwissenschaftliche Tatsachen und Probleme.” “Physiologie und
      Entwicklungslehre,” 1886, in the collection of the “Allgemeiner
      Vereins für Deutsche Literatur.” Also in the same collection, “Aus
      Natur- und Menschen-leben.”

   80 These ideas are not fully worked out, and they are disguised in
      poetic form—for instance, when even the play of flames is compared
      to vital processes. But if they be stripped of their poetic garb,
      they lead to the same conclusions to which one is always led when
      one approaches the problem unprejudiced by naturalistic or
      anthropomorphic preconceptions of the relation of the infinite to
      the finite, or the divine to the natural. If we exclude the
      materialistic or semi-materialistic position which regards
      teleological phenomena, vital processes, and even states of
      sensation and consciousness as the function of a “substance” or of
      matter, we can quite well speak of them as general “cosmo-organic”
      functions of universal being, meaning that they occur of necessity
      wherever the proper conditions exist. According to the doctrine of
      potentiality and actuality, this is to say that all possible stages
      of the higher and highest phenomena are _semper et ubique_
      potentially present in universal being, and that they become actual
      wherever the physical processes are far enough advanced to afford
      the necessary conditions.

      Preyer’s ideas have been revived of late, especially in the romantic
      form, as, for instance, in Willy Pastor’s “Lebensgeschichte der
      Erde” (“Leben und Wissen,” Vol. I., Leipzig, 1903). And in certain
      circles, characterised by a simultaneous veneration for and
      combination of modern natural science—Haeckel, Romanticism, Novalis
      and other antitheses—Fechner appears to have come to life again. The
      type of this group is W. Bölsche. Naturally enough, Pastor has
      turned his attention also to the recent views of Schroen in regard
      to crystallisation. The fact, _omne crystallum e crystallo_, like
      the corresponding fact, _omne vivum e vivo_, was long a barrier
      against mechanistic derivation. But Schroen draws a parallel between
      crystallisation and organic processes, so that the alleged clearness
      and obviousness of the inorganic can no longer be carried over—in
      the old fashion—into the realm of life, but, conversely, the mystery
      of life must be extended downwards, and continued into the
      inorganic.

   81 Worthy of note and much cited is a somewhat indefinite essay on
      “Neovitalism,” by the Wurzburg pathologist, E. von Rindfleisch (in
      “Deutsche Medizinische Wochensehrift,” 1895, No. 38).

   82 Already given in detail in his “Lehrbuch der phys. und pathol.
      Chemie” (Second Edition, 1889), in the first chapter, “Vitalism and
      Mechanism.” In the meantime a fifth revised and enlarged edition of
      Bunge’s book has appeared as a “Lehrbuch der Physiologie des
      Menschen” (Leipzig, 1901), The relevant early essays appear here
      again under the title “Idealism and Mechanism.” The arguments are
      the same. It is often supposed that it is merely a question of time,
      and that in the long run we must succeed in finding proofs that the
      whole process of life is only a complex process of movement; but the
      history of physiology shows that the contrary is the case. All the
      processes which can be explained mechanically are those which are
      not vital phenomena at all. It is in activity that the riddle of
      life lies. The solution of this riddle is looked for, more decidedly
      than before but still somewhat vaguely, in the “idealism” of
      self-consciousness and its implications, “_Physiologus nemo nisi
      psychologus_.” These views have been also stated in a separate
      lecture: G. Bunge, “Vitalismus und Mechanismus,” (Leipzig, 1886).

   83 “Allgemeine Biologie” (2 vols.), Vienna, 1899.

   84 Jena, 1903.

_   85 Cf._ especially Verworn’s example of the manufacture of sulphuric
      acid. See what we have previously said on the “second line” of
      mechanistic theory, along which Neumeister’s thought mainly moves.
      See especially p. 198. As regards the “fifth line,” the problem of
      the development of form in its present phase, there is an
      instructive short essay by Fr. Merkel (Nachrichten der K.
      Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften Göttingen. Geschäftl. Mitt. 1897,
      Heft 2)—“Welche Kräfte wirken gestaltend auf den Körper der Menschen
      und Tiere?” This essay avoids, obviously intentionally, the
      shibboleths of controversy. The mechanical point of view and the
      play with mechanical analogies and models are abruptly dismissed.
      “If things, which were in themselves susceptible of mechanical
      explanations, occur in the absence of the mechanical antecedent
      conditions, then we must seek for other forces to enable us to
      understand them.” And quite calmly a return is made to the old,
      simple conception of a “regulative” and a “formative force,”
      inherent as a capacity _sui generis_ within the “energids,” the
      really living parts of the cell. The cell-energid carries within it
      the “pattern” of the organisation, and the partial or perfect
      “capacity” (“Fertigkeit”) for producing and reproducing the whole
      organism. But these two forces “make use of” the physico-chemical
      forces as tools to work out details. So to describe the state of the
      case is not of course a solution of the problem; it is only a
      figurative formulation of it. But that, at the present day, we can
      and must return to doing this if we are to describe things simply
      and as they actually occur, is precisely what is most instructive in
      the matter.

   86 “Beiträge zur Kritik der Darwinschen Lehre,” which was first
      published in the “Biologisches Zentralblatt,” 1898.

   87 Leipzig, 1892.

   88 Before Wigand’s larger works there had appeared F. Delpino:
      “Applicazione della Teoria Darwinia ai Fiori ed agli Insetti
      Visitatori dei Fiori” (Bull. della Societa Entomologica Ital.,
      Florence 1870). He says: “Un principio intrinsico, reagente, finchè
      dura la vita, contro le influenze estrinseche ossia contro gli
      agenti chimici e fisici.”

   89 “Elemente der Wissenschaftlichen Botanik. Biologie der Pflanzen.”
      1889.

   90 “Lehrbuch der Biologie der Pflanzen.” Stuttgart, 1895.

_   91 Cf._ Cohn, “Beiträge zur Biologie der Pflanzen,” vii. 407, See
      especially the concluding chapter, “Einiges über Functionen der
      einzelnen Zellorgane.” From Zoology we may cite E. Teichmann’s
      investigation, “Ueber die Beziehung zwischen Astrosphären und
      Furchen.” “Experimentelle Untersuchungen am Seeigelei” (“Archiv. f.
      Entw. Mech.” xvi. 2, 1903). This paper contains no references to
      “psychical phenomena,” “power,” or “will,” and we cannot but approve
      of this in technical research. But it is pointed out that the
      mechanistic interpretation of the detailed processes of development
      has definite limitations, and we are referred to “fundamental
      characters of living matter which we must take for granted.”

      This is even more decidedly the case in Tad. Garbowski’s beautiful
      “Morphogenetische Studien, als Beitrag zur Methodologie zoologischer
      Forschung.” These belong to the line of thought followed by Driesch
      and Wolff, who are both frequently and approvingly quoted, and they
      afford an excellent instance of that mood of dissatisfaction with
      and protest against the “dogmas” of descent, selection and
      phylogeny, which is observable in many quarters among the younger
      generation of investigators. Garbowski vigorously combats Haeckel’s
      theories of development, especially “the fundamental biogenetic law,
      and the Gastræa theory.” He criticises “mechanistic” interpretations
      of the development of the embryo, which “treat the living being
      morphologically, as if the matter were one of vesicles, cylinders
      and plates, and not of vital units”: and he does not look with
      favour on “artificial amoebæ,” which can move, creep, and do
      everything except live. The ideal of biology is of course always a
      science with laws and equations, but the key to these will not be
      found in mechanics. Garbowski’s studies may be highly recommended as
      giving a sharp and vivid impression of the modern anti-mechanistic
      tendencies observable even in technical research.

   92 Trans. by Levinsohn. “Beilage zur Allgemeinen Zeitung,” Munich,
      1898, No. 166.

   93 Bütschli, _op. cit._, p. 200.

   94 “The Monist,” 1899, p. 179.

_   95 Cf._ “Entwicklung der Biologie in 19. Jahrhundert” (“Naturforscher
      Versammlung,” 1900), and “Zeit- und Streit-fragen der Biologie,”
      1894-7, especially Part II., “Mechanik und Zoologie.”

   96 “Die Organismen und ihr Ursprung,” published in “Nord und Süd,”
      xviii., p. 201 _seq._—“Die Welt als Tat,” Berlin 1899, since then in
      second edition.—“Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie,” 1901.—And
      “Der Ursprung des Lebens auf der Erde,” in the “Türmer-Jahrbuch,”
      1903.

_   97 Cf._, the discussion by A. Drews in the “Preuss. Jahrbuch,”
      October, 1902, p. 101, a review of Reinke’s “Einleitung in die
      theoretische Biologie.”

   98 Of all the bad Greek zoology has produced, “Ontogenesis” is probably
      the worst. The Becoming of the Being! The word is used in contrast
      to Phylogenesis, the becoming of the race or of the species, and it
      denotes the development of the individual.

_   99 Cf._ p. 130. Excellent observations on “purpose.” If two or more
      chains of causes meet, we call it “chance;” if they do so constantly
      and in a typical manner, we call it “purpose.”

  100 “Biolog. Centralbl.,” 1896, p. 363.

  101 “Die Lokalisation (= spatial determination) morphogenetischer
      Vorgänge, ein Beweis vitalistischen Geschehens,” 1899 (in “Archiv.
      f. Entw.-Mechanik,” viii., 1, and separately published), and “Die
      organischen Regulationen: Vorbereitungen zu einer Theorie des
      Lebens,” Leipzig, 1901. Also “Die ‘Seele’ als elementarer
      Natur-factor,” (studies on the movements of organisms), Leipzig,
      1903. He gives a general review of his own evolution in the
      “Süddeutsche Monatshefte,” January 1904, under the title “Die
      Selbständigkeit der Biologie und ihre Probleme.”

  102 In the “Biol. Zentralbl.,” June 1903, p. 427, Driesch is criticised
      by Moszkowski, who rejects Driesch’s teleological standpoint. But
      even this criticism shows us how far the untenability of the
      mechanistic position has been recognised. It is based upon a
      somewhat vague dynamism, which admits that the physico-chemical and
      all other mechanical interpretations have been destructively
      criticised by Driesch, and recognises entelechy (“ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὸ τέλος
      ἔχον”). An entelechy without τέλος!

  103 “Vorfragen der Biologie,” 1899. “Die ‘Ueberwindung des Mechanismus’
      in der Biologie.” “Biolog. Zentralbl.,” 1901, p. 130.

_  104 Cf._ Tad. Garbowski, “Morphogenetische Studien,” p. 167. The
      illustration here employed of the arc and the “explanation of form
      by form” would be a good criticism of many of Albrecht’s statements.

  105 Schneider has expounded his physiological and morphological view in
      his “Comparative Histology.” In “Vitalismus” (“Elementare
      Lebensfunctionen,” Vienna, 1903) he sums up his vitalistic views. It
      is a comprehensive work which goes deeper than others of its class
      into the detailed description and analysis of the intimate phenomena
      of life. Indeed it almost amounts to an independent biology. But the
      most essential vital problems, the development of form,
      regeneration, and inheritance, to which Driesch gives the fullest
      consideration, are all too briefly treated. In Chapters XI. and XII.
      the question of vitalism expands into a far-reaching discussion of
      the general outlook upon nature. We need not here concern ourselves
      with his more general views. Schneider must be regarded as a
      representative of the most modern tendency of “Psychism,” which,
      stimulated by Mach, Avenarius, and the school of
      “immanence-philosophy,” finds expression among the younger
      physiologists and biologists, from Schneider to Driesch, Verworn,
      Albrecht, and others. To overthrow “materialism” and “realism,” they
      utilise, with impetuous delight, the ancient self-evident idea that
      what is given to us is sensation. They confuse and identify such
      opposites as Kant and Berkeley, and their own position with that of
      “solipsism.” This outlook is still vague and vacillating, and it may
      perhaps compel epistemology to return on its old path from the
      sophists to Plato, from Hume to Kant. In Schneider’s case, however,
      the thin stream of this new sensualism is intermingled with so many
      intuitions and perceptions of the deeper nature of knowledge that
      one is now curious to know how this strange mixture of
      semi-materialism, idealism, solipsism, and a priorism is to make the
      transition from its present extremely labile phase to a condition of
      stable equilibrium. One fears lest sooner or later a reaction
      against the contortions of this empiricism and psychism should lead
      to a modern rehabilitation of mysticism or occultism. (_Cf._ p. 295
      ff.)

      In an essay on “Vitalism” in the “Preuss. Jahrbuch,” Aug. 1903, p.
      276, Schneider has supplemented his previous work.

  106 If the protest of natural science against these means no more than
      that they should be excluded as inaccessible to scientific
      understanding, from the domain of its investigation, but not from
      reality, it is perhaps fully justified in its methods.

  107 Though somewhat inconsequent, since at any rate the enthusiasm for
      truth could not result from a naturalistic, but only from some kind
      of idealistic basis.

  108 Schleiermacher, “Reden über die Religion,” ii.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NATURALISM AND RELIGION***



CREDITS


March 27, 2009

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 31794‐0.txt or 31794‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/1/7/9/31794/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

