The Project Gutenberg eBook of Thoughts on Art and Life
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Thoughts on Art and Life

Author: da Vinci Leonardo

Editor: Lewis Einstein

Translator: Maurice Baring


        
Release date: September 4, 2009 [eBook #29904]
                Most recently updated: January 5, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/29904

Credits: Produced by Al Haines






Produced by Al Haines











THE HUMANISTS' LIBRARY

Edited by Lewis Einstein

I


LEONARDO DA VINCI

THOUGHTS

ON ART AND LIFE




THOUGHTS

ON

ART AND LIFE


BY

LEONARDO DA VINCI


Translated

by

MAURICE BARING




Boston

The Merrymount Press

1906




Copyright, 1906, by D. B. Updike




A TABLE OF CONTENTS

      Introduction                             ix
   I. Thoughts on Life                          3
  II. Thoughts on Art                          59
 III. Thoughts on Science                     141
  IV. Bibliographical Note                    193
   V. Table of References                     194




{ix}

INTRODUCTION

    * *
     *

The long obscurity of the Dark Ages lifted over Italy, awakening to a
national though a divided consciousness.  Already two distinct
tendencies were apparent.  The practical and rational, on the one hand,
was soon to be outwardly reflected in the burgher-life of Florence and
the Lombard cities, while at Rome it had even then created the civil
organization of the curia.  The novella was its literary triumph.  In
art it expressed itself simply, directly and with vigour.  Opposed to
this was the other great undercurrent in Italian life, mystical,
religious and speculative, which had run through the nation from the
earliest times, and received fresh volume from mediaeval Christianity,
encouraging ecstatic mysticism to drive to frenzy the population of its
mountain cities.  Umbrian painting is inspired by it, and the glowing
words of Jacopone da Todi expressed in poetry the same religious
fervour which the life of Florence and Perugia bore witness to in
action.

Italy developed out of the relation and conflict of these two forces
the rational with the mystical.  Their later union in the greater men
was to {x} form the art temperament of the Renaissance.  The practical
side gave it the firm foundation of rationalism and reality on which it
rested; the mystical guided its endeavour to picture the unreal in
terms of ideal beauty.

The first offspring of this union was Leonardo.  Since the decay of
ancient art no painter had been able to fully express the human form,
for imperfect mastery of technique still proved the barrier.  Leonardo
was the first completely to disengage his personality from its
constraint, and make line express thought as none before him could do.
Nor was this his only triumph, but rather the foundation on which
further achievement rested.  Remarkable as a thinker alone, he
preferred to enlist thought in the service of art, and make art the
handmaid of beauty.  Leonardo saw the world not as it is, but as he
himself was.  He viewed it through the atmosphere of beauty which
filled his mind, and tinged its shadows with the mystery of his nature.
To all this, his birthright as a painter, a different element was
added.  A keen desire for knowledge, guiding his action in life,
spurred him onward.  Conscious of this dominant impulse, he has
fancifully described himself in a Platonic allegory.  He had passed
beneath overhanging cliffs on his way to a great cavern.  On bended
knees, peering through its darkness, fear and desire had overwhelmed
him,--fear for the menacing darkness of the cavern; and desire {xi} to
ascertain if there were wonders therein.

From his earliest years, the elements of greatness were present in
Leonardo.  But the maturity of his genius came unaffected from without.
He barely noticed the great forces of the age which in life he
encountered.  After the first promise of his boyhood in the Tuscan
hills, his youth at Florence had been spent under Verrocchio as a
master, in company with those whose names were later to brighten the
pages of Italian art.  He must then have heard Savonarola's impassioned
sermons, yet, unlike Botticelli, remained dumb to his entreaties.  He
must have seen Lorenzo the Magnificent.  But there was little opening
in the Medicean circle for the young painter, who had first to gain
fame abroad.  The splendour of Milan under Il Moro, then the most
brilliant court in Europe, attracted him.  He went there, proclaiming
his ability, in a remarkable letter, to accomplish much, but desiring
chiefly to erect a great monument to the glory of the Sforza.  He spent
years at that court, taken up by his different ventures,--painting,
sculpture, engineering, even arranging festivities--but his greater
project was doomed to failure, enmeshed in the downfall of Ludovico.
Even to this he remained impassive.  "Visconti dragged to prison, his
son dead, ... the duke has lost his state, his possessions, his
liberty, and has finished nothing he undertook," was his only comment
on his patron's end, written on the {xii} margin of a manuscript.
After the overthrow of the Duke of Milan, began his Italian wanderings.
At one time he contemplated entering the service of an Oriental prince.
Instead, he entered that of Caesar Borgia, as military engineer, and
the greatest painter of the age became inspector of a despot's
strongholds.  But his restless nature did not leave him long at this.
Returning to Florence he competed with Michelangelo; yet the service of
even his native city could not retain him.  His fame had attracted the
attention of a new patron of the arts, prince of the state which had
conquered his first master.  In this his last venture, he forsook
Italy, only to die three years later at Amboise, in the castle of the
French king.

The inner nature of Leonardo remained as untouched by the men he
encountered as by the events which were then stirring Europe.  Alone,
he influenced others, remaining the while a mystery to all.  The most
gifted of nations failed to understand the greatest of her sons.
Isabella d'Este, the first lady of her time, seeking vainly to obtain
some product of his brush, was told that his life was changeful and
uncertain, that he lived for the day, intent only on his art.  His own
thoughts reveal him in another light.  "I wish to work miracles," he
wrote.  And elsewhere he exclaimed, "Thou, O God, sellest us all
benefits, at the cost of our toil....  As a day well spent makes sleep
{xiii} seem pleasant, so a life well employed makes death pleasant.  A
life well spent is long."


Leonardo's views of aesthetic are all important in his philosophy of
life and art.  The worker's thoughts on his craft are always of
interest.  They are doubly so when there is in them no trace of
literary self-consciousness to blemish their expression.  He recorded
these thoughts at the instant of their birth, for a constant habit of
observation and analysis had early developed with him into a second
nature.  His ideas were penned in the same fragmentary way as they
presented themselves to his mind, perhaps with no intention of
publishing them to the world.  But his ideal of art depended
intimately, none the less, on the system he had thrown out seemingly in
so haphazard a manner.  His method gives to his writings their only
unity.  It was more than a method: it was a permanent expression of his
own life, which aided him to construct a philosophy of beauty
characteristic of the new age.

He had searched to find a scientific basis for art, and discovered it
in the imitation of nature, based on rational experience.  This idea
was, in part, Aristotelian, imbibed with the spirit of the time; though
in the ordinary acceptance of the word Leonardo was no scholar, least
of all a humanist.  His own innovation in aesthetic was in requiring a
rational and critical experience as a necessary {xiv} foundation, the
acquisition of which was to result from the permanent condition of the
mind.  He had trained his own faculties to critically observe all
natural phenomena: first try by experience, and then demonstrate why
such experiment is forced to operate in the way it does, was his
advice.  The eye, he gave as an instance, had been defined as one
thing; by experience, he had found it to be another.

But by imitation in art, Leonardo intended no slavish reproduction of
nature.  When he wrote that "the painter strives and competes with
nature," he was on the track of a more Aristotelian idea.  This he
barely developed, using nature only partly in the Stagirite's sense, of
inner force outwardly exemplified.  The idea of imitation, in fad, as
it presented itself to his mind, was two-fold.  It was not merely the
external reproduction of the image, which was easy enough to secure.
The real difficulty of the artist lay in reflecting inner character and
personality.  It was Leonardo's firm conviction that each thought had
some outward expression by which the trained observer was able to
recognize it.  Every man, he wrote, has as many movements of the body
as of varieties of ideas.  Thought, moreover, expressed itself
outwardly in proportion to its power over the individual and his time
of life.  By thus employing bodily gesture to represent feeling and
idea, the painter could affect the spectator whom he {xv} placed in the
presence of visible emotion.  He maintained that art was of slight use
unless able to show what its subject had in mind.  Painting should aim,
therefore, to reproduce the inner mental state by the attitude assumed.
This was, in other words, a natural symbolism, in which the symbol was
no mere convention, but the actual outward projection of the inner
condition of the mind.  Art here offered an equation of inward purpose
and outward expression, neither complete without the other.

Further than this, influenced by Platonic thought, Leonardo's
conception of painting was, as an intellectual state or condition,
outwardly projected.  The painter who practised his art without
reasoning of its nature was like a mirror unconsciously reflecting what
was before it.  Although without a "manual act" painting could not be
realized, its true problems--problems of light, of colour, pose and
composition, of primitive and derivative shadow--had all to be grasped
by the mind without bodily labour.  Beyond this, the scientific
foundation in art came through making it rest upon an accurate
knowledge of nature.  Even experience was only a step towards attaining
this.  "There is nothing in all nature without its reason," he wrote.
"If you know the reason, you do not need the experience."

In the history of art, as well, he urged that nature had been the test
of its excellence.  A {xvi} natural phenomenon had brought art into
existence.  The first picture in the world, he remarked in a happy
epigram, had been "a line surrounding the shadow of a man, cast by the
sun on the wall."  He traced the history of painting in Italy during
its stagnation after the decay of ancient art, when each painter copied
only his predecessor, which lasted until Giotto, born among barren
mountains, drew the movements of the goats he tended, and thus advanced
farther than all the earlier masters.  But his successors only copied
him, and painting sank again until Masaccio once more took nature as
his guide.

A quite different and combative side to Leonardo's aesthetic, which
forced him to state the broad principles of art, appears in his attacks
on poetry and music as inferior to painting.  In that age of humanistic
triumph, literature had lorded it over the other arts in a manner not
free from arrogance.  There was still another cause for his onslaught
on poetry.  Leonardo resented the fact that painters, who were rarely
men of education, had not defended themselves against the slurs cast on
their art.  His counter attack may have been intended to hide his own
small scholarship.  It served another end as well.  His conception of
the universal principles of beauty was made clear by this defence.  His
first principle stated broadly that the most useful art was the one
which could most easily be communicated.  {xvii} Painting was
communicable to all since its appeal was made to the eye.  While the
painter proceeded at once to the imitation of nature, the poet's
instruments were words which varied in every land.  He took the
Platonic view of poetry as a lying imitation, removed from truth.  He
called the poet a collector of other men's wares, who decked himself in
their plumage.  Where poetry presented only a shadow to the
imagination, painting offered a real image to the eye; and the eye, as
the window of the soul through which all earthly beauty was revealed,
the sight, he exclaimed, which had discovered navigation, which had
impelled men to seek the West, was the noblest of all the senses.
Painting spoke only by what it accomplished, poetry ended in the very
words with which it sang its own praises.  If, then, poets called
painting dumb poetry, he could retort by dubbing poetry blind painting.
In common with his successors, Leonardo could not escape from this
fallacy, which, in overlooking all save descriptive verse, was destined
to burden aesthetic until demolished by Lessing.

It was the opinion of Leonardo that the temporary nature of music
caused its inferiority to painting.  Although durability was in itself
no absolute test,--else the work of coppersmiths would be the highest
art,--yet in any final scale, permanence could not altogether be
disregarded.  Music perished in the very act of its creation, {xviii}
while painting preserved the beautiful from the hand of time.  "Helen
of Troy, gazing in a mirror, in her old age, wondered how she had twice
been ravished."  Mortal beauty would thus vanish, if it were not
rescued by art from destroying age and death.

Leonardo contrasted painting with sculpture, for he had practised both,
and thought himself peculiarly qualified to judge their merit.  He
considered the former the nobler art of the two, for sculpture involved
bodily toil and fatigue, while by its very nature it lacked perspective
and atmosphere, colour, and the feeling of space.  Painting, on the
other hand, caused by an illusion, was in itself the result of deeper
thought.  An even broader test served to convince him of its final
superiority.  That art was of highest excellence, he wrote, which
possessed most elements of variety and universality.  Painting
contained and reproduced all forms of nature; it made its appeal by the
harmonious balance of parts which gratified all the senses.  By its
very duality it fulfilled the highest purpose.  The painter was able to
visualize the beauty which enchanted him, to bring to reality the fancy
of his dreams, and give outward expression to the ideal within.

The genius of Leonardo as a painter came through unfolding the mystery
of life.  Like Miranda, he had gazed with wonder at the beauty of the
world.  "Look at the grace and sweetness {xix} of men and women in the
street," he wrote.  The most ordinary functions of life and nature
amazed him most.  He observed of the eye how in it form and colour, and
the entire universe it reflected, were reduced to a single point.
"Wonderful law of nature, which forced all effects to participate with
their cause in the mind of man.  These are the true miracles!"
Elsewhere he wrote again: "Nature is full of infinite reasons which
have not yet passed into experience."  He conceived it to be the
painter's duty not only to comment on natural phenomena as restrained
by law, but to merge his very mind into that of nature by interpreting
its relation with art.  Resting securely on the reality of experienced
truth, he felt the deeper presence of the unreal on every side.  In the
same way that he visualized the inner workings of the mind, his keen
imagination aided him to make outward trifles serve his desire to find
mysterious beauty everywhere.  Oftentimes, in gazing on some ancient,
time-stained wall, he describes how he would trace thereon landscapes,
with mountains, rivers and valleys.  The whole world was full of a
mystery to him, which his work reflected.  The smile of consciousness,
pregnant of that which is beyond, illumines the expression of Mona
Lisa.  So, too, in the strange glance of Ann, of John the Baptist, and
of the Virgin of the Rocks, one realizes that their thoughts dwell in
another world.

{xx}

Leonardo had found a refuge in art from the pettiness of material
environment.  Like his own creations, he, too, had learned the secret
of the inner life.  The painter, he wrote, could create a world of his
own, and take refuge in this new realm.  But it must not be one of
shadows only.  The very mystery he felt so keenly had yet to rest on a
real foundation; to treat it otherwise would be to plunge into mere
vapouring.  Although attempting to bridge the gulf which separated the
real from the unreal, he refused to treat the latter supernaturally.
That mystery which lesser minds found in the occult, he saw in nature
all about him.  He denied the existence of spirits, just as he urged
the foolishness of the will-o'-the-wisps of former ages,--alchemy and
the black art.  In one sentence he destroyed the pretensions of
palmistry.  "You will see," he wrote, "great armies slaughtered in an
hour's time, where in each individual the signs of the hands are
different."

His art took, thus, its guidance in realism, its purpose in
spirituality.  The search for truth and the desire for beauty were the
twin ideals he strove to attain.  The keenness of this pursuit saved
him from the blemish of egoism which aloofness from his surroundings
would otherwise have forced upon him.  For his character presented the
anomaly, peculiar to the Renaissance, of a lofty idealism coupled in
action with {xxi} irresponsibility of duty.  He stood on a higher
plane, his attitude toward life recognizing no claims on the part of
his fellowmen.  In his desire to surpass himself, fostered by this
isolation of spirit and spurred on by the eager wish to attain
universal knowledge, he has been compared to Faust; but the likeness is
only half correct.  He was not blind to the limitations which
encompassed him, his very genius making him realize their bounds.  Of
the ancients he said that in attempting to define the nature of the
soul, they sought the impossible.  He wrote elsewhere, "It is the
infinite alone that cannot be attained, for if it could it would become
finite."

In Leonardo's personality was reflected both the strength and weakness
of Renaissance Italy.  So, to know him, it is necessary to understand
the Italy of that age.  Its brilliancy, its universality, its desire
for beauty, are but one side of the medal.  On its reverse, Italy
lacked the solid vigour of a national purpose.  The discord of
political disunion, reacting on art, laid bare great weakness in the
want of any constructive direction, toward which the strength of the
Renaissance could aim.  The energy was there, whether finding an outlet
in statecraft or in discovery, in art or in letters.  But it laboured
for no common end; there was internal unity of force and method, but
external divergence of purpose.  The tyranny of petty despots could
provide no adequate ideal toward {xxii} which to aim.  No ruler, and no
city save Venice, could long symbolize the nation's patriotism.
Venetian painters alone glorified the state in their work, and thus
felt the living force of a national ambition which raised them above
themselves.  But elsewhere there was little to inspire that devotion
for a common country necessary as a background to sustain the greatest
work.  Hence Italian art, so living within certain limits, remained
stunted beyond these.  The conviction that art existed in order to
express ideal beauty, that its main purpose was to please the eye and
the senses in spite of the result attained, proved inadequate
compensation for all that had been withdrawn.  The art ideal tended
more and more to become a conscience and a purpose in itself, an inward
impulse for action and an outward goal.


The artist's real greatness will depend at all times on his qualities
as a representative.  His true merit will arise from giving expression
in ideal terms to his nation and to his age.  In so far as he has been
able to do this and the spirit of his country is reflected in his work,
in so far as he has represented what is best therein and most enduring,
he will have achieved greatness.  Not that this is always, or even
often, a conscious expression.  It is unfair reading to search for deep
thought in the work of either painter or poet.  Neither art {xxiii}
offers the best medium to convey the abstractions of the mind, since
each has its own method of expression, independent of pure reason.  But
painter and poet, in the degree they attain greatness, express more
than themselves.  Ariosto, intent only to amuse, reflects with playful
wit and skepticism the splendid luxury and joy of living in Renaissance
court life.  The care with which he chiselled each line proves that his
real seriousness and conscience lay in his artistic purpose.  Without
Ariosto's wit, Paolo Veronese depicted a similar side in painting,
though his Venetian birthright made him celebrate the glory of the
Republic.  Poet and painter alike expressed far more than either could
know.  If such a test be applied to the artists of the Renaissance,
each in turn will respond to it,--just as the weakness of the later
Bolognese as a school is that, beyond a certain technical merit, they
meant and represented so little.  But the noblest
painters,--Michelangelo and Raphael, Titian and Leonardo,--in addition
to possessing the solid grasp of technical mastery, reflected some
aspect of their nation's life and civilization.  In Michelangelo was
realized the grandeur of Italy struggling vainly against crushing
oppression.  He expressed that which was highest in it, reflecting the
loftiest side of its idealism mingled with deep pessimism in his survey
over life; for, wrapped in austerity, he saw mankind in heroic terms of
sadness.  Raphael, on the {xxiv} other hand, found only beautiful
sweetness everywhere.  The tragedies of life failed to touch the young
painter, who blotted from view all struggle and sorrow, and, in spite
of the misery which had befallen his nation, could still rejoice in the
sensuous beauty of the world.  There was another side to the
Renaissance, dependent neither on beauty nor heroic grandeur, yet
sharing in both through qualities of its own.  Titian, who painted the
living man of action, the man of parts, susceptible alike to the
appreciation of ideal beauty and heroic impulse, but guided withal by
expediency, reflected this more practical aspect of life.  In his
portraiture he expressed the statecraft for which Italians found
opportunity beyond the Alps, since in Italy it was denied them; and
Titian found even Venice too narrow for the scope of his art.

But before Titian, before Raphael, before Michelangelo, Leonardo
reflected the rationalism and the mystery, the subtlety and the
philosophical speculation, of the age.  To find in his work only the
individual thought of genius would be to mistake, perhaps, its most
important side; for the expression of his mind, both by its brilliancy
and its limitations, is typical of the spirit of his time.  The Italian
Renaissance was reflected in him as rarely a period has been expressed
in the life-work of a single man.  He represented its union of practice
and theory, of thought placed in the {xxv} service of action.  He
summed up its different aspects in his own individuality.
Intellectually, he represented its many-sidedness attained through
penetration of thought, and a keenness of observation, profiting from
experience, extended into every sphere.  As an artist he possessed a
vigour of imagination from which sprang his power of creating beauty.
But, in spite of his practical nature, he remained a dreamer in an age
which had in it more of stern reality than of golden dreams.  His very
limitations, his excess of individualism, his want of long-continued
concentration, his lack of patriotism, his feeling of the superiority
of art to nationality, are all characteristic of Renaissance Italy.

The union in Leonardo of reality to mystery has often been shared by
genius in other fields.  His own peculiar greatness sprang from
expressing in art the apparent contradiction of attaining the world of
mystery through force of reality.  Like Hamlet, it was the union of the
real with the unreal which appealed to him, of the world as he saw it
and the world as he imagined it to be.  It was but another expression
of the eternal ideal of truth and beauty.

L. E.

American Embassy
  London, 1906




{3}

I

THOUGHTS ON LIFE

      * *
       *

[Sidenote: Of the Works of Leonardo]

Begun at Florence in the house of Piero di Braccio Martelli, on the 22d
day of March, 1508; and this is to be a collection without order, taken
from many papers which I have copied here, hoping to arrange them
later, each in its place, according to the various subjects treated.
And I think that before I shall have finished this work, it will be
necessary for me to repeat the same thing many times over; so, O
reader, blame me not, because the subjects are many, and memory cannot
retain them and say: This I will not write because I have already
written it; and if I did not wish to fall into this error it would be
necessary, every time that I wished to copy something, in order not to
repeat myself, to read over all the preceding matter, all the more so
since the intervals are long between one time of writing and another.


[Sidenote: His Thirst after Knowledge]

2.

Not louder does the tempestuous sea bellow when the north wind strikes
its foaming waves between Scylla and Charybdis; nor Stromboli nor Mount
Etna when the sulphurous flames, {4} shattering and bursting open the
great mountain with violence, hurl stones and earth through the air
with the flame it vomits; nor when the fiery caverns of Mount Etna,
spitting forth the element which it cannot restrain, hurl it back to
the place whence it issued, driving furiously before it any obstacle in
the way of its vehement fury ... so I, urged by my great desire and
longing to see the blending of strange and various shapes made by
creating nature, wandered for some time among the dark rocks, and came
to the entrance of a great cave, in front of which I long stood in
astonishment and ignorance of such a thing.  I bent my back into an
arch and rested my left hand on my knee, and with my right hand shaded
my downcast eyes and contracted eyebrows.  I bent down first on one
side and then on the other to see whether I could perceive anything,
but the thick darkness rendered this impossible; and after having
remained there some time, two things arose within me, fear and
desire,--fear of the dark and threatening cave, desire to see whether
there were anything marvellous within.


3.

I discover for man the origin of the first and perhaps of the second
cause of his being.


[Sidenote: Leonardo's Studies]

4.

Recognizing as I do that I cannot make use of {5} subject matter which
is useful and delightful, since my predecessors have exhausted the
useful and necessary themes, I shall do as the man who by reason of his
poverty arrives last at the fair, and cannot do otherwise than purchase
what has already been seen by others and not accepted, but rejected by
them as being of little value.  I shall place this despised and
rejected merchandise, which remains over after many have bought, on my
poor pack, and I shall go and distribute it, not in the big cities, but
in the poor towns, and take such reward as my goods deserve.


[Sidenote: Vain Knowledge]

5.

All knowledge which ends in words will die as quickly as it came to
life, with the exception of the written word: which is its mechanical
part.


6.

Avoid studies the result of which will die together with him who
studied.


[Sidenote: Value of Knowledge]

7.

The intellect will always profit by the acquisition of any knowledge
whatsoever, for thus what is useless will be expelled from it, and what
is fruitful will remain.  It is impossible either to hate or to love a
thing without first acquiring knowledge of it.

{6}

8.

Men of worth naturally desire knowledge.


9.

It is ordained that to the ambitious, who derive no satisfaction from
the gifts of life and the beauty of the world, life shall be a cause of
suffering, and they shall possess neither the profit nor the beauty of
the world.


[Sidenote: On his Contemners]

10.

I know that many will say that this work is useless, and these are they
of whom Demetrius said recked no more of the breath which made the
words proceed from their mouth, than of the wind which proceeded from
their body,--men who seek solely after riches and bodily satisfaction,
men entirely denuded of that wisdom which is the food and verily the
wealth of the soul; because insomuch as the soul is of greater value
than the body, so much greater are the riches of the soul than those of
the body.  And often when I see one of these take this work in his
hand, I wonder whether, like a monkey, he will not smell it and ask me
if it is something to eat.


[Sidenote: On the Vulgar]

11.

Demetrius used to say that there was no difference between the words
and the voice of the {7} unskilled ignorant and the sounds and noises
of a stomach full of superfluous wind.  And it was not without reason
that he said this, for he considered it to be indifferent whence the
utterance of such men proceeded, whether from their mouth or their
body; both being of the same substance and value.


12.

I do not consider that men of coarse and boorish habits and of slender
parts deserve so fine an instrument nor such a complicated mechanism as
men of contemplation and high culture.  They merely need a sack in
which their food may be held and whence it may issue, since verily they
cannot be considered otherwise than as vehicles for food, for they seem
to me to have nothing in common with the human race save the shape and
the voice; as far as the rest is concerned they are lower than the
beasts.


13.

Knowledge of the past and of the places of the earth is the ornament
and food of the mind of man.


[Sidenote: Knowledge the supreme Good]

14.

Cornelius Celsus: Knowledge is the supreme good, the supreme evil is
physical pain.  We are composed of two separate parts, the soul and the
the body; the soul is the greater of these two, the body the lesser.
Knowledge appertains to the {8} greater part, the supreme evil belongs
to the lesser and baser part.  Knowledge is an excellent thing for the
mind, and pain is the most grievous thing for the body.  Just as the
supreme evil is physical pain, so is wisdom the supreme good of the
soul, that is to say of the wise man, and no other thing can be
compared with it.


[Sidenote: Life and Wisdom]

15.

In the days of thy youth seek to obtain that which shall compensate the
losses of thy old age.  And if thou understandest that old age is fed
with wisdom, so conduct thyself in the days of thy youth that
sustenance may not be lacking to thy old age.


[Sidenote: Praise of Knowledge]

16.

The fame of the rich man dies with him; the fame of the treasure, and
not of the man who possessed it, remains.  Far greater is the glory of
the virtue of mortals than that of their riches.  How many emperors and
how many princes have lived and died and no record of them remains, and
they only sought to gain dominions and riches in order that their fame
might be ever-lasting.  How many were those who lived in scarcity of
worldly goods in order to grow rich in virtue; and as far as virtue
exceeds wealth, even in the same degree the desire of the poor man
proved more fruitful than that of the rich man.  {9} Dost thou not see
that wealth in itself confers no honour on him who amasses it, which
shall last when he is dead, as does knowledge?--knowledge which shall
always bear witness like a clarion to its creator, since knowledge is
the daughter of its creator, and not the stepdaughter, like wealth.


[Sidenote: The World]

17.

Bountiful nature has provided that in all parts of the world you will
find something to imitate.


18.

[Sidenote: The Beauty of Life]

Consider in the streets at nightfall the faces of men and women when it
is bad weather, what grace and sweetness they manifest!


19.

Just as iron which is not used grows rusty, and water putrefies and
freezes in the cold, so the mind of which no use is made is spoilt.


[Sidenote: Fruitless Study]

20.

Just as food eaten without appetite is a tedious nourishment, so does
study without zeal damage the memory by not assimilating what it
absorbs.


21.

Truth was the only daughter of time.


{10}

[Sidenote: In Praise of Truth]

22.

So vile a thing is a lie that even if it spoke fairly of God it would
take away somewhat from His divinity; and so excellent a thing is truth
that if it praises the humblest things they are exalted.  There is no
doubt that truth is to falsehood as light is to darkness; and so
excellent a thing is truth that even when it touches humble and lowly
matters, it still incomparably exceeds the uncertainty and falsehood in
which great and elevated discourses are clothed; because even if
falsehood be the fifth element of our minds, notwithstanding this,
truth is the supreme nourishment of the higher intellects, though not
of disorderly minds.  But thou who feedest on dreams dost prefer the
sophistry and subterfuges in matters of importance and uncertainty to
what is certain and natural, though of lesser magnitude.


23.

Obstacles in the way of truth are finally punished.


[Sidenote: Versus Humanists]

24.

I am well aware that not being a literary man the presumptuous will
think that they have the right to blame me on the ground that I am not
a man of letters.  Vainglorious people!  Know they not that I could
make answer as Marius did to the Roman people, and say: They who make a
{11} display with the labours of others will not allow me mine?  They
will say that being unskilled in letters I cannot find true expression
for the matters of which I desire to treat; they do not know that in my
subjects experience is a truer guide than the words of others, for
experience was the teacher of all great writers, and therefore I take
her for guide, and I will cite her in all cases.


25.

Although I may not be able to quote other authors, as they do, I can
quote from a greater and more worthy source, namely, experience,--the
teacher of their masters.  They go about swelled with pride and
pomposity, dressed up and bedight, not with their own labour, but with
that of others; and they will not concede me mine.  And if they despise
me, who am a creator, far more are they, who do not create but trumpet
abroad and exploit the works of other men, to be blamed.


[Sidenote: Authority]

26.

He who in reasoning cites authority is making use of his memory rather
than of his intellect.


[Sidenote: On Commentators]

27.

Men who are creators and interpreters of nature to man, in comparison
with boasters and exploiters of the works of others, must be judged
{12} and esteemed like the object before the mirror as compared with
its image reflected in the mirror.--one being something in itself, and
the other nothing.  Little to nature do they owe, since it is merely by
chance they wear the human form, and but for it I might include them
with herds of cattle.


28.

A well lettered man is so because he is well natured, and just as the
cause is more admirable than the effect, so is a good disposition,
unlettered, more praiseworthy than a well lettered man who is without
natural disposition.


29.

Against certain commentators who disparage the inventors of antiquity,
the originators of science and grammar, and who attack the creators of
antiquity; and because they through laziness and the convenience of
books have not been able to create, they attack their masters with
false reasoning.


30.

It is better to imitate ancient than modern work.


[Sidenote: Experience]

31.

Wisdom is the daughter of experience.


[Sidenote: Experience never Errs]

32.

Wrongly men complain of experience, which {13} with great railing they
accuse of falsehood.  Leave experience alone, and turn your lamentation
to your ignorance, which leads you, with your vain and foolish desires,
to promise yourselves those things which are not in her power to
confer, and to accuse her of falsehood.  Wrongly men complain of
innocent experience, when they accuse her not seldom of false and lying
demonstrations.


33.

Experience never errs; it is only your judgements that err, ye who look
to her for effects which our experiments cannot produce.  Because given
a principle, that which ensues from it is necessarily the true
consequence of that principle, unless it be impeded.  Should there,
however, be any obstacle, the effect which should ensue from the
aforesaid principle will participate in the impediment as much or as
little as the impediment is operative in regard to the aforesaid
principle.


34.

Experience, the interpreter between creative nature and the human race,
teaches the action of nature among mortals: how under the constraint of
necessity she cannot act otherwise than as reason, who steers her helm,
teaches her to act.


35.

All our knowledge is the offspring of our perceptions.


{14}

[Sidenote: Origin of Knowledge]

36.

The sense ministers to the soul, and not the soul sense; and where the
sense which ministers ceases to serve the soul, all the functions of
that sense are lacking in life, as is evident in those who are born
dumb and blind.


[Sidenote: Testimony of the Senses]

37.

And if thou sayest that sight impedes the security and subtlety of
mental meditation, by reason of which we penetrate into divine
knowledge, and that this impediment drove a philosopher to deprive
himself of his sight, I answer that the eye, as lord of the senses,
performs its duty in being an impediment to the confusion and lies of
that which is not science but discourse, by which with much noise and
gesticulation argument is constantly conducted; and hearing should do
the same, feeling, as it does, the offence more keenly, because it
seeks after harmony which devolves on all the senses.  And if this
philosopher deprived himself of his sight to get rid of the obstacle to
his discourses, consider that his discourses and his brain were a party
to the act, because the whole was madness.  Now could he not have
closed his eyes when this frenzy came upon him, and have kept them
closed until the frenzy consumed itself?  But the man was mad, the
discourse insane, and egregious the folly of destroying his eye-sight.

{15}

[Sidenote: Judgement prone to Error]

38.

There is nothing which deceives us as much as our own judgement.


39.

The greatest deception which men incur proceeds from their opinions.


40.

Avoid the precepts of those thinkers whose reasoning is not confirmed
by experience.

[Sidenote: Intelligence of Animals]

41.

Man discourseth greatly, and his discourse is for the greater part
empty and false; the discourse of animals is small, but useful and
true: slender certainty is better than portentous falsehood.


42.

What is an element?  It is not in man's power to define the quiddity of
the elements, but a great many of their effects are known.


43.

That which is divisible in fact is divisible in potentiality also; but
not all quantities which are divisible in potentiality are divisible in
fact.


[Sidenote: Infinity incomprehensible]

44.

What is that thing which is not defined and would {16} not exist if it
were defined?  It is infinity, which if it could be defined would be
limited and finite, because that which can be defined ends with the
limits of its circumference, and that which cannot be defined has no
limits.


45.

O contemplators of things, do not pride yourselves for knowing those
things which nature by herself and her ordination naturally conduces;
but rejoice in knowing the purposes of those things which are
determined by your mind.


[Sidenote: Insoluble Questions]

46.

Consider, O reader, how far we can lend credence to the ancients who
strove to define the soul and life,--things which cannot be proved;
while those things which can be clearly known and proved by experience
remained during so many centuries ignored and misrepresented!  The eye,
which so clearly demonstrates its functions, has been up to my time
defined in one manner by countless authorities; I by experience have
discovered another definition.


[Sidenote: Beauty of Nature's Inventions]

47.

Although human ingenuity may devise various inventions which, by the
help of various instruments, answer to one and the same purpose, yet
{17} will it never discover any inventions more beautiful, more simple
or more practical than those of nature, because in her inventions there
is nothing lacking and nothing superfluous; and she makes use of no
counterpoise when she constructs the limbs of animals in such a way as
to correspond to the motion of their bodies, but she puts into them the
soul of the body.  This is not the proper place for this discourse,
which belongs rather to the subject of the composition of animated
bodies; and the rest of the definition of the soul I leave to the minds
of the friars, the fathers of the people, who know all secrets by
inspiration.  I leave the sacred books alone, because they are the
supreme truth.


[Sidenote: Completeness in Knowledge]

48.

Those who seek to abbreviate studies do injury to knowledge and to love
because the love of anything is the daughter of this knowledge.  The
fervency of the love increases in proportion to the certainty of the
knowledge, and the certainty issues from a complete knowledge of all
the parts, which united compose the totality of the thing which ought
to be loved.  Of what value, then, is he who abbreviates the details of
those matters of which he professes to render a complete account, while
he leaves behind the chief part of the things of which the whole is
composed?  It is true that impatience, the mother of {18} stupidity,
praises brevity, as if such persons had not life long enough to enable
them to acquire a complete knowledge of one subject such as the human
body!  And then they seek to comprehend the mind of God, in which the
universe is included, weighing it and splitting it into infinite
particles, as if they had to dissect it!

O human folly! dost thou not perceive that thou hast been with thyself
all thy life, and thou art not yet aware of the thing which more fully
than any other thing thou dost possess, namely, thy own folly?  And
thou desirest with the multitude of sophists to deceive thyself and
others, despising the mathematical sciences in which truth dwells and
the knowledge of the things which they contain; and then thou dost busy
thyself with miracles, and writest that thou hast attained to the
knowledge of those things which the human mind cannot comprehend, which
cannot be proved by any instance in nature, and thou deemest that thou
hast wrought a miracle in spoiling the work of some speculative mind;
and thou perceivest not that thy error is the same as that of a man who
strips a plant of the ornament of its branches covered with leaves,
mingled with fragrant flowers and fruits.  Just as Justinius did when
he abridged the stories written by Trogus Pompeius, who had written
elaborately the noble deeds of his forefathers, which were full of
wonderful beauties of style; and thus {19} he composed a barren work,
worthy only of the impatient spirits who deem that they are wasting the
time which they might usefully employ in studying the works of nature
and mortal affairs.  But let such men remain in company with the
beasts; let dogs and other animals full of rapine be their courtiers,
and let them be accompanied with these running ever at their heels! and
let the harmless animals follow, which in the season of the snows come
to the houses begging alms as from their master.


[Sidenote: Nature]

49.

Nature is full of infinite causes which are beyond the pale of
experience.


50.

Nature in creating first gives size to the abode of the intellect (the
skull, the head), and then to the abode of the vital spirit (the chest).


[Sidenote: Law of Necessity]

51.

Necessity is the mistress and guide of nature.  Necessity is the theme
and inventress of nature, her curb and her eternal law.


52.

When anything is the cause of any other thing, and brings about by its
movement any effect, {20} the movement of the effect necessarily
follows the movement of the cause.


[Sidenote: Of Lightning in the Clouds]

53.

O mighty and once living instrument of creative nature, unable to avail
thyself of thy great strength thou must needs abandon a life of
tranquillity and obey the law which God and time gave to Nature the
mother.  Ah! how often the frighted shoals of dolphins and great tunny
fish were seen fleeing before thy inhuman wrath; whilst thou,
fulminating with swift beating of wings and twisted tail, raised in the
sea a sudden storm with buffeting and sinking of ships and tossing of
waves, filling the naked shores with terrified and distracted fishes.


[Sidenote: The Human Eye]

54.

Since the eye is the window of the soul, the soul is always fearful of
losing it, so much so that if a man is suddenly frightened by the
motion or an object before him, he does not with his hands protect his
heart, the source of all life; nor his head, where dwells the lord of
the senses; nor the organs of hearing, smell and taste.  But as soon as
he feels fright it does not suffice him to close the lids of his eyes,
keeping them shut with all his might, but he instantly turns in the
opposite direction; and still not feeling secure he covers his eyes
with one hand, stretching out the {21} other to ward off the danger in
the direction in which he suspects it to lie.  Nature again has
ordained that the eye of man shall close of itself, so that remaining
during his sleep without protection it shall suffer no hurt.


[Sidenote: Universal Law]

55.

Every object naturally seeks to maintain itself in itself.


56.

The part always tends to reunite with its whole in order to escape from
its imperfection; the soul desires to remain with its body, because
without the organic instruments of that body it can neither act nor
feel.


57.

The lover is moved by the object he loves as the senses are by sensible
things; and they unite and become one and the same.  The work is the
first thing which is born of this union; if the thing loved is base,
the lover becomes base.  When what is united is in harmony with that
which receives it, delight, pleasure and satisfaction ensue.  When the
lover is united to the beloved he rests there; when the burden is laid
down it finds rest there.


58.

A natural action is accomplished in the briefest manner.


{22}

[Sidenote: Nature Variable and Infinite.]

59.

To such an extent does nature delight and abound in variety that among
her trees there is not one plant to be found which is exactly like
another; and not only among the plants, but among the boughs, the
leaves and the fruits, you will not find one which is exactly similar
to another.


60.

If nature had made one rule for the quality of limbs, the faces of men
would resemble each other to such a degree that it would not be
possible to distinguish one from the other; but she has varied the five
features of the face in such a way that, although she has made an
almost universal rule with regard to their size, she has not done so
with regard to their quality, so that each one can be clearly
distinguished from the other.


61.

It is an easy matter for him who knows man to arrive at universal
knowledge, since all terrestrial animals are similar in regard to their
structure, that is to say, in regard to the muscles and bones, and they
do not vary save in height and thickness; then there are the aquatic
animals, and I will not persuade the painter that any rule can be made
with regard to these because they are of infinite variety--so are the
insects.


{23}

62.

The body of anything which is fed is continually dying and being
reborn, since nourishment cannot enter save where the past nourishment
is exhausted; and if it is exhausted, it no longer has life, and if you
do not furnish it with nourishment equal to that which has been before,
you will impair the health of the organism, and if you deprive it of
this nourishment, life will be altogether destroyed.  But if you supply
it with so much as can be consumed in a day, then as much life will be
restored as was consumed, like the light of the candle which is
furnished to it by the fuel provided by the moisture of the candle, and
this light with most speedy succour restores beneath what is consumed
above as it dies in dusky smoke; and this death is continuous, likewise
the continuity of the smoke is equal to the continuity of the fuel; and
in the same moment the light dies and is born again together with the
movement of its fuel.


63.

Man and animals are in reality vehicles and conduits of food, tombs of
animals, hostels of Death, coverings that consume, deriving life by the
death of others.


[Sidenote: Light]

64.

Look on light and consider its beauty.  Shut your {24} eyes, and look
again: that which you see was not there before, and that which was, no
longer is.  Who is he who remakes it if the producer is continually
dying?


65.

Anaxagoras: Everything proceeds from everything, and everything becomes
everything, because that which exists in the elements is composed of
those elements.


[Sidenote: Nature]

66.

Nature appears to have been the cruel stepmother rather than the mother
of many animals, and in some cases not the stepmother, but the pitying
mother.


67.

Why did nature not ordain that one animal should not live by the death
of the other?  Nature, being inconstant and taking pleasure in
continually creating and making lives and forms, because she knows that
her earthly materials are thereby augmented, is more willing and swift
to create than time is to destroy; and so she has ordained that many
animals shall feed on each other.  And as even thus her desire is not
satisfied, she frequently sends forth certain poisonous and
pestilential vapours upon the increasing multitude and congregation of
animals, and especially upon men who increase to a great extent,
because other animals do not feed on them; and since there is no cause,
{25} there would follow no effect.  This earth, therefore, seeks to
lose its [animal] life, desiring only continual reproduction, and as,
by the logical demonstration you adduce, effects often resemble their
causes, animals are the image of the life of the world.


[Sidenote: Life's Philosophy]

68.

Now you see that the hope and the desire of returning home to one's
former state is like the desire of the moth for the light, and the man
who, with constant yearning and joyful expectancy, awaits the new
spring and the new summer, and every new month and the new year, and
thinks that what he longs for is ever too late in coming, and does not
perceive that he is longing for his own destruction.  But this desire
is the quintessence, the spirit, of the elements, which, finding itself
captive in the soul of the human body, desires always to return to its
giver.  And I would have you know that this same desire is the
quintessence which is inseparable from nature, and that man is the
model of the world.  And such is the supreme folly of man that he
labours so as to labour no more, and life flies from him while he
forever hopes to enjoy the goods which he has acquired at the price of
great labour.


[Sidenote: The Senses and the Soul]

69.

The soul seems to dwell in the intellect, and the intellect appears to
dwell in that part where all {26} the senses meet which is called the
brain, and the brain does not pervade the whole body, as many have
thought; on the contrary, it dwells entirely in one part, because if it
were all in all and the same in every part, it would not have been
necessary for the instruments of the senses to combine among themselves
in one single spot; but rather, it would have been sufficient for the
eye to fulfil the function of its sensation on the surface without
transmitting, by means of the optic nerves, the likeness of its vision
to the brain, so that the soul, for the reason given above, might
perceive it in the surface of the eye.  Likewise, with regard to the
sense of hearing, it would have been sufficient if the voice had
sounded only in the porous cavity of the indurated bone which lies
within the ear, without making any further transit from this bone to
the brain, which is its destination and where it discourses with common
judgement.  The sense of smell, too, is likewise compelled by necessity
to proceed to the intellect; the sense of touch passes through the
nerves and is conveyed to the brain, and these nerves diverge with
infinite ramification in the skin, which encloses the limbs of the body
and the entrails.  The nerves convey volition and sensation to the
muscles, and these nerves and the tendons which lie between the muscles
and the sinews give movement to them; the muscles and sinews obey, and
this obedience takes effect by the decrease {27} of their thickness,
for in swelling their length is reduced, and the tendons which are
interwoven among the particles of the limbs shrink, and as they extend
to the tips of the fingers they transmit to the brain the cause of the
sense of touch which they feel.  The tendons with their muscles obey
the nerves as soldiers obey their officers, and the nerves obey the
brain as the officers obey their captain; thus the joint of the bones
obeys the tendon, and the tendons obey the muscles, and the muscles
obey the nerves, and the nerves obey the brain, and the brain is the
dwelling of the soul, and the memory is its ammunition and the
perception is its refundary.


[Sidenote: Of Sensation]

70.

The brain is that which perceives what is transmitted to it by the
other senses.  The brain moves by means of that which is transmitted to
it by the five senses.  Motion is transmitted to the senses by objects,
and these objects, transmitting their images to the five senses, are
transferred by them to the perception, and by the perception to the
brain; and there they are comprehended and committed to the memory, in
which, according to their intensity, they are more or less firmly
retained.

The thinkers of ancient times concluded that the part of man which
constitutes his intellect is caused by an instrument to which the other
five {28} senses refer everything by means of the perception, and this
instrument they have named the "common sense" or brain, and they say
that this sense is situated in the centre of the head.  And they have
given it this name "common sense" solely because it is the common judge
of the five other senses, that is to say, sight, hearing, touch, taste
and smell.  The "common sense" is stirred by means of the perception
which is placed between it and the senses.  The perception is stirred
by means of the images of things conveyed to it by the external
instruments to the senses, and these are placed in the centre between
the external things and the perception, and the senses likewise are
stirred by objects.  Surrounding objects transmit their images to the
senses, and the senses transfer them to the perception, and the
perception transfers them to the "common sense" (brain), and by it they
are stamped upon the memory, and are there retained in a greater or
lesser degree according to the importance and intensity of the
impression.  The sense which is most closely connected with the
perception is the most rapid in action, and this sense is the eye, the
highest and chief of the others; of this sense alone we will treat, and
we will leave the others in order not to unduly lengthen our matter.


[Sidenote: Automatic Movements]

71.

Nature has ordained for man the ministering {29} muscles which exercise
the sinews, and by means of which the limbs can be moved according to
the will and desire of the brain, like to officers distributed by a
ruler over many provinces and towns, who represent their ruler in these
places, and obey his will.  And this officer, who will in a single
instance have most faithfully obeyed the orders he received from his
master by word of mouth, will afterwards, in a similar way, of his own
accord fulfil the wishes of his master.

An example of this can be frequently seen in the fingers, which learn
to perform on an instrument the things which the intellect commands,
and the lesson once learnt they will perform it without the aid of the
intellect.  And do not the muscles which cause the legs to move perform
their duty without man being conscious of it?


72.

You will see palsied and shivering persons move, and their trembling
limbs, such as their head and hands, quiver, without the permission of
the soul, and the soul, though it expend all its might, cannot prevent
these limbs from trembling.  The same thing occurs in epilepsy or when
limbs are partially truncated, as in the case of tails of lizards.


[Sidenote: Intellect]

73.

It happens that our intellect is that which prompts the hand to create
the features of figures in {30} divine aspects until it finds
satisfaction; and since the intellect is one of the tones of our soul,
by means of the soul it composes the form of the body where it dwells,
according to its volition.  And when it has to reproduce a human body,
it takes pleasure in repeating the body which it originally created;
whence it follows that they who fall in love are prone to become
enamoured of what resembles them.


[Sidenote: Of the Senses]

74.

There are the four powers: memory, intellect, sensuality and lust.  The
first two are intellectual, the others sensual.  Of the five senses,
sight, hearing, smell are with difficulty prevented; touch and taste
not at all.  Taste follows smell in the case of dogs and other greedy
animals.


75.

Why does the eye perceive things more clearly in dreams than with the
imagination when one is awake?


[Sidenote: Time]

76.

Although time is included among continuous quantities, being
indivisible and immaterial it does not altogether fall into the scope
of geometry,--by which it is divided into figures and bodies of
infinite variety, which are seen to be continuous inasmuch as they are
visible and material,--but it agrees only with its first principles,
{31} i.e. with the point and the line; the point in time may be
compared to an instant, and the line to the length of a certain
quantity of time.  Just as the point is the beginning and end of a
line, so is an instant the beginning and end of any given space of
time; and just as a line is infinitely divisible, so can a given space
of time be likewise divided, and as the divisions of the line are in
proportion to each other, so likewise are the divisions of time.


77.

In twelve whole figures the cosmography of the miniature world will be
shown to you in the same manner as Ptolemy in his cosmography.  And so
I will divide it afterwards into limbs as he divided the world into
provinces; then I will explain the function of the parts in every
direction, and put before your eyes a description of the whole figure
and substance of man as regards his movements by means of his limbs.
And thus if it please our great author I will demonstrate the nature of
man and his habits in the way I describe his form.


[Sidenote: On the Human Body]

78.

And thou, O man, who wilt gaze in this work of mine on the marvellous
works of nature, if thou thinkest it would be an act of wickedness to
destroy it, think how much more wicked it is to take the life of a man;
and if this his structure appears to thee a miraculous work of art,
remember that {32} it is nothing in comparison with the soul which
inhabits this structure; for verily, whatever it may be, it is divine.
Let it, then, dwell in His work and at His good will, and let not thy
rage or malice destroy so great a thing as life, for he who does not
value it does not deserve it.


[Sidenote: The Experimental Method]

79.

By these rules thou wilt be able to distinguish falsehood from truth by
means of which knowledge men aim at possible things with greater
moderation; and do not veil thyself in ignorance, for the result of
this would be that thou wouldst be ineffectual and fall into melancholy
and despair.


[Sidenote: Of Navigation below the Waters]

80.

How by the aid of a machine many may remain for some time under water.
And how and why I do not describe my method of remaining under water
and of living long without food; and I do not publish nor divulge these
things by reason of the evil nature of man, who would use them for
assassinations at the bottom of the sea and to destroy and sink ships,
together with the men on board of them; and notwithstanding I will
teach other things which are not dangerous....


[Sidenote: Of Physiognomy]

81.

I will not dwell on false physiognomy and chiromancy {33} because there
is no truth in them, and this is manifest because chimeras of this kind
have no scientific foundation.  It is true that the lineaments of the
face partly reveal the character of men, their vices and temperaments;
but in the face: (a) the features which separate the cheeks from the
lips, and the nostrils and cavities of the eyes, are strongly marked if
they belong to cheerful and good-humoured men, and if they are slightly
marked it denotes that the men to whom they belong are given to
meditation, (b) Those whose features stand out in great relief and
depth are brutal and bad-tempered, and reason little, (c) Those who
have strongly marked lines between the eyebrows are bad-tempered, (d)
Those who have strongly marked lines on the forehead are men full of
concealed or unconcealed bewailing.

And we can reason thus about many features.  But the hand?  You will
find that whole armies perished in the same hour by the sword in which
no two men had similar marks in their hands, and the same argument
applies to a shipwreck.


[Sidenote: Of Pain]

82.

Nature has placed in the front part of man, as he moves, all those
parts which when struck cause him to feel pain; and this is felt in the
joints of the legs, the forehead and the nose, and has been so devised
for the preservation of man, because {34} if such pain were not felt in
these limbs they would be destroyed by the many blows they receive.


[Sidenote: Why Plants do not feel Pain]

83.

While nature has ordained that animals should feel pain in order that
the instruments which might be liable to be maimed or marred by motion
may be preserved, plants do not come into collision with the objects
which are before them; whence pain is not a necessity for them, and
therefore when they are broken they do not feel pain, as animals do.


84.

Lust is the cause of generation.

Appetite is the support of life.

Fear or timidity is the prolongation of life.

Pain is the preserver of the instrument (of the human frame).


[Sidenote: Fear]

85.

Just as courage is the danger of life, so is fear its safeguard.


[Sidenote: Body and Soul]

86.

Let him who wishes to see how the soul inhabits its body observe what
use the body makes of its daily habitation; that is to say, if the soul
is full of confusion and disorder the body will be kept in disorder and
confusion by the soul.

{35}

87.

The soul can never be corrupted with the corruption of the body, but it
is like the wind which causes the sound of the organ, and which ceases
to produce a good effect when a pipe is spoilt.


[Sidenote: Memory]

88.

Every loss which we incur leaves behind it vexation in the memory, save
the greatest loss of all, that is, death, which annihilates the memory,
together with life.


[Sidenote: Spirit]

89.

Our body is subject to Heaven, and Heaven is subject to the Spirit.


[Sidenote: Sense and Reason]

90.

The senses are earthly; reason lies outside them when in contemplation.


91.

Where most feeling exists, there amongst martyrs is the greatest martyr.


92.

That which can be lost cannot be deemed riches.  Virtue is our true
wealth and the true reward of its possessor; it cannot be lost, it
never deserts us until life leaves us.  Hold property and external
riches with fear; they often leave their possessor scorned and mocked
at for having lost them.


{36}

[Sidenote: Flight of Time]

93.

Men wrongly lament the flight of time, blaming it for being too swift;
they do not perceive that its passage is sufficiently long, but a good
memory, which nature has given to us, causes things long past to seem
present.


[Sidenote: Illusions]

94.

Our intellect does not judge events which happened at various intervals
of time in their true proportion, because many things which happened
years ago appear recent and close to the present, and often recent
things appear old and seem to belong to our past childhood.  The eye
does likewise with regard to distant objects which in the light of the
sun appear to be close to the eye, and many objects which are close
appear to be remote.


95.

Let us not lack ways and means of dividing and measuring these our
wretched days, which we ought to take pleasure in spending and living
not vainly and not without praise, nor without leaving any memory in
the minds of men, so that this our miserable existence may not be spent
in vain.


[Sidenote: Virtuous Life]

96.

The age which flies glides by in stealth and deceives others; and
nothing is more swift than the years, and he who sows virtue reaps
glory.

{37}

[Sidenote: Sleep and Death]

97.

O sleeper, what is sleep?  Sleep is like unto death.  Why dost thou not
work in such wise that after death thou mayst have the semblance of
perfect life, just as during life thou hast in thy sleep the semblance
of the hapless dead?


98.

The water you touch in a river is the last of that which has gone, and
the first of that which is coming: so it is with time present.


99.

A long life is a life well spent.


[Sidenote: Life]

100.

As a well spent day affords happy sleep, so does a life profitably
employed afford a happy death.


[Sidenote: Time the Destroyer]

101.

O time, consumer of things!  O envious age!  Thou dost destroy all
things, and consumest all things with the hard teeth of old age, little
by little in a slow death.  Helen, when she looked in her mirror and
saw the withered wrinkles made in her face by old age, wept, and
wondered why she had twice been ravished.  O time, devourer of things!
O envious age, by which all is consumed!


{38}

[Sidenote: On Fault-finders]

102.

There exists among the foolish a certain sect of hypocrites who
continually seek to deceive themselves and others, but others more than
themselves, though in reality they deceive themselves more than others.
And these are they who blame the painters who study on feast-days the
things which relate to the true knowledge of the forms of the works of
nature, and sedulously strive to acquire knowledge of these things to
the best of their ability.

But such fault-finders pass over in silence the fact that this is the
true manner of knowing the Artificer of such great and marvellous
things, and that this is the true way in which to love so great an
Inventor!  For great love proceeds from the perfect knowledge of the
thing loved; and if you do not know it you can love it but little or
not at all; and if you love it for the gain which you anticipate
obtaining from it and not for its supreme virtue, you are like the dog
which wags its tail and shows signs of joy, leaping towards him who can
give him a bone.  But if you knew the virtue of a man you would love
him more--if that virtue was in its place.


[Sidenote: Prayer]

103.

I obey Thee, Lord, first for the love which in reason I ought to bear
Thee; secondly because Thou {39} hast the power to shorten or prolong
the lives of men.


104.

Thou, O God, dost sell us all good things at the price of labour.


105.

And many make a trade deceiving the foolish multitude, and if no one
comes to unmask their deceits, they punish it.


106.

Pharisees,--that is to say, holy friars.


107.

Nothing can be written by means of new researches.


[Sidenote: Patience]

108.

Patience serves against insults as clothes do against the cold; since
if you multiply your clothes as the cold increases, the cold cannot
hurt you.  Similarly, let thy patience increase under great offences,
and they will not be able to hurt your feelings.


[Sidenote: Advice to a Speaker]

109.

Words which do not satisfy the ear of the listener will always weary or
annoy him; and you will often see signs of this in such listeners in
their frequent yawns.  Therefore, you who speak before men whose good
opinion you seek, when you {40} observe such signs of vexation, shorten
your speech or vary your argument; and if you do otherwise, then
instead of the favour you seek you will incur hate and hostility.

And if you would see what gives pleasure to a man speak to him on
various themes, and when you see him intent, without yawning, or
contracting his brow, or performing other actions, then be certain that
the matter of which you are speaking is such as affords him pleasure.


[Sidenote: Advice]

110.

Here is a thing which the more it is needed the more it is rejected:
and this is advice, which is unwillingly heeded by those who most need
it, that is to say, by the ignorant.

Here is a thing which the more you fear and avoid it the nearer you
approach to it, and this is misery; the more you flee from it the more
miserable and restless you will become.  When the work comes up to the
standard of the judgement, this is a bad sign for the judgement; and
when the work excels the standard of the judgement, this is the worst
sign, as occurs when a man marvels at having worked so well; and when
the standard of the judgement exceeds that fulfilled by the work, this
is a sign of perfection; and if the man is young and be thus disposed,
he will without doubt grow into an excellent workman: he will only
accomplish few works.  But they will {41} be of a quality which will
compel men to contemplate their perfection with admiration.


[Sidenote: Proverbs]

111.

Nothing should be so greatly feared as empty fame.

This empty fame issues from vices.

A broken vase of clay can be remodelled, but this is no longer possible
when it has been baked.

The vow is born when hope dies.

The beautiful is not always the good.  And the fine talkers labour
under this error without any reason.

He who wishes to grow rich in a day will be hanged in a year.

The memory of benefits is a frail defence against ingratitude.

Reprove your friend in secret and praise him in public.

He who fears dangers will not perish by them.

The evil which does me no harm is like the good which in no wise avails
me.

He who offends others is not himself secure.

Be not false about the past.

Folly is the shield of lies, just as unreadiness is the defence of
poverty.

Where there is liberty, there is no rule.

{42}

Here is a thing which the more it is heeded the more it is
spurned,--advice.

It is ill to praise, and worse to blame, the thing which you do not
understand.

On Mount Etna the words freeze in your mouth and you make ice of them.

Threats are the only weapons of the threatened man.

Ask advice of him who governs himself well.

Justice needs power, intelligence and will, and is like the Queen Bee.

Not to punish evil is equivalent to authorizing it.

He who takes the snake by the tail will be bitten by it.

The pit will fall in upon him who digs it.

He who does not restrain voluptuousness is in the category of the
beasts.

You can have no dominion greater or less than that over yourself.

He who thinks little errs much.

It is easier to contend at the first than at the last.

No counsel is more sincere than that given on ships which are in danger.

Let him who acts on the advice of the young expect loss.

You grow in reputation like bread in the hands of a child.

{43}

Cannot beauty and utility be combined--as appears in citadels and men?

He who is without fear often incurs great losses, and is often full of
regret.

If you governed your body according to virtue you would not live in
this world.

Where good fortune enters, envy lays siege to her and attacks her, and
when she departs sorrow and regret remain behind.

When beauty exists side by side with ugliness, the one seems more
powerful, owing to the presence of the other.

He who walks straight rarely falls.

O miserable race of man! of how many things you make yourself the slave
for the sake of money!

The worst evil which can befall the artist is that his work should
appear good in his own eyes.

To speak well of a bad man is the same as speaking ill of a good man.

Truth ordains that lying tongues shall be punished by the lie.

He who does not value life does not deserve it.

The beautiful works of mortals pass and do not endure.

Labour flies with fame almost hidden in its arm.

The gold in ingots is refined in the fire.

{44}

The shuttle says: I will continue to move until the cloth is woven.

Everything that is crooked is straightened.

Great ruin proceeds from a slight cause.

Fine gold is recognized when it is tested.

The image will correspond to the die.

The wall will fall on him who scrapes it.

Ivy lives long.

To the traitor, death is life, because if he makes use of others he is
no longer believed.

When fortune comes seize her in front firmly, because behind she is
bald.

Constancy means, not he who begins, but he who perseveres.

I do not yield to obstacles.

Every obstacle is overcome by resolve.

He who is chained to a star does not change.


[Sidenote: Truth]

112.

Fire destroys falsehood,--that is to say, sophistry,--and rehabilitates
truth, scattering the darkness.

Fire must be represented as the consumer of all sophistry and the
revealer of truth, because it is light and scatters darkness which
conceals all essences.

Fire destroys all sophistry,--that is to say, deceit,--and preserves
truth alone, which is gold.  {45} Truth cannot be concealed in the end,
dissimulation is of no avail.  Dissimulation is frustrated before so
great a judge.  Falsehood puts on a mask.

There is nothing hidden under the sun.  Fire must represent truth
because it destroys all sophistry and lies, and the mask is for
sophistry and lies, which conceal truth.


113.

Rather privation of limbs than weariness of doing good.  The power of
using my limbs shall fail me before the power of being useful.  Rather
death than weariness.  I cannot be satiated with serving.  I do not
weary of giving help.  No amount of work is sufficient to weary me.
This is a carnival motto: "Sine lassitudine."  Hands in which ducats
and precious stones abound like snow never grow weary of serving, but
such a service is for its utility only and not for our profit.  Nature
has formed me thus.


[Sidenote: Ingratitude]

114.

This shall be placed in the hand of ingratitude: The wood nourishes the
fire that consumes it.  When the sun, the scatterer of darkness,
shines, you put out the light which for you in particular, and for your
need and convenience, expelled the darkness.


[Sidenote: Physiological Inferiority of Man]

115.

I have found that in the composition of the human body as compared with
the bodies of {46} animals the senses are less subtle and coarser; it
is thus composed of less ingenious machinery and of cells less capable
of receiving the power of senses.  I have seen that in the lion the
sense of smell is connected with the substance of the brain and
descends through the nostrils which form an ample receptacle for it;
and it enters into a great number of cartilaginous cells which are
provided with many passages in order to receive the brain.  A large
part of the head of the lion is given up to the sockets of the eyes,
and the optic nerves are in immediate contact with the brain; the
contrary occurs in man, because the sockets of the eyes occupy a small
portion of the head, and the optic nerves are subtle and long and weak,
and owing to the weakness of their action we see little by day and less
at night; and the animals above mentioned see better at night than in
the daytime; and the proof of this is that they seek their prey at
night and sleep during the daytime, as do also the nocturnal birds.


[Sidenote: Man's Ethical Inferiority]

116.

Thou hast described him king of animals, but I would rather say, king
of beasts, thou being the greatest--for hast thou not slain them in
order that they may give thee their children to glut thy greed with
which thou hast striven to make a sepulchre for all animals?  And I
would say still more if I might speak the whole truth.  But let us {47}
confine ourselves to human matters, relating one supreme infamy, which
is not to be found among the animals of the earth; because among these
you will not find animals who eat their young, except when they are
utterly foolish (and there are few indeed of such among them), and this
occurs only among the beasts of prey, such as the lions, and leopards,
panthers, lynxes, cats and the like, which sometimes feed on their
young; but thou, besides thy children, dost devour thy father, thy
mother, thy brother and thy friends; and not satisfied with this, thou
goest forth to hunt on the islands of others, seizing other men and
these half naked ... thou fattenest and chasest them down thy own
throat.  Now does not nature produce enough vegetables for thee to
satisfy thyself?  And if thou art not content with vegetables, canst
thou not by a mixture of them make infinite compounds as Platina wrote,
and other writers on food?


[Sidenote: Man in the Animal World]

117.

The description of man, including that of such creatures belonging
almost to the same species, such as apes, monkeys and the like, of
which there are many.


118.

The way of walking in man is similar in all cases to the universal way
of walking in four-footed animals, because, just as they move their
feet {48} crosswise, like a trotting horse, so man moves his four limbs
crosswise, that is to say, in walking he puts forward his right foot
simultaneously with his left arm, and so on vice versa.


119.

Write a special treatise to describe the movements of four-footed
animals, among which is man, who in his childhood also walks on four
feet.


[Sidenote: Fragment of a Letter]

120.

There is one who having promised me much less than his due, and being
disappointed of his presumptuous desire, has tried to deprive me of all
my friends; and finding them wise and not pliable to his will, he has
threatened me that he would bring accusations against me and alienate
my benefactors from me: hence I have informed Your Lordship of this, so
that this man, who wishes to sow the usual scandals, may not find a
soil fit for sowing the thoughts and deeds of his evil nature; and that
when he tries to make Your Lordship the tool of his infamous and
malicious nature he may be disappointed of his desire.


[Sidenote: Giacomo of Pupil of Leonardo]

121.

On the 23d of April, 1490, I began this book; and started again on the
horse.  Giacomo came to live with me on Saint Mary Magdalen's day in
1490; {49} he was ten years old.  He was a thief, a liar, obstinate,
and a glutton.  On the second day I had two shirts made for him, a pair
of socks and a jerkin, and when I placed the money aside to pay for
these things, he stole it out of the purse and I could never force him
to confess the fact, though I was quite certain of it--4 lire.  On the
following day I went to sup with Giacomo Andrea, and this same Giacomo
supped for two and did mischief for four, since he broke three bottles,
spilled the wine, and after this came to sup where I...  Item: on the
7th of September he stole a silver point, worth twelve soldi, from
Marco, who was living with me, and took it from his studio; and when
Marco had looked for it for some time he found it hidden in Giacomo's
box--lire 1, soldi 2.  Item: on the 26th of the following January,
being in the house of Messer Galeazzo di San Severino, in order to
arrange the festivity of his joust, and certain henchmen having
undressed to try on the costumes of rustics who were to take part in
the aforesaid festivity, Giacomo took the purse of one of them, which
was on the bed with other clothes, and stole the money he found in
it--2 lire, 4 soldi.  Item: Maestro Agostino of Padua gave me while I
was in the same house a Turkish hide to have a pair of shoes made of
it, and Giacomo stole this from me within a month and sold it to a
cobbler for 20 soldi, with which money by his own confession he bought
sweets of aniseed.  Item: {50} again, on the 2d of April, Giovanni
Antonio left a silver point on one of his drawings, and Giacomo stole
it; it was worth 24 soldi,--1 lire, 4 soldi.  The first year a cloak, 2
lire; six shirts, 4 lire; three doublets, 6 lire: four pairs of socks,
7 lire, 8 soldi.


122.

And in this case I know that I shall make not a few enemies, since no
one will believe what I say of him; because there are but few whom his
vices have disgusted, indeed they only disgusted those men whose
natures are contrary to such vices; and many hate their fathers and
break off friendship with those who reprove their vices, and they will
have no examples brought up against them, nor tolerate any advice.  And
if you meet with any one who is good and virtuous drive him not away
from you, do him honour, so that he may not have to flee from you and
hide in hermitages, or caverns and other solitary spots, in order to
escape from your treachery; and if there be such an one do him honour,
because these are your gods upon earth, they deserve statues from you
and images ... but remember that you are not to eat their images, as is
practised still in some parts of India, where, when images have
performed some miracle, the priests cut them in pieces (since they are
of wood) and distribute them among the people of the country, not {51}
without payment, and each one grates his portion very fine and puts it
upon the first food he eats; and thus they believe that they have eaten
their saint by faith, who will preserve them from all perils.  What is
thy opinion, O man, of thy own species?  Art thou so wise as thou
believest to be?  Are these things to be done by men?


[Sidenote: Pleasure and Pain]

123.

This represents pleasure together with pain because one is never
separated from the other; they are depicted back to back because they
are opposed to each other; they are represented in one body because
they have the same basis, because the source of pleasure is labour
mingled with pain, and the pain issues from the various evil pleasures.
And it is therefore represented with a reed in its right hand which is
ineffectual and devoid of strength, and the wounds inflicted by it are
poisonous.  In Tuscany such reeds are placed to support beds, to
signify that this is the place of idle dreams, that here a great part
of life is consumed, here much useful time is wasted, that is, the
morning hours when the mind is sober and rested and the body disposed
to start on fresh labours; there, again, many vain pleasures are
enjoyed by the mind, which pictures to itself impossible things, and by
the body, which indulges in those pleasures that are so often the cause
of the {52} failing of life; and for this reason the reed is used as
their support.


[Sidenote: Brain and Soul]

124.

The spirit returns to the brain whence it had departed, with a loud
voice and uttering these words:

O blissful and fortunate spirit, whence comest thou?  I have known this
man well, against my will.  He is a receptacle of villainy, he is a
very heap of the highest ingratitude combined with all the other vices.
But why should I tire myself with vain words?  Nothing is to be found
in him save the accumulation of all sins, and if there is to be found
among them any that possess good, they will not be treated differently
than I have been by other men; in short I have come to the conclusion
that they are bad if they are enemies, and worse if they are friends.


[Sidenote: Of the Eye]

125.

The eye, which reflects the beauty of the universe to those who see, is
so excellent a thing that he who consents to its loss deprives himself
of the spectacle of the works of nature; and it is owing to this
spectacle, effected by means of the eye, which enables the soul to
behold the various objects of nature, that the soul is content to
remain in the prison of the body; but he who loses his eyesight leaves
the soul in a dark prison, where {53} all hope of once more beholding
the sun, the light of the whole world, is lost....  And how many are
they who feel great hatred for the darkness of night, although it is
brief.  Oh! what would they do were they constrained to abide in this
darkness during the whole of their life?  Certainly there is no one who
would not rather lose his hearing or his sense of smell than his
eyesight, and the loss of hearing includes the loss of all sciences
which find expression in words; and this loss a man would incur solely
so as not to be deprived of the sight of the beauty of the world which
consists in the surfaces of bodies artificial as well as natural, which
are reflected in the human eye.


[Sidenote: The Eye in Animal Life]

126.

Animals suffer greater loss in losing their sight than their hearing
for many reasons: firstly, because it is by means of their sight that
they find the food which is their nourishment, and is necessary for all
animals; secondly, because by means of sight the beauty of created
things is apprehended, especially those which lead to love, while he
who is born blind cannot apprehend such beauty by hearing, because he
has never received any knowledge as to what is beauty of any kind.
There remains hearing, by which I mean only the human voice and speech;
they contain the names of all things whatsoever.  It is possible to
live happily without the knowledge of these {54} words, as is seen in
those who are born deaf, that is to say, the dumb, who take delight in
drawing.


[Sidenote: Ascension of Monte Rosa]

127.

I say that the azure we see in the atmosphere is not its true colour,
but is caused by warm moisture evaporated in minute and insensible
atoms which the solar rays strike, rendering them luminous against the
darkness of the infinite night of the fiery region which lies beyond
and includes them.  And this may be seen, as I saw it, by him who
ascends Mounboso (Monte Rosa), a peak of the Alps which separates
France from Italy.  The base of this mountain gives birth to the four
large rivers which in four different directions water the whole of
Europe; and no mountain has its base at so great a height as this.  It
rises to such a height that it almost lifts itself up above the clouds;
snow seldom falls on it, but only hail in summer, when the clouds are
at their greatest height, and this hail is preserved there so that were
it not for the absorption of the rising and falling clouds, which does
not occur twice in an age, a great quantity of ice would be piled up
there by the hail, which in the middle of July I found to be very
considerable; and I saw above me the dark air, and the sun which struck
the mountain shone far lighter than in the plains below, because a
lesser quantity of atmosphere lay between the summit of the mountain
and the sun.

{55}

[Sidenote: Prophecies]

128.

Men will communicate with each other from the most distant countries,
and reply.

Many will abandon their own habitations and take with them their own
goods, and go and inhabit other countries.

Men will pursue the thing which they most greatly fear; that is to say,
they will be miserable in order to avoid falling into misery.

Men standing in separate hemispheres will converse with each other,
embrace each other, and understand each other's language.


129.

We should not desire the impossible.




{59}

