Chapter XXI.)

"And Moses was enraged against the chief officers of the army, against the
tribunes, and the centurions who returned from battle.

"And he said unto them, Why have you saved the women and the children?

"Slay therefore all the males amongst the children, and the women who have
been married.

"But reserve for yourselves all the young girls who are still virgins."

Moses spoke "in the name of God," as does his Holiness at Rome to-day.
Comment is hardly necessary. A few more quotations from the Vedas:

"A virtuous woman needs no purification, for she is never defiled, even by
contact with impurity.

"Women should be shielded by fostering solicitude by their fathers, their
brothers, their husbands, and the brothers of their husbands, if they hope
for great prosperity.

"When women are honored, the divinities are content, but where they are
not honored, all undertakings fail."

The sacerdotal caste in Egypt followed the inspiration of the Brahmans,
and took care to make no change in that situation.

And Moses followed the example of the priests of Egypt, where woman was a
slave or a prostitute in the temples as out.

The degeneracy of a people, the decay of religion, and the degradation of
woman are inseparable, and it is so-called "religion" that institutes the
change, and sets the pace, "down the steep descent."

The Brahmans "forgot God" and instituted the worship of saints and holy
men, and mythological characters, just as Rome does to-day. The women of
America to-day by a consensus of public opinion should make auricular
confession _disreputable_.

Excommunication, which is such a power in the hands of Rome, is merely a
subterfuge and substitute for the degradation of "outcasts," and pariahs,
instituted by the Brahman priests to terrify the disobedient and retain
their power.

If the reader cares to know the danger and the degradation to woman
fostered and protected through the Confessional by the Celibate Roman
priesthood, he should read "The History of Auricular Confession," by De
Lasteyrie, translated into English and printed in London in 1848. Now and
then a Pope or a council undertook to institute reform, but found, as in
Spain, prostitution of women by priests through the confessional so
widespread and universal that they more often gave up the attempt through
fear of scandal and contempt for the Church itself.

Lecky, in his "History of European Morals," records the case of "the
abbot-elect of St. Augustine, at Canterbury, who in 1171 was found on
investigation to have _seventeen illegitimate children in a single
village_; or, an abbot of St. Pelayo, in Spain, who in 1130 was proved to
have kept no less than seventy concubines; or Henry III, Bishop of Liège,
who was deposed in 1274 for having sixty-five illegitimate children."
(History of European Morals. P. 350.)

If the reader remarks that "this is ancient history," he should remember
that a celibate priesthood to-day have the same opportunity, through the
secrecy and power of the Confessional, as ever.

I have barely touched on this disgusting but all-important question on the
general thesis of Jacolliot, viz.: "The first result of the baneful
domination of priests in India was the abasement and moral degradation of
woman."

Rome, who derived her religious code from paganized Egypt, added celibacy
to the opportunities and inducements for the degradation of woman. Rome
never attained the heights from which the Brahman priesthood plunged into
debauchery. Even to-day in the festivals in the Brahman temples wholesale
orgies of prostitution are sometimes found, as witnessed and recorded by
Jacolliot. From the first, Brahman priests have married and reared
families. Their degradation and debauchery, therefore, cannot be charged
to their original "Divine Revelation," but to their corruption of it.

I have given a few brief quotations among hundreds recorded by Jacolliot
as to the respect and veneration accorded to woman in early Vedic times,
and in the Laws of Manu.

"The Brahman may not approach the altar of sacrifice _but with a soul
pure, in a body undefiled_.

"Spirituous liquors beget drunkenness, neglect of duty, and they profane
prayer.

"The antiquity of India stands forth to establish its priority of
religious legislation in prohibiting to priests the use of spirituous
liquors, and especially in forbidding the pleasures of love when they are
about to offer sacrifice.

"The woman whose words and thoughts and person are pure is a celestial
balm.

"Happy shall he be whose choice is approved by all the good.

"It is ordained that a devotee shall choose a wife from his own class.

"The Brahman who marries a woman who is not a virgin, who is a widow, or
divorced by her husband, or who is not known as a virtuous woman, cannot
be permitted to offer sacrifice, for he is impure, and nothing can cleanse
him from his impurities."

And Jacolliot adds, "It is not recorded, says the divine Manu, that a
Brahman has ever, even by compulsion, married a girl of low class.

"Let the Brahman espouse a Brahmine, says the Veda.

"Let him take a well-formed virgin, of an agreeable name, of the graceful
carriage of the swan, or of the young elephant, whose body is covered with
light down, her hair fine, her teeth small, and her limbs charmingly
graceful."

Jacolliot compares these early Vedic injunctions with Leviticus, Chapter
XXI, and the absurdities introduced by Moses as to a "crooked nose or a
squint eye."

Woman here in the West is just emerging from the slavery and degradation
of ages, and she _ought_ to know that that degradation was not the
handicap of barbaric and undeveloped races, so far as the Aryan race is
concerned, but a demoralization and degradation instituted by priests, in
the name of religion, through which they have sought to rule the world,
and so far as institutional religions are concerned, woman has had to
progress _in spite of them_.

Without the aid and influence of woman to-day, neither Protestant nor
Roman Church could exist at all, as witness almost any Sabbath service
where women outnumber men often ten to one.

One day woman will be wise enough and brave enough to dictate terms, as
she did ages ago in old Aryavarta. When that day comes, and the really
Divine Motherhood planted in every true woman's soul is recognized by man
and woman alike, God grant that she may thenceforth hold the fort till the
Kali-Yuga is at full tide, and the Spiritual Evolution of our present
Humanity is fully accomplished.

In the meantime the world will have learned to _know_ Jesus, who and what
he was, and how he became the Christ, and will have joined in his Divine
Mission to man, as the teeming millions joined in old India under Christna
ages ago.




