CHAPTER XII

PORTENTS OF THE PRESENT TIME


There is no disguising nor denying the fact that during the past half
century institutional religion in the West has steadily lost its hold upon
the great mass of the people. Creeds and dogmas are denied and
repudiated.

The "higher criticism" represents the reluctant yielding of theologians to
the existing conditions. In order to maintain any hold whatever upon the
people and retain a semblance of the old faith, they have revised and
modified beliefs and interpretations, and relaxed completely the former
demand for the confession of faith and acceptance of the old creeds. Mere
general verbal assent admitting of many mental reservations is now often
deemed sufficient.

In the meantime, the living of the life and the doing of the work demanded
by Jesus have come more and more into demand and general recognition.

The "Emmanuel Movement," now gaining such recognition and making such
rapid progress, is sufficient evidence at this point.

With the Church of Rome no such change is manifest. By keeping its people
in ignorance, by condemning all change or any improvement under the name
of "Modernism," and by insisting upon the dogma of infallibility and blind
obedience, Rome thus far has resisted all change and refused all
compromise.

The change in Protestantism represents the growth of intelligence, the
recognition of the rights of conscience, and individual and intellectual
freedom.

The stability so apparent in Romanism relies solely on Ignorance,
Superstition, and Fear, enforced by the dogma of "_Infallibility_," and
reinforced by the power of "Excommunication" and the penalty of
"Anathema."

The unity and stability of the Roman Church, thus secured by force, will
presently be found to be apparent only. It could only work and hold in the
dark ages. Internal division and dissension, now known to exist, await
only some fresh act of oppression, or some new abomination, or abuse of
political power, to disrupt its solidarity.

In the meantime physical science has steadily advanced, opening new
avenues of wealth, industry, and opportunity, and so developing the
resources of this Western world.

But more important and far-reaching still have been the discoveries
regarding the finer forces of nature.

The wonderful development and application of discoveries in Electricity
have not only opened a new world previously unknown and unsuspected, but
have seemed to endow these subtle forces almost with an intelligence of
their own. Crass materialism is dead and space practically annihilated.

If a single wire or a vibrating disc cannot originate intelligent speech,
it can retain, repeat, and transmit the qualities, tones and inflections
of the human voice in a way that seems miraculous and uncanny. It is thus
that our concepts of nature have been enlarged, refined, and actually
spiritualized. "Brutal" and "dead" matter are no longer in evidence nor
even mentioned.

With the advent of modern spiritualism came another group of phenomena.
Making the largest allowance for fraud, self-deception, and all the
vagaries of the imagination, no intelligent individual, familiar with the
phenomena, will attempt to deny the extension of man's psychic world of
consciousness and the manifestation of intelligence in ways and under
conditions previously unknown. The identification of these intelligences,
always difficult, and generally problematical, need not here be discussed
at all. The facts and the phenomena are all that we are here concerned
with.

The most important consideration regarding all these phenomena is that
they do not _develop_, but on the contrary _dominate_ the individual. They
are, in fact, altogether subjective. The medium may put himself in the
negative or passive condition to be controlled, but he cannot _command_
nor _control_ the influence nor the "entity" that influences him, and
eventually he loses the power to resist it, and likewise the power of
self-control.

Science demands _facts_, and here are facts in abundance. These facts
supplement the discoveries in electricity and nature's finer forces, and
pass from physics to metaphysics, from physiology to psychology, and push
back the veil of the unseen, and hitherto unknown, many degrees.

The trend of all this progress, and of these discoveries, is exceedingly
plain.

Our concepts of Nature, of Life, and of Man have been almost immeasurably
enlarged, refined, and elevated.

Expectancy is in the air. "What next is going to happen?" is the question
everywhere asked. The conditions and portents, in a general way, are those
that herald a new Avatar; an Avatar now, of science rather than of
religion; of knowledge rather than of faith, and this knowledge is to be
of spiritual things, the foundations of which are already in evidence.

This science is not to be time-serving, but man-serving; not so much a
renewal of faith as a revelation of knowledge; less anxious for the glory
of God than for the elevation of man, which is the more direct and certain
way of honoring Divinity.

This does not mean the decay nor the repudiation of religion, but a
_realization_ of _true_ religion, such as heretofore prophets have
foretold, revelation has forecast, and toward which humanity has toiled
and journeyed in sorrow and pain; the very religion that Jesus lived and
taught. "A clean life, an open mind, an unveiled spiritual perception, a
brotherliness for all, and human life a journeying upward toward the
realms of eternal day, 'with no night there, and no sorrow.'"

_And why not?_ If man can conceive it, why may he not _realize_ it? The
"Old Adam" as an excuse is exploded. The "New Adam" is indeed "a
quickening spirit."

Nothing is plainer nor more demonstrable at the present day than the fact
that mankind is slowly but surely shaking off the traditions and the
superstitions that have bound it in the past, rising above the myths and
the folklore of every age and clime, and awaking as if from slumber, to
behold a new day and a new world.

This awakening is even more in evidence and remarkable in the case of
woman than of man. Progress here during the last decade has been such as
the world has never before seen on any such scale, and it means more to
the elevation of humanity than anyone has hitherto been able to forecast
or to measure.

In the meantime social and economic conditions with the great masses of
the people are very far from what they should be.

Unrest and confusion are strongly in evidence. On the whole, there is far
less suffering and destitution than ever before. Oppression and
abominations meet with quick and powerful protest from all classes, when
exposed, and at least temporary relief is quick to follow.

The blame is confined to no one class, rich or poor. The equitable
distribution of wealth, resources, and opportunity that have developed
beyond all precedent during the last half century, requires time. Justice
and equity are not dead, but everywhere in evidence, dominating mankind at
large. Public sentiment was never more keen and never nearer right than
to-day. There is general confusion, however, as to methods and ways and
means. The cunning shark and the selfish brute resort to concealment,
cunning and subterfuge, to deceive the people and often succeed for a
time, only to meet with condemnation and execration later. Injustice is
often in evidence, but it is neither rampant nor dominant. It stands in
fear of public sentiment.

These, in brief and in outline, are the conditions, the portents, to-day,
everywhere in evidence:

1. The decay of creeds and dogmas.

2. Great progress in Science, Art, and the Crafts.

3. Immense discoveries regarding Nature's finer forces and the psychical
powers latent in man.

4. Great expectancy as to new revelations.

5. Unprecedented increase in wealth and the development of natural
resources.

6. Enfranchisement of woman, and immense progress as to her rights and
opportunities.

7. Economic Justice recognized and aimed at, and fortified by public
sentiment, with strong efforts to secure and maintain it.

The present age or epoch is not one of darkness, but of light; not of
discouragement, but of hope. It is neither retrograde nor stagnant, but
progressive to a degree never before witnessed in the history of man on so
large a scale and involving all classes and so many people at one time.

Organized or institutional religion alone is on the wane. Evidence and
utility are everywhere demanded. Nothing is sacred simply because it is
old; nor true merely because it is dogmatically asserted so to be.

Holy books, holy men, and holy days are matters of evidence, and not of
blind credence.

What will the new religion--the new revelation--be? and whence will it
come?




