CHAPTER XIII

THE SEPARABLE SOUL IN FOLKLORE


Belief in a separable soul in man is virtually universal. Such belief is
found amongst the lowest races, and in the few instances where it has not
been clearly discovered it is admitted that it may still exist and be
disguised by the native meaning of words or signs that escape the
explorer.

The universality of this belief has often been urged as an evidence of its
validity and proof of the soul's existence.

Modern physical science deduces this belief from the phenomena of daily
life and the analogies of individual experience, thus giving precedence to
material causes for mental concepts, or universal ideas. This view is, I
think, entitled to the most careful consideration, but it cannot once for
all be admitted, nor is it consistent with the general theory and progress
of evolution that the phenomenal stands to the noumenal, the actual to the
ideal, as cause to effect. These two groups of experiences are alternate
and coincident; and, as to priority, it is only the old question in a new
form, as to which was first, the bird that laid the egg, or the egg that
hatched the bird.

This distinction is particularly pertinent to the present subject, for the
reason that by the method of modern physical science, in dealing with the
belief in the existence of the soul, the whole of this universal belief is
swept away. Its origin is found in the ignorance, superstition, and false
analogies of barbarous races, and the inference is that the belief can
only linger as a remnant of superstition among civilized men. This method
prejudges the whole question, and (while it must readily be admitted that
the opposite method equally prejudges it), my contention is for neither
the one nor the other, but for the careful consideration and final
blending of both. If at first sight these two theories, which form the
basis of the working hypothesis of the materialist and the spiritist, seem
paradoxical and wholly irreconcilable, with careful consideration and
unbiased investigation of both sides of the problem the paradox will
disappear.

With both the lowest and the highest races not only do we find the
existence of belief in the existence of a separable soul in man, but of
ghosts, gods, genii, a spirit of the air, and hierarchies of celestial and
infernal beings.

In this regard, philosophers like Plato and Pythagoras, the intellectual
giants of the human race, may be said to have elaborated and specialized
the rude conceptions of the Fiji Islander, and to vie with him in peopling
space with invisible entities and potencies. In spite of the dictum of
science, the world, intelligent and ignorant alike, believes, and will
continue to believe, in the reality of the unseen universe, and the
Platonic doctrine of "emanation" and the "world of divine ideas" not only
begin where modern physical science leaves off, but at this very point
science either begs the question, or ignores it entirely.

How things come to be what they are, and to evolve as they do, science
nowhere declares. It simply takes things as it finds them, and dubs
the ultimate and antecedent causation the _Unknowable_. The philosophy
of Plato, it is true, reaches at last the unknowable and the
incomprehensible, but only after revealing another universe, the
metaphysical and spiritual, entirely unknown to, or ignored or derided by
the materialist.

It is, however, from this invisible realm that all visible things have
come forth, the two being not only under absolute and universal law, but
bearing everywhere definite analogies to each other. Hence Plato says,
"God geometrizes." Absolute mathematics determines the relations of atoms
to suns, and the circulation of the blood in man to the revolutions of
suns and solar systems.

A further general consideration remains to be noted before taking up the
evidence of belief in the separable soul, and that is, the evolutionary
life-wave of humanity on our earth.

The progress of man for some millions of years past has by no means been a
straightforward climbing from barbarism to civilization. The wave of
evolution has ebbed and flowed. While at one place man has slowly emerged
from savagery, at another he has as surely sunk to it. Continents and
islands have risen from and again sunk to the bottom of the sea, bearing
the races of men in their upheavals or descent, and cataclysmic and
seismic or volcanic upheavals have blotted out in a day the accumulated
progress of centuries. The poles of the earth have shifted with results to
the life of the globe more awful than the imagination can portray. Bodies
of people like our North American Indians represent the remains of many
peoples, as in Russia or India to-day, fragments of many nationalities are
being absorbed in one.

Bearing in mind, therefore, that owing to many causes a nation may descend
to barbarism or disappear entirely, we shall find everywhere the fragments
and decay of the old belief no less than the dawn of the new. A noble
creed, or a philosophical concept of a highly advanced race, may exist as
a transformed and degrading superstition with a race, or a fragment of a
people, undergoing degeneracy.

Every religion known to man has gone through just this transformation. The
tendency is innate and inevitable and no civilization or religion has ever
yet been able long to resist it. If we bear this in mind we shall be less
surprised at anthropogeneses, cosmogeneses or psychologies found sometimes
among otherwise rude or savage peoples, and be better able to understand
the incongruities and lack of symmetry in their evolution. It would be
easy to cite instances and draw comparisons at this point.

Bearing in mind, then, these general considerations underlying all
interpretation, and nowhere more applicable than to our present subject,
the following illustrations of belief in the separable soul, gleaned
largely from Spencer's "Descriptive Sociology," may be of interest. It is
drawn largely from the lower civilizations, as all are more or less
familiar with the mythologies of the Greeks, Babylonians, Phoenicians,
etc., all of which are accessible. The material available is embarrassing
on account of its magnitude alone.

Oscar Peschel, in his "Races of Man," says that "perhaps the Brazilian
Botocudos, of all the inhabitants of the world, are most nearly in the
primitive state, and yet," he adds, "possibly we may be altogether
mistaken in this regard, as their languages are very imperfectly known."

Humboldt rescued the Caribs from such an impeachment and declares that
their language "combines wealth, grace, strength, and gentleness. It has
expressions for abstract ideas, for Futurity, Eternity, and Existence, and
enough numerical terms to express all possible combinations of our
numerals." It might be noted in passing that it was these same Brazilian
natives that the Portuguese settlers sought to decimate by spreading
smallpox and scarlet fever amongst them, as the English colonists in
Tasmania shot the natives when they had no better food for their dogs.

Hariot says that "many of the Indian natives of North and South America
believe that the soul, after its separation from the body, enters into a
wide path crowded with spirits which are journeying toward a region of
eternal repose. They have to cross an impetuous river on a trembling
wicker bridge which is very dangerous."

Some Greenlanders believe that the soul can go astray out of the body for
a considerable time. Some believe that they can leave their souls at home
when going on a journey, and others believe in the migration of souls.

Belief in the soul and a future state is universal among the Indians of
North America. All are familiar with the tradition of the "Happy Hunting
Ground." With them the future life is patterned after the present.

Schoolcraft says that the Chippewas believe that there are duplicate
souls, one of which remains with the body, while the other is free to
depart on excursions during sleep. After death the soul departs to the
Indian Elysium and a fire is kept burning on the newly-made grave for four
days, the time required for the soul to reach its destination.

The Dakotas stand in great fear of the spirits of the dead, who they think
have power to injure them, and they recite prayers and give offerings to
appease them.

The Mandans, according to Schoolcraft, have anticipated Prof. Lloyd's
Etidorhpa, even to the beautiful maiden. They believe that they were the
first people created on the earth, and that they first lived inside the
globe. They raised many vines, one of which having grown up through a hole
in the earth, one of the young men climbed up until he crawled out on the
bank of the river where the Mandan village stands. (Jack and the bean
stalk.) The young man returned to the nether world and piloted several of
his companions to the outer world, and among them two very beautiful
virgins. Among those who tried to get up was a very large and fat woman,
who was ordered by the chiefs to remain behind. Her curiosity prompted her
secretly to make the trial. The vine broke under her weight and she was
badly hurt by the fall, but did not die, and was ever after in disgrace
for having cut off all communication with the upper world. Those who had
already ascended built the Mandan village, and when these die they expect
to return to the nether world from which they came. They also believe the
earth a great tortoise, and have a tradition of a universal deluge.

The Indians of Guiana believe in the immortality of the soul, as do also
the Arawaks. The Brazilians are said by Spix and Martins to have had no
religious belief whatever before mingling with the civilized races. The
Guaranis believed in a soul which remained in the grave with the body.

The Patagonians believe in a country of the dead which they call Alhue
Mapu and they kill the horses of the deceased in order that their owner
may ride in Alhue Mapu.

From the beliefs of the Negritto and Malayo-Polynesian races, I glean the
following: The Fuegians believe in a superior being, and in good and evil
spirits, in dreams, omens, signs, etc. Fitzroy says he could not satisfy
himself that they had any idea of the immortality of the soul.

The Veddahs believe in the guardianship of the spirits of the dead, who
visit them in dreams and minister to them in sickness, and they have
ceremonies of invocation.

Eyra says some at least of the Australians believe in the existence and
separability of the soul.

The Tasmanians believed in a future life as a tradition of a primitive
religion, and Bonwick says they conversed with the spirits of the dead.

The New Caledonians believe that white men are the spirits of the dead,
and that they bring sickness. They believe that the soul on leaving the
body goes to the Bush, and every fifth month they have a "spirit night" or
"grand concert of spirits." The gods of the New Caledonians are their
ancestors, whose relics they keep and idolize.

The Fijians believe in a separable soul, and dying is by them described by
the same terms as sunset.

Belief in a future state among them is said by Siemann to be universal. In
Fiji heaven the inhabitants plant, live in families, fight, and so repeat
the incidents of life on earth. They believe that the spirit of men, while
still alive, may leave the body and trouble other people when asleep.

The Sandwich Islanders believe that the spirit of the departed hovers
about his former home, appears to his relatives in dreams, and they
worship an image which they believe to be in some way connected with the
departed. They regard the spirit of one of their ancient kings as a
tutelar deity, and the king and the priest were believed to be descended
from the gods.

The Tahitians believe in a separable soul which, on leaving the body, is
seized by other spirits and conducted to the state of night, where it is
by degrees eaten by the gods. A few escape this fate, while others, after
being three times eaten, become immortal.

The Tongons believe that the human soul is the more ethereal part of the
body and that it exists in Bolotoo in the form and likeness of the body
the moment after death.

The Samoans believe that the spirits of the dead have power to return and
to cause disease and death in other members of the family, hence all are
anxious to part with the dying on good terms.

The New Zealanders believe that during sleep the mind leaves the body, and
that dreams are the objects seen during its wanderings. They believe in
two separate abodes for departed spirits, the sky, and the sea, and that
the abodes of souls are to be approached only down the face of a steep
precipice--Cape Maria Van Dieman.

The Dyaks have great difficulty in distinguishing sleep from death. They
believe that the soul during sleep goes on an expedition of its own, and
sees, hears, and talks. They believe in spirits, omens, and in all that
occurs in dreams as real and literally true.

The Sumatrans believe in spirits and superior beings, and are said to have
a vague idea of the immortality of the soul, and the Malays believe in
spirits, good and bad, and seem to have a vague idea of a separable soul.

The Mexicans believed in a separable soul, and distinguished three
different abodes for it after death.

Landa says the people of Yucatan have always believed more firmly in the
immortality of the soul than other people, though they were less advanced
in civilization. They believed that after death there would be a better
life, which the soul would enjoy after its separation from the body. They
worshiped their dead kings as gods. The mythology of the people of
Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua is extensive and complicated and their
National Book, the Popol Vuh, possesses intense interest for the student.
There can be no doubt that these people believed in a separable soul, as
did also the Chibchas.

It was the belief of the ancient Peruvians that the soul leaves the body
during sleep, and that the soul itself cannot sleep, but that dreams are
what the soul sees in the world while the body sleeps. Waitz says they
believed in the transmigration of human souls into the bodies of animals.

In the case of the Arabians the primitive belief, which was Sabianism, has
been altered far less by Mohammedan invasion than most persons suppose.
Burton says Mohammed and his followers conquered only the more civilized
Bedouins, and Baker says that the Arabs are unchanged, and that the
theological opinions which they now hold are the same as those which
prevailed in remote ages, and of this belief the soul and its immortality
formed a part.

In general the Hill Tribes of India share in the universal belief in the
soul, in spirits, gods, and devils, though of many of these tribes little
is really known in modern times.

Nearly all our North American Indians (I can find no exceptions) bury
objects with their dead, such as food implements, jewelry, etc., and kill
the horses of the deceased that he may ride in the Happy Hunting Ground.

With the Carib's death his wife and captives were killed, and food
utensils, etc., were buried with him.

A curious custom prevailed with some Brazilian tribes. After burying food,
utensils, arms, etc., with the body, a month after death the body was
disinterred, put in a pan over a fire, the volatile substances driven off,
the black residue reduced to powder and mixed with water and drunk by the
company.

The Patagonians bury all the possessions of the deceased with the body.

With the Hottentots, widows lose one joint of a finger as an offering to
the deceased husband every time they re-marry.

With the Kaffirs, the hut and utensils of the deceased are burnt. The East
Africans offer prayer to the dead.

The Congo people bury ornaments, utensils, arms, etc., and embalm the body
after one or two years. The body of the chief must be carried in a
straight line from the hut to place of burial, and if trees or huts impede
the passage, they are cut down.

The Coast Negroes bury property with the body and have a ceremony like an
Irish wake, as do also the Abyssinians.

With the Ashantis, gold dust and utensils are buried and human sacrifices
occur.

The wives of the Fijians are strangled that they may attend their lords in
the new country.

The people of Malagasy bury in vaults 10×12, and 7 feet high, and put in a
large quantity of property.

With the ancient Mexicans, wives, slaves, concubines, and chaplains were
slaughtered to attend the deceased.

The Arabs fasten the camels to the grave of their master.

The Todas cremate the dead and slaughter the whole herd of buffalo
belonging to him, in order to secure them to him in the after life.

I have by no means given a complete category of the primitive and
barbarous peoples who believe in a separate soul, and who believe in a
future state much like the present and in conformity with that belief bury
arms, ornaments, and utensils with the dead or place them on the grave,
and who slaughter horses, camels, wives, slaves, etc., in order that the
deceased may retain his possessions. How far these customs extend in case
of the death of woman I do not know, but as with most of these people the
women are regarded as chattels of the males, the case is doubtless very
different.

Now as to the origin of these beliefs and customs, their causes naturally
fall into two categories, the physical and the metaphysical. Modern
biological science regards the whole question from the physical side
almost exclusively, and facts and experiences that belong largely or
exclusively to the metaphysical realm are warped out of their natural
order to fit the theory of interpretation.

Every savage observes not only that he casts a shadow, but that shadows
attend all inanimate objects that stand so as to intercept the light, and
as shadows move as do objects that gives rise to the idea of animation.
Hence we have genii, dryads, naiads, ghosts, angels, demons, etc. To
fortify this belief we have echoes, which give voice to animate and
inanimate objects. Movement and voice are the universal accompaniment of
animation.

The part played by the breath, and its sudden cessation at death, are
believed to contribute to the belief in invisible existences.

The beating of the heart, and its cessation at death, adds another link to
the chain of phenomena, going to show that _something_ leaves the body at
death. This may be the origin of the sacrifice of the hearts of captives
to the gods, or to a deceased warrior or chief as with the ancient
Mexicans, with the belief that the heart is the seat of the soul, and the
soul of the captive or victim shall attend the departed chief in the other
world.

But the most important place should doubtless be assigned to dreams as
giving rise to belief in the world of spirits. Dreams are universal
amongst men, and animals like the dog also dream.

Most if not all primitive people are also aware that fasting promotes
dreaming, and while many of them practice long fasting, partly, no doubt,
to increase fortitude and bodily endurance, in very many cases it is known
to be practiced for the purpose of promoting dreams. Beyond this voluntary
fasting there is the enforced fast due to famine or the scarcity of food.

It will be noticed in many of the cases cited how much stress is laid on
the phenomena of dreams and how literally they are interpreted.

Among civilized races and those wise in philosophy dreams play a very
important part, and are classified as monitorial, prophetic, etc., etc.
The habit in modern times of regarding dreams as altogether fantastic and
unreal, is unscientific. In the mingling of the real and the apparently
unreal, in the dream state, while the experience itself is always real to
the dreamer, lies undoubtedly the source of many beliefs that influence
the lives of men.

Dreaming must be regarded as one of the states of consciousness, and
hence, of whatsoever stuff dreams are made, they represent an actual
experience of the individual. No greater mistake can be made than the
belief that no experience is real save that which brings us in contact
with gross matter through the agency of the five senses. The world of
ideas and the creations of the imagination are in fact no more evanescent
than matter itself. Here impermanency differs only in time. All in time
pass away.

I hold that dreams, in general, show more clearly the nature of the soul,
and the experiences of the waking state show the office of the bodily
organism, and that each _on its own plane_ is as valid as the other.

In other words, "the soul is such stuff as dreams are made of." It does
not hold true, nor need it, that the experiences in dreams shall be true
and valid on the physical plane, though this is often the case, or that
the experiences of the physical plane shall be literally repeated in
dreams, which, nevertheless, frequently happens.

It is an undeniable fact that the experiences of the conscious ego in man
compass the subjective no less than the objective planes of being. That
the subjective avenues should be closed when the ego is functioning on the
physical plane through the bodily organs by aid of the senses, is quite as
remarkable as that the physical avenues should be closed when in dreams,
or trance, or syncope, or under anaesthetics, the ego functions on the
subjective planes.

I hold, therefore, that here, more than anywhere else, is the source of
not only belief in the existence of the soul, but of the relatively
uniform conceptions everywhere attained. The common experience of man on
the one plane is as easily accounted for as on the other, and individual
experience differs no more widely in the one case than in the other. So
also is the persistence of the human type, or the _genus_, involved in the
one case no less than in the other.

All the agencies recognized in modern evolution tend to elevation only
through differentiation, and even the "eternal cell" of Weismann fails in
explaining permanency of form through any physical transmission. When
atavism and degeneracy are admitted as factors, as they certainly must be,
the perpetuity of the human species fails from physical causes alone.

I hold the idea of a separable soul to be innate in the human
consciousness, as a necessary deduction from the experience of the
continuity of self-consciousness which compasses both the objective and
subjective states. This deduction from experience occurs whenever the
evolving ego has advanced sufficiently above the animal plane to reason on
its own experience, and for this reason the belief in the separable soul
is universal.

It is no more strange that the experience of the individual should be
modified by traditions and the beliefs of others regarding, for example,
the dream state, than that the experience of the individual should in like
manner be modified or shaped by traditions and the ceremonies and usages
of others on the physical plane. The bond of unity and that of diversity
have one common root in humanity. What we need for larger knowledge is, I
think, a recognition of the breadth and sweep of human experience. To stop
either ignoring or quibbling over one-half of all our actual experience.

The inner world of thought and being is really the habitat of the soul,
while the physical body, like the diving-bell, enables us to explore and
gain experience on another plane which otherwise must remain to us forever
unknown.

The limitations of space and time are unknown to us in dreams. These are
the limitations of the fleshly casket. The consciousness of freedom, the
absence of pain and sorrow even under great trial, are often experienced
in the dream state. The range and character of experience in the
subjective state is modified, and held in check by that of the physical
plane, and the correspondence of an emotion to an idea, or of an act to a
thought, ought to give us the key to the two sets of experiences and
reveal the underlying basis of equilibrium.

A universal fact and a common experience argue a universal nature. Like
conditions everywhere come from like causes. These are neither accidental
nor incidental, nor are they left to the caprice of savages, nor to that
of the more advanced civilizations.

It is not at all strange that a common experience should result in a
universal belief. The range of experience and varying vicissitudes of life
on the outer physical plane differ as widely as do those of the dream
plane, and the conscious identity of the individual is equally preserved
on both planes.

I hold that here lies the origin of belief in the existence of a soul in
man, separable from the body, and the confines of matter, space, and time,
in an actual experience of every individual. The beating of the heart, the
phenomena of respiration, the cessation of these at death, and the shadows
cast by man and inanimate bodies serve as connecting links between the
experiences of the individual on the subjective and objective planes of
being.

The dream state and the experiences thence derived are subjects for
psychological science to investigate. The experiences allotted by du
Maurier to "Peter Ibbetson" are not altogether fantastic and unwarranted,
as the records of somnambulism and hypnotism abundantly prove. When we
remember that nothing deserving the name of Psychology or Psychic Science
exists in the western world to-day, we need not wonder why men eminent for
investigations in other departments prove themselves novices and
dogmatists here.

The folklore, the traditions, and the mythology of dreams would form a
very interesting subject for discussion. It is true that the literature of
the subject is fantastic, mixed with fable and often altogether
unreliable; but these difficulties offer no more formidable bar to
scientific investigation than many another problem already classified and
formulated for systematic study.

I know a lady of very superior ability, the mother of a prominent jurist,
who all her life has had distinct premonitions of many calamities and
coming events, and there are those who dream true in every community.
Fantasies, nightmare, dreams from indigestion and delirium, form a
separate class where the dreamer is entangled in the meshes of the bodily
functions.

Here fasting, either voluntary or enforced, comes in, and drugs known to
the remotest times are found to promote and to determine the character of
dreams. There are furthermore processes of mental gymnastics whereby the
thinker withdraws himself from the bodily avenues of sense and functions
at will on the subjective plane of being.

"When then," said Socrates, in the _Phædo_, "does the soul light on the
truth? for when it attempts to consider anything in conjunction with the
body, it is plain that it is led astray by it."

"And surely," he continues, "the soul reasons best when none of these
things disturb it, neither hearing, nor sight, nor pain, nor pleasure of
any kind, but it retires as much as possible _within itself_, _taking
leave of the body_, and as far as it can, not communicating or being in
contact with it, _it aims at the discovery of that which is_."

I hold that the most valuable triumphs of science in the future lie in the
realm of psychology, and that by no means the least important contribution
in this direction will come from the study of Folklore, of which belief in
the separable soul, and the phenomena and universality of the dream state
must form a very important part.

One final consideration is suggested not without some degree of hesitation
and diffidence. If there be a soul in man destined to continued existence,
and if in any case perfection is the goal of evolution as formulated by
Herbert Spencer for a future residue of the human race, then this soul in
its essential elements is without beginning in time.

Pre-existence and evolution necessitate repeated re-embodiment on the
physical plane, and the continuity of self-consciousness in man I hold to
be the proof of life without beginning or end.

Viewed in this light, dreams and all subjective experiences in man must
mingle reminiscences of the soul with the experiences of the present life,
and the theory of innate ideas assumes a purely scientific form. We hence
arrive at the intuition of the soul to account for universal belief. The
experience of Socrates and the Fiji Islander agree as to the subjective
plane as perfectly as in regard to the beating of the heart. They differ
only in degree of evolution.




