CHAPTER XVI

THE NEW AVATAR


From all the foregoing general considerations it may be discerned that the
"New Avatar" is strictly that of _Scientific Demonstration_.

As we use terms in vogue at the present day, it pertains to the field of
Natural Science.

This does not imply that it is irreligious, nor unreligious, nor
sacrilegious.

When it is clearly apprehended it will be found to be the only thing that
harmonizes--not the Institutions of man--but Science, Philosophy, and
Religion _per se_, as departments in human intelligence.

Man will thus discern "the rational order that pervades the universe."

The purpose and result of such knowledge to man are Harmony,
Enlightenment, Courage, and Hope.

Man _is_ the arbiter of his own destiny. He may _become_ the Master of his
own Fate. Such are the _Illuminati_, the "Masters of the Great White
Lodge," the Benefactors of the whole human race, the members of the
"School of Natural Science."

What would I have my readers do? I answer, _Investigate_! Study! Think!
Wait! Hope! Anticipate!

Careful, intelligent, and conscientious investigation will determine the
fact that we possess in America to-day _one_ who can fill all the
requirements that I have endeavored to designate and portray--not as a
"reincarnation" of Buddha or Jesus, but as a "Master"--one who has been
duly instructed and prepared, who has had the personal experience, and has
made a _practical demonstration_, that determines Mastership.

He has demonstrated that "there is no death," but transition only (except
through conscious and determined devolution, or _suicide of the soul_).
Man is, after all, and in the last analysis, a "free moral agent."

As a Member of the "Great School" he was educated and initiated many years
ago, and has consecrated his life to this service. He has demonstrated the
separability of the soul by leaving and returning to his body at will.

The School of Natural Science; the Great Work; the Individual
Representative; the conditions of the present age; the opportunities
offered; the demand for real knowledge everywhere; the falling in pieces
of creeds and dogmas; the expectancy so often voiced--all of these
correspond intimately with what the ancient Aryans designated as
"_Avataric_."

It is not now the deification of any Individual, but the "_apotheosis of
Natural Science_," as the foundation and method in the achievement of
actual knowledge.

From this actual knowledge will arise a new Faith, not a new religion, but
the old Religion of Humanity, precisely as taught and lived by Jesus,
Christna, Buddha, and all the other "Redeemers," and real Avatars of the
past.

The "Enemy of all Righteousness," as already said, have made many attempts
to assassinate this Representative of the Great School, but he goes
steadily about his own work. These enemies realize the danger to their
unholy work, but not the _Power_ back of this great movement. This they
can never destroy.

The day of enlightenment has come, and the cry has gone forth, Ho! all ye
who are heavy-laden, involved in fear and doubt and uncertainty;
bewildered, discouraged, despairing, and committing suicide! There is no
death! Man is the Arbiter of his own Fate! Look up and Live, and Hope and
_Realize_!

And there shall dawn for you a new heaven and a new earth in which
dwelleth Love and Peace and Righteousness; with Jesus--the
_Christos_--your "elder Brother," leading the way, and the downtrodden,
the poor and despised children of men, shouting Hosanna! for the Loving
Kindness that will have taken the place of selfishness, strife, cruelty,
superstition, and Dogma.

Religion will no longer be a matter of mere sentiment, nor of emotion, of
blind belief, nor of fear, superstition, dogma, nor creed--but a _Great
Work_. So Mote it be.

The author of this volume can lay no claim for it as a systematic treatise
on Psychology, either according to the rules of composition or the orderly
sequence of science.

It is rather a number of essays, some of which were written without
reference to publication, or the design, at the time, of putting them
together in a single volume.

There is, therefore, more or less repetition, the same subject under a
different title, viewed from a different aspect, yet involving the same
principles, motives, and aims.

But the subject of Psychology is so vast, so intricate, so interesting and
important, and yet, in the average mind, so confused, and so little known,
that considerations from many sides, and even repetitions in the
application of a given principle in various ways, are believed more likely
to make the whole subject apprehensible to the general reader to whom it
is addressed.

Moreover, the author believes that the time has come when Psychology, as a
_Constructive Science_ of the nature, laws, and destiny of the Human Soul,
need no longer be regarded as unknown or unattainable, but open to all who
seek it in the right way, giving to it the consideration, time, and
loyalty it so amply deserves.

To such as these, it is hoped, the foregoing pages may give many clews and
sidelights, suggestions, encouragement, and hope.

Psychology, to the Author of this volume, means literally _A Knowledge of
the Human Soul_, rather than of treatises upon the subject, or of the
opinions, beliefs, or dogmas of men.




NOTES


The oligarchy of creeds, and the autocrats of Rome no more represent the
"Coming of the Son of Man," the Divine Logos that was and is "in the bosom
of the Father in heaven," than do the Rockefellers, the Morgans and the
Harrimans, constituting the oligarchy of wealth, or than the political
grafters and bosses of our municipalities represent the "New Commandment,"
"that ye love one another." The barons of wealth have not yet resorted
directly to murder, as has Rome for ages.

St. Augustine says, "What is now called the Christian religion existed
among the ancients and was not absent from the human race until Christ
came, from which time, the true Religion, which existed already, began to
be called 'Christian.'" (See Heckethorne's "Secret Societies," page 12,
Introduction.)

As to the basis of scientific chronology regarding the Wisdom of the
Masters, and their indestructible records, I quote the following from a
modern student of Astrology. His method of reckoning is correct, even
though his dates may not be absolutely exact, as he is not a "Master."

CHRONOLOGY AND THE "RIDDLE OF THE SPHINX."

Ancient religious symbols bear a striking resemblance to the
constellations of the heavens, especially those of the Zodiac, and if this
be their true meaning, we have an infallible key to their chronology. At
the beginning of the Christian Era, the constellation Aries, or Ram,
occupied the equinoctial place, being in the first degree of that
constellation. About 2150 B.C. the first degree of Taurus, or Bull,
contained the Equinox. When the constellation Taurus, or the Bull, was in
the first division, or the equinoctial place, the people used a symbol
representing a bull, described as giving fecundity, a deity of vegetation
as at Dodona, in their religious ceremonies. One of the statuettes found
recently in the excavations of Crete, was a woman figured between bulls
and lions, with a dove or eagle on her head, and holding serpents in her
hand. This figure would seem to represent mother earth between the
constellations Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius. She is figured between
Taurus (the Bull) on one side, Leo (the Lion) at her feet, Aquila (or
Eagle) in the constellation, Aquarius on her head, and Scorpio (or the
Serpent) in her hand; all forming the sacred cross or 'Swastika,' with the
constellations Taurus in the vernal Equinox; Leo beneath the earth, the
Eagle or Aquarius overhead, and Scorpio held in her hand toward the west.

Archæologists place the date in which this symbol was in use in Crete at
1100 to 1500 B.C. These dates are included between 2150 B.C. and the year
1 A.D. By the same method we are enabled to calculate the age of the
Sphinx.

This Sphinx apparently represents the constellations Leo (the Lion) and
Virgo (the Virgin). It has a lion's body, and a woman's head and breast.
When the Sphinx was built, it seems the spring equinox occupied a point
between these two constellations, and as the spring, or Easter, festivals
of the ancients were held on or about March 21st of our calendar, this
Sphinx was the representation of Leo and Virgo, the point in which the Sun
crossed the equator, or equinoctial line.

Now as the equinox retrogrades from east to west in the reverse order of
the constellations, as well as the reverse order of the movement of the
planets, the Sun will not cross the equator at the same point each year,
but at a point a little to the west, amounting to about fifty and a third
seconds of arc. At this rate the equinox will pass backward through the
constellations, making a complete revolution in a little less than
twenty-six thousand years, or at the rate of about twenty-one hundred and
fifty years to a constellation of thirty degrees. Now by taking the
present position of the equinox in the constellation Pisces, we find that
it has nearly reached the constellation Aquarius. About 1909 years ago it
was in the first point of Aries. If we begin at its present point in
Pisces, and count back to the Junction of Leo-Virgo, we will have to count
1909 years to first point of Aries; 2150 years to the first point of
Taurus; 2150 years to Camini; 2150 years to Cancer; 2150 years to Leo and
2150 years to the constellation Virgo. This indicates that the Sphinx was
built 12,659 years ago, or approximately 10,750 B.C. (John Kilduff.)




THE HARMONIC SERIES

These are the text books of that Ancient School of Wisdom whose members
have ever been "Masters of the Law" of Life and of Death, able at will,
independently at all times, to travel in the Spiritual World and
communicate with those who live there--your friends and our friends,--who
have passed through the gates of death and now live another life beyond
the grave.

Vol. I. HARMONICS OF EVOLUTION

By Florence Huntley

This book is a clear statement of the philosophy of Individual Life, as
taught by modern Masters of the Law. Its teachings mean the dawn of a "New
Day" in the intellectual and ethical evolution of the whole world.

Mrs. Huntley has sensed the very soul of mankind and understands and
explains its yearnings for what Drummond names "the greatest thing in the
world, LOVE." 463 pages; illustrated.

Vol. II. THE GREAT PSYCHOLOGICAL CRIME

By TK

This remarkable book deals with the imminent dangers of the day, and
covers the most mysterious and fascinating phenomena and experiences of
human life. The author's analysis of Hypnotism and Mediumship is masterly
and complete. For fifteen chapters, by the most relentless and
unanswerable facts, he _proves_ that Hypnotism and subjective Mediumship
are vitally destructive to the physical body and _the human soul_.

This volume carries a hope, a message, a suggestion and a warning to all
who are honestly, patiently and persistently seeking to prove that Death
does not end all. 464 pages; illustrated.

Vol. III. THE GREAT WORK

By TK

This is the book which tells _how_ one must live and _what_ he must do to
become able himself to demonstrate the fact of another life.

"_The Great Work_" _and_ "_The Great Psychological Crime_" were written by
the American Representative of that "Venerable School of Wisdom," whose
records are the most ancient at this time known to man, and which for many
thousands of years, has influenced the civilization and work of every
great nation of earth. 464 pages; illustrated.

These books are founded upon an exact science. More impressive, more
fascinating and "stranger than fiction." "When a man dies, he shall live
again," is the inspiring message of the Great Work in America,--and this
message is written in clear, concise, simple and easily readable English.

Bound in red silk, gold stamped. Price single copy, $2.00. _Per set $6.00,
express prepaid._

In Persian Morocco, _de luxe_ edition $3.50 each. _The set at one time,
$10.00._

[Illustration]
THREE-IN-ONE

"As beautiful a volume as the mind can imagine."

The HARMONIC SERIES--Three Volumes--Bound in FULL, PERSIAN MOROCCO (Oxford
Bible style), round corners, silk head-bands and markers, red-under-gold
edges, _Genuine Gold Stamped_. Printed on Japan French paper; several
beautiful full-page half-tones. Durable, practical, artistic. Name stamped
on cover in pure gold, if desired.

Price _de luxe_ edition, all charges prepaid, $12.00.

All orders filled the same day they are received.

INDO-AMERICAN BOOK CO. 5705 South Boulevard, Chicago, Ill.




QUESTIONS ON NATURAL SCIENCE

[Illustration]
This volume is an aid to the study of the "Harmonic Series." While it
commands the attention of the casual reader of the Text Books, it is
intended more especially for those who contemplate a closer relationship
with the philosophy and for those who _have been admitted to
studentship_.

To the aspiring student it opens up the entire Harmonic Philosophy in a
manner that invites and facilitates the most intense interest,
satisfaction and progress.

355 pages, 20 chapters, and 3,857 carefully formulated questions, all of
which are _authoratatively_ answered in the Text Books. Three-quarter
leather, price $2.00.

KEY TO QUESTIONS ON NATURAL SCIENCE. Leather, $1.00.

                          --------------------

THE SPIRIT OF THE WORK

[Illustration]
_By TK._

These beautiful and inspiring essays by the Beloved Elder Brother are now
printed in book form, for ready reference, and will prove to be quite as
interesting and helpful to the beginner in Natural Science, as they are
useful to instructors and regularly admitted students.

They unfold in simple language a wealth of spiritual light that leads at
once to a most searching soul--analysis and readjustment of the entire
intelligence to the Constructive Principle in Nature. Every page breathes
the very inmost meaning and spirit of the educational work of the Great
School. If you are in earnest this book will help you. 331 pages, cloth,
price $1.00.

                          --------------------

THE QUESTION BOX SERIES

[Illustration]
_By TK._

These two volumes consist of Questions from Students and Friends of the
Work of the Great School, touching all manner of interesting subjects,
together with answers by the TK. Volume I contains about 40 general
topics, 217 pages. Volume II has over 75 topics and 245 pages.

Charming and valuable aids to readers, students and instructors, and
strictly authoritative in their teaching.

Large, clear, beautiful type; carefully indexed, and attractively
arranged.

Price, $1.00 each.

                          --------------------

HARMONIC BIRTHDAY BOOK

[Illustration]
A large book--310 pages. There are quotations from the "Harmonic
Philosophy" for every day in the year (with space for writing) and the
following valuable and unique features: A section devoted to Birthstones;
Wedding Anniversaries; the Meaning of Flowers; section devoted to the
deaths of Relatives and Friends, and a frontispiece and beautiful
half-tone portrait of _Florence Huntley_.

It is really a family record, that will increase in value with the years
and become priceless to the fortunate owner. Bound in leather, gold
stamped and embossed, gold edges and printed on heavy parchment paper.

Without doubt the most beautiful gift book ever sold. Price, $2.00.




THE DREAM CHILD (GIFT EDITION)

[Illustration]
_By Florence Huntley_

This is doubtless one of the most beautiful, masterful and mystical books
ever written. The descriptive incidents in this book could only emanate
from the brilliant and fertile brain of Florence Huntley.

Florence Huntley was the first instructed student of the TK, dating from
the year 1887; and from 1894 the Work commanded her undivided time and
effort.

"_The Dream Child_"--the first result of that interest--was written in
1889, and stands for that earlier and therefore more poetic and less exact
treatment of the Great Law than her later writings.

A book that EVERYBODY reads and re-reads with the keenest appreciation and
enthusiasm. Price $1.00

                          --------------------

THE GAY GNANI OF GINGALEE.

[Illustration]
_By Florence Huntley_

Only those who knew Mrs. Huntley's earlier humorous writings will be
prepared for such a book from the serious Author of "_Harmonics of
Evolution_."

The publishers feel entirely safe in saying there is nothing like "The Gay
Gnani" in the whole range of modern satirical fiction.

The most extraordinary feature of this indescribable satire lies in
Chapter XII, "THE WAGES Of SIN IS DEATH," contributed by the TK. This
chapter is a masterpiece of concept, treatment and beauty, setting forth
the meaning and purpose of the whole extravaganza.

Don't miss reading this book. Red cloth, gold stamped. Price, $1.00.

                          --------------------

ZANONI AND ZICCI

[Illustration]
_By Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton_

As a work of art this romance is one of great power and original
conception.

No other works of this great author have provoked such diversity of
criticism as "_Zanoni_." To some, this book represents a temporary
aberration of genius without definite purpose. To others it represents
surpassing, bold and original speculation, profound analysis of character
and thrilling interest; but _to the one who knows_, every character in
this book is recognized by a familiar sign and symbol which, though
hidden, is nevertheless patent to the initiated.

The TWO books, "Zanoni" and "Zicci" in one, SPECIAL EDITION, cloth, gold
stamped. Price, $1.00.

                          --------------------

A STRANGE STORY and THE HAUNTED AND THE HAUNTERS

[Illustration]
This is another of those marvelous books by _Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton_. "A
Strange Story" is the antithesis of "Zanoni." It is a most absorbingly
interesting story depicting the destructive psychic practices and
possibilities against which "_The Great Psychological Crime_" so timely
warns the human race.

As a matter of fact, both "A Strange Story" and "Zanoni" are carefully
veiled exposes of the two oldest and most powerful centers of Spiritual
knowledge extant, and are revelations of the loftiest pursuits and the
most malign practices known to human Intelligence.

Be sure to read both of these books.

Special edition. Price, $1.00.








