CHAPTER IX

HERO WORSHIP AND FOLKLORE


The history of every people, of all time, and of every religion of which
we have any record, reveals a similar origin, course, and destiny.

We of the present day have the advantage of these records upon which to
institute comparisons, ascertain relations, and draw conclusions.

True, the partisans and postulants of all these religions at the present
day will claim exception in favor of their own cult, and regard as
sacrilegious and profane any attempt to institute comparisons and draw
general conclusions.

Any attempt to persuade them of their error would be useless.

The essentials of their religion will not be called in question, but on
the other hand, they will find that it is impossible to escape from the
habitual and universal tendencies in which they are involved.

However veritable may have been the original revelations, the tendencies
and habits of weaving around them the traditions and superstitions of
folklore seem to have been inevitable and universal.

It is the province of Science to ascertain the facts in any given case, to
institute comparisons, and to draw deductions and generalizations
dispassionately and relentlessly.

It is thus that every tradition, superstition, creed, dogma, and
revelation comes under review, and is placed on trial.

True science has no preconceived notion, no foregone conclusion. Each
subject examined must tell its own story and in its own way, and stand or
fall measured by intrinsic evidence and revealed fact.

To this tribunal every episode in the life of man and the history of the
human race must at last come.

What are the _facts_? What do they reveal and signify?

To most religionists this method and aim of science seem as relentless and
dogmatic as their own creed or dogmas.

It is a sifting and discriminative process, that, while relentless, is in
the end eminently Just, and in the end will be found to be the revealer of
all that is essential and true in religion itself.

In itself, science is not and never can be a religion.

It is a _method_ only, which, like a search-light, reveals all religions
in all their essentials, and places them in their true light.

Religion _per se_ is an essential element in the nature and life of man
and of the human race.

Science is a method, a way of procedure in the intelligent mind of man in
its search for truth.

Religion is vital, essential, basic. It is born of the relation which
inheres in the kinship of the individual intelligence to the Universal
Spirit of Nature and of all life.

Science is the intelligent and rational use of the mental powers of man.

Religion is intuitional, spiritual perception, involving the heart, the
affections. Man aspires, worships, adores, and by the light of Faith or
intuitive conviction, recognizes that which he cannot explain and cannot
get rid of if he tries.

Science is the just weight and measure of things seen, and of the natural
causes of phenomena.

Religion--the evidence of things unseen. Religion, as a _fact_, can never
be explained away by Science.

The so-called science that assumes or undertakes to do that, is
materialism and nescience.

Superstition is the false interpretation of religion, and folklore and
tradition are the accretions that gather around the foundations and
original revelations of religion, and lead at last to obscuration and the
need of a new revelation.

Each genuine new "revelation" is but the rehabilitation of the primeval
religion in which accretions, false interpretations, and dogmatic
assertions are cast aside.

Religion represents man's endeavor to apprehend and interpret the unseen;
that "something more" and "something beyond" the visible, the sensuous,
and the tangible.

It is this conscious _awareness_ of something more and something beyond
the visible and the tangible, that furnishes man with a conception of God
and of the human soul. This is a natural intuition, inseparable from the
_awareness_ of self. It lies at the foundation like man's self-conscious
identity, and can neither be explained nor explained away.

Here lies the root of all religions. The imagery of man's imagination, in
his effort to apprehend the unseen, and to formulate the unknown, gives
rise to myths, allegory, tradition, folklore, and in the end, to
superstition, creed, and dogma.

Then come priestcraft, oppression, persecution. The death of religion, the
deification of the revealer or _Avatar_, and the substitution of the
priesthood as of divine authority, in place of the _revealer_ or the
revelation.

Jove, Orpheus, Jehovah, and at last Jesus, are enthroned beyond the
clouds, and priest or church assume the earthly prerogative, speak in
their place, assume dogmatic authority, promise heaven and happiness for
obedience, and dire penalties for disobedience, and resort to persecution
to maintain their authority.

The traditions, mythologies, and folklore of all the past have thus
arisen. The creeds and dogmas of the present constitute the effort of man
to assume exclusive dominion, and to exercise divine authority over the
masses of mankind. It is only another form of the ambition of individuals
for wealth, fame or power, lifting them to a "class" above the toiling,
suffering, and sorrowing masses.

There are exceptional individuals all along the way, who conceive, hold,
and exercise the spirit of the Master, and sink self in the service of
man, and but for these the organized priesthood would be execrated by
mankind long before.

The organized church deifies, where the true disciple humanizes and helps
mankind in the name and in the spirit of the Master.

This is the spirit, the origin, the genius and the history of every
Avatar, of Christna, and all the Buddhas, the Saviors and Redeemers of
history.

The orthodox Christian of to-day, whether Catholic or Protestant, will be
likely to admit the foregoing outline except as it applies to his own
religion. Whereas it is abundantly proven to-day regarding his own
religion as nowhere else in history.

The histories of former religions are vague, distant, and so covered over
by tradition, myth, and folklore, as to be difficult to trace.

The beginnings, history, and progress of the Christian religion are
comparatively nearer at hand, and the process above outlined readily
demonstrable.

Not only so, but the recognition of the facts and processes is everywhere
in evidence.

This fact, however, by no means ends the controversy.

Traditions, creeds, and dogmas die hard, and fight to the last extremity.
Nothing else known to man fights so desperately and dies so hard as an
organized priesthood, and beyond this, they are upheld by the ignorance,
superstition, the fear, and the faith of the masses.

Their adherents often believe and assume that they have discovered final
truths, essential and unalterable verities. They undertake to support and
to maintain these by dogmatic authority, a holy book, a "thus sayeth the
Lord."

"There it is, down in black and white." No further evidence is required.

To question such authority is to be damned. To believe, accept, and to
conform, is to be _saved_.

Difference of opinion and of interpretation inevitably arise, even among
those who dare not question the ultimate authority and genuineness of the
original revelation. Hence arise sects, schisms, and theological warfare.

Notwithstanding all this, the original revelation becomes a matter of
thorough investigation and of criticism.

The so-called "higher criticism" had already discovered errors in
translation, and contradictions in interpretation, resulting in a "revised
edition" of the sacred books, while under the name "_Pragmatism_," certain
metaphysical writers and accredited teachers have undertaken to determine
essential meanings and interpretations, and to submit religious
revelations, creeds, dogmas, and theologies to critical analysis.

How far this analysis has gone, and how little of the original
interpretation actually remains, only they are aware who keep abreast of
current thought, and who with open mind care more for the simple truth
than for custom, tradition, theologies, and the folklore of the past.

Dogmatic theological authority is completely undermined, and its days are
numbered.[1]

With the masses there is the habitual unrest, the feeling of uncertainty,
the social upheaval, with the inevitable tendency to confusion and
anarchy. A new religion is already in the formative stage, a new Avatar
inevitable.

It is to be less a repudiation than a revision and rehabilitation of the
old religion.

People everywhere are looking for the new revelation, for the coming of
_Christos_, for the new Avatar, and few are aware that he is already
here.

It should be borne strictly in mind that in every instance in the past,
the advent of the Avatar has been unattended by signs and wonders, has
come upon the stage of human action in the most commonplace way, and that
myth, miracle, and folklore have followed as time went on.

To the people of his time Jesus was the "son of the carpenter," whose
family was obscure. He came "eating with publicans and sinners."

Jesus, the demigod of to-day, was unknown and undreamed of in Galilee.
Philo Judæus seems never to have heard of him.

What and who Jesus was, and what he did, is separated from what the church
and theologians have made of him by a gulf that seems almost impassable,
and yet this gulf has already been bridged and passed.

The new Avatar has for its mission the rehabilitation of Jesus as he
actually existed, divested of all myth and miracle, while the mission for
which he came, and the doctrines for which he lived and died are to be
completely restored to mankind in their purity.

The old Hindoos would call this transformation a "reincarnation of
Vishnu," a "new Avatar."

It will mean Jesus the divine Man, the master, _Christos_, restored to the
heart of Humanity from the mysticism and miracle of monks and theologies,
from the superstitions and folklore of the multitude.

This means a reconstruction and a restatement of the religion of Jesus.

Jesus remaining what he actually was and is, it will be the province of
Natural Science to explain and to demonstrate by natural and spiritual
law, how, without mystery or miracle, Jesus became the Master _Christos_
and so remains to-day.

Natural Science is not the invention of man, more than is the law of
gravitation, the law of equilibrium, or the binomial theorem. Man may
discover these laws from the phenomena of Nature, and demonstrate their
existence and mode of operation like any others.

It is a question of dispassionate and intelligent apprehension and
demonstration.

All actual progress of man up to the present time lies along these lines.
Beyond this all is conjecture and guess-work. Natural Science, however, is
far more than modern physical science so-called. It includes physical,
mental, moral, and spiritual science.

Its _methods_ everywhere and at all times are the same.

It may theorize, but never dogmatize, and it must _demonstrate_ at every
step. Facts must not only support the theorem, but demonstrate the
conclusions as inevitable, and the basis of all such actual demonstration
must be a verifiable individual experience, with formulated laws and
processes for its repetition, just as in physical science, in chemistry,
and mathematics. Nothing less than this on any plane or in any department
of investigation can enable the individual to declare "_I Know_."

Demonstration is the sign manual of knowledge; Dogmatism the arrogance of
ignorance.

It is impossible to make these radical distinctions too clear and
specific.

When this method of Natural Science is applied to the investigation of
religions, tradition is separated from fact, dogma from demonstration,
miracle from natural law, mythology and folklore are found to be the
fabric woven by the imagination of mankind around the receding
revelations, deifying their authors, and mingling fact with fable, till
the originals become unrecognizable.

Romance and superstition become substitutes for simple Faith, moral law,
and social Justice.

To question or to repudiate the dogmas of superstition becomes a "mortal
sin," even when the most plain and specific moral or ethical obligations
are entirely subverted or reversed by dogmatic authority.

It is thus that the original revelation is subverted and at last
overthrown.

From first to last, the whole fabric is claimed to be "sacred and divine,"
and to question it, "sacrilege" and "profanation of holy things." Thus,
that which seemed originally as wings to the toiling, sorrowing children
of men, becomes at last a "millstone about the neck," a "burden grievous
to be borne."

Then comes protest, repudiation, reform, and usually a new revelation,
embodying the primitive faith, and adapting it to modern times and
conditions.

This is, in brief, the history of the Avatars of Ancient India, the
Buddhas and the Zoroasters of later centuries; of the Greek Orpheus; of
the legends and folklore clustering around many of the sages of Israel,
and though in a less miraculous fashion, of Confucius and Laotse. But most
patent of all does this principle apply to the founder of the Christian
religion, because less ancient and more readily verifiable.

Though no new Avatar is yet recognized, the _spirit_ of _modern science_
does not hesitate to repudiate myth, miracle, and superstition, and to
insist on fact and natural law.

-----

  [1] See President Eliot's latest utterances.




