CHAPTER XIV

FROM CONFUSION TO CONSTRUCTION


A concise and detailed review of the past, in the long journey of man
toward civilization and independent self-knowledge, has not been herein
attempted. Only hints, here and there, and the barest outline have been
undertaken.

If, however, the intelligent student will follow these clews, he will find
a mass of material and abundant evidence to corroborate the general
thesis.

Every great religion has had its Avatar, its Redeemer, its _Christos_.

Each of these religions has adapted from its predecessors and transformed
the old, in whole or in part, to suit the conditions and apparent needs of
the time.

Each of these revivals of religion has been instituted on account of the
abominations of a dominant priesthood and the poverty and degradation of
the masses. What was at first claimed and instituted as a Divine
Revelation for the elevation and happiness of the whole people, has openly
and shamelessly degenerated into enslavement of the masses and the
creation of a despotic and arrogant class who enslaved both body and soul
in the name of Religion.

Priest, Prince, and Potentate generally, united to terrorize through
force, and by superstition and fear, in order to retain their power.

The reaction has invariably resulted from economic conditions, as in the
case of the Protestant Reformation, when the gold sent to Rome through the
shameless sale of Indulgences, threatened to impoverish the whole of
Northern Europe, and Princes broke allegiance to the Priesthood in
desperate self-protection.

Then, and then only, came sufficient protest and Reformation.

The religionist is apt to regard and designate Science as "profane," and
Religion _per se_, as essentially "holy."

Nothing can be really considered "holy" that does not elevate, encourage,
and inspire the whole human race and promote the Brotherhood of Man.
Whenever any religion fails to do this it becomes indeed a profanation of
holy things.

The only religion that ever became the inspiration of a whole people, so
far as history records, was that of Christna, with the teeming millions of
India. Buddhism was driven out of India by the powerful and unscrupulous
Brahmans, and took refuge in Ceylon, Thibet, and adjacent provinces.

The religion of Jesus met a similar fate from the Jews and the Roman
governors, until Pagan Rome adapted and transformed it on the principle of
dominance and exploitation inherent in the genius of the Latin Race.

Since which time no one will pretend to claim that the Religion of Jesus
has ever dominated the human race or any large part of it.

Rome to-day no more represents the religion of Jesus than the Brahmans of
to-day represent that of Christna, or Buddha, or the religion of the
Vedas.

Nothing is so amazing to-day as that the intelligence of the present age
fails to recognize this fact.

All of these religions of the past have adapted their teaching to the
multitude through parable and allegory. Nothing in literature can be found
more beautiful and inspiring, and at the same time comprehensible to the
commonest intelligence, than Christna's "Parable of the Fisherman."

Christna and Buddha, like Jesus, taught to their disciples a "Secret
Doctrine," apprehensible only to the few. "To you it is given to know the
mysteries," but to others, who are without, it is not given.

It can readily be proven from at least a half score of the early Church
Fathers (see page 70 _et seq._ of the author's "Mystic Masonry"), that the
early church practiced "Initiation," patterned after those of the
Gnostics, Therapeutia and the Mysteries of Egypt, and divided their
neophytes and postulants into three degrees, as in Blue Lodge Masonry
to-day.

While the great mass of mankind to-day are incapable of apprehending these
genuine mysteries of life, and of the individual soul of man, it is
doubtful if any civilization ever existed where so many were willing and
capable of understanding them as are found here in America to-day.

The reason for this and the growth of intelligence have already been
outlined.

A new race is slowly forming here, designated by the ancient Wisdom as the
"Fifth Race," and called the _Manasic_, the growth of Intelligence, or
"Mind."

It is above all things important that with this development of _Mind_
there should also develop that of _Buddhi_, or Loving Kindness, the
essential element in the Universal Brotherhood of Man; a thing largely
overlooked in the modern theory of Evolution, and ignored, or set at
naught by Romanism by its dogmas, anathemas, and persecutions. Instead of
the brotherhood of man, she has exhibited the cruelty and rapacity of
devils. (Establishment of Roman Catholic Caste.)

This all-around development of the whole man, as essential to human
evolution, is everywhere insisted upon by all the great Masters of
antiquity, and is illustrated and exemplified in the genuine Greater
Mysteries.

Hence, the saying in Kabala, "The wicked _obey_ the law through _fear_;
the wise _keep_ the law through _knowledge_." The Saviors all preached and
practiced the "Good Law," and obedience to legal mandates.

The explanation usually given of an Avatar by the ancient Masters, as "a
descent, embodiment, or incarnation of _Vishnu_," who is not only the
"Preserver," but the "Rejuvenator" of mankind, is rather a _blind_, and
was an interpretation given to the common people, or the "profane."

All things--even heaven and earth--pass away, and all things are renewed.

This renewal, or regeneration, through the constructive principle of
evolution, is "designed" to be continually on higher and still higher
planes.

It is not the range of experience, nor the growth of intelligence alone,
that elevates man, but the progressive and constructive growth of the
soul, from the physical toward the spiritual plane of Being.

This actual growth means Knowledge, Wisdom, Understanding, Knowledge of
the Law, Obedience to its Commands, and Realization of its Rewards.

This Constructive Psychology is the _growth of the Soul_.

Man passes, therefore, from the age of Fable, Superstition, and Fear, to
the age of Faith and Obedience, and finally to that of actual Knowledge.

This _age of Knowledge_--not for all of mankind, but for a larger number
who are worthy and well-qualified, duly and truly prepared than was ever
known at one time before--has at last dawned.

The question is continually asked, "Why do the Masters of Wisdom Conceal
their Knowledge?"

The only adequate answer is that so few are ready, willing, and able to
receive it in the right way, and to use and not abuse it.

Those who deny that any such knowledge has ever existed, or exists to-day,
or can exist, had better waste no time over it. They cannot alter it, nor
destroy it, as their predecessors have tried to do for ages, often
murdering or crucifying all who were even suspected of possessing it. They
might as well try to destroy the law of gravitation, or imagine that by
murdering the foremost mathematician of the day that they had destroyed
the science of mathematics. I am speaking of _Knowledge_ of Spiritual
things.

A new Avatar, therefore, is not simply an individual, though many
individuals may understand and exemplify it--the Initiated, the
Illuminati--and one man may lead in representing it.

To call it "the descent and embodiment, or Incarnation of Vishnu," in a
metaphysical sense, the Spirit (generically), that renews, rejuvenates,
transforms, and regenerates, is by no means an empty metaphor.

In the same sense we speak of the "Genius of Greece," or of Rome, or of
Civilization.

The _idea_ is composite, and represents an underlying and _universal
principle and potency_.

But after all metaphor and generalization, each Avataric movement centered
around an individual _Man_, and this _Man_ embodied the principle and
undertook the special work of an evangel, or _Christos_, or "Avatar,"
amongst men.

Not only have there been many Avatars, and many Buddhas, but when we
realize the meaning of these terms and the mysteries they represent, we
discover that while it may be the special mission of one, like Christna,
or Buddha, or Jesus, to undertake the work of enlightening and redeeming
any age; there are other Masters, or Illuminati, engaged in other work, on
different planes, to promote the same general results.

The result with each of the great Saviors of mankind has been, that the
common people, or the priesthood, have eventually either crucified or
deified them.

In the case of Jesus they have done both. Eight separate and deliberate
attempts have already been made to assassinate the present representative
of the School of Natural Science, who was educated in the order of the
Illuminati, and delegated by that Order to present these great truths to
the world to-day.

This individual is only in the broadest _metaphysical_ sense (as already
defined), an Avatar, which, as shown, is a _composite idea_, _focused_ in
and _represented by_ an individual man or teacher.

The work of this Master is to instruct, to exemplify, and to demonstrate,
the ancient Wisdom on Scientific lines, in keeping with the needs, the
opportunities, and the scientific spirit of the present age.

He does not preach to the multitude in parables. He undertakes to instruct
the few who are ready and qualified to receive such instruction, and who
will properly use and not abuse it, and he does this "without money and
without price"; "without the hope of fee or reward." (Herein is the
Avataric Spirit of Freemasonry.)

What his reward will be with the rabble, or with the "money changers," he
knows too well, but to such as he, fear is unknown.

I am speaking not _for_ him, but _of_ him, after the blessed privilege of
seven years of the most intimate association, and such co-operation as I
have been capable of giving.

His plan and motive seem to be to get as much as possible of this
knowledge of the soul, and of spiritual things, to the attention of the
"progressive intelligence of the present age," in order that it may become
exemplified and diffused among all classes, and for the benefit of the
whole human race.

We have passed the age of fable, and of blind faith, and have come to the
age of fact and law. _Kali Yuga_ means the Iron Age.

As two natures, the physical and spiritual, meet and mingle in the
constitution of man, so do his faculties, capacities, and powers mingle
and function on the two planes, the physical and the spiritual, though
very largely on the former, with the great majority in any age or time.

There is implanted in the very foundation of man's being the idea or the
consciousness of a separable soul. It would seem to be an intuition, for
with nearly every people of which we have any knowledge, no matter how
near the animal plane, the belief or the folklore of a separable soul
exists, in many cases held to be separable during life, and in most cases
believed to survive the death of the physical body. (See folio editions of
Herbert Spencer's "Descriptive Sociology," and Chapter XIII, herein.)

It has generally been held by scientists and commentators, that this
intuition, or belief, results largely from dreams.

To say that dreams, in general, are mere fantasies, or the results of
imagination, and have no real basis in consciousness, is folly; for dreams
are of many kinds, and present great varieties.

They are, moreover, both reminiscent and prophetic, sometimes moving like
any other conscious experience, from fact to fruition, and in others, we
are unable to relate them to any other conscious experience.[1]

Hypnosis and Telepathy are related to the same states, so much so, that
the modern scientist has been constrained to coin two new terms to avoid
endless repetitions, viz.: "subliminal" and "supraliminal" states of
consciousness.

Bearing in mind all these subjective states and experiences, including the
whole range of so-called mediumship, the _theorem_ of the Masters and
adepts of all ages may be made exceeding plain.

[Footnote 1: For a very valuable and suggestive treatise on "Sleep," see
F. W. H. Myers "Human Personality," Chap. IV.]

It consists in the _dominance of the Will_ over all conscious states.

This is the _Alpha_ and the _Omega_--the principle, the potency, and the
act--of Mastership.

The mind of the Master no longer drifts in a boundless sea of fantasy, but
with rudder and compass, he guides his ship whithersoever he would go.

This does not mean that there are not still degrees and related states and
conditions of consciousness in his experience.

It does mean, however, that all these states and conditions, with all his
faculties, capacities, and powers, are _co-ordinated_, not only in his
_awareness_ of them as a whole, but in the exercise of each and its
relation to the others, dominated by his own Will.

He has "Mastered" them, and can incite or repress them, while they can no
longer dominate him. Can the reader imagine such a degree of
_Self-Control_?

This, however, is but the beginning, as the "Secret of Power," and by no
means the end.

Controlling the phases and forms of consciousness, there comes next the
determination to extend their boundary and to _refine and elevate the
powers of the Soul_.

In the first case, that of co-ordination, the ancient Wisdom admonishes
the student or _chela_ to "_make the mind one pointed, like a light
burning in a quiet place_." Light a candle and put it in a corner where no
draught can reach it, and the flame will seem as though cut out of solid
fire, and "one pointed."

It is at the point of refining and elevating the individual consciousness
that Ethics or Morals come in. It is just at this point also that the
_Path_ is determined.

What our ancient Brothers called "the power of Will and
Yoga"--self-control--_may_ ignore Ethics. Here the paths separate, and
are called "the Right-hand Path" and "the Left-hand Path," determining
the "White" and the "Black Magician," about whom so much is said in all
ancient scriptures and traditions regarding "Sorcery" and "Black Magic,"
of which Egypt and Rome and Modern Mediumship and Hypnotism, are
illustrations.

The _supreme importance_ of this natural division or "parting of the way"
reveals the real and final reason why the Masters of the "right-hand path"
conceal their knowledge from the profane and reveal it only after an
ethical formulary has been learned and once for all _ingrained_.

The "Thugs" of India are no more an idle dream nor a bugaboo to frighten
children and old women than are the Mafia and the Roman Jesuit to-day.

In Egypt the time came when these "Black Magicians" dominated the people
and drove out those of the right-hand path who built the great pyramid and
gave to Egypt the wisdom and glory of its prime.

The consciousness and power of these evil men, however, was limited to the
lower planes. Whenever they wished to transcend these lower planes they
were powerless. Hence arose the _Sibyl_; young boys or virgins were
hypnotized, and being pure, they could thus be inducted into a somewhat
higher plane. (See Mabel Collins' "Idyll of the White Lotus.")

Margrave, in Bulwer's "Strange Story," is a fine picture of an "adept of
the left-hand path." He would sacrifice the whole human race in order to
gain his personal and selfish ends, just as would "Mother Church" to-day.

The Master of the White Lodge would readily lay down his life for the
benefit of his fellowmen. Herein is the vital difference.

Here lies the meaning and the complete antithesis represented by
_Christos_ and _Satan_. Both names are generic and Avataric, and yet, may
be personified.

This elevating and refining process to which I have referred is not a
matter of sentiment or emotion, but a matter of fact, with a definite,
scientific formula.

In a previous chapter belief in the existence AND SEPARABILITY OF THE
HUMAN SOUL HAS BEEN SHOWN to be virtually universal, and in some cases,
even with people of very low development, the belief is held that the soul
may be separated from the body and reunited again during life.

This is, however, a _belief_, and proves nothing as to _fact_, _science_,
and _law_, beyond the existence of the belief, with all the appurtenances,
concomitants, and subjective experiences of individuals thereunto
belonging.

We thus arrive at the real _theorem_ as a cold psychological problem.

Can the existence and separability of the soul of man, during his physical
embodiment on earth, and its survival of the death of the physical body,
be scientifically demonstrated as a _fact_?

If so, then the principles involved, the methods employed and the whole
_modus operandi_ must be capable of exact, scientific formulation, the
same as any other theorem of science.

Furthermore, granting that this is true, and that it can be done according
to exact formulary, the value, the effect of such a demonstration upon the
character and the normal faculties, capacities, and powers of the
individual who undertakes and accomplishes such a demonstration, must be
revealed and taken fully into account.

Does it elevate or degrade him? Is it in line with normal evolution, and
therefore, potentially the birthright, and finally, through spiritual
evolution, the higher destiny of all men?

Nor is this all. The effect of the existence of such Knowledge and of its
teaching, upon communities, as a substitute for blind superstition,
credulity, or belief, must also be taken into account.

It may thus be seen how much even beyond the mere _fact_ of demonstration,
is included in this transcendent problem; this question of all ages, "If a
man die, shall he live again?" or, "Does the real man ever die at all?"

Now it is a demonstrated fact, proven in every case of a genuine Master,
and held inviolable in the "Greater Mysteries" of every age and time, that
the ethical question above raised, as to the effect upon individuals and
society, _comes first_, and is made a _test_ of the "first step" in the
way of demonstration.

This is the meaning of the oft repeated quotation, the candidate for
initiation must first be "worthy and well-qualified, duly and truly
prepared."

This comprises and constitutes the "Lesser Mysteries," as in the School of
Pythagoras, viz.: the instruction of the neophyte in ethics or morals.

Nor is this instruction sufficient in any case. The candidate must himself
demonstrate that he has absorbed, apprehended, and utilized such
instruction by "_Living the Life_."

In other words, it must have become so ingrained in his character as to
govern absolutely all his acts and impulses to action, i.e., automatic,
habitual, and natural.

In the School of Natural Science this comprises and constitutes the
"Ethical Section of the General Formulary."

In the School of Pythagoras we are informed that students sometimes
remained for years in the "outer court," and sometimes they failed
entirely and hopelessly, and went back to the outer world. Whereupon a
white stone was erected to their memory as though they were dead. They
were indeed, for the time being, dead to the School.

This fully answers the ethical question as to the effect of this real
knowledge on the individual and on mankind.

The real Master sees to it that all that precaution can provide, or human
wisdom can suggest, is done to insure beneficent _use_ of the knowledge
gained.

It is here that "degrees" in initiation become a necessity. Every step, or
passage of the candidate from a lower to a higher degree, is marked and
determined finally and solely by his "proficiency in the preceding
degree."

The question of Morals, or the ethical effect, therefore, is
pre-determined, and as far as possible, solved first.

But even with all this wise precaution, the unprepared and the unqualified
have sometimes entered the outer courts; and when compelled at last to
reveal their character, have turned to rend their teachers, and have done
their utmost to destroy the School and demoralize mankind.

If these moral renegades could only realize the _meaning to themselves_ of
thus entering the "Left-hand Path" of devolution and of starting
voluntarily "down the deep descent," as portrayed in Dante's "Inferno," or
in Ahrinzeman, they would, indeed, hesitate long before "turning to the
left," for inevitable destruction lies that way.

Here lies the scientific explanation of the "Fall of Lucifer," portrayed
in some form in the pantheons and mythologies of every philosophy and
religion known to man.

The ordinary "sinner" may yet possess an "average" of all the virtues, and
the ordinary "saint" an "average" of all the vices. Concerning these it
was said, "I would have you either hot or cold, but because ye are neither
hot nor cold, I have spewed you out of my mouth." No lukewarm soul ever
entered the Kingdom of Heaven.

But a time at last comes when the soul of man, enmeshed in the "lusts of
the flesh and the deceitfulness of riches," _must make his choice_. He
_realizes_ that he can no longer "serve two masters." He will make his
choice knowingly, deliberately, and voluntarily. Happy and blessed will be
he if with his whole soul, and with every impulse of his being, he
declares, "I know not what others may do, _but as for me and my house, we
will serve the Lord_."

If there are real Masters (and there are), they have to work under both
Natural and Divine Law, and in strict harmony with the higher evolution of
the whole human race.

It is only a low, feeble, and undeveloped intelligence that finds God and
Nature at cross-purposes.

He who has found "the place of peace," harmonized his own nature, purified
his own life, and elevated all his desires and aspirations, has discerned
the "harmony of the morning stars," and caught the symphony of the
heavenly hosts. In other words, he is already functioning on the Spiritual
Plane.

This would seem to make clear the ethical problem raised, the stress
placed upon it, and how it is met and answered by every genuine Initiate
throughout the ages.

It has to be solved _first_ in each individual case. Only "he who _lives
the life_ shall know the doctrine," or advance to power.




