CHAPTER XI

CONCEPTIONS AND PORTENTS OF AN AVATAR


The conflict between Science and Religion has been thoroughly thrashed out
during the last half century, and the "reign of law," and orderly, and
progressive evolution, have made for themselves a habitation and a name
that nothing is likely to overthrow.

It is recognized that every effect has a sufficient and a commensurate
cause, not _en bloc_, but in matter, energy, mind, and spirit. Action and
reaction are definite mathematical processes. The parallelogram of force
tends everywhere to equilibrium and secures further action and new
processes under universal law.

The "special creation" theory--everything made out of nothing by a
personal God--is no longer regarded as tenable by intelligent individuals,
though miracle and special providence are often included in accounting for
the vicissitudes of life, just as the so-called scientist superficially
and flippantly uses the word "coincidence," as though it really explained
anything.

"The rational order that pervades the universe," as Prof. Huxley defined
the concept and aim of scientific discovery, has steadily gained
ascendancy, until it dominates and measures individual intelligence.

The criticism is still occasionally made that this means Pantheism,
overlooking the fact that in all mythologies and cosmologies, an ideal and
pure theism was recognized as lying back of and beyond the pantheons of
the gods and the deification of the powers of Nature.

This was true in the Greek, Persian, Egyptian, and Hindoo mythologies.
Back of the many, and beyond the transient and contending divinities, was
the _One_, postulated, but unknown and changeless.

Every religion known to man, with the advancing civilization of a people,
copied, modified, adopted, and adapted the mythology and folklore of some
pre-existing religion and people. This is readily demonstrable with the
Hebrew, Greek, and later Christian dispensations, notwithstanding the most
strenuous and persistent determination to deny, disprove, and destroy the
ancient records.

It is embodied in the etymology of the very names of heroes, gods, and
demigods. A new language arising with any people _de novo_ can nowhere be
found.

Phonetics and picturegraphs, the various alphabets and glyphs, are mixed
and modified, but never invented nor altogether changed.

Complicated as they may be, it is thus that philology, ethnology,
theology, and anthropology constitute a consistent whole, the mythology
and folklore of mankind. This reveals the practical unity and solidarity
of the human race.

The tradition and prophecy among the ancient Hebrews of the coming of the
Messiah, the portents that heralded, and the signs and wonders that
preceded or accompanied his appearance, are merely translations or
adaptations from previous eras, Buddhas, or Avatars.

Whether Christian or non-Christian, the object of the advent is always
identical.

The light of the spirit having become enfeebled or obscured, the people
are left in darkness and given over to sin and wickedness. Moral ruin
seems inevitable unless there is a divine influx, a new Avatar, or Buddha,
or Advent of the God-man.

God incarnates himself as the son of Mary, and Jesus says, "I am come a
light into the world that whosoever believeth in me should not abide in
darkness."

Christna says, "Though I am unborn, and my nature is eternal, and I am the
Lord also of all creatures, yet taking control of my nature-form, I am
born by my illusive power. For whenever piety decays, O son of Bharata,
and impiety is in the ascendant, then I produce myself. For the protection
of good men, for the destruction of evildoers, for the re-establishment of
piety, I am born from age to age." (Bhagavadgita.)

The historical Buddha taught that he was only one of a long series of
Buddhas, who appear at intervals in the world, and who all teach the same
system. After the death of each Buddha his religion flourishes for a time
and then decays, till at last it is completely forgotten and wickedness
and violence rule the earth. The names of twenty-four of these Buddhas who
appeared previous to Gautama have been handed down to us, just as the
"second coming of Christ" is believed in and referred to among the
Christians.

Even the Mohammedan Koran refers to this succession of prophets and
messengers of Allah. The same is true of the Parsis.

"I have said that I first of all chose Abad, and after him I sent thirteen
prophets in succession, all called Abad. By these fourteen prophets the
world enjoyed prosperity."

"Tradition informs us that when these auspicious prophets and their
successors behold evil to prevail among mankind, they invariably withdraw
from among them--as they could not endure to behold or hear wickedness."

This is precisely what happened to Egypt after the ambitious priesthood
had gained the ascendency. The Master Builders retired.

Bonwick says ("Egyptian Belief and Modern Thought"): "What is commonly
called the _Christ idea_ of humanity, thus appears to have been the hope
and consolation of the ancient Egyptians so many thousand years ago."

That which thus appears and disappears, dies out and is born again, is the
spiritual light in the soul of man.

The diversity of man's intellectual activities exercise, elaborate, and
deepen his mental perceptions, and these largely concern the things of
sense and time, his appetites, passions, desires, and ambitions.

Back of and beyond all these lie the things of the spirit. On the physical
plane of life the former obscure and crowd out the latter, which are thus
continually in need of renewal.

In adapting the new revelation to the conditions of life on the physical
plane, it is intellectualized and theologized. Pundits and theologians
undertake to _explain_ what it all means and how it happened to be. Hence
arise wrangles, disputes, and finally creeds, dogmas, and persecution.

"Men fight like devils for the love of God." This is the ultimate history
of every religion known to man.

Meantime, the soul of man, a spiritual being dwelling in a material body
on the physical plane, is seeking real knowledge of spiritual things.

This real knowledge is an experience of the soul. It concerns, and is
comprised in, the _living of a life_. It is more than mind or intellect.
It is _knowledge_ gained by experience. "This only I know, that whereas I
was blind, now I see."

"Whether in the body or out of the body, I know not, but I saw things
impossible to utter."

Gradually man's _idea_ of God and his conception of Nature have changed
and enlarged.

Man, as a spiritual being, is part of a spiritual universe. He has been
able to harmonize his concept of God and Nature progressively as he has
gained larger views and deeper insight of both. He is no longer a puppet
of infinite caprice, nor a somewhat "improved animal."

The idea of man as a "fallen god" with the capacity to regain his heavenly
estate, is far nearer the truth.

As man advances in knowledge through the combined experiences of his
spiritual nature and his physical embodiment, his beliefs change, his
horizon enlarges, and his concepts become elevated and purified. The past
is apprehended and utilized and the future intelligently anticipated. He
begins to understand.

This means the recognition of law and order, permanency, _Foundation_, and
stability.

The birth stories, the portents, signs and wonders that announce,
accompany, or follow the birth of a Messiah or Avatar, are almost
identical. A common instinct seems to have led all scripture-compilers to
infer a simultaneous stimulus of nature and man upon the appearance of
what the Hindoo calls an Avatar.

Men, too, seem prepared to expect such an advent as its necessary time
approaches. It is an instinct which tells them that "the darkest hour
precedes the dawn."

In the Christian scriptures the premonitions and birth stories are found
largely in the Apocryphal books. Doubtless the copying and substitution
from the lives of Christna and Buddha were too plain.

At the death of Jesus the seismic, astral, and cosmic disturbances are
graphically described, as befitting the death of a god. "The veil of the
temple was rent in twain," etc.

The simple fact is that mankind feels instinctively in the soul the
far-reaching influences at work. The spiritual nature is stirred to its
depths, and when he tries to describe what he sees and feels, his
emotions, fears, or aspirations being at white heat, his imagination draws
from the folklore of other times, races, and religions, to express what he
so powerfully, but vaguely senses.

But beyond all this, the time of great religious revivals and social
upheavals is likely to coincide with seismic disturbance, tidal waves and
the like, owing to the conjunction of planets under the general law of
cycles. Man is completely involved with and evolved from the bosom of
Nature. His freedom is determined by knowledge and obedience to Law.

From the mystic Hymns of Orpheus, with the legends of Gods, demigods, and
heroes, and the personification of the varied powers of man and nature,
arose the Greek Pantheon, which, in poetic concept, romantic and dramatic
embodiment and expression, as a concise and complete whole, has probably
never been equaled by man.

True, every essential element, under a different name and detail, may be
found elsewhere, but never equaled in concise and constructive folklore
and mythology.

But running underneath all this, like a vein of gold under the mountain,
was the philosophy of Plato. Grasping the _One_ from the many, Unity from
the fantastic diversity, he came to the individual experience of the human
soul and its conscious mastership over the body and the things of sense
and time.

Civic pride, patriotism, and heroism, walked side by side with dialectics,
and the pantheon of the gods and the achievements of warriors rivaled each
other on the stage, as themes for the poetic philosopher and dramatist.

Mythology and folklore here furnished a background from which the
philosophy of the mysteries and the real science of life gained a
hearing.

Plato and Pythagoras generalized, and with many reservations represented
that which they had been taught in the mysteries of Egypt.

Greece, with its triumphs in literature, in the drama and in art, and all
its magnificent civilization, knew no Avatar.

Jacolliot, in his "Bible in India," has shown conclusively that not only
the whole Greek pantheon, its folklore and mythology, and even its civil
code were adopted from the Laws of Manu and the far older Aryan
civilization, including even the names of heroes.

The fame of Greece rests upon its _Genius fo Construction_ in Art and
Architecture and the Drama, and upon the open door it gave to Philosophy.
There was no dominant priesthood to close the door of progress.

It utilized all the past and built and beautified the present.

It bequeathed no creed nor dogma to the future, and yet its civilization
was transcendent and is immortal.

It had its canons of Art and of Architecture. These it demonstrated by
constructive work. It illustrated, explained and exemplified, but it did
not argue nor dogmatize.

The world for two thousand years has been "going back to Greece" and
trying to explain how it all happened, just as we have been trying to
explain Goethe's "Faust."

Genius is transcendent and immortal.

With the decline of Greece there arose the Genius of the Tiber, Imperial
Rome, and the Cæsars.

Rome created an _Avatar_ out of the "Babe of Bethlehem." Having enthroned
Jehovah, it proceeded to deify Jesus, and then by substitution to take the
place of both.

Imperial Rome, the "Scarlet Mother of the Tiber," assumed the government
and dictatorship of the world. Imperial, dogmatic, relentless, the arbiter
of the fate of humanity on earth and beyond.

Here was arbitrary, relentless _power_ at any cost, to be maintained on
any terms. "The end always justified the means."

In the civilization of Greece, the Individual, the citizen was first, and
association and co-operation built the State.

With Rome the Individual is nothing but a pawn, an accessory to the
Church. It was and is the Church first, last, and all the time. The
Individual can claim no right nor prerogative except as a concession from
the Church.

The contrast is extreme and absolute between the Genius of Greece and that
of Rome.

As the Genius of Greece was adapted from the older Aryan, so also was that
of Rome, from the Brahmans, through Egypt.

Among the various Avatars of old India designated as "Incarnations of
Vishnu," Siva "_the destroyer_," was often in evidence.

Rome proceeded to adopt the Hindoo Trinity--Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva--(the
Creator, the Preserver, and the Destroyer), and to so shape its creed and
dogmas as to secure and maintain the power of Mother Church, simply with a
change of names--"Father, Son, and Holy Ghost."

It has enslaved nations and slaughtered millions in order to maintain its
power. For more than fifteen hundred years it has maintained its
relentless warfare against the inalienable rights of the Individual, and
the inevitable progress of humanity.

It has escaped the execration of the world only by its priestly trick of
deifying Jesus and sophisticating every doctrine that he taught.
Supporting its pretensions by Mariolatry, the Auricular Confession, and
its army of spies and inquisitors, it has dominated mankind, impoverished
whole nations, devastated provinces and murdered all who opposed its
progress wherever and whenever it has gained civil power.

Rome is to-day the literal and visible reincarnation of _Siva_, the
_Avatar of Destruction_. She has originated nothing. Her mass and all her
ritualistic mummeries are adopted from paganism at its worst stage and in
its most degenerate form, and she awaits the fate that befell Egypt and
all her predecessors, "Sodom, Gomorrah, and the cities of the plain."

Protestantism has hitherto "protested" only in part. Refusing Mariolatry
and auricular confession, Protestantism, by accepting the miraculous
conception, the deification of Jesus and the vicarious atonement, has kept
Rome in countenance.

When these are swept away, and their doom is already declared by the
leaders of thought in nearly all our institutions of higher learning, the
Roman _Avatar_ will stand revealed in all its nakedness and villainy to
the execration of mankind. It is this "_Modernism_" that "His Holiness" so
much fears and is trying to arrest. It is too late, unless civilization
and the march of time move backward.

The most amazing thing about it all is, how the world, with its present
intelligence and culture, can be so indifferent to this most aggressive,
cruel, and relentless Avatar of all the ages, instead of repelling it with
contempt and execration.

Thirty-seven Italian Cardinals,[2] proud and arrogant, rule the Church,
elect the Pope, and assume dictatorship of the earth, as also arbiters of
human destiny, here and hereafter. America, the corn-bin of this modern
Egypt, by courtesy has _one cardinal_, just to keep her in countenance.

The effrontery is cyclopean, but our supineness and indifference are
deplorable and inexcusable.

Shipping her impoverished, degraded, criminal, and priest-ridden hordes to
America by the million every year, Rome is massing her army for the
overthrow of our government and all our present civilization. With her
dogma of obedience, her army now _votes_ and will, by and by, _fight_
under the dictatorship of the Cardinals at Rome. Already undermining our
Public Free Schools, boycotting the public press, with their army of
Jesuit spies and secret assassins of every liberty prized by man, the
"merry war" goes on right under our eyes, and we sleep and dream and
blindly assume that "there is no danger."

Read the history of the Crusaders, of the Protestant Reformation and of
the "Holy Inquisition," and if further enlightenment is needed, study the
origin, history, and denouement of all the Avatars of the past, the fate
of Egypt, the cities of the plain, where paganism and a degenerate
priesthood usurped the place of pure and undefiled religion, and literally
wiped from the map of the world the civilizations of the past. _Nemesis_
is written in letters of flame across the starry heavens, as an atonement
for the blood of nations and the degeneracy and diabolism of an ambitious,
cruel, relentless, and unrestrained priesthood. And it is all being
literally repeated to-day without the novelty of a new idea, or method, or
device, or motive. It is _The Reincarnation of the Avatar of Siva, the
Destroyer_.

-----

  [2] At the death of Pope Leo there were 65 Cardinals, 39 of
      whom were Italians.




