CHAPTER XV

THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY AS A KNOWLEDGE OF THE HUMAN SOUL


The writer of the present treatise is quite well aware that the great
majority of intelligent and educated people at the present day will deny
that any real knowledge of the human soul as a spiritual entity, separable
from the physical body during life and demonstrably surviving its death,
exists now, has heretofore existed, or, if possible for man, is likely to
exist for some time to come. Some will unhesitatingly declare such a thing
_unknowable_ for man.

I hold the firm _conviction_ that this knowledge has been for ages the
possession of certain individuals, few in number in any age or country,
and that this knowledge has resulted through conformity to certain
definite and specific requirements, formulated under well-known laws of
man's spiritual being, involving a definite individual experience and
resulting in a scientific and exact demonstration.

I ask the reader to note two points in the foregoing statement: First,
that for myself I use the word "conviction," and not "knowledge"; and,
second, that the demonstration of real knowledge referred to, is made by,
and confined to an individual, in each instance.

With these individuals the knowledge is a _scientific demonstration
through personal experience_. With me, the "firm conviction" is a matter
of "circumstantial evidence," supported by analogy, and fortified by
empirical testimony, such as acquaint the world with the facts and
findings of science, and which I think admit of no other consistent and
rational interpretation.

In the foregoing pages I have endeavored to give outlines, analogies, and
suggestions which seem to fortify the conviction referred to.

While these are fragmentary and desultory, owing to the fact that the
circumstances are so varied, the subject so vast, and the materials so
abundant, yet, taken as a whole, they seem overwhelming, and, except to
the careful, persistent, and intelligent student, confusing.

It must be clearly apprehended that no one familiar with the subject can
reasonably suppose, nor has it ever been claimed by a real Master of the
"Art," that this knowledge ever has been, or can be, communicated to, or
acquired by groups of individuals at any time, or under any
circumstances.

Through all the past, and at the present time, it is designated as an
_individual experience_.

True, the ethics, and the philosophy, and even the principles of exact
psychic science that in the past constituted the "Lesser Mysteries," can
be, and often have been, taught to groups, or classes.

In the present "School of Natural Science," this preparatory training
constitutes the "Ethical Section."

But above and beyond all the foregoing general considerations the
"empirical facts" and the "circumstantial evidence," if we know personally
one who claims to have had the specific instruction, the personal
experience, and to have made the scientific demonstration referred to and
outlined in the problem, our opportunity for instruction, and for the
application of tests for validity and reasonableness as to the whole
problem, is exceedingly valuable.

This personal acquaintance may become the nearest possible criterion,
short of our own personal experience, as to demonstration.

In previous chapters this phase of the subject has, perhaps, been
sufficiently dwelt upon.

The Master may say, "I know; I have had the personal experience; I have
demonstrated."

The student may at last say, "I believe; I am convinced; I am satisfied."

All through the foregoing pages the effort has continually been made to
preserve clearly this distinction.

In tracing analogies through the history of the past, the conditions,
premonitory, present, and subsequent to great world-movements have often
been referred to.

Nothing is more common or more patent than the oft-repeated saying, "This
is the age of science." Any great movement that undertakes at the present
day to deal with the deeper problems of individual and social life, must
fit in and conform to the "spirit of the present age."

To that platform it must appeal; in that language it must be addressed,
and by such judgment and criterion must it stand or fall.

All these tests and criteria have been fully met by the School of Natural
Science, and they are clearly outlined and set forth in the "Great Work,"
addressed to "the Progressive Intelligence of the Age."

There need be no misconception or misinterpretation at this point.

It is true that superficial thinkers and readers, enthusiasts and
emotionalists, are likely to infer that the science of the soul can now be
had "for a consideration" and in "a dozen easy lessons."

All such are doomed to disappointment.

It is furthermore likely, if the average "physical scientist" pays any
heed at all, that he will devise a series of "tests" and "experiments" of
his own, to fit his preconceived notion of things psychical, with the
latent conviction, at least, that he will be able to prove the whole thing
a humbug.

These, also, are doomed to disappointment. Physical tests of psychical and
spiritual laws and processes are unscientific. No spiritual problem can be
solved in terms of physical matter alone.

So-called psychological science to-day is in the condition of one
possessing a fine piece of ground, and gathering materials for a house, a
superstructure.

The ground is already covered with bricks and stones, and sand and lumber,
piled in every direction, with the purpose of one day beginning the work
of construction, and the slogan, "Wait! Not yet!" "Some day we are hoping
to build."

No architect, "no designs on the trestle-board," and so they go on
accumulating "facts" and "evidence" day after day, year after year,
century after century.

They have a "working hypothesis," but no definite _theorem_, and they may
work till doomsday on this line without a glimmer of real scientific
knowledge of the human soul, yet with mountains of "facts" or of
"rubbish."

They can never prove the existence of a _spiritual entity_ in terms of
matter on the physical plane.

Their work has been, and still is, of great interest and value, but it is
in no scientific sense, _Constructive_, backed by the laws of proportion
and harmony, nor the "Canon of Architecture."

The apotheosis of Natural Science is like the "canon of proportion" in
architecture, introduced by Vitruvius (an Initiate) centuries ago. It is
the verification of Plato's saying, "God geometrizes," and his concept of
"the World of Divine Ideas."

Plato further declares, "He who knows not the common things of life is a
brute among men. He who knows the common things of life is a man among
brutes. But he who knows all that can be learned by diligent inquiry is a
god among men."

Natural Science, as shown in the Great Work, includes scientific knowledge
on all planes of being on which the soul of man functions: The physical,
moral, psychical, and spiritual; for man is a composite being.

The apotheosis of Natural Science, therefore, is Fact, Law, Demonstration,
and Knowledge; before theory, conjecture, creed, dogma, superstition, or
fear, intuition, inspiration, revelation, and "holy men" or "holy books"
that must be accepted without evidence, or "believed" against evidence.

The _Avatars_ of all the past have originated great reformations which
have at last degenerated into dogma and superstition.

The people, incapable of understanding the Law, have been taught in
parables, while the few in all religions and in every age have apprehended
the law and learned the "Secret Doctrine."

To-day, for the first time in centuries, for the reasons already assigned,
and in keeping with the scientific spirit of the age, and because
superstition in power, dogma, and persecution are politically dethroned,
these great truths, this Great Work, is openly declared and outlined so
that he who wills may apprehend.

Let no one say, "This is an effort to _deify_ an individual." It _is_ an
effort to enthrone Truth; to remove the barriers to the rights of
conscience, the shackles of reason, private judgment and Individual
Responsibility, and to free the soul of man from all the fetters of
ignorance, superstition, and fear, in order that he may be "first a man,"
"then a Master," and at length on a higher plane of being, something more
than man has yet realized, or ever dreamed.

Something "that eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it yet entered
into the heart of man to conceive the glory that shall be revealed."

The beginning is here and now, when man shall achieve the Mastery of Self
and really possess his own soul, and not hold it tremblingly as a _pawn_
of some pretentious potentate of the soul.

The right of Light, Knowledge, and further progress by "_Being a Man_,"
and not a chattel, an asset, a pawn, or a slave.

This is the coming _Avatar_, and the dawn is already here.

Will the day darken, the Light be quenched? Who can tell?

The redemption of Woman from the slavery of all the past is well under
way, and it is indeed a glorious sign.

No lesson in history is plainer nor more readily demonstrated than the
fact that the degeneracy of a religion and the degradation of woman go
hand in hand.

Demonstrate to-day in any country on earth the status of woman as a whole,
and no mistake need be made as to the prevailing religion.

Woman's political disability is another matter entirely; for she is
dominated by man only because, and only so far as, she is handicapped or
degraded by the dominant religion.

Take woman from the churches, Protestant or Romish, to-day, and no church
could do business for a twelvemonth.

For these reasons the immense and rapidly growing movements, Women's Clubs
and the like, to-day, are of great significance, backed and illuminated as
they are by all past history.

In the new movement, the School of Natural Science, the door is as wide
open to woman as to man. I might paraphrase the slogan of the Robber
Barons of the middle ages. "_She_ may seize who hath the power, _She_ may
hold who can."

In the coming Illuminati woman will stand by the side of man in all
opportunity, endeavor, or achievement.

In the new age woman will be something few men have even yet dreamed of.

We might call this new age "_the Woman's Avatar_," without doing violence
to either religion, tradition, history, or science; while the sacred Hymns
of the Vedas, with the angel of the household and the inspirer of the soul
of man, the worship of Divinity, by both men and women, opened a new
heaven on this old earth.

And then--such children as will be born, without pain, not through chance,
caprice, nor under protest, but even as they were in Greece, as an
offering of Love on the altar of divine man-womanhood, with a song of joy
to heaven.

Prof. Fiske somewhere said, "The evolution of man by Natural Selection
draws near its close, to be followed by that of Divine Selection."

The Divinity _in_ man is _Christos_, the "son of the Father," the Divine
and Eternal _Avatar_.

Belief is rather a superficial process, the intellect ("mortal mind")
mingled with the emotions, changing and evanescent. "Now you see it, and
now you don't." It is mingled with hope that alternates with fear and
doubt.

Faith, when once analyzed and apprehended, is another thing entirely,
though nearly every one, and most writers, confuse "belief" and "faith."

"Faith is the soul's _intuitive conviction_ of that which both _Reason_
and _Conscience_ approve."

Genuine faith rarely wavers or changes, because it is an evolution, a
"growth of the soul," a spiritual experience, and it becomes the "dominant
chord" in the symphony of life, determining Harmony.

It is in this deliberate and discriminative sense that I have used the
term _conviction_ in relation to the Master and his "Great Work." He never
dogmatizes, nor undertakes to "indoctrinate."

In answer to a question on some deep and perplexing problem of the soul or
of the spiritual plane, he replies, "So far as we _know_, it is so and
so." "A new experience, or an added light, may alter our conclusion."

The average individual scarcely realizes what absolute sincerity, with no
motive save Love of Truth, and beneficence to man guided by clear
intelligence, and dominated by the rational Will, means, or can
accomplish.

These are the natural powers of the human soul. There is nothing
mysterious or miraculous about them, more than in the art of music of a
Beethoven or a Paganini, or in gymnastics and the winner of the Marathon.

                 "To _shape_ and _use_, arise and fly,
                 The reeling Faun, the sensual feast,
                 Move upward, working out the beast,
                 And let the ape and tiger die."

My _conviction_ is strong, and my Faith unwavering.

"The great and peaceful ones live, regenerating the world like the coming
of spring: and having themselves crossed the ocean of embodied existence,
help those who try to do the same thing without personal motive." ("Crest
Jewel of Wisdom.")




