CHAPTER III

MEDIUMSHIP, SEERSHIP, AND HYPNOSIS


Into this arena of the inquiring soul of man, came Modern Spiritualism.

It contained little or nothing new, as to methods, aims, or results.

The Church, Protestant and Catholic alike, uttered their warnings, called
it "dealings with the devil," but divested of political authority and
without power to arrest or persecute, as in the past, were unable to stay
the tide. It swept the country like a whirlwind. The average individual,
desiring to know and to get tidings from departed friends, was
unrestrained and unterrified.

He could not see why, if the gates were really ajar, angels might not
communicate, no less than devils.

Then came the cry of "fraud," often amply justified, and a cloud of
uncertainty and unreliability settled over the phenomena generally.
Unscrupulous men and women seeing their opportunity, sophisticated and
exploited it, and "exposures" of these became common.

But in spite of all this, there remained facts, and groups of phenomena
impossible to explain away.

Finally, men like Crookes and Wallace took up the subject and investigated
the phenomena, not from the emotional, expectant, or fraternal aspect, but
from the purely scientific, and rendered their verdict, which, though
frequently ignored or treated with contempt, remains practically
unaltered.

Thousands became convinced of the _fact_ of life beyond the grave, and at
the same time of the unreliability of many so-called "communications."
Finally the "Society for Psychical Research" was formed; phenomena were
searchingly examined, verified, and recorded as a basis for further
research.

The posthumous work of F. W. H. Myers, "Human Personality and its Survival
of Bodily Death," added to the Society's records and many other
publications a record of verified facts in psychic phenomena such as never
before existed, and which nothing short of a cataclysm can destroy.

In the meantime, the "dark circle" went into desuetude, and Spiritualism,
as a cult, declined. Accepting the broad conclusion of a life after death,
and with no very clear demonstration as to exactly where, or how, the case
rested largely.

The reason for this obscurity was to be found in the absence of clear
conceptions as to the nature of the human soul, and what life on the
spiritual plane really signifies.

In other words, the foundation was laid empirically to await
classification and conclusions in a comprehensive Philosophy of
Psychology, consistent with a science of the soul; and there it remains
to-day with the average individual, and the average man of physical or
psychical science.

Returning now from this brief excursion into the social status, to the
problem as related to the mental, moral, and physical health of
individuals, and bearing in mind our Modulus of Man, and Theorem of
Constructive Psychology, we find the annals of Spiritualism, Mediumship,
or subjective control, of exceeding importance.

Another plane of life exists. Individuals on either plane communicate with
the controlling entity on the supra-physical plane.

The Medium is invariably subjective and controlled. He has no choice of
controls, and often no knowledge (never reliable knowledge) as to who or
what controls him. He is sometimes informed by his "guide" as to the
control's identity, and learns, often, that he and his circle have been
deceived by ignorant or "lying spirits."

The whole process reverses our Modulus and Theorem of Constructive
Psychology, the building of character and normal evolution.

The most important consideration at this point is its relation to the
sanity of individuals.

There are thousands of individuals to-day, who, failing in rational
volition, or self-control, are controlled by entities on the subjective
plane. They are _obsessed_.

This subjective control without the knowledge or consent of the victim,
and unrecognized and generally called "absurd" by "Alienists" and
"experts," constitutes a very large per cent, of the insane to-day, and
because ignored or unrecognized, these cases are classed as "Incurable."

It should be remembered that the annals of Spiritualism, and the records
of scientific Psychical Research, have _demonstrated_ the possibility and
the _fact_ of such control. It should also be remembered that the average
"expert alienist" is guided solely by results of such obsession, where it
occurs; that he is blind to causes, liable to exclude or taboo obsession,
and therefore largely liable to err.

In other words, he is prejudiced; and his bias and incredulity blind him
to the facts and to the real causes.

He could hardly be expected to make the obsession _let go_, while denying
that it exists. But he _might_ help the victim gain _Self-control_ if he
but recognized the facts and knew how.

Realizing the fact of the connection of the two worlds, the physical and
the spiritual, and communication between them in the subjective or
irresponsible way, the question naturally arises, "Is there not another
way of communication? May not the Individual Intelligence on the physical
plane communicate with the denizens of the spiritual plane _at his own
volition, independently_? May he not learn to see and hear them without
attempting, or desiring to _control_ them, more than he does his
associates, his friends and neighbors on the physical plane, or allowing
them to control him?"

Is it not purely a question of _fact_, and of scientific demonstration, to
be determined by experiment?

This question leads us to another phase of psychology and the records of
the past. There have been Seers, Clairvoyants, and Clairaudiants in all
ages.

Unlike the psychical phenomena already referred to,--and belonging to the
positive and initiative, rather than the negative and subjective side of
the psychical equation,--these seers have been fewer in number, and are
always individuals showing a high degree of self-control, and of
intellectual and moral evolution.

Admitting the general propositions involved, it can readily be seen that
this must be so from the very nature of the case. The Masters of mankind,
in any and all directions have been few. The slaves, through ignorance,
superstition and fear, have been legions. Those who have gained habitual
self-control, and finally self-mastery, knowledge and power, have been
few; while the majority have been controlled by their own appetites and
passions, and by other individuals.

This self-mastery and higher evolution also includes another element
beside strength of character, and that is, Refinement.

In other words; it is, from first to last, a journey from the gross and
sensuous physical plane, toward the refined and spiritual plane, involving
all the faculties, capacities, and powers, feelings, sensations, emotions,
intuitions, and aspirations of man. It is, in short, a normal, higher
evolution.

All the elements of this higher evolution are basic and innate in the
original endowment of man. By exercise, the latent faculties, capacities
and powers grow, expand, and develop. Self-control, rational volition, and
the sense of personal responsibility, (conscience) make the evolution
conformatory to the Modulus--the Perfect Man.

As this human being, dwelling on the physical plane, _e_volves, the
spiritual faculties of the Divine Man are _in_volved from the spiritual
plane. When this simultaneous and co-ordinate development is complete, the
Human and the Divine are _at-one_ in the Individual.

This at-one-ment is the exact opposite of "vicarious." It is the result of
personal effort and self-mastery.

The dogma of the church has so completely sophisticated it as to turn
normal evolution into _devolution_; and, so far as it has any effect, or
is operative at all, to turn man backward toward the animal, instead of
upward toward the Divine.

Seership and Spiritual powers, therefore, as the result of "Living the
Life," are _Evolutionary_. Mediumship, subjective control, and obsession
in any form, or in whatsoever degree, are _Devolutionary_.

Progress along either line may be very slow, but the trend is as opposite
as is the East from the West, as Light from Darkness, as Good from Evil.

By classifying these powers of man and psychical phenomena to which they
give rise, whether in the conscious, inner realm, in functions of the
bodily organism, or observable to others, we are able to assign each to
its proper class with considerable accuracy.

Both evolutionary and devolutionary progress, with the ordinary
individual, are slow processes. Seldom is either process a designed and
straightforward climbing, or a quick descent "into the dark abyss."

Consequently, as the human race evolves as a whole, relatively more and
more individuals are found who "get flashes" of sight or sound, more or
less from the subjective or spiritual plane of being. There are
intuitions, "warnings," and premonitions of coming events. Some seek and
cultivate, others fear and avoid them.

They are mostly on the "border-land," if not on the "ragged-edge" of
insanity. It is only necessary to further weaken the will, or to indulge
the passions and emotions, in order to decide the matter, derange the
mind, and send the individual to an asylum.

On the other hand, with individuals who lead a clean, cheerful,
well-ordered life, these experiences may mean encouragement, confirmation,
and progress toward the spiritual realm of being. They should be observed
carefully, but not _cultivated_. They may serve as guide-posts and as mere
incidents of a day's journey.

The average popular cult to-day, as often in the past, where psychical
phenomena are involved, results in converting the normal mental realm, the
realm of normal self-consciousness, into a vaudeville performance; a mere
"Variety Show," where all due sense of proportion and relation is lost.

In place of the normal Individual Intelligence, sitting serenely on the
throne of life and ruling his Kingdom with justice, wisdom and paternal
love, the king joins the melee of acrobats and dancing girls, encourages
the orchestra till, in a pandemonium of revelry, he puts out the lights,
or in wild frenzy fires the building.

Sometimes it claims to "command success" by _demanding_ it; or wealth
without earning it; or health without regard to hygienic law; or by
"taking a Mantram" to open the gates of heaven. Or again, by servile
obedience to the freaks or dogmas of a "Leader" or "Official Head" and
adulation _ad nauseam_, to gain admission to the "Elect."

One and all of these, from first to last, tend toward Devolution. They are
destructive, not constructive, in building character and true manhood and
womanhood.

Again, the Monk or the devotee abandons society, becomes a recluse, flees
into the desert or the mountain, subsists upon roots or herbs, sits in one
posture till the joints of the body become fixed, holds the arms above the
head till they become immovable, and the finger nails _turn and grow
through the palms of the hands_; or sits gazing at the navel and repeating
the word _Om_.

Indeed, it would seem that the ways and means to stop normal growth,
constructive evolution and healthy living, had been well-nigh exhausted.

The enthusiast, the fanatic and the "easy mark" of to-day are seldom aware
of any of these things, and so they are bled, fleeced, and exploited
accordingly. "All is Mind!" "Great is Elijah!" or "Mrs." Elijah, and
Oahspe is his Prophet! while Babel reigns in the place of Natural
Science.

The Theosophical Movement inaugurated in this country by H. P. Blavatsky
in 1875, differed essentially and radically from all others; first, in
placing ethics as the first stone in the foundation of a real knowledge of
the nature of man. Its objects as concisely stated at the time were--

First: To establish a _nucleus_ for a Universal Brotherhood of Man.

Second: To study ancient religions, philosophies and sciences, and
determine their relations and values.

Third: To investigate the Psychical Powers latent in Man.

Hospitality to Truth from any source and under any name, was
characteristic of the movement during the entire lifetime of the
Founders.

Dogma was eliminated, Authority beyond facts and demonstrated truth
denied, and Superstition regarded as only another name for ignorance.

While the facts and the demonstrations of Science were recognized, and
given the largest hospitality, nevertheless, the "Secret Doctrine" and, in
a broad sense, the whole movement was an effort to present to modern
times, and particularly to the Western world, the most ancient and pure
philosophy of old India, the _Vedanta_ or "Wisdom-Religion."

An immense work of rejuvenation has gone on in India, particularly in the
establishment and maintenance of Schools for Girls, and in the relief of
poverty and discouragement of the teeming millions.

An immense literature was created, not yet appreciated, except by students
here and there, who found light, explanation, and encouragement in their
studies of the mysteries of Nature and of life.

Since the death of the founders of the Society, in this country at least,
only a few branches and fragments of the original organization now
remain.

"Leaders" and "Official Heads" often wholly ignorant of the Philosophy,
which colossal egotism and exploitation could hardly supply, have brought
the very names "Theosophy" and "Brotherhood" into contempt and ridicule in
many sections.

As some of these "official heads" are still in evidence, final results
cannot now be formulated, and need not be here considered or forecast. The
evidence is not all in.

Personally, I desire to record my great indebtedness and highest
appreciation of a noble life and a magnificent work accomplished by one of
the most remarkable and unselfish women known to history, and for the
light and knowledge which she made accessible, and which I still hold,
practically unchanged, but with the theorems of Natural Science, in place
of the postulates of Philosophy as better fitting "the progressive
intelligence" of the present time.

The two lines of presentation when clearly apprehended are not
antagonistic, but supplementary. Their aims and purpose are the same.




