CHAPTER X

CORROBORATIVE EVIDENCE


The devout and conscientious believers in the Christian Religion of to-day
often view with sorrow and alarm the encroachments of modern science.

Unable to prevent these encroachments, they stubbornly resent them. Once
admitted, it seems to them that nothing sacred or worthy the name of
Religion would remain. To shift to other and more ancient faiths can never
be considered at all, for the "higher criticism" and "pragmatism" have
left them all in even a worse plight.

It seems to these devout souls like the death of religion itself, and its
elimination from the life of man.

The intuitive basis and the intrinsic necessity of religion in some form
have already been considered.

This point is often overlooked or ignored by the Iconoclasts.

Their position would seem to be, "Unravel the superstition, disprove the
possibility of miracle, and let the deluge come if it must."

Neither pragmatism nor higher criticism has been in any large sense
constructive, but more largely destructive. The really spiritual element
in all religions, already referred to, is generally lost sight of.

Modern psychology is no nearer a science of the soul, than are folklore
and superstition to true religion. It should be recognized and granted
once for all that psychology, as a department of modern physical science,
has no substitute whatever to offer in the place of Religion.

It is gathering facts, classifying, and labeling psychic phenomena.

Here and there an advanced scientist, like Sir Oliver Lodge, ignores
tradition, repudiates orthodox scientific restraints, and steps over the
border of actual or implied nihilism.

This smug nihilism with its superior air of scientific wisdom, is often
only the opposite pole of the dogmatic certitude of the churchman. Actual
knowledge of the human soul is quite as far removed from the one as from
the other. Credulity and Incredulity simply annul each other; often make
faces at each other; while Progress stalks alone in the middle of the
road, a "tramp" or a "vagabond," like Paracelsus, "reading the leaves of
the book of Nature," laughing at poverty, fleeing from persecution, yet
_knowing_, and "becoming a light to man forever."

The consensus of opinion among the presidents and professors in the
leading colleges and universities of this country, their unhesitating and
unqualified denial or repudiation of the claims set up by the church
regarding revelation and the basic dogmas of the Christian Religion, and
which his "Holiness" of the Vatican designates as "Modernism," reveal, not
only the "signs of the times," but show indisputably that modern education
has shaken itself free from the superstitions of the past, and repudiated
the old restraints to free thought and modern progress.

Orthodoxy in religious matters has often nothing to do in determining
college curriculums, in the selection of presidents, or in filling the
chairs.

Bright young men and women, the advanced students of the schools of
to-day, who are to become the leaders of thought and the teachers of
to-morrow, find little restraint and no formative element in the creeds
and dogmas that in the past have been so much in evidence, and so
constraining. Intensity of feeling has given place to breadth and
inclusiveness, and under the name of "Comparative Religions," ancient
faiths and modern, are classified, and studied like fossils in the
different ages of the past.

The "crusader impulse" has rather settled down in each individual breast,
as the master passion, to do, to dare, and to become something more and
better than the individual, or than the past has hitherto known. Such a
general period of intellectual activity, with so few restraints, history
nowhere else records, and the world has never before known.

Here lie the elements, the impulses, and the formative stage of the new
Avatar.

At this stage of our discussion it is of exceeding interest and importance
to bear in mind one great fact. The average intelligent student of to-day
may take this fact tentatively, reserving final judgment till accumulative
evidence becomes satisfactory and conclusive.

No one who is dominated by shallow incredulity, and who attempts to close
this door contemptuously, will ever arrive at the real truth. The judgment
of such individuals is simply worthless, notwithstanding the smug conceit
of their own opinions.

The important fact referred to, is the demonstrated existence, all through
the ages, of the so-called _Mysteries_.

Their existence is beyond all question. What they concealed and taught is
sometimes difficult to determine.

There were also the genuine and the spurious Mysteries, and a fair
appreciation of their origin, purpose, methods, and genius, as illustrated
by Plato, Pythagoras, Zoroaster, and nearly every great sage of antiquity,
leaves no possible doubt that in these "Secret Orders" were preserved the
loftiest and the most profound mental and spiritual achievements of all
previous human history.

If there were no other evidence in existence at the present day except the
traditions, landmarks, ritual, and Genius of Freemasonry, a careful and
intelligent study of that Ancient Order would be sufficient.

Whether one Mason in a thousand to-day apprehends and realizes this fact,
has nothing whatever to do with the real question. The evidence is there,
and the indifference or superficial intelligence of numbers cannot alter
it.




