CHAPTER 29

Barbara

In the meantime, with Derba to minister to his wants, with Curdie to
protect him, and Irene to nurse him, the king was getting rapidly
stronger.  Good food was what he most wanted and of that, at least of
certain kinds of it, there was plentiful store in the palace.
Everywhere since the cleansing of the lower regions of it, the air was
clean and sweet, and under the honest hands of the one housemaid the
king's chamber became a pleasure to his eyes.  With such changes it was
no wonder if his heart grew lighter as well as his brain clearer.

But still evil dreams came and troubled him, the lingering result of
the wicked medicines the doctor had given him.  Every night, sometimes
twice or thrice, he would wake up in terror, and it would be minutes
ere he could come to himself.  The consequence was that he was always
worse in the morning, and had loss to make up during the day.  While he
slept, Irene or Curdie, one or the other, must still be always by his
side.

One night, when it was Curdie's turn with the king, he heard a cry
somewhere in the house, and as there was no other child, concluded,
notwithstanding the distance of her grandmother's room, that it must be
Barbara.  Fearing something might be wrong, and noting the king's sleep
more quiet than usual, he ran to see.  He found the child in the middle
of the floor, weeping bitterly, and Derba slumbering peacefully in bed.
The instant she saw him the night-lost thing ceased her crying, smiled,
and stretched out her arms to him.  Unwilling to wake the old woman,
who had been working hard all day, he took the child, and carried her
with him.  She clung to him so, pressing her tear-wet radiant face
against his, that her little arms threatened to choke him.

When he re-entered the chamber, he found the king sitting up in bed,
fighting the phantoms of some hideous dream.  Generally upon such
occasions, although he saw his watcher, he could not dissociate him
from the dream, and went raving on.  But the moment his eyes fell upon
little Barbara, whom he had never seen before, his soul came into them
with a rush, and a smile like the dawn of an eternal day overspread his
countenance; the dream was nowhere, and the child was in his heart.  He
stretched out his arms to her, the child stretched out hers to him, and
in five minutes they were both asleep, each in the other's embrace.

From that night Barbara had a crib in the king's chamber, and as often
as he woke, Irene or Curdie, whichever was watching, took the sleeping
child and laid her in his arms, upon which, invariably and instantly,
the dream would vanish.  A great part of the day too she would be
playing on or about the king's bed; and it was a delight to the heart
of the princess to see her amusing herself with the crown, now sitting
upon it, now rolling it hither and thither about the room like a hoop.
Her grandmother entering once while she was pretending to make porridge
in it, held up her hands in horror-struck amazement; but the king would
not allow her to interfere, for the king was now Barbara's playmate,
and his crown their plaything.

The colonel of the guard also was growing better.  Curdie went often to
see him.  They were soon friends, for the best people understand each
other the easiest, and the grim old warrior loved the miner boy as if
he were at once his son and his angel.  He was very anxious about his
regiment.  He said the officers were mostly honest men, he believed,
but how they might be doing without him, or what they might resolve, in
ignorance of the real state of affairs, and exposed to every
misrepresentation, who could tell? Curdie proposed that he should send
for the major, offering to be the messenger.  The colonel agreed, and
Curdie went--not without his mattock, because of the dogs.

But the officers had been told by the master of the horse that their
colonel was dead, and although they were amazed he should be buried
without the attendance of his regiment, they never doubted the
information.  The handwriting itself of their colonel was insufficient,
counteracted by the fresh reports daily current, to destroy the lie.
The major regarded the letter as a trap for the next officer in
command, and sent his orderly to arrest the messenger.  But Curdie had
had the wisdom not to wait for an answer.

The king's enemies said that he had first poisoned the good colonel of
the guard, and then murdered the master of the horse, and other
faithful councillors; and that his oldest and most attached domestics
had but escaped from the palace with their lives--not all of them, for
the butler was missing.  Mad or wicked, he was not only unfit to rule
any longer, but worse than unfit to have in his power and under his
influence the young princess, only hope of Gwyntystorm and the kingdom.

The moment the lord chancellor reached his house in the country and had
got himself clothed, he began to devise how yet to destroy his master;
and the very next morning set out for the neighbouring kingdom of
Borsagrass to invite invasion, and offer a compact with its monarch.



CHAPTER 30

Peter

At the cottage in the mountain everything for a time went on just as
before.  It was indeed dull without Curdie, but as often as they looked
at the emerald it was gloriously green, and with nothing to fear or
regret, and everything to hope, they required little comforting.  One
morning, however, at last, Peter, who had been consulting the gem,
rather now from habit than anxiety, as a farmer his barometer in
undoubtful weather, turned suddenly to his wife, the stone in his hand,
and held it up with a look of ghastly dismay.

'Why, that's never the emerald!' said Joan.

'It is,' answered Peter; 'but it were small blame to any one that took
it for a bit of bottle glass!'

For, all save one spot right in the centre, of intensest and most
brilliant green, it looked as if the colour had been burnt out of it.

'Run, run, Peter!' cried his wife.  'Run and tell the old princess.  It
may not be too late.  The boy must be lying at death's door.'

Without a word Peter caught up his mattock, darted from the cottage,
and was at the bottom of the hill in less time than he usually took to
get halfway.

The door of the king's house stood open; he rushed in and up the stair.
But after wandering about in vain for an hour, opening door after door,
and finding no way farther up, the heart of the old man had well-nigh
failed him.  Empty rooms, empty rooms!--desertion and desolation
everywhere.

At last he did come upon the door to the tower stair.  Up he darted.
Arrived at the top, he found three doors, and, one after the other,
knocked at them all.  But there was neither voice nor hearing.  Urged
by his faith and his dread, slowly, hesitatingly, he opened one.  It
revealed a bare garret room, nothing in it but one chair and one
spinning wheel.  He closed it, and opened the next--to start back in
terror, for he saw nothing but a great gulf, a moonless night, full of
stars, and, for all the stars, dark, dark!--a fathomless abyss.  He
opened the third door, and a rush like the tide of a living sea invaded
his ears.  Multitudinous wings flapped and flashed in the sun, and,
like the ascending column from a volcano, white birds innumerable shot
into the air, darkening the day with the shadow of their cloud, and
then, with a sharp sweep, as if bent sideways by a sudden wind, flew
northward, swiftly away, and vanished.  The place felt like a tomb.
There seemed no breath of life left in it.

Despair laid hold upon him; he rushed down thundering with heavy feet.
Out upon him darted the housekeeper like an ogress-spider, and after
her came her men; but Peter rushed past them, heedless and
careless--for had not the princess mocked him?--and sped along the road
to Gwyntystorm.  What help lay in a miner's mattock, a man's arm, a
father's heart, he would bear to his boy.

Joan sat up all night waiting his return, hoping and hoping.  The
mountain was very still, and the sky was clear; but all night long the
miner sped northward, and the heart of his wife was troubled.



