CHAPTER 34

Judgement

The king and his army returned, bringing with them one prisoner only,
the lord chancellor.  Curdie had dragged him from under a fallen tent,
not by the hand of a man, but by the foot of a mule.

When they entered the city, it was still as the grave.  The citizens
had fled home.  'We must submit,' they cried, 'or the king and his
demons will destroy us.'  The king rode through the streets in silence,
ill-pleased with his people.  But he stopped his horse in the midst of
the market place, and called, in a voice loud and clear as the cry of a
silver trumpet, 'Go and find your own.  Bury your dead, and bring home
your wounded.'  Then he turned him gloomily to the palace.

Just as they reached the gates, Peter, who, as they went, had been
telling his tale to Curdie, ended it with the words:

'And so there I was, in the nick of time to save the two princesses!'

'The two princesses, Father!  The one on the great red horse was the
housemaid,' said Curdie, and ran to open the gates for the king.

They found Derba returned before them, and already busy preparing them
food.  The king put up his charger with his own hands, rubbed him down,
and fed him.

When they had washed, and eaten and drunk, he called the colonel, and
told Curdie and the page to bring out the traitors and the beasts, and
attend him to the market place.

By this time the people were crowding back into the city, bearing their
dead and wounded.  And there was lamentation in Gwyntystorm, for no one
could comfort himself, and no one had any to comfort him.  The nation
was victorious, but the people were conquered.

The king stood in the centre of the market place, upon the steps of the
ancient cross.  He had laid aside his helmet and put on his crown, but
he stood all armed beside, with his sword in his hand. He called the
people to him, and, for all the terror of the beasts, they dared not
disobey him.  Those, even, who were carrying their wounded laid them
down, and drew near trembling.

Then the king said to Curdie and the page:

'Set the evil men before me.'

He looked upon them for a moment in mingled anger and pity, then turned
to the people and said:

'Behold your trust!  Ye slaves, behold your leaders!  I would have
freed you, but ye would not be free.  Now shall ye be ruled with a rod
of iron, that ye may learn what freedom is, and love it and seek it.
These wretches I will send where they shall mislead you no longer.'

He made a sign to Curdie, who immediately brought up the legserpent.
To the body of the animal they bound the lord chamberlain, speechless
with horror.  The butler began to shriek and pray, but they bound him
on the back of Clubhead.  One after another, upon the largest of the
creatures they bound the whole seven, each through the unveiling terror
looking the villain he was.  Then said the king:

'I thank you, my good beasts; and I hope to visit you ere long. Take
these evil men with you, and go to your place.'

Like a whirlwind they were in the crowd, scattering it like dust. Like
hounds they rushed from the city, their burdens howling and raving.

What became of them I have never heard.

Then the king turned once more to the people and said, 'Go to your
houses'; nor vouchsafed them another word.  They crept home like
chidden hounds.

The king returned to the palace.  He made the colonel a duke, and the
page a knight, and Peter he appointed general of all his mines. But to
Curdie he said:

'You are my own boy, Curdie.  My child cannot choose but love you, and
when you are grown up--if you both will--you shall marry each other,
and be king and queen when I am gone.  Till then be the king's Curdie.'

Irene held out her arms to Curdie.  He raised her in his, and she
kissed him.

'And my Curdie too!' she said.

Thereafter the people called him Prince Conrad; but the king always
called him either just Curdie, or my miner boy.

They sat down to supper, and Derba and the knight and the housemaid
waited, and Barbara sat at the king's left hand.  The housemaid poured
out the wine; and as she poured for Curdie red wine that foamed in the
cup, as if glad to see the light whence it had been banished so long,
she looked him in the eyes.  And Curdie started, and sprang from his
seat, and dropped on his knees, and burst into tears.  And the maid
said with a smile, such as none but one could smile:

'Did I not tell you, Curdie, that it might be you would not know me
when next you saw me?'

Then she went from the room, and in a moment returned in royal purple,
with a crown of diamonds and rubies, from under which her hair went
flowing to the floor, all about her ruby-slippered feet. Her face was
radiant with joy, the joy overshadowed by a faint mist as of
unfulfilment.  The king rose and kneeled on one knee before her.  All
kneeled in like homage.  Then the king would have yielded her his royal
chair.  But she made them all sit down, and with her own hands placed
at the table seats for Derba and the page.  Then in ruby crown and
royal purple she served them all.



CHAPTER 35

The End

The king sent Curdie out into his dominions to search for men and women
that had human hands.  And many such he found, honest and true, and
brought them to his master.  So a new and upright court was formed, and
strength returned to the nation.

But the exchequer was almost empty, for the evil men had squandered
everything, and the king hated taxes unwillingly paid.  Then came
Curdie and said to the king that the city stood upon gold.  And the
king sent for men wise in the ways of the earth, and they built
smelting furnaces, and Peter brought miners, and they mined the gold,
and smelted it, and the king coined it into money, and therewith
established things well in the land.

The same day on which he found his boy, Peter set out to go home. When
he told the good news to Joan, his wife, she rose from her chair and
said, 'Let us go.'  And they left the cottage, and repaired to
Gwyntystorm.  And on a mountain above the city they built themselves a
warm house for their old age, high in the clear air.

As Peter mined one day, at the back of the king's wine Cellar, he broke
into a cavern crusted with gems, and much wealth flowed therefrom, and
the king used it wisely.

Queen Irene--that was the right name of the old princess--was
thereafter seldom long absent from the palace.  Once or twice when she
was missing, Barbara, who seemed to know of her sometimes when nobody
else had a notion whither she had gone, said she was with the dear old
Uglies in the wood.  Curdie thought that perhaps her business might be
with others there as well.  All the uppermost rooms in the palace were
left to her use, and when any one was in need of her help, up thither
he must go.  But even when she was there, he did not always succeed in
finding her.  She, however, always knew that such a one had been
looking for her.

Curdie went to find her one day.  As he ascended the last stair, to
meet him came the well-known scent of her roses; and when he opened the
door, lo! there was the same gorgeous room in which his touch had been
glorified by her fire!  And there burned the fire--a huge heap of red
and white roses.  Before the hearth stood the princess, an old
grey-haired woman, with Lina a little behind her, slowly wagging her
tail, and looking like a beast of prey that can hardly so long restrain
itself from springing as to be sure of its victim. The queen was
casting roses, more and more roses, upon the fire. At last she turned
and said, 'Now Lina!'--and Lina dashed burrowing into the fire.  There
went up a black smoke and a dust, and Lina was never more seen in the
palace.

Irene and Curdie were married.  The old king died, and they were king
and queen.  As long as they lived Gwyntystorm was a better city, and
good people grew in it.  But they had no children, and when they died
the people chose a king.  And the new king went mining and mining in
the rock under the city, and grew more and more eager after the gold,
and paid less and less heed to his people.  Rapidly they sank toward
their old wickedness.  But still the king went on mining, and coining
gold by the pailful, until the people were worse even than in the old
time.  And so greedy was the king after gold, that when at last the ore
began to fail, he caused the miners to reduce the pillars which Peter
and they that followed him had left standing to bear the city.  And
from the girth of an oak of a thousand years, they chipped them down to
that of a fir tree of fifty.

One day at noon, when life was at its highest, the whole city fell with
a roaring crash.  The cries of men and the shrieks of women went up
with its dust, and then there was a great silence.

Where the mighty rock once towered, crowded with homes and crowned with
a palace, now rushes and raves a stone-obstructed rapid of the river.
All around spreads a wilderness of wild deer, and the very name of
Gwyntystorm had ceased from the lips of men.









End of Project Gutenberg's The Princess and the Curdie, by George MacDonald



