CHAPTER CCXXX.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN YOUNG ANGELS AND YOUNG YAHOOS.—FAIRIES, KILLCROPS 
AND CHANGELINGS.—LUTHER'S OPINIONS ON THE SUBJECT.—HIS COLLOQUIA 
MENSALIA.—DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE OLD AND NEW EDITION.

I think it not impertinent sometimes to relate such accidents as may 
seem no better than mere trifles; for even by trifles are the 
qualities of great persons as well disclosed as by their great 
actions; because in matters of importance they commonly strain 
themselves to the observance of general commended rules; in lesser 
things they follow the current of their own natures.

SIR WALTER RALEIGH.


It may easily be inferred from some of the Doctor's peculiar opinions, 
or fancies, as he in unaffected humility would call them, that though 
a dear lover of children, his love of them was not indiscriminate. He 
made a great distinction between young angels and young yahoos, and 
thought it might very early be discovered whether the angel or the 
brute part predominated.

This is sometimes so strongly marked and so soon developed as to 
excite observation even in the most incurious; and hence the 
well-known superstition concerning Changelings.

In the heroic ages a divine origin is ascribed to such persons as were 
most remarkable for their endowments either of body or of mind; but 
this may far more probably be traced to adulation in the poets, than 
to contemporary belief at any time prevailing among the people; 
whereas the opposite superstition was really believed in the middle 
ages, and traces of it are still to be found.

It is remarkable that the Fairies who in the popular belief of this 
country are never represented as malignant upon any other occasion, 
act an evil part in the supposed case of Changelings. So it is with 
the Trolls also of our Scandinavian kinsmen, (though this race of 
beings is in worse repute;) the children whom they substitute for 
those whom they steal are always a plague to the nurse and to the 
parents. In Germany such children were held to be young Devils, but 
whether Mac-Incubi, Mac-Succubi, or O'Devils by the whole blood is not 
clearly to be collected from Martin Luther, who is the great authority 
upon this subject. He is explicit upon the fact that the Nix or Water 
Fiend, increases the population by a mixed breed; but concerning the 
Killcrops, as his countrymen the Saxons call them, whom the Devil 
leaves in exchange, when he steals children for purposes best known to 
himself, Luther does not express any definite opinion, farther than 
that they are of a devilish nature: how fathered, how mothered the 
reader is left to conjecture as he pleases.

“Eight years since,” said Luther, at “Dessaw I did see and touch a 
changed child, which was twelve years of age; he had his eyes and all 
members like another child; he did nothing but feed, and would eat as 
much as two clowns or threshers were able to eat. When one touched it, 
then it cried out. When any evil happened in the house, then it 
laughed and was joyful; but when all went well, then it cried, and was 
very sad. I told the Prince of Anhalt, that if I were Prince of that 
country, so would I venture _homicidium_ thereon, and would throw it 
into the river Moldaw. I admonished the people dwelling in that place 
devoutly to pray to God to take away the Devil; the same was done 
accordingly, and the second year after the Changeling died.

“In Saxonia, near unto Halberstad, was a man that also had a Killcrop, 
who sucked the mother and five other women dry, and besides devoured 
very much. This man was advised that he should in his pilgrimage at 
Halberstad make a promise of the Killcrop to the Virgin Mary, and 
should cause him there to be rocked. This advice the man followed, and 
carried the Changeling thither in a basket. But going over a river, 
being upon the bridge, another Devil that was below in the river 
called, and said, Killcrop! Killcrop! Then the child in the basket, 
(which never before spake one word) answered ho, ho! The Devil in the 
water asked further, whither art thou going? The child in the basket 
said, ‘I am going towards Halberstad to our Loving Mother, to be 
rocked.’ The man being much affrighted thereat, threw the child with 
the basket over the bridge into the water. Whereupon the two Devils 
flew away together, and cried, ho, ho, ha! tumbling themselves one 
over another and so vanished.

“Such Changelings and Killcrops,” said Luther, “_supponit Satan in 
locum verorum filiorum;_ for the Devil hath this power, that he 
changeth children, and instead thereof layeth Devils in the cradles, 
which thrive not, only they feed and suck: but such Changelings live 
not above eighteen or nineteen years. It oftentimes falleth out that 
the children of women in child-bed are thus changed, and Devils laid 
in their stead, one of which more fouleth itself than ten other 
children do, so that the parents are much therewith disquieted; and 
the mothers in such sort are sucked out, that afterwards they are able 
to give suck no more. Such Changelings,” said Luther, “are baptized, 
in regard that they cannot be known the first year, but are known only 
by sucking the mothers dry.”

Mr. Cottle has made this the subject of a lively eclogue; but if that 
gentleman had happened upon the modern edition of Luther's _Colloquia 
Mensalia_, or Divine Discourses at his Table, instead of the old one, 
this pleasant poem would never have been written, the account of the 
Killcrops being one of the passages which the modern editor thought 
proper to omit. His omissions are reprehensible, because no notice is 
given that any such liberty has been taken; and indeed a paragraph in 
the introductory life which is prefixed to the edition might lead the 
reader to conclude that it is a faithful reprint; that paragraph 
saying there are many things which, for the credit of Luther, might as 
well have been left out, and proceeding to say, “but then it must be 
considered that such Discourses must not be brought to the test of our 
present refined age; that all what a man of Luther's name and 
character spoke, particularly at the latter part of his life, was 
thought by his friends worth the press, though himself meant it only 
for the recreation of the company; that he altered many opinions in 
his progress from darkness to light; and that it is with a work of 
this kind, as with the publishing of letters which were never intended 
for the press; the Author speaks his sentiments more freely, and you 
are able to form a true idea of his character, by looking, as it were, 
into his heart.” Nevertheless there are considerable omissions, and as 
may be supposed of parts which are curious, and in a certain sense 
valuable because they are characteristic. But the reprint was the 
speculation of a low publisher, put forth in numbers, and intended 
only for a certain class of purchasers, who would read the book for 
edification. The work itself deserves farther notice, and that notice 
is the more properly and willingly bestowed upon it here, because the 
original edition is one of the few volumes belonging to my venerable 
friend which have passed into my possession, and his mark occurs 
frequently in its margin.

“I will make no long excursion here, but a short apology for one that 
deserved well of the _reformed_ Religion. Many of our adversaries have 
aspersed _Luther_, with ill words, but none so violent as our 
_English_ fugitives, because he doth confess it that the _Devil_ did 
encounter him very frequently, and familiarly, when he first put pen 
to paper against the corruptions of the _Church of Rome_. In whose 
behalf I answer: much of that which is objected I cannot find in the 
_Latin Editions_ of his works which himself corrected, although it 
appears by the quotations some such things were in his first writings 
set forth in the Dutch language. 2. I say no more than he confesseth 
ingenuously of himself in an epistle to _Brentius_, his meaning was 
good, but his words came from him very unskilfully, and his style was 
most rough and unsavoury. St. Paul says of himself, that he was _rudis 
sermone, rude in speech_. But Luther was not so much _ἰδιώτης τῷ λόγῳ_ 
the word used in Saint Paul, as _ἄγροικος_, after his _Dutch 
Monastical_ breeding, and his own hot freedom. By nature he had a 
boisterous clownish expression; but for the most part very good jewels 
of doctrine in the dunghills of his language. 3. If the devil did 
employ himself to delude and vex that heroical servant of God, who 
took such a task upon him, being a simple Monk, to inveigh against 
errors and superstitions which had so long prevailed, why should it 
seem strange to any man? _Ribadaneira_ sticks it among the praises of 
his founder _Ignatius Loiola_, that the Devil did declaim and cry out 
against him, (believe it every one of you at your leisure,) and why 
might not the Devil draw near to vex _Luther_, as well as roar out a 
great way off against _Loiola_? I have digrest a little with your 
patience, to make _Luther's_ case appear to be no outrageous thing, 
that weak ones may not be offended when they hear such stuff objected 
out of _Parsons_, or _Barclay_, or _Walsingham_, or out of 
_Bellarmine_ himself. If _Beelzebub_ was busy with the _Master_, what 
will he be with the _Servants_? When Christ did begin to lay the first 
corner stone of the _Gospel, then he walked into the wilderness to be 
tempted of the Devil._”[1]

[Footnote 1: HACKET'S SERMONS.]




