CHAPTER CCXII.

SPECULATIONS CONNECTED WITH THE DOCTOR'S THEORY.—DOUBTS AND 
DIFFICULTIES.

_Voilà bien des mysteres, dira-t-on; j'en conviens; aussi le sujet le 
mérite-t-il bien. Au reste, il est certain que ces mysteres ne cachent 
rien de mauvais._

GOMGAM.


But although the conformity of the Bardic system to his own notions of 
progressive existence would have appeared to the Doctor

          —confirmation strong
  As proof of holy writ,—

he would have assented to that system no farther than such preceding 
conformity extended. Holding it only as the result of his own 
speculations,—as hypothesis,—a mere fancy,—a toy of the mind,—a 
plaything for the intellect in its lighter moments, and sometimes in 
its graver ones the subject of a dream,—he valued it accordingly. And 
yet the more he sported with it, and the farther he pursued it in his 
reveries, the more plausible it appeared, and the better did it seem 
to explain some of the physical phenomena, and some of the else 
seemingly inexplicable varieties of human nature. It was Henry More's 
opinion that the Pre-existence of the Soul, which is so explicit and 
frequent a doctrine of the Platonists, “was a tenet for which there 
are many plausible reasons, and against which there is nothing 
considerable to be alleged; being a key, he said, for some main 
mysteries of Providence which no other can so handsomely unlock.” More 
however, the Doctor thought might be advanced against that tenet, than 
against his own scheme, for to that no valid objection could be 
opposed. But the metempsychosis in a descending scale as a scheme of 
punishment would have been regarded by him as one of those corruptions 
which the Bards derived from the vain philosophy or false religions of 
the Levant.

Not that this part of their scheme was without a certain plausibility 
on the surface which might recommend it to inconsiderate minds. He 
himself would have thought that no Judge ever pronounced a more just 
decision than the three Infernal Lord Chancellors of the dead would 
do, if they condemned his townsman the pettyfogger to skulk upon earth 
again as a pole-cat, creep into holes as an earwig, and be flattened 
again between the thumbnails of a London chambermaid, or exposed to 
the fatal lotion of Mr. Tiffin, bug-destroyer to his Majesty. It was 
fitting he thought that every keen sportsman, for once at least should 
take the part of the inferior creature in those amusements of the 
field which he had followed so joyously, and that he should be winged 
in the shape of a partridge, run down in the form of a hare by the 
hounds, and Actæonized in a stag: that the winner of a Welsh main 
should be the cock of one, and die of the wounds received in the last 
fight; that the merciless postmaster should become a posthorse at his 
own inn; and that they who have devised, or practised, or knowingly 
permitted any wanton cruelty for the sake of pampering their 
appetites, should in the next stage of their existence, feel in their 
own person the effect of those devices, which in their human state 
they had only tasted. And not being addicted himself to “the most 
honest, ingenuous, quiet, and harmless art of angling,” (forgive him 
Sir Humphrey Davy! forgive him Chantrey! forgive him, thou best of all 
publishers, John Major, who mightest write _Ne plus ultra_ upon thy 
edition of any book which thou delightest to honour) he allowed that 
even Izaak Walton of blessed memory could not have shown cause for 
mitigation of the sentence, if Rhadamanthus and his colleagues in the 
Court below, had condemned him to be spitted upon the hook of some 
dear lover and ornament of the art, in the shape of “a black snail 
with his belly slit to shew the white;” or of a perch which of fish, 
he tells us, is the longest lived on a hook; or sewed him 
metempsycho-sized into a frog, to the arming iron, with a fine needle 
and silk, with only one stitch, using him in so doing, according to 
his own minute directions, as if he loved him, that is, harming him as 
little as he possibly might, that he might live the longer.

This would be fitting he thought, and there would have been enough of 
purgatory in it to satisfy the sense of vindictive justice, if any 
scheme of purgatory had been reconcilable with his scriptural belief. 
Bishop Hall has a passage in his Choice Helps for a Pious spirit, 
which might be taken in the sense of this opinion, though certainly no 
such meaning was intended by the writer. “Man,” he says, “as he 
consists of a double nature, flesh and spirit, so is he placed in a 
middle rank, betwixt an angel, which is a spirit, and a beast, which 
is flesh: partaking of the qualities and performing the acts of both. 
He is angelical in his understanding, in his sensual affections 
bestial; and to whether of these he most incline and comforteth 
himself, that part wins more of the other, and gives a denomination to 
him; so as he that was before half angel, half beast, if he be drowned 
in sensuality, hath lost the angel and is become a beast; if he be 
wholly taken up with heavenly meditations, he hath quit the beast, and 
is improved angelical. It is hard to hold an equal temper, either he 
must degenerate into a beast, or be advanced to an angel.”

Had the Doctor held this opinion according to the letter, and believed 
that those who brutalized their nature in the stage of humanity, were 
degraded to the condition of brutes after death, he could even have 
persuaded himself that intelligible indications of such a 
transmigration might be discovered in the eyes of a dog when he looks 
to some hard master for mercy, or to some kind one for notice, and as 
it were for a recognition of the feelings and thoughts which had no 
other means of expression. But he could not have endured to think it 
possible that the spaniel who stood beside him in mute supplication, 
with half-erected ears, looking for a morsel of food, might be a 
friend or relation; and that in making a troublesome or a thievish cur 
slink away with his tail between his legs, he might be hurting the 
feelings of an old acquaintance.

And indeed on the whole it would have disturbed his sense of order, to 
think that while some inferior creatures were innocently and 
unconsciously ascending in the scale of existence through their 
appointed gradations, others were being degraded to a condition below 
humanity for their sins committed in the human state. Punishment such 
degradation could not be deemed, unless the soul so punished retained 
its consciousness; and such consciousness would make it a different 
being from those who were externally of its fellow kind, and thus 
would the harmony of nature be destroyed: and to introduce discord 
there were to bring back Chaos. Bad enough as he saw is the inequality 
which prevails among mankind, though without it men would soon be all 
upon the dead level of animal and ferine life: But what is it to that 
which would appear in the lower world, if in the same species some 
individuals were guided only by their own proper instincts, and others 
endued with the consciousness of a human and reasonable mind.

The consequences also of such a doctrine where it was believed could 
not but lead to pitiable follies, and melancholy superstitions. Has 
humanity ever been put to a viler use than by the Banians at Surat, 
who support a hospital for vermin in that city, and regale the souls 
of their friends who are undergoing penance in the shape of fleas, or 
in loathsome pedicular form, by hiring beggars to go in among them, 
and afford them pasture for the night!

Even from his own system consequences followed which he could not 
reconcile to his wishes. Fond as he was of animals, it would have been 
a delight to him if he could have believed with the certainty of faith 
that he should have with him in Heaven all that he had loved on earth. 
But if they were only so many vehicles of the living spirit during its 
ascent to humanity,—only the egg, the caterpillar and the aurelia from 
which the human but immortal Psyche was to come forth at last, then 
must their uses be at an end in this earthly state: and Paradise he 
was sometimes tempted to think would want something if there were no 
beautiful insects to hover about its flowers, no birds to warble in 
its groves or glide upon its waters,—would not be the Paradise he 
longed for unless the lion were there to lie down with the lamb, and 
the antelope reclined its gentle head upon the leopard's breast. 
Fitting and desirable and necessary he considered the extinction of 
all noxious kinds, all which were connected with corruption, and might 
strictly be said to be of the earth earthly. But in his Paradise he 
would fain have whatever had been in Eden, before Paradise was lost, 
except the serpent.

“I can hardly,” says an English officer who was encamped in India near 
a lake overstocked with fish, “I can hardly censure the taste of the 
Indians who banish from a consecrated pond, the net of the fisher, the 
angler's hook and the fowler's gun. Shoals of large fish giving life 
to the clear water of a large lake covered with flocks of aquatic 
birds, afford to the sight a gratification which would be ill 
exchanged for the momentary indulgence of appetite.” My excellent 
friend would heartily have agreed with this Englishman: but in the 
waters of Paradise he would have thought, neither did the fish prey 
upon each other, nor the birds upon them, death not being necessary 
there as the means of providing aliment for life.

That there are waters in the Regions of the Blessed, Bede it is said, 
assures us for this reason, that they are necessary there to temper 
the heat of the Sun. And Cornelius à Lapide has found out a most 
admirable use for them above the firmament,—which is to make rivers 
and fountains and waterworks for the recreation of the souls in bliss, 
whose seat is in the Empyrean Heaven.

“If an herd of kine,” says Fuller, “should meet together to fancy and 
define happiness,—(that is to imagine a Paradise for themselves,)—they 
would place it to consist in fine pastures, sweet grass, clear water, 
shadowy groves, constant summer; but if any winter, then warm shelter 
and dainty hay, with company after their kind, counting these low 
things the highest happiness, because their conceit can reach no 
higher. Little better do the heathen poets describe Heaven, paving it 
with pearl and roofing it with stars, filling it with Gods and 
Goddesses, and allowing them to drink, (as if without it, no poet's 
Paradise) nectar and ambrosia.”




