CHAPTER CCI.

QUESTION CONCERNING THE USE OF TONGUES.—THE ATHANASIAN 
CONFESSORS.—GIBBON'S RELATION OF THE SUPPOSED MIRACLE OF TONGUES.—THE 
FACTS SHOWN TO BE TRUE, THE MIRACLE IMAGINARY, AND THE HISTORIAN THE 
DUPE OF HIS OWN UNBELIEF.

_Perseveremus, peractis quæ rem continebant, scrutari etiam ea quæ, si 
vis verum connexa sunt, non cohærentia; quæ quisquis diligenter 
inspicit, nec facit operæ prætium, nec tamen perdit operam._

SENECA.


For what use were our tongues given us? To speak with, to be sure, 
will be the immediate reply of many a reader. But Master, Mistress, 
Miss or Master Speaker (whichever you may happen to be), I beg leave 
to observe that this is only one of the uses for which that member was 
formed, and that for this alone it has deserved to be called an unruly 
member, it is not its primary, nor by any means its most important 
use. For what use was it given to thy labourer the ox, thy servant the 
horse, thy friend,—if thou deservest to have such a friend,—the 
dog,—thy playfellow the kitten,—and thy cousin the monkey?[1]

[Footnote 1: _Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia notis._

ENNIUS.]

In another place I shall answer my own question, which was asked in 
this place, because it is for my present purpose to make it appear 
that the tongue although a very convenient instrument of speech, is 
not necessary for it.

It is related in Gibbon's great history, a work which can never be too 
highly praised for its ability, nor too severely condemned for the 
false philosophy which pervades it, that the Catholics, inhabitants of 
Tipasa, a maritime colony of Mauritania, were by command of the Arian 
King, Hunneric, Genseric's detestable son and successor, assembled on 
the forum, and there deprived of their right hands and their tongues. 
“But the holy confessors,” he proceeds to say, “continued to speak 
without tongues; and this miracle is attested by Victor, an African 
bishop, who published an history of the persecution within two years 
after the event. ‘If any one,’ says Victor, ‘should doubt of the 
truth, let him repair to Constantinople, and listen to the clear and 
perfect language of Restitutus, the subdeacon, one of these glorious 
sufferers, who is now lodged in the palace of the Emperor Zeno, and is 
respected by the devout Empress.’ At Constantinople we are astonished 
to find a cool, a learned, an unexceptionable witness, without 
interest and without passion. Æneas of Gaza, a Platonic philosopher, 
has accurately described his own observations on these African 
sufferers. ‘I saw them myself: I heard them speak: I diligently 
enquired by what means such an articulate voice could be formed 
without any organ of speech: I used my eyes to examine the report of 
my ears: I opened their mouth, and saw that the whole tongue had been 
completely torn away by the roots; an operation which the physicians 
generally suppose to be mortal.’ The testimony of Æneas of Gaza might 
be confirmed by the superfluous evidence of the Emperor Justinian, in 
a perpetual edict; of Count Marcellinus in his Chronicles of the 
times; and of Pope Gregory the first, who had resided at 
Constantinople as the minister of the Roman Pontiff. They all lived 
within the compass of a century, and they all appeal to their personal 
knowledge, or the public notoriety, for the truth of a miracle, which 
was repeated in several instances, displayed on the greatest theatre 
of the world, and submitted during a series of years, to the calm 
examination of the senses.” He adds in a note that “the miracle is 
enhanced by the singular instance of a boy who had _never_ spoken 
before his tongue was cut out.”

Now comes the unbelieving historian's comment. He says, “this 
supernatural gift of the African confessors, who spoke without 
tongues, will command the assent of those, and of those only, who 
already believe, that their language was pure and orthodox. But the 
stubborn mind of an infidel is guarded by secret, incurable suspicion; 
and the Arian, or Socinian, who has seriously rejected the doctrines 
of the Trinity, will not be shaken by the most plausible evidence of 
an Athanasian miracle.”

Well has the sceptical historian applied the epithet stubborn to a 
mind affected with the same disease as his own,

              Oh dear unbelief
  How wealthy dost thou make thy owner's wit!
  Thou train of knowledge, what a privilege
  Thou givest to thy possessor! anchorest him
  From floating with the tide of vulgar faith
  From being damn'd with multitudes![2]

[Footnote 2: MARSTON.]

Gibbon would not believe the story because it had been adduced as a 
miracle in confirmation of the Catholic doctrine as opposed to the 
Arian heresy. He might probably have questioned the relation between 
the alleged miracle and the doctrine: and if he had argued that it is 
not consistent with the plan of revelation (so far as we may presume 
to reason upon it) for a miracle to be wrought in proof of a doctrinal 
point, a Christian who believes sincerely in that very doctrine might 
agree with him.

But the circumstances are attested, as he fairly admits, by the most 
ample and unexceptionable testimony; and like the Platonic philosopher 
whose evidence he quotes, he ought to have considered the matter of 
fact, without regard to the application which the Catholics, in 
perfect good faith, made of it. The story is true, but it is not 
miraculous.

Cases which demonstrate the latter part of this question were known to 
physiologists before a book was published at Paris in the year 1765, 
the title of which I find in Mr. D'Israeli's Curiosities of 
Literature, thus translated; “The Christian Religion proved by a 
single fact; or a Dissertation in which is shown that those Catholics 
whose tongues Hunneric King of the Vandals cut out, spoke miraculously 
all the remainder of their days: from whence is deduced the 
consequence of the miracle against the Arians, the Socinians and the 
Deists, and particularly against the author of Emilius, by solving 
their difficulties.” It bears this motto _Ecce Ego admirationem facio 
populo huic, miraculo grandi et stupendo_. And Mr. D'Israeli closes 
his notice of the Book by saying “there needs no farther account of it 
than the title.” That gentleman who has contributed so much to the 
instruction and entertainment of his contemporaries, will I am sure be 
pleased at perusing the facts in disproof of the alleged miracle, 
brought together here by one who as a Christian believes in miracles 
and that they have not ceased, and that they never will cease.

In the Philosophical Transactions, and in the Gentleman's Magazine is 
an account of a woman, Margaret Cutting by name, who about the middle 
of the last century was living at Wickham Market in Suffolk. When she 
was four years of age “a cancer ate off her tongue at the root, yet 
she never lost the power of speech, and could both read distinctly 
afterwards and sing.” Her speech was very intelligible, but it was a 
little through the nose owing to the want of the uvula; and her voice 
was low. In this case a new tongue had been formed, about an inch and 
half in length and half an inch broad; but this did not grow till some 
years after the cure.

Upon the publication of this case it was observed that some few 
instances of a like nature had been recorded; and one in particular by 
Tulpius of a man whom he had himself examined, who having had his 
tongue cut out by the Turks, could after three years speak distinctly. 
One of the persons who published an account of this woman saw several 
men upon whom the same act of cruelty had been committed by these 
barbarians or by the Algerines: “one of them,” says he, “aged 
thirty-three, wrote a good hand, and by that means answered my 
questions. He informed me that he could not pronounce a syllable, nor 
make any articulate sound; though he had often observed that those who 
suffered that treatment when they were very young, were some years 
after able to speak; and that their tongues might be observed to grow 
in proportion to the other parts of the body: but that if they were 
adults, or full grown persons, at the time of the operation, they were 
never able to utter a syllable. The truth of this observation was 
confirmed to me by the two following cases. Patrick Strainer and his 
son-in-law came to Harwich, in their way to Holland, the third of this 
month. I made it my business to see and examine them. The father told 
me he had his tongue cut out by the Algerines, when he was seven years 
of age: and that some time after he was able to pronounce many 
syllables, and can now speak most words tolerably well; his tongue, he 
said, was grown at least half an inch. The son-in-law, who is about 
thirty years of age, was taken by the Turks, who cut out his tongue; 
he cannot pronounce a syllable; nor is his tongue grown at all since 
the operation; which was more than five years ago.”

Sir John Malcolm in one of his visits to Persia, became acquainted 
with Zâl Khan of Khist, who “was long distinguished as one of the 
bravest and most attached followers of the Zend family. When the death 
of Lootf Ali Khan terminated its powers, he along with the other 
governors of provinces and districts in Furs, submitted to Aza Mahomed 
Khan. That cautious and cruel monarch, dreading the ability, and 
doubtful of the allegiance of this chief, ordered his eyes to be put 
out. An appeal for the recall of the sentence being treated with 
disdain, Zâl Khan loaded the tyrant with curses. ‘Cut out his tongue,’ 
was the second order. The mandate was imperfectly executed, and the 
loss of half this member deprived him of speech. Being afterwards 
persuaded that its being cut close to the root would enable him to 
speak so as to be understood, he submitted to the operation; and the 
effect has been, that his voice, though indistinct and thick, is yet 
intelligible to persons accustomed to converse with him. This I 
experienced from daily intercourse. He often spoke to me of his 
sufferings and of the humanity of the present King, who had restored 
him to his situation as head of his tribe, and governor of Khist.—I am 
not an anatomist,” Sir John adds, “and cannot therefore give a reason 
why a man, who could not articulate with half a tongue, should speak 
when he had none at all. But the facts are as stated; and I had them 
from the very best authority, old Zâl Khan himself.”[3]

[Footnote 3: This account of Zâl Khan, (Mrs. Southey writes me word) 
was farther confirmed by the testimony of Mr. Bruce, her relative, who 
knew him and had _looked_ into the tongue-less mouth. Mr. Bruce was 
well acquainted with another person who had undergone the same cruel 
punishment. Being a wealthy man, he bribed the executioner to spare a 
considerable portion of the tongue; but finding that he could not 
articulate a word with the imperfect member, he had it entirely 
extracted—root and all, and then spoke almost as intelligibly as 
before his punishment.

This person was well known at Calcutta, as well as at Bushire and 
Shiraz—where Mr. Bruce first became acquainted with him. He was a man 
of some consequence and received as such in the first circles at 
Calcutta, and it was in one of those—a dinner party—that on the 
question being warmly argued—as to the possibility of articulation 
after the extraction of the tongue, he opened his mouth and desired 
the company assembled to look into it, and so set their doubts on the 
matter for ever at rest.]

A case occurred in the household of that Dr. Mark Duncan whom our 
James I. would have engaged as his Physician in ordinary, but Duncan 
having married at Saumur and settled in that city declined the 
invitation, because his wife was unwilling to leave her friends and 
relations and her native place. Yielding therefore as became him to 
her natural and reasonable reluctance he passed the remainder of his 
useful and honourable life at Saumur. It is noticed as a remarkable 
circumstance that the five persons of whom his family consisted died 
and were interred in as many different kingdoms, one in France, 
another at Naples, a third at Stockholm, a fourth in London, and the 
fifth in Ireland. A son of Duncan's valet, in his thirteenth year lost 
his tongue by the effects of the small-pox, the root being so consumed 
by this dreadful disease, that in a fit of coughing it came away. The 
boy's speech was no otherwise affected by the loss than that he found 
it difficult to pronounce the letter r. He was exhibited throughout 
Europe, and lived long afterwards. A surgeon at Saumur composed a 
treatise upon the case, and Duncan who was then Principal of the 
College in that city supplied him with this title for it 
Aglossostomographie. A rival physician published a dissertation to 
prove that it ought to be Aglossostomatographie, and he placed these 
verses at the conclusion of this odd treatise.

   _Lecteur, tu t'esmerveilleras
  Qu'un garçon qui n'a point de langue,
  Prononce bien une harangue;
  Mais bien plus tu t'estonneras
  Qu'un barbier que ne sçait pas lire
  Le grec, se mesle d'en escrire.
  Que si ce plaisant épigramme,
  Doux fruit d'un penser de mon âme
  Te semble n'aller pas tant mal,
  C'est que je l'ai fait à cheval._

_Quelques gens malins changerent le dernier vers dans les exemplaires 
qu'ils purent trouver, et y mirent—C'est que je l'ai fait en cheval._

       *       *       *       *       *

The reader who thinks upon what he reads, will find some materials for 
thinking on, in what has here been collected for him. First as to the 
physical facts:—they show that the power of reproduction exists in the 
human body, in a greater degree than has been commonly supposed. But 
it is probable that this power would be found only in young subjects, 
or in adults whose constitutions were unusually healthful and 
vigorous. A very small proportion of the snails which have been 
decapitated by experimental physiologists, have reproduced their 
heads; though the fact of such reproduction is certainly established.

Rhazes records two cases which had fallen under his own observation; 
in one of which the tibia, in the other the underjaw had been 
reproduced; neither acquired the consistency of the other bones. The 
Doctor used to adduce these cases in support of a favourite theory of 
his own, with which the reader will in due time be made acquainted.

Secondly, there is a moral inference to be drawn from the effect which 
the story produced upon Gibbon. He could not invalidate, or dispute 
the testimony upon which it came before him; but he chose to 
disbelieve it. For he was ignorant that the facts might be physically 
true, and he would not on any evidence give credit to what appeared 
miraculous. A stubborn mind conduces as little to wisdom, or even to 
knowledge, as a stubborn temper to happiness.




