CHAPTER CCXXXI.

QUESTION AS TO WHETHER BOOKS UNDER THE TERMINATION OF “ANA” HAVE BEEN 
SERVICEABLE OR INJURIOUS TO LITERATURE CONSIDERED IN CONNECTION WITH 
LUTHER'S TABLE TALK.—HISTORY OF THE EARLY ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THAT 
BOOK, OF ITS WONDERFUL PRESERVATION, AND OF THE MARVELLOUS AND 
UNIMPEACHABLE VERACITY OF CAPTAIN HENRY BELL.

  Prophecies, predictions,  Or where they abide,
  Stories and fictions,     On this or that side,
  Allegories, rhymes,       Or under the mid line
  And serious pastimes      Of the Holland sheets fine,
  For all manner men,       Or in the tropics fair
  Without regard when,      Of sunshine and clear air,
            Or under the pole
            Of chimney and sea coal:
    Read they that list; understand they that can;
   _Verbum satis est_ to a wise man.

BOOK OF RIDDLES.


Luther's Table Talk is probably the earliest of that class of books, 
which, under the termination of _ana_, became frequent in the two 
succeeding centuries, and of which it may be questioned whether they 
have been more serviceable or injurious to literature. For though they 
have preserved much that is valuable, and that otherwise might 
probably have been lost, on the other hand they have introduced into 
literary history not a little that is either false, or of suspicious 
authority; some of their contents have been obtained by breach of 
confidence; many sayings are ascribed in them to persons by whom they 
were never uttered, and many things have been fabricated for them.

The Collection concerning Luther bears this title in the English 
translation: “Doctoris Martini Lutheri Colloquia Mensalia: or, Dr. 
Martin Luther's Divine Discourses at his Table, &c., which in his 
lifetime he held with divers learned men, (such as were Philip 
Melancthon, Casparus Cruciger, Justus Jonas, Paulus Eberus, Vitus 
Dietericus, Joannes Bugenhagen, Joannes Forsterus, and others:) 
containing Questions and Answers touching Religion, and other main 
Points of Doctrine; as also many notable Histories, and all sorts of 
Learning, Comforts, Advices, Prophecies, Admonitions, Directions and 
Instructions. Collected first together by Dr. Antonius Lauterbach, and 
afterwards disposed into certain Common-places by John Aurifaber, 
Doctor in Divinity. Translated out of the High German into the English 
tongue, by Captain Henry Bell.

  John vi. 12. Gather up the fragments that nothing be lost.

  1 Cor. x. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
    do, do all to the Glory of God.

  Tertull. Apologet. cap. 39. The primitive Christians ate and drank
    to satisfy nature, and discoursed at their Tables of the Holy
    Scriptures, or otherwise, as became those that knew God did hear
    them, _ut non tam cœnam cœnaverint, quam disciplinam_.

  Ancient Writers, Councils, and our University College Statutes
    require _sacra ad mensam_.

  Luther in Gen. 2. _Sermones vera sunt condimenta ciborum._

  Melchior Adamus in Vita Lutheri. _Inter prandendum et cænandum non
    rarò conciones aliis dictavit._

London, Printed by William Du Gard, dwelling in Suffolk-lane, near 
London-stone, 1652.”

The original Collection was first published three and thirty years 
after Luther's death, consequently not till most of those persons from 
whose reminiscences it professes to be compiled, had past away. The 
book therefore is far from carrying with it any such stamp of 
authenticity as Boswell's Life of Johnson, which in that respect, as 
well as for its intrinsic worth is the Ana of all Anas. But though it 
may have been undertaken upon book-making motives, there seems no 
reason to suppose that the task was not performed faithfully by the 
Doctors Clearstream and Goldsmith, according to their judgment, and 
that much which had lightly or carelessly fallen from such a man as 
Luther was likely to be carefully preserved, and come into their 
hands. Many parts indeed authenticate themselves, bearing so strong a 
likeness that no one can hesitate at filiating them upon the 
ipsissimus Luther. The editor of the modern English edition, John 
Gottlieb Burckhardt, D.D., who was Minister of the German Lutheran 
Congregation in the Savoy, says, “the Book made a great noise at its 
first appearance in 1569. Some indeed have called its authenticity in 
question; but there is no reason to doubt of the testimony of Dr. John 
Aurifaber; and indeed the full character of Luther's free manner of 
speaking and thinking is seen almost in every line. The same manly, 
open, bold and generous spirit breathes through the whole, as is felt 
in reading the compositions which he published himself in his life 
time. There is a pleasing variety of matters contained in these 
discourses, and many fundamental truths are proposed in a familiar, 
careless dress, and in Luther's own witty, acute manner; for which 
reason it is as much entertaining to popular capacities as to men of 
genius. Many good Christians have found it to be of great benefit for 
establishing their souls in the knowledge and practice of truth, and 
of the good old way; and since many weeds grow up from time to time in 
the Church, this book handed down to posterity, will be a standing 
test of sound doctrines, which our forefathers believed, and of such 
wise principles on which they acted at, and after the Reformation.” On 
the other hand the book afforded as much gratification to the enemies 
of Luther, as to his admirers. Bayle after noticing some of the 
monstrous calumnies with which the Papists assailed his memory, 
proceeds to say, _La plûpart de ces medisances sont fondées sur 
quelques paroles d'un certain livre publié par les amis de Luther, 
ausquelles on donne un sens tres-malin, et fort éloigné de la pensée 
de ce Ministre. Ce n'est pas qu'il ne faille convenir qu'il y eut une 
très-grande imprudence à publier une telle compilation. Ce fut l'effet 
d'un zêle inconsideré, ou plútôt d'une preoccupation excessive, qui 
empêchoit de conoître les defauts de ce grand homme._ In like manner 
Seckendorf, whom Bayle quotes, says it was compiled with little 
prudence, and incautiously published, but upon its authenticity (as 
far as any such collection can be deemed authentic) he casts no 
suspicion.

Something worse than want of prudence may be suspected in those who 
set forth the English translation. The translator introduced it by “a 
Narrative of the miraculous preserving” of the book, and “how by God's 
Providence it was discovered lying under the ground where it had lain 
hid fifty-two years:” “I, Capt. Henry Bell,” he says, “do hereby 
declare both to the present age and also to posterity, that being 
employed beyond the seas in state affairs divers years together, both 
by King James, and also by the late King Charles, in Germany I did 
hear and understand in all places, great bewailing and lamentation 
made, by reason of the destroying or burning of above fourscore 
thousand of Martin Luther's books, entituled his last Divine 
Discourses. For after such time as God stirred up the spirit of Martin 
Luther to detect the corruptions and abuses of Popery, and to preach 
Christ, and clearly to set forth the simplicity of the Gospel, many 
Kings, Princes and States, Imperial Cities, and Hanse-Towns, fell from 
the Popish Religion, and became Protestants as their posterities still 
are, and remain to this very day. And for the further advancement of 
the great work of Reformation then begun, the foresaid Princes and the 
rest did then order, that the said Divine Discourse of Luther should 
forthwith be printed, and that every Parish should have and receive 
one of the foresaid printed Books into every Church throughout all 
their principalities and dominions, to be chained up, for the common 
people to read therein. Upon which the Reformation was wonderfully 
promoted and increased, and spread both here in England and other 
countries beside. But afterwards it so fell out, that the Pope then 
living, viz. Gregory XIII. understanding what great hurt and prejudice 
he and his popish religion had already received by reason of the said 
Luther's Divine Discourses; and also fearing that the same might bring 
farther contempt and mischief upon himself, and upon the popish 
Church, he therefore to prevent the same, did fiercely stir up and 
instigate the Emperor then in being, viz. Rudolphus II. to make an 
edict through the whole empire, that all the foresaid printed books 
should be burnt, and also that it should be _Death_ for any person to 
have or keep a copy thereof, but also to burn the same: which edict 
was speedily put in execution accordingly, in so much that not one of 
all the said printed books, not so much as any one copy of the same 
could be found out, nor heard of in any place.”

Upon this it is to be observed that in the popish states of Germany 
such an edict was not required, and that in the Protestant ones it 
could not be enforced. There is therefore as little foundation for the 
statement, as for the assertion introduced in it that the Reformation 
was promoted in England by the publication of this book in German. The 
Book appears not to have been common, for Bayle had never seen it; but 
this was because few editions were printed, not because many copies 
were destroyed. The reader however will judge by what follows of the 
degree of credit which may be given to any statement of Capt. Henry 
Bell's.

“Yet it pleased God,” the veracious Captain proceeds, “that anno 1626 
a German Gentleman, named Casparus Van Sparr, (with whom, in the time 
of my staying in Germany about King James's business, I became very 
familiarly known and acquainted,) having occasion to build upon the 
old foundation of an house wherein his grandfather dwelt at that time 
when the said edict was published in Germany for the burning of the 
foresaid Books, and digging deep into the ground under the said old 
foundation, one of the said original printed books was there happily 
found, lying in a deep obscure hole, being wrapt in a strong linen 
cloth, which was waxed all over with bees-wax both within and without, 
whereby the book was preserved fair without any blemish. And at the 
same time Ferdinandus II. being Emperor in Germany, who was a severe 
enemy and persecutor of the Protestant religion, the foresaid 
Gentleman and grandchild to him that had hidden the said Book in that 
obscure hole, fearing that if the said Emperor should get knowledge 
that one of the said Books was yet forthcoming and in his custody, 
thereby not only himself might be brought into trouble, but also the 
Book in danger to be destroyed, as all the rest were so long before; 
and also calling me to mind, and knowing that I had the High Dutch 
tongue very perfect, did send the said original Book over hither into 
England, unto me; and therewith did write unto me a letter, wherein he 
related the passages of the preserving and finding out of the said 
Book. And also he earnestly moved me in his letter, that for the 
advancement of God's glory, and of Christ's Church, I would take the 
pains to translate the said Book, to the end that that most excellent 
Divine Work of Luther might be brought again to light!

“Whereupon I took the said Book before me, and many times began to 
translate the same, but always I was hindered therein, being called 
upon about other business; insomuch that by no possible means I could 
remain by that work. Then about six weeks after I had received the 
said Book, it fell out, that I being in bed with my Wife, one night 
between twelve and one of the clock, she being asleep but myself yet 
awake, there appeared unto me an Antient Man, standing at my bed-side, 
arrayed all in white, having a long and broad white beard, hanging 
down to his girdle-stead; who, taking me by my right ear, spake these 
words following unto me. _Sirrah! Will not you take time to translate 
that Book which is sent unto you out of Germany? I will shortly 
provide for you both place and time to do it!_ And then he vanished 
away out of my sight. Whereupon being much thereby affrighted, I fell 
into an extreme sweat, insomuch that my Wife awaking, and finding me 
all over wet, she asked me what I ailed, I told her what I had seen 
and heard; but I never did heed nor regard visions, nor dreams. And so 
the same fell soon out of my mind.

“Then, about a fortnight after I had seen that Vision, I went to 
Whitehall to hear the Sermon; after which ended, I returned to my 
lodging, which was then in King Street at Westminster, and sitting 
down to dinner with my Wife, two Messengers were sent from the whole 
Council-Board, with a warrant to carry me to the Keeper of the Gate 
House, Westminster, there to be safely kept, until further order from 
the Lords of the Council; which was done without showing me any cause 
at all wherefore I was committed. Upon which said warrant I was kept 
there ten whole years close prisoner; where I spent five years thereof 
about the translating of the said Book: insomuch as I found the words 
very true which the old man in the foresaid Vision did say unto me, 
‘_I will shortly provide for you both place and time to translate 
it._’”




