


THE DOCTOR, _&c._




There is a kind of physiognomy in the titles of books no less than in 
the faces of men, by which a skilful observer will as well know what 
to expect from the one as the other.

BUTLER'S REMAINS.




[Frontispiece: THE STATUES
        (Fragment of Interchapter)
        London: Longman & Co. 1847.]




THE DOCTOR, _&c._




[Illustration: a tetrahedron]




VOL. VII.




LONDON:
LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.

1847.




LONDON:
PRINTED BY W. NICOL, PALL-MALL.




PREFACE.

INVENIAS ETIAM DISJECTI MEMBRA POETÆ.


The present Volume contains all that it is thought advisable to 
publish of the Papers and Fragments for THE DOCTOR, &C. Some of these 
Papers, as in the former Volume, were written out fair and ready for 
Publication—but the order, and the arrangement intended is altogether 
unknown.

I have taken care to examine the different extracts,—and occasionally 
I have added a note or an explanation, where such seemed to be needed. 
The whole has been printed with scrupulous exactness from the MSS. The 
Epilude of Mottoes is a selection from such as had not been worked up 
in the body of the work. Some of them may possibly have been used 
before—but if so, it has escaped my recollection.—

                                _Mihi dulces
  Ignoscent, si quid peccâro stultus, amici,
  Inque vicem illorum patiar delicta libenter._

JOHN WOOD WARTER.

  _Vicarage, West-Tarring,
   Sussex.
   Sept. 14th, 1847._




PRELUDE OF MOTTOES.


Well: we go on.

MERIC CASAUBON.


_Ventri utinam pax sit, sic variante cibo._

VENANTIUS FORTUNATUS.


  I had forgot one half, I do protest,
  And now am sent again to speak the rest.

DRYDEN.


  Well said, Master Doctor, well said;
  By the mass we must have you into the pulpit.

LUSTY JUVENTUS.


Why this is quincy quarie pepper de watchet single go-by, of all that 
ever I tasted!

ROBERT GREENE.


_Alonso._ Prythee no more! thou dost talk nothing to me.

_Gonzalo._ I did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen who are of 
such sensible and nimble lungs, that they always use to laugh at 
nothing.

TEMPEST.


  _Comme l'on voit, à l'ouvrir de la porte
     D'un cabinet royal, maint beau tableau,
     Mainte antiquaille, et tout ce que de beau
   Le Portugais des Indes nous apporte;_

  _Aussi deslors que l'homme qui medite,
     Et est sçavant, commence de s'ouvrir,
     Un grand thresor vient à se descouvrir,
   Thresor cachè au puits de Democrite._

QUATRAINS DE PIBRAC.


_Cum enim infelicius nihil sit iis ingeniis, ut rectè J. Cæs. Scaliger 
censet, quæ mordicùs sentiunt Majores nostros nihil ignorasse, 
mancipium alienarum opinionum nunquam esse volui. Contra nec me puduit 
ab aliis discere, et quædam ex iis in mea scripta transferre; quod 
omnibus seculis ab omnibus viris doctis factitatum video, neminemque 
adhuc inventum existimo, qui omnia, quæ in publicum edidit, in suo 
cerebro nata esse gloriari potuerit. Invenient tamen, qui volent, in 
meis aliqua, eaque à veritate non aliena, quæ in aliorum scriptis 
forsan non ita sunt obvia. Verùm omnibus placere impossibile; et, ut 
J. Cæs. Scaliger ait_

  _Qui sevit, ab alto pluviam satis precatur;
   At iter faciens imbribus imprecatur atris,
   Non sæpe Deus placet; et tu placere credis?_

_Ideoque invidorum obtrectationibus nihil motus, tomum sextum_ 
Doctoris _in publicum edidi, ac septimum jam in manus sumam, et in eo 
quousque D. O. M. placuerit, progredior. In quo ipso etiam etsi non 
pauca quæ obtrectationi malevolorum et invidorum obnoxia esse 
poterunt, dicenda erunt, proferam tamen ea liberè._

SENNERTUS.


Tired of thee, my Opus? that is impossible!

   _οὐδὲ μεστὸς σοῦ γέγον᾽ οὐδεὶς πώποτε.
  τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλων ἐστὶ πάντων πλησμόνή·
  ἔρωτος,
          ἄρτων,
                 μουσικῆς,
                           τραγημάτων,
  τιμῆς,
         πλακούντων,
                     ἀνδραγαθίας,
                                  ἰσχάδων,
  φιλοτιμίας,
              μάζης,
                     στρατηγίας,
                                 φακῆς.
  σοῦ δ᾽ ἐγένετ᾽ οὐδεὶς μεστὸς οὐδεπώποτε._

ARISTOPHANES.


I desire the unlearned readers not to be offended for that I have in 
some places intermixed Greek and Latin—(and other tongues) with the 
English. For, I have an especial regard unto young scholars and 
students, unto whom it is not possible to be expressed what great 
utility, benefit and knowledge doth redound, of conferring one strange 
language with another. Neither is it to be doubted, but that such as 
are towards the discipline of good literature in divers tongues, may 
of such doings as this, pick out as much utility and furtherance of 
their studies, as the unlearned shall take pleasure and fruit of the 
English for their use. Whoso careth not for the Latin may pass it 
over, and satisfy himself with the English. Who passeth not on the 
Greek, may semblably pass it over, and make as though he see none 
such. There is in this behalf no man's labour lost but mine, and yet 
not that all lost neither, if my good zeal and honest intent to do 
good to all sorts, be in good part interpreted and accepted.

NICHOLAS UDALL.


Truly for the Englishman to be offended with the admixtion of Latin, 
or the Latin-man to dislike the powdering of Greek, appeareth unto me 
a much like thing, as if at a feast with variety of good meats and 
drinks furnished, one that loveth to feed of a capon should take 
displeasure that another man hath appetite to a coney; or one that 
serveth his stomach with a partridge should be angry with another that 
hath a mind to a quail; or one that drinketh small beer, should be 
grieved with his next fellow for drinking ale or wine.

NICHOLAS UDALL.


If food and amusement are wanted for the body, what does he deserve 
who finds food and amusement for the mind?

GNOMICA.


_Mai voi,—seguitate il ragionamento del Dottore; et mostrateci, come 
havete bona memoria; che credo se saperete ritaccarlo ove lo 
lasciaste, non farete poco._

CASTIGLIONE.


If any complain of obscurity, they must consider, that in these 
matters it cometh no otherwise to pass than in sundry the works both 
of art and also of nature, where that which hath greatest force in the 
very things we see, is, notwithstanding, itself oftentimes not seen. 
The stateliness of horses, the goodliness of trees, when we behold 
them delighteth the eye; but that foundation which beareth up the one, 
that root which ministreth unto the other nourishment and life, is in 
the bosom of the earth concealed; and if there be at any time occasion 
to search into it, such labour is then more necessary than pleasant, 
both to them which undertake it, and for the lookers on.

HOOKER.


_Alcuni—dicono ch'io ho creduto formar me stesso, persuadendomi che le 
conditioni ch'io al Dottore attribuisco, tutte siano in me. A' questi 
tali non voglio già negar di non haver tentato tutto quello, ch'io 
vorrei che sapesse il_ Dottore; _et penso che chi non havesse havuto 
qualche notitia delle cose che nel libro si trattano, per erudito che 
fosse stato, male haverebbe potuto scriverle: ma io non son tanto 
privo di giudicio in conoscere me stesso, che mi presuma saper tutto 
quello, che so desiderare._

CASTIGLIONE.


In a building,—if it be large, there is much to be done in preparing 
and laying the foundation, before the walls appear above ground; much 
is doing within, when the work does not seem, perhaps, to advance 
without, and when it is considerably forward, yet being encumbered 
with scaffolds and rubbish, a byestander sees it at great 
disadvantage, and can form but an imperfect judgement of it. But all 
this while the architect himself, even from the laying of the first 
stone, conceives of it according to the plan and design he has formed; 
he prepares and adjusts the materials, disposing each in its proper 
time and place, and views it in idea as already finished. In due 
season it is compleated, but not in a day. The top-stone is fixed, and 
then, the scaffolds and rubbish being removed, it appears to others as 
he intended it should be.

JOHN NEWTON.


_Non si dea adunque l'uomo contentare di fare le cose buone, ma dee 
studiare di farle anco leggiadre. E non è altro leggiadria, che una 
cotale quasi luce, che risplende dalla convenevolezza delle cose, che 
sono ben composte, e ben divisate l'una con l'altra, e tutte insieme; 
senza la quel misura eziandio il bene non è bello, e la bellezza non è 
piacevole._

M. GIO. DELLA CASA, GALATEO.


  Pick out of mirth, like stones out of thy ground
    Profaneness, filthiness, abusiveness;
  These are the scum with which coarse wits abound;
    The few may spare them well.

HERBERT.


  The wise,—weighs each thing as it ought,
    Mistakes no term, nor sentence wrests awry;
  The fond will read awhile, but cares for nought,
    Yet casts on each man's work a frowning eye.
    This neither treats of matters low nor high,
  But finds a meane, that each good meaning might
  In all true means take Charity aright.

CHURCHYARD.


  While others fish with craft for great opinion,
  I with great truth catch mere simplicity.
  Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
  With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
  Fear not my truth; the moral of my wit
  Is—plain and true;—there's all the reach of it.

SHAKESPEARE.


                           _τούτων οὖν οὓνεκα παντων,
  ὅτι σοφρονικῶς, κοὐκ ἀνοήτως ἐσπήδησας ἐφλυάρει,
  αἴρεσθ᾽ αὐτῷ πολὺ τὸ ῥόθιον, παραπέμψατ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἓνδεκα κώπαις
                 θόρυβον χρηστὸν ληναΐτην,
                 ἳν᾽ ὁ ποιητὴς ἀπίῃ χαίρων,
                     κατὰ νοῦν πράξας,
                 φαιδρὸς λάμποντι μετώπῳ._

ARISTOPHANES.


  _Io vorrei, Monsignor, solo tant' arte
   Ch'io potessi, per longo e per traverso,
   Dipingervi il mio cor in queste carte._

LUDOVICO DOLCE.


  _Nous nous aimons un peu, c'est notre faible à tous;
   Le prix que nous valons qui le sçait mieux que nous?
   Et puis la mode en est, et la cour l'autorise
   Nous parlons de nous mêmes avec tout franchise._

CORNEILLE.


_Mes paroles sont un peu de dure digestion pour la foiblesse des 
estomacs d' à present. Mais si on les remâche bien, on en tirera 
beaucoup de substance._

MADEMOISELLE BOURIGNON.


_Supersunt etiam plurima quæ dici possint in hanc materiam, quibus pro 
vitando fastidio, supersedendum puto; ut si quis eadem conari velit, 
habiat etiamnum aliquid in quo exerceat industriam._

REN. RAPIN.


I wish thee as much pleasure in the reading, as I had in the writing.

QUARLES.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER CCI.—p. 1.

QUESTION CONCERNING THE USE OF TONGUES.—THE ATHANASIAN 
CONFESSORS.—GIBBON'S RELATION OF THE SUPPOSED MIRACLE OF TONGUES.—THE 
FACTS SHOWN TO BE TRUE, THE MIRACLE IMAGINARY, AND THE HISTORIAN THE 
DUPE OF HIS OWN UNBELIEF.

_Perseveremus, peractis quæ rem continebant, scrutari etiam ea quæ, si 
vis verum connexa sunt, non cohærentia; quæ quisquis diligenter 
inspicit, nec facit operæ prætium, nec tamen perdit operam._

SENECA.


