CHAPTER CCVI.

THE SUBJECT CONTINUED.—OPINIONS OF THE RABBIS.—ANECDOTE OF LADY JEKYLL 
AND A TART REPLY OF WILLIAM WHISTON'S.—JEAN D'ESPAGNE.—QUEEN ELIZABETH 
OF THE QUORUM QUARUM QUORUM GENDER.—THE SOCIETY OF GENTLEMEN AGREE 
WITH MAHOMET IN SUPPOSING THAT WOMEN HAVE NO SOULS, BUT ARE OF OPINION 
THAT THE DEVIL IS AN HERMAPHRODITE.

Sing of the nature of women; and then the song shall be surely full of 
variety, old crotchets, and most sweet closes: it shall be humourous, 
grave, fantastic, amorous, melancholy, sprightly, one in all and all 
in one.

MARSTON.


The Doctor had other theological arguments in aid of the opinion which 
he was pleased to support. The remark has been made which is curious, 
or in the language of Jeremy Taylor's age, _considerable_, that we 
read in Genesis how when God saw every thing else which he had made he 
pronounced that it was very good, but he did not say this of the 
woman.

There are indeed certain Rabbis who affirm that Eve was not taken out 
of Adam's side: but that Adam had originally been created with a tail 
(herein agreeing with the well-known theory of Lord Monboddo) and that 
among the various experiments and improvements which were made in his 
form and organization before he was finished, the tail was removed as 
an inconvenient appendage, and of the excrescence or superfluous part 
which was then lopt off, the Woman was formed.

We are not bound to believe the Rabbis in every thing, the Doctor 
would say; and yet it cannot be denied that they have preserved some 
valuable traditions which ought to be regarded with much respect. And 
then by a gentle inclination of the head—and a peculiar glance of the 
eye, he let it be understood that this was one of those traditions 
which were entitled to consideration. It was not impossible he said, 
but that a different reading in the original text might support such 
an interpretation: the same word in Hebrew frequently signified 
different things, and rib and tail might in that language be as near 
each other in sound or as easily miswritten by a hasty hand, or 
misread by an inaccurate eye as _costa_ and _cauda_ in Latin. He did 
not pretend that this was the case—but that it might be so. And by a 
like corruption (for to such corruptions all written and even all 
printed books are liable) the text may have represented that Eve was 
taken from the side of her husband instead of from that part of the 
back where the tail grew. The dropping of a syllable might occasion 
it.

And this view of the question he said, derived strong support from 
that well known and indubitable text wherein the Husband is called the 
Head; for although that expression is in itself most clear and 
significative in its own substantive meaning, it becomes still more 
beautifully and emphatically appropriate when considered as referring 
to this interpretation and tradition, and implying as a direct and 
necessary converse that the Wife is the Tail.

There is another legend relating to a like but even less worthy 
formation of the first helpmate, and this also is ascribed to the 
Rabbis. According to this mythos the rib which had been taken from 
Adam was for a moment laid down, and in that moment a monkey stole it 
and ran off with it full speed. An Angel pursued, and though not in 
league with the Monkey he could have been no good Angel; for 
overtaking him, he caught him by the Tail, brought it maliciously back 
instead of the Rib, and of that Tail, was Woman made. What became of 
the Rib, with which the Monkey got clear off, “was never to mortal 
known.”

However the Doctor admitted that on the whole the received opinion was 
the more probable. And after making this admission he related an 
anecdote of Lady Jekyll who was fond of puzzling herself and others 
with such questions as had been common enough a generation before her, 
in the days of the Athenian Oracle. She asked William Whiston of 
berhymed name and eccentric memory, one day at her husband's table to 
resolve a difficulty which occurred to her in the Mosaic account of 
the creation. “Since it pleased God, Sir,” said she, “to create the 
Woman out of the Man, why did he form her out of the rib rather than 
any other part.” Whiston scratched his head and answered. “Indeed 
Madam I do not know, unless it be that the rib is the most crooked 
part of the body.” “There!” said her husband, “you have it now: I hope 
you are satisfied!”

He had found in the writings of the Huguenot divine, Jean D'Espagne, 
that Women have never had either the gift of tongues, or of miracle; 
the latter gift according to this theologian being withheld from them 
because it properly accompanies preaching, and women are forbidden to 
be preachers. A reason for the former exception the Doctor supplied; 
he said it was because one tongue was quite enough for them: and he 
entirely agreed with the Frenchman that it must be so, because there 
could have been no peace on earth had it been otherwise. But whether 
the sex worked miracles or not, was a point which he left the 
Catholics to contend. Female Saints there certainly had been,—“the 
Lord,” as Daniel Rogers said, “had gifted and graced many women above 
some men especially with holy affections; I know not,” says that 
divine, “why he should do it else (for he is wise and not superfluous 
in needless things) save that as a Pearl shining through a chrystal 
glass, so her excellency shining through her weakness of sex, might 
show the glory of the workman.” He quoted also what the biographer of 
one of the St. Catharines says, “that such a woman ought not to be 
called a woman, but rather an earthly Angel, or a heavenly homo: _hæc 
fœmina, sed potius Angelus terrestris, vel si malueris, homo cælestis 
dicenda erat, quam fœmina._” In like manner the Hungarians thinking it 
infamous for a nation to be governed by a woman—and yet perceiving the 
great advantage of preserving the succession, when the crown fell to a 
female, they called her King Mary, instead of Queen.

And Queen Elizabeth rather than be accounted of the feminine gender, 
claimed it as her prerogative to be of all three. “A prime officer 
with a White Staff coming into her presence” she willed him to bestow 
a place then vacant upon a person whom she named. “May it please your 
Highness Madam,” said the Lord, “the disposal of that place pertaineth 
to me by virtue of this White Staff.” “True,” replied the Queen, “yet 
I never gave you your office so absolutely, but that I still reserved 
myself of the _Quorum_.” “Of the _Quarum_, Madam,” returned the Lord, 
presuming, somewhat too far, upon her favour.—Whereat she snatched the 
staff in some anger out of his hand, and told him “he should 
acknowledge her of the _Quorum, Quorum, Quorum_ before he had it 
again.”

It was well known indeed to Philosophers, he said, that the female is 
an imperfection or default in nature, whose constant design is to form 
a male; but where strength and temperament are wanting—a defective 
production is the result. Aristotle therefore calls Woman a Monster, 
and Plato makes it a question whether she ought not to be ranked among 
irrational creatures. There were Greek Philosophers, who (rightly in 
his judgment) derived the name of _Ἀθηνῆ_ from _Θῆλυς_ and _alpha 
privativa_, as implying that the Goddess of wisdom, though Goddess, 
was nevertheless no female, having nothing of female imperfection. And 
a book unjustly ascribed to the learned Acidalius was published in 
Latin, and afterwards in French, to prove that women were not 
reasonable creatures, but distinguished from men by this specific 
difference, as well as in sex.

Mahomet too was not the only person who has supposed that women have 
no souls. In this Christian and reformed country, the question was 
propounded to the British Apollo whether there is now, or will be at 
the resurrection any females in Heaven—since, says the questioner, 
there seems to be no need of them there! The Society of Gentlemen who, 
(in imitation of John Dunton, his brother-in-law the elder Wesley, and 
their coadjutors,) had undertaken in this Journal to answer all 
questions, returned a grave reply, that sexes being corporeal 
distinctions there could be no such distinction among the souls which 
are now in bliss; neither could it exist after the resurrection, for 
they who partook of eternal life neither marry nor are given in 
marriage.

That same Society supposed the Devil to be an Hermaphrodite, for 
though by his roughness they said he might be thought of the masculine 
gender, they were led to that opinion because he appeared so often in 
petticoats.




