CHAPTER CCXXXIV.

OPINION OF A MODERN DIVINE UPON THE WHEREABOUT OF NEWLY DEPARTED 
SPIRITS.—ST. JOHN'S BURIAL, ONE RELIC ONLY OF THAT SAINT, AND 
WHEREFORE.—A TALE CONCERNING ABRAHAM, ADAM AND EVE.

_Je sçay qu'il y a plusieurs qui diront que je fais beaucoup de petits 
fats contes, dont je m'en passerois bien. Ouy, bien pour aucuns,—mais 
non pour moy, me contentant de m'en renouveller le souvenance, et en 
tirer autant de plaisir._

BRANTÔME.


Watts who came to the odd conclusion in his Philosophical Essay, that 
there may be Spirits which must be said, in strict philosophy to be no 
where, endeavoured to explain what he called the _ubi_ or _whereness_ 
of those spirits which are in a more imaginable situation. While man 
is alive, the soul he thought might be said to be in his brain, 
because the seat of consciousness seems to be there; but as soon as it 
is dislodged from that local habitation by death, it finds itself at 
once in a heaven or hell of its own, and this “without any removal or 
relation to place, or change of distances.” The shell is broken, the 
veil is withdrawn; it is where it was, but in a different mode of 
existence, in the pure intellectual, or separate world. “It reflects 
upon its own temper and actions in this life, it is conscious of its 
virtues, or its vices,” and it has an endless spring of peace and joy 
within, or is tormented with the anguish of self condemnation.

In his speculations the separation of soul from body is total, till 
their re-union at the day of judgment; and this unquestionably is the 
christian belief. The fablers of all religions have taken a different 
view, because at all times and in all countries they have accommodated 
their fictions to the notions of the people. The grave is with them a 
place of rest, or of suffering. If Young had been a Jew, a Mahommedan, 
or a Roman Catholic, he might be understood as speaking literally when 
he says,

  How populous, how vital is the grave.

St. Augustine had been assured by what he considered no light 
testimony that St. John was not dead, but asleep in his sepulchre, and 
that the motion of his breast as he breathed might be perceived by a 
gentle movement of the earth. The words of our Lord after his 
Resurrection, concerning the beloved disciple, “If I will that he 
tarry till I come, what is that to thee,” gave scope to conjecture 
concerning the fate of this Evangelist, and yet in some degree set 
bounds to that spirit of lying invention which in process of time 
annexed as many fables to corrupted Christianity as the Greek and 
Roman poets had engrafted upon their heathenism, or the Rabbis upon 
the Jewish faith. “Sinner that I am,” said a French prelate with 
demure irony, when a head of St. John the Baptist was presented to him 
to kiss in some Church of which it was the choicest treasure,—“sinner 
that I am, this is the fourth head of the glorious Baptist that I have 
had the happiness of holding in these unworthy hands!” But while some 
half dozen or half score of these heads were produced, because it was 
certain that the Saint had been beheaded, no relic of St. John the 
Evangelist's person, nor of the Virgin Mary's, was ever invented. The 
story of the Assumption precluded any such invention in the one 
case,—and in St. John's the mysterious uncertainty of his fate had the 
same effect as this received tradition. The Benedictines of St. 
Claude's Monastery in the Jura exhibited his own manuscript of the 
Apocalypse,—(the most learned of that order in no unlearned age, 
believed or affected to believe that it was his actual autograph,)—and 
they considered that it was greatly enhanced in value by its being the 
only relic of that Saint in existence.

The fable which St. Augustine seems to have believed, was either 
parent or child of the story told under the name of Abdias, that when 
the Beloved Disciple had attained the postdiluvian age of ninety 
seven, our Lord appeared to him, said unto him, “come unto me, that 
thou mayest partake at my feast with thy brethren,” and fixed the next 
Sunday, being Easter, for his removal from this world. On that Sunday 
accordingly, the Evangelist after having performed service in his own 
temple at Ephesus, and exhorted the people, told some of his chosen 
disciples to take with them two mattocks and spade, and accompany him 
therewith. They went to a place near the city, where he had been 
accustomed to pray, there he bade them dig a grave, and when they 
would have ceased from the work, he bade them dig it still deeper. 
Then taking off all his garments except a linen vestment, he spread 
them in the grave, laid himself down upon them, ordered his disciples 
to cover him up, and forthwith fell asleep in the Lord. Abdias 
proceeds no farther with the story; but other ecclesiastic romancers 
add that the evangelist enjoined them to open the grave on the day 
following; they did so and found nothing but his garments, for the 
blessed virgin in recompence for the filial piety which he had 
manifested towards her in obedience to our Lord's injunctions from the 
cross, had obtained for him the privilege of an Assumption like her 
own. Baronius has no objection to believe this, but that St. John 
actually died is, he says more than certain,—_certo certius_; and that 
his grave at Ephesus was proof of it, for _certe non nisi mortuorum 
solent esse sepulchra_.

Yet the Cardinal knew that the historian of his Church frequently 
represented the dead as sentient in their graves. The Jews have some 
remarkable legends founded upon the same notion. It is written in the 
book of Zohar, say the Rabbis, how when Abraham had made a covenant 
with the people of the land, and was about to make a feast for them, a 
calf which was to be slaughtered on the occasion, broke loose and ran 
into the cave of Machpelah. Abraham followed, and having entered the 
cave in pursuit, there he discovered the bodies of Adam and Eve, each 
on a bed, with lamps burning between them. They were sleeping the 
sleep of death, and there was a good odour around them, like the odour 
of repose. In consequence of having made this discovery it was that he 
desired to purchase the cave for his own burial place; and when the 
sons of Jebus refused to sell it, he fell upon his knees, and bowed 
himself before them, till they were entreated. When he came to deposit 
the body of Sarah there, Adam and Eve rose up, and refused their 
consent. The reason which they gave for this unexpected prohibition 
was, that they were already in a state of reproach before the Lord, 
because of their transgression, and a farther reproach would be 
brought upon them by a comparison with his good deeds, if they allowed 
such company to be introduced into their resting place. But Abraham 
took upon himself to answer for that; upon this they were satisfied 
with his assurances, and composed themselves again to their long 
sleep.

The Rabbis may be left to contend for the authority of the book of 
Zohar in this particular against the story of the Cabalists that 
Adam's bones were taken into the Ark, and divided afterwards by Noah 
among his sons. The skull fell to Shem's portion; he burnt it on the 
mountain which for that reason obtained the name of Golgotha, or 
Calvary,—being interpreted, the place of a skull, and on that spot, 
for mystical signification the cross whereon our Saviour suffered was 
erected;—a wild legend, on which as wild a fiction has been grafted, 
that a branch from the Tree of Life had been planted on Adam's grave, 
and from the wood which that branch had produced the cross was made.

And against either of these the authority of Rabbi Judas Bar Simon is 
to be opposed, for he affirms that the dust of Adam was washed away by 
the Deluge, and utterly dispersed.

The Rabbis have also to establish the credit of their own tradition 
against that of the Arabs who at this time shew Eve's grave near 
Jeddah;—about three days journey east from that place, according to 
Bruce. He says, it is covered with green sods, and about fifty yards 
in length. The Cashmerian traveller Abdulkurreem who visited it in 
1742, says that it measured an hundred and ninety-seven of his 
footsteps, which would make the mother of mankind much taller than 
Bruce's measurement. He likens it to a flower-bed; on the middle of 
the grave there was then a small dome, and the ends of it were 
enclosed with wooden pales. Burckhardt did not visit it; he was told 
that it was about two miles only, northward of the town, and that it 
was a rude structure of stone, some four feet in length, two or three 
in height and as many in breadth, thus resembling the tomb of Noah, 
which is shewn in the valley of Bekaa, in Syria. Thus widely do these 
modern travellers, on any one of whom reasonable reliance might have 
been placed, differ in the account of the same thing.




