CHAPTER CCXXIX.

RATS LIKE LEARNED MEN LIABLE TO BE LED BY THE NOSE.—THE ATTENDANT UPON 
THE STEPS OF MAN, AND A SORT OF INSEPARABLE ACCIDENT.—SEIGNEUR DE 
HUMESESNE AND PANTAGRUEL.

  Where my pen hath offended,
  I pray you it may be amended
  By discrete consideration
  Of your wise reformation:
  I have not offended, I trust,
  If it be sadly discust.

SKELTON.


Marvel not reader that rats, though they are among the most sagacious 
of all animals, should be led by the nose. It has been the fate of 
many great men, many learned men, most weak ones and some cunning 
ones.

When we regard the comparative sagacity of animals, it should always 
be remembered that every creature, from the lowest point of sentient 
existence upward, till we arrive at man, is endued with sagacity 
sufficient to provide for its own well-being, and for the continuance 
of its kind. They are gifted with greater endowments as they ascend in 
the scale of being, and those who lead a life of danger, and at the 
same time of enterprise, have their faculties improved by practice, 
take lessons from experience, and draw rational conclusions upon 
matters within their sphere of intellect and of action, more 
sagaciously than nine tenths of the human race can do.

Now no other animal is placed in circumstances which tend so 
continually to sharpen its wits,—(were I writing to the learned only, 
I should perhaps say to acuate its faculties, or to develope its 
intellectual powers,) as the rat, nor does any other appear to be of a 
more improvable nature. He is of a most intelligent family, being 
related to the Beaver. And in civilized countries he is not a wild 
creature, for he follows the progress of civilization, and adapts his 
own habits of life to it, so as to avail himself of its benefits.

The “pampered Goose” who in Pope's Essay retorts upon man, and says 
that man was made for the use of Geese, must have been forgetful of 
plucking time, as well as ignorant of the rites that are celebrated in 
all old-fashioned families on St. Michael's day. But the Rat might 
with more apparent reason support such an assertion: he is not 
mistaken in thinking that corn-stacks are as much for his use as for 
the farmers; that barns and granaries are his winter magazines; that 
the Miller is his acting partner, the Cheesemonger his purveyor, and 
the Storekeeper his steward. He places himself in relation with man, 
not as his dependent like the dog, nor like the cat as his ally, nor 
like the sheep as his property, nor like the ox as his servant, nor 
like horse and ass as his slaves, nor like poultry who are to “come 
and be killed” when Mrs. Bond invites them; but as his enemy, a bold 
borderer, a Johnnie Armstrong or Rob Roy who acknowledge no right of 
property in others, and live by spoil.

Wheresoever man goes, Rat follows, or accompanies him. Town or country 
are equally agreeable to him. He enters upon your house as a tenant at 
will, (his own, not yours,) works out for himself a covered way in 
your walls, ascends by it from one story to another, and leaving you 
the larger apartments, takes possession of the space between floor and 
ceiling, as an entresol for himself. There he has his parties, and his 
revels and his gallopades, (merry ones they are) when you would be 
asleep, if it were not for the spirit with which the youth and belles 
of Rat-land keep up the ball over your head. And you are more 
fortunate than most of your neighbours, if he does not prepare for 
himself a mausoleum behind your chimney-piece or under your 
hearth-stone,[1] retire into it when he is about to die, and very soon 
afford you full proof that though he may have lived like a hermit, his 
relics are not in the odour of sanctity. You have then the additional 
comfort of knowing that the spot so appropriated will thenceforth be 
used either as a common cemetery, or a family vault. In this respect, 
as in many others, nearer approaches are made to us by inferior 
creatures than are dreamt of in our philosophy.

[Footnote 1: Southey alludes here to an incident which occurred in his 
own house. On taking up the hearth-stone in the dining-room at 
Keswick, it was found that the mice had made underneath it a Campo 
Santo,—a depository for their dead.]

The adventurous merchant ships a cargo for some distant port, Rat goes 
with it. Great Britain plants a colony in Botany Bay, Van Diemen's 
Land, or at the Swan River, Rat takes the opportunity for colonizing 
also. Ships are sent out upon a voyage of discovery. Rat embarks as a 
volunteer. He doubled the Stormy Cape with Diaz, arrived at Malabar in 
the first European vessel with Gama, discovered the new world with 
Columbus and took possession of it at the same time, and 
circumnavigated the globe with Magellan and with Drake and with Cook.

After all, the Seigneur de Humesesne, whatever were the merits of that 
great case which he pleaded before Pantagruel at Paris, had reasonable 
grounds for his assertion when he said, _Monsieur et Messieurs, si 
l'iniquité des hommes estoit aussi facilement vuë en jugement 
categorique, comme on connoit mousches en lait, le monde quatre bœufs 
ne seroit tant mangé de Rats comme il est._

The Doctor thought there was no creature to which you could trace back 
so many persons in civilized society by the indications which they 
afforded of habits acquired in their prænatal professional education. 
In what other vehicle, during its ascent could the Archeus of the 
Sailor have acquired the innate courage, the constant presence of 
mind, and the inexhaustible resources which characterise a true 
seaman? Through this link too, on his progress towards humanity, the 
good soldier has past, who is brave, alert and vigilant, cautious 
never to give his enemy an opportunity of advantage, and watchful to 
lose the occasion that presents itself. From the Rat our Philosopher 
traced the engineer, the miner, the lawyer, the thief, and the 
thief-taker,—that is, generally speaking: some of these might have 
pre-existed in the same state as moles or ferrets; but those who 
excelled in their respective professions had most probably been 
trained as rats.

The judicious reader will do me the justice to observe that as I am 
only faithfully representing the opinions and fancies of my venerable 
friend, I add neither M. P., Dean, Bishop nor Peer to the list, nor 
any of those public men who are known to hanker after candle-ends and 
cheese-parings.

  Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time;
  But men may construe things after their fashion,
  Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.[2]

[Footnote 2: SHAKSPEARE.]

It behoves me to refrain more especially upon this subject from 
anything which the malicious might interpret as scandal: for the word 
itself _σκάνδαλον_, the Greek grammarians tell us, and the great 
Anglo-Latin Lexicographist tells me, properly signifies that little 
piece of wood in a mouse-trap or pit-fall, which bears up the trap, 
and being touched, lets it fall.




