CHAPTER CCXXXVI.

CHARITY OF THE DOCTOR IN HIS OPINIONS.—MASON THE POET.—POLITICAL 
MEDICINE.—SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE.—CERVANTES.—STATE PHYSICIANS.—ADVANTAGE 
TO BE DERIVED FROM, WHETHER TO KING, CABINET, LORDS OR 
COMMONS.—EXAMPLES.—PHILOSOPHY OF POPULAR EXPRESSIONS.—COTTON 
MATHER.—CLAUDE PAJON AND BARNABAS OLEY.—TIMOTHY ROGERS AND MELANCHOLY.

                              Go to!
  You are a subtile nation, you physicians,
  And grown the only cabinets in court!

B. JONSON.


The Doctor, who was charitable in all his opinions, used to account 
and apologize for many of the errors of men, by what he called the 
original sin of their constitution, using the term not theologically, 
but in a physico-philosophical sense. What an old French physician 
said concerning Charles VIII. was in entire accord with his 
speculations,—_ce corps etoit composé de mauvais pâte, et de matiere 
cathareuse._ Men of hard hearts and heavy intellect, he said, were 
made of stony materials. For a drunkard, his qualifying censure 
was,—“poor fellow! bibulous clay—bibulous clay!” Your light-brained, 
light-hearted people, who are too giddy ever to be good, had not earth 
enough, he said, in their composition. Those upon whose ungrateful 
temper benefits were ill bestowed, and on whom the blessings of 
fortune were thrown away, he excused by saying that they were made 
from a sandy soil;—and for Mammon's muckworms,—their mould was taken 
from the dunghill.

Mason the poet was a man of ill-natured politics, out of humour with 
his country till the French Revolution startled him and brought him 
into a better state of feeling. This however was not while the Doctor 
lived, and till that time he could see nothing but tyranny and 
injustice in the proceedings of the British Government, and nothing 
but slavery and ruin to come for the nation. These opinions were the 
effects of Whiggery[1] acting upon a sour stomach and a saturnine 
constitution. To think ill of the present and augur worse of the 
future has long been accounted a proof of patriotism among those who 
by an illustrious antiphrasis call themselves patriots. “What the 
Romans scorned to do after the battle of Cannæ,” said Lord Keeper 
Finch in one of his solid and eloquent speeches, “what the Venetians 
never did when they had lost all their _terra firma_, that men are now 
taught to think a virtue and the sign of a wise and good man, 
_desperare de Republica_: and all this in a time of as much justice 
and peace at home, as good laws for the security of religion and 
liberty, as good execution of these laws, as great plenty of trade and 
commerce abroad, and as likely a conjuncture of affairs for the 
continuance of these blessings to us, as ever nation prospered under.”

[Footnote 1: See Vol. IV. p. 375.]

The Doctor, when he spoke of this part of Mason's character, explained 
it by saying that the elements had not been happily tempered in 
him—“cold and dry, Sir!” and then he shook his head and knit his brow 
with that sort of compassionate look which came naturally into his 
countenance when he was questioned concerning a patient whose state 
was unfavourable.

But though he believed that many of our sins and propensities are bred 
in the bone, he disputed the other part of the proverb, and maintained 
that they might be got out of the flesh. And then generalizing with a 
rapidity worthy of Humboldt himself, he asserted that all political 
evils in modern ages and civilized states were mainly owing to a 
neglect of the medical art;—and that there would not, and could not be 
so many distempers in the body politic, if the _primæ viæ_ were but 
attended to with proper care; an opinion in which he was fortified by 
the authority of Sir William Temple.

“I have observed the fate of _Campania_,” says that eminent statesman, 
“determine contrary to all appearances, by the caution and conduct of 
a General, which was attributed by those that knew him, to his age and 
infirmities, rather than his own true qualities, acknowledged 
otherwise to have been as great as most men of the age. I have seen 
the counsels of a noble country grow bold, or timorous, according to 
the fits of his good or ill-health that managed them, and the pulse of 
the Government beat high with that of the Governor; and this unequal 
conduct makes way for great accidents in the world. Nay, I have often 
reflected upon the counsels and fortunes of the greatest monarchies 
rising and decaying sensibly with the ages and healths of the Princes 
and chief officers that governed them. And I remember one great 
minister that confessed to me, when he fell into one of his usual fits 
of the gout, he was no longer able to bend his mind or thought to any 
public business, nor give audiences beyond two or three of his 
domestics, though it were to save a kingdom; and that this proceeded 
not from any violence of pain, but from a general languishing and 
faintness of spirits, which made him in those fits think nothing worth 
the trouble of one careful or solicitous thought. For the approaches, 
or lurkings of the Gout, the Spleen, or the Scurvy, nay the very fumes 
of indigestion, may indispose men to thought and to care, as well as 
diseases of danger and pain. Thus accidents of health grow to be 
accidents of State, and public constitutions come to depend in a great 
measure upon those of particular men; which makes it perhaps seem 
necessary in the choice of persons for great employments (at least 
such as require constant application and pains) to consider their 
bodies as well as their minds, and ages and health as well as their 
abilities.”

Cervantes according to the Doctor clearly perceived this great truth, 
and went farther than Sir W. Temple, for he perceived also the 
practical application, though it was one of those truths which because 
it might have been dangerous for him to propound them seriously, he 
was fain to bring forward in a comic guise, leaving it for the wise to 
discover his meaning, and for posterity to profit by it. He 
knew—(_Daniel loquitur_) what did not Cervantes know?—that if Philip 
II. had committed himself to the superintendence of a Physician 
instead of a Father Confessor, many of the crimes and miseries by 
which his reign is so infamously distinguished, might have been 
prevented. A man of his sad spirit and melancholy complection to be 
dieted upon fish the whole forty days of Lent, two days in the week 
during the rest of the year, and on the eve of every holiday 
besides,—what could be expected but atrabilious thoughts, and 
cold-blooded resolutions? Therefore Cervantes appointed a Physician 
over Sancho in his Baratarian government: the humour of the scene was 
for all readers, the application for those who could penetrate beyond 
the veil, the benefit for happier ages when the art of Government 
should be better understood, and the science of medicine be raised to 
its proper station in the state.

Shakespere intended to convey the same political lesson, when he said 
“take physic pomp!” He used the word pomp instead of power, 
cautiously, for in those days it was a perilous thing to meddle with 
matters of state.

When the Philosopher Carneades undertook to confute Zeno the Stoic in 
public argument, (still reader _Daniel loquitur_) how did he prepare 
himself for the arduous disputation? by purging his head with 
hellebore, to the intent that the corrupt humours which ascended 
thither from the stomach should not disturb the seat of memory and 
judgment, and obscure his intellectual perception. The theory, Sir, 
was erroneous, but the principle is good. When we require best music 
from the instrument, ought we not first to be careful that all its 
parts are in good order, and if we find a string that jars, use our 
endeavours for tuning it?

It may have been the jest of a satirist that Dryden considered stewed 
prunes as the best means of putting his body into a state favourable 
for heroic composition; but that odd person George Wither tells us of 
himself that he usually watched and fasted when he composed, that his 
spirit was lost if at such times he tasted meat or drink, and that if 
he took a glass of wine he could not write a verse:—no wonder 
therefore that his verses were for the most part in a weak and watery 
vein.[2] Father Paul Sarpi had a still more extraordinary custom; it 
is not to an enemy, but to his friend and admirers that we are 
indebted for informing us with what care that excellent writer 
attended to physical circumstance as affecting his intellectual 
powers. For when he was either reading or writing, alone, “his 
manner,” says Sir Henry Wotton, “was to sit fenced with a castle of 
paper about his chair, and over head; for he was of our Lord of St. 
Alban's opinion _that all air is predatory_, and especially hurtful 
when the spirits are most employed.”

[Footnote 2: The Greek Proverb, adverted to by Horace in i. Epist. 
xix., was in the Doctor's thoughts.

  _ὓδωρ δὲ πίνων οὐδὲν ἂν τέκοι σοφόν._]

There should be a State Physician to the King, besides his Physicians 
ordinary and extraordinary,—one whose sole business should be to watch 
over the royal health as connected with the discharge of the royal 
functions, a head keeper of the King's health.

For the same reason there ought to be a Physician for the Cabinet, a 
Physician for the Privy Council, a Physician for the Bench of Bishops, 
a Physician for the twelve Judges, two for the House of Lords, four 
for the House of Commons, one for the Admiralty, one for the War 
Office, one for the Directors of the East India Company, (there was no 
Board of Controul in the Doctor's days, or he would certainly have 
advised that a Physician should be placed upon that Establishment 
also): one for the Lord Mayor, two for the Common Council, four for 
the Livery. (He was speaking in the days of Wilkes and Liberty). How 
much mischief, said he, might have been prevented by cupping the Lord 
Mayor, blistering a few of the Aldermen, administering salts and manna 
to lower the pulse of civic patriotism, and keeping the city orators 
upon a low regimen for a week before every public meeting.

Then in the Cabinet what evils might be averted by administering 
laxatives or corroborants as the case required.

In the Lords and Commons, by clearing away bile, evacuating ill 
humours and occasionally by cutting for the simples.[3]

[Footnote 3: The probable origin of this Proverb is given in Grose's 
Dictionary of the vulgar tongue.]

While men are what they are, weak, frail, inconstant, fallible, 
peccable, sinful creatures,—it is in vain to hope that Peers and 
Commoners will prepare themselves for the solemn exercise of their 
legislative functions by fasting and prayer,—that so they may be 
better fitted for retiring into themselves, and consulting upon 
momentous questions the Urim and Thummim which God hath placed in the 
breast of every man. But even as Laws are necessary for keeping men 
within the limits of their duty when conscience fails, so in this case 
it should be part of the law of Parliament that what its Members will 
not do for themselves, the Physician should do for them. They should 
go through a preparatory course of medicine before every session, and 
be carefully attended as long as Parliament was sitting.

Traces of such a practice, as of many important and primeval truths, 
are found among savages, from whom the Doctor was of opinion that much 
might be learnt, if their customs were diligently observed and their 
traditions carefully studied. In one of the bravest nations upon the 
Mississippi, the warriors before they set out upon an expedition 
always prepared themselves by taking the Medicine of War, which was an 
emetic, about a gallon in quantity for each man, and to be swallowed 
at one draught. There are other tribes in which the Beloved Women 
prepare a beverage at the Physic Dance, and it is taken to wash away 
sin.

Here said the Doctor are vestiges of early wisdom, probably 
patriarchal and if so, revealed,—for he held that all needful 
knowledge was imparted to man at his creation. And the truth of the 
principle is shown in common language. There is often a philosophy in 
popular expressions and forms of speech, which escapes notice, because 
words are taken as they are uttered, at their current value and we 
rest satisfied with their trivial acceptation. We take them in the 
husk and the shell, but sometimes it is worth while to look for the 
kernel. Do we not speak of _sound_ and orthodox opinions,—_sound_ 
principles, _sound_ learning? _mens sana in corpore sano._ A sound 
mind is connected with a sound body, and sound and orthodox opinions 
result from the sanity of both. Unsound opinions are diseased ones, 
and therefore the factious, the heretical and the schismatic, ought to 
be put under the care of a physician.

“I have read of a gentleman,” says Cotton Mather, “who had an humour 
of making singular and fanciful expositions of scripture; but one 
Doctor Sim gave him a dose of physic, which when it had wrought, the 
gentleman became orthodox immediately and expounded at the old rate no 
more.”

Thus as the accurate and moderate and erudite Mosheim informs us, the 
French theologian Claude Pajon was of opinion that in order to produce 
that amendment of the heart which is called regeneration, nothing more 
is requisite than to put the body, if its habit is bad, into a sound 
state by the power of physic, and having done this, than to set truth 
and falsehood before the understanding, and virtue and vice before the 
will, clearly and distinctly in their genuine colours, so as that 
their nature and their properties may be fully apprehended. But the 
Doctor thought that Pajon carried his theory too far, and ought to 
have been physicked himself.

That learned and good man Barnabas Oley, the friend and biographer of 
the saintly Herbert, kept within the bounds of discretion, when he 
delivered an opinion of the same tendency. After showing what power is 
exercised by art over nature, 1st. in inanimate materials, 2dly. in 
vegetables, and 3dly. the largeness or latitude of its power over the 
memory, the imagination and locomotive faculties of sensitive 
creatures, he proceeds to the fourth rank, the rational, “which adds a 
diadem of excellency to the three degrees above mentioned, being an 
approach unto the nature angelical and divine.” “Now,” says he, “1st. 
in as much as the human body partly agrees with the first rank of 
materials inanimate, so can Art partly use it, as it uses them, to 
frame (rather to modify the frame of) it into great variety; the head 
thus, the nose so; and other ductile parts, as is seen and read, after 
other fashions. 2. Art can do something to the Body answerable to what 
Gardeners do to plants. If our Blessed Saviour's words (Matthew VI. 
27.) deny all possibility of adding procerity or tallness to the 
stature, yet as the Lord Verulam notes to make the Body dwarfish, 
crook-shouldered (as some Persians did) to recover straightness, or 
procure slenderness, is in the power of Art. But, 3. much more 
considerable authority has it over the humours, either so to impel and 
enrage them, that like furious streams they shall dash the Body (that 
bottom wherein the precious Soul is embarked) against dangerous rocks, 
or run it upon desperate sands; or so to attemper and tune them, that 
they shall become like calm waters or harmonious instruments for 
virtuous habits, introduced by wholesome moral precepts, to practise 
upon. It is scarce credible what services the _Noble Science of 
Physic_ may do unto Moral, (_yea to Grace and Christian_) virtue, by 
prescribing diet to prevent, or medicine to allay the fervors and 
eruptions of humours, of blood, and of that _irriguum concupiscentiæ_, 
or _ὁ τροχὸς τῆς γενέσεως_, especially if these jewels, their recipes, 
light into obedient ears. These helps of bettering nature, are within 
her lowest and middle region of Diet and Medicine.”

A sensible woman of the Doctor's acquaintance, (the mother of a young 
family) entered so far into his views upon this subject, that she 
taught her children from their earliest childhood to consider 
ill-humour as a disorder which was to be cured by physic. Accordingly 
she had always small doses ready, and the little patients whenever it 
was thought needful took rhubarb _for the crossness_. No punishment 
was required. Peevishness or ill-temper and rhubarb were associated in 
their minds always as cause and effect.

There are Divines who have thought that melancholy may with advantage 
be treated in age, as fretfulness in this family was in childhood. 
Timothy Rogers, who having been long afflicted with Trouble of Mind 
and the Disease of Melancholy, wrote a discourse concerning both for 
the use of his fellow sufferers, says of Melancholy, that “it does 
generally indeed first begin at the body, and then conveys its venom 
to the mind; and if any thing could be found that might keep the blood 
and spirits in their due temper and motion, this would obstruct its 
further progress, and in a great measure keep the soul clear. I 
pretend not (he continues) to tell you what medicines are proper to 
remove it, and I know of none, I leave you to advise with such as are 
learned in the profession of Physic.” And then he quotes a passage 
from “old Mr. Greenham's Comfort for afflicted Consciences.” “If a 
Man,” saith old Mr. Greenham, “that is troubled in conscience come to 
a Minister, it may be he will look all to the Soul and nothing to the 
Body: if he come to a Physician he considereth the Body and neglecteth 
the Soul. For my part, I would never have the Physician's counsel 
despised, nor the labour of the Minister neglected: because the Soul 
and Body dwelling together,—it is convenient, that as the Soul should 
be cured by the Word, by Prayer, by Fasting, or by Comforting, so the 
Body must be brought into some temperature by physic, and diet, by 
harmless diversions and such like ways; providing always that it be so 
done in the fear of God, as not to think by these ordinary means quite 
to smother or evade our troubles, but to use them as preparatives, 
whereby our Souls may be made more capable of the spiritual methods 
which are to follow afterwards.”

But Timothy Bright, Doctor of Physic, is the person who had the most 
profound reverence for the medical art. “No one,” he said, “should 
touch so holy a thing that hath not passed the whole discipline of 
liberal sciences, and washed himself pure and clean in the waters of 
wisdom and understanding.” “O Timothy Bright, Timothy Bright,” said 
the Doctor, “rightly wert thou called Timothy Bright, for thou wert a 
Bright Timothy!” Nor art thou less deserving of praise, O Timothy 
Bright, say I, for having published an abridgement of the Book of Acts 
and Monuments of the Church, written by that Reverend Father Master 
John Fox, and by thee thus reduced into a more accessible form,—for 
such as either through want of leisure or ability, have not the use of 
so necessary a history.




