CHAPTER CCXIV.

FURTHER DIFFICULTIES.—QUESTION CONCERNING INFERIOR APPARITIONS.—BLAKE 
THE PAINTER, AND THE GHOST OF A FLEA.

_In amplissimâ causâ, quasi magno mari, pluribus ventis sumus vecti._

PLINY.


There was another argument against the immortality of brutes, to which 
it may be, he allowed the more weight, because it was of his own 
excogitating. Often as he had heard of apparitions in animal forms, 
all such tales were of some spirit or hobgoblin which had assumed that 
appearance; as, for instance that _simulacrum admodum monstruosum_, 
that portentous figure in which Pope Gregory the ninth after his death 
was met roaming about the woods by a holy hermit: it was in the form 
of a wild beast with the head of an ass, the body of a bear, and the 
tail of a cat. Well might the good hermit fortify himself with making 
the sign of the cross when he beheld this monster: he approved himself 
a courageous man by speaking to the apparition which certainly was not 
“in such a questionable shape” as to invite discourse: and we are 
beholden to him for having transmitted to posterity the bestial Pope's 
confession, that because he had lived an unreasonable and lawless 
life, it was the will of God and of St. Peter whose chair he had 
defiled by all kinds of abominations, that he should thus wander about 
in a form of ferine monstrosity.

He had read of such apparitions, and been sufficiently afraid of 
meeting a barguest[1] in his boyish days; but in no instance had he 
ever heard of the ghost of an animal. Yet if the immaterial part of 
such creatures survived in a separate state of consciousness why 
should not their spirits sometimes have been seen as well as those of 
our departed fellow creatures? No cock or hen ghost ever haunted its 
own barn door; no child was ever alarmed by the spirit of its pet 
lamb; no dog or cat ever came like a shadow to visit the hearth on 
which it rested when living. It is laid down as a certain truth 
deduced from the surest principles of demonology by the Jesuit 
Thyræus, who had profoundly studied that science that whenever the 
apparition of a brute beast or monster was seen, it was a Devil in 
that shape. _Quotiescumque sub brutorum animantium forma conspiciuntur 
spiritus, quotiescumque monstra exhibentur dubium non est,_ 
autoprosopos _adesse Dæmoniorum spiritus._ For such forms were not 
suitable for human spirits, but for evil Demons they were in many 
respects peculiarly so: and such apparitions were frequent.

[Footnote 1: A northern word, used in Cumberland and Yorkshire. 
Brocket and Grose neither of them seem aware that this spirit or dæmon 
had the form of the beast. Their derivations are severally “_Berg_ a 
hill, and _geest_ ghost;”—“_Bar_, a gate or style, and _gheist_.”

The locality of the spirit will suggest a reference to the Icelandic 
_Berserkr_. In that language _Bera_ and _Bersi_ both signify a 
_bear_.]

Thus the Jesuit reasoned, the possibility that the spirit of a brute 
might appear never occurring to him, because he would have deemed it 
heretical to allow that there was anything in the brute creation 
partaking of immortality. No such objection occurred to the Doctor in 
his reasonings upon this point. His was a more comprehensive creed; 
the doubt which he felt was not concerning the spirit of brute 
animals, but whether it ever existed in a separate state after death, 
which the Ghost of one, were there but one such appearance well 
attested, would sufficiently prove.

He admitted indeed that for every authenticated case of an apparition, 
a peculiar cause was to be assigned, or presumed; but that for the 
apparition of an inferior animal, there could in general be no such 
cause. Yet cases are imaginable wherein there might be such peculiar 
cause, and some final purpose only to be brought about by such 
preternatural means. The strong affection which leads a dog to die 
upon his master's grave, might bring back the spirit of a dog to watch 
for the safety of a living master. That no animal ghosts should have 
been seen afforded therefore in this judgment no weak presumption 
against their existence.

O Dove, “my guide, philosopher and friend!” that thou hadst lived to 
see what I have seen, the portrait of the Ghost of a Flea, engraved by 
Varley, from the original by Blake! The engraver was present when the 
likeness was taken, and relates the circumstances thus in his Treatise 
on Zodiacal Physiognomy.

“This spirit visited his imagination in such a figure as he never 
anticipated in an insect. As I was anxious to make the most correct 
investigation in my power of the truth of these visions, on hearing of 
this spiritual apparition of a Flea, I asked him if he could draw for 
me the resemblance of what he saw. He instantly said, ‘I see him now 
before me.’ I therefore gave him paper and a pencil, with which he 
drew the portrait of which a fac-simile is given in this number. I 
felt convinced by his mode of proceeding, that he had a real image 
before him; for he left off, and began on another part of the paper to 
make a separate drawing of the mouth of the Flea, which the spirit 
having opened, he was prevented from proceeding with the first sketch 
till he had closed it. During the time occupied in compleating the 
drawing, the Flea told him that all fleas were inhabited by the souls 
of such men as were by nature blood-thirsty to excess, and were 
therefore providentially confined to the size and form of insects; 
otherwise, were he himself, for instance, the size of a horse, he 
would depopulate a great portion of the country. He added that if in 
attempting to leap from one island to another he should fall into the 
sea, he could swim, and should not be lost.”

The Ghost of the Flea spoke truly when he said what a formidable beast 
he should be, if with such power of leg and of proboscis, and such an 
appetite for blood he were as large as a horse. And if all things came 
by chance, it would necessarily follow from the laws of chance that 
such monsters there would be; but because all things are wisely and 
mercifully ordered, it is, that these varieties of form and power 
which would be hideous, and beyond measure destructive upon a larger 
scale, are left in the lower stages of being, the existence of such 
deformity and such means of destruction there, and their non-existence 
as the scale of life ascends, alike tending to prove the wisdom and 
the benevolence of the Almighty Creator.




