CHAPTER CCXLII.

FARTHER REMARKS UPON THE EFFECTS OF SCHISM, AND THE ADVANTAGES WHICH 
IT AFFORDS TO THE ROMISH CHURCH AND TO INFIDELITY.

               —_Io non ci ho interresso
    Nessun, nè vi fui mai, ne manco chieggo
    Per quel ch'io ne vò dir, d'esservi messo.
  Vò dir, che senza passion eleggo,
    E non forzato, e senza pigliar parte;
    Di dirne tutto quel, ch'intendo e veggo._

BRONZINO PITTORE.


One cause why infidelity gained ground among the middle and the lower 
classes was, that owing to the increase of population, the growth of 
the metropolis, and the defects of our Church Establishment, no 
provision had been made for their religious instruction. Every one 
belonged to a parish, but in populous parishes a small part only of 
the parishioners belonged to the Clergyman's flock; his fold in very 
many places would not have contained half, and in some, not a tenth of 
them; they were left therefore as stray sheep, for false shepherds and 
for the wolf. This was the main cause of the increase of dissenters 
among us, and their increase occasioned an increase of infidelity. 
Many of their ministers and more of their students, revolting against 
the monstrous doctrines of Calvinism, past from one extreme to the 
other, more gradually indeed than their brethren have done in Germany, 
in Geneva and in New England, for they halted awhile on Arian ground, 
before they pitched their tents in the debateable land of Socinianism, 
where not a few of them afterwards crossed the border. The principle 
of Nonconformity itself led naturally to this consequence; it 
scornfully rejected that reasonable and well-defined submission to 
authority required by the Church of England, which is the true 
Catholic Church; and thus it encouraged and indeed invited tutors and 
pupils at their Academies to make their own immature and 
ill-instructed reason the test of all truths. A good and wise man has 
well remarked that “what men take for, or at least assert to be, the 
dictates of their conscience, may often in fact, be only the dictates 
of their pride.” With equal truth also he has said that he who 
“decides for himself in rejecting what almost all others receive, has 
not shewn himself at least in one instance to be a ‘wise man;’—he does 
not ‘know that he is a fool.’”

This cause was continually operating upon their students and younger 
ministers during the latter half of the last century. It was suspended 
first by the missionary spirit, which called forth a high degree of 
enthusiasm, and gave that feeling its most useful direction, and 
secondly by the revival of political Puritanism, as soon as the 
successors of the Parliamentary Divines thought themselves strong 
enough to act as a party in the state, and declare war against the 
Establishment. But as in that time, so in a greater degree at present, 
the floating population who by no fault of their own are 
extra-parochial as to all purposes of church-worship and religious 
instruction, are as much endangered by facility of change, as the 
students used to be by their boasted liberty of choice. Sectarian 
history might supply numerous examples; one may be related here for 
the extraordinary way in which it terminated. I know not from what 
community of Christians the hero of the tale strayed over to the 
Methodists, but he enjoyed for awhile the dream of perfection, and the 
privilege of assurance as one of their members. When this excitement 
had spent itself, he sought for quietness among the Quakers, _thee'd_ 
his neighbour, wore drab, and would not have pulled off his hat to the 
king. After awhile, from considering, with them, that baptism was a 
beggarly element, he passed to the opposite extreme; it was not enough 
for him to have been sprinkled in his infancy, he must be dipt over 
head and ears in the water, and up he rose, rejoicing as he shook his 
dripping locks, that he was now a Baptist. His zeal then took another 
direction; he had a strong desire to convert the lost sheep of Israel; 
and off he set from a remote part of the country to engage in single 
controversy with a learned Rabbi in one of the Midland counties. Tell 
it not in Duke's-Place! Publish it not in the Magazine of the Society 
for converting the Jews!—The Rabbi converted him: and if the victor in 
the dispute had thought proper to take the _spolia opima_ which were 
fairly lost, the vanquished would have paid the penalty, as he 
conceived himself in honour and in conscience bound. He returned home 
glorying in his defeat, a Jew in every thing but parentage and the 
outward and visible sign. The sons of the synagogue are not ambitious 
of making converts, and they did not chuse to adopt him by performing 
the initiating rites. He obtained it however from a Christian surgeon, 
who after many refusals, was induced at length in humanity to oblige 
him, lest, as he solemnly declared he would, he should perform it upon 
himself.

They who begin in enthusiasm, passing in its heat and giddiness from 
one sect to another, and cooling at every transition, generally settle 
in formalism where they find some substantial worldly motives for 
becoming fixed; but where the worldly motives are wanting, it depends 
upon temperament and accident whether they run headlong into 
infidelity, or take refuge from it in the Roman Catholic church. The 
papal clergy in England have always known how to fish in troubled 
waters; and when the waters are still, there are few among them who 
have not been well instructed in the art of catching gudgeons. Our 
clergy have never been in the same sense, fishers of men.

In an epigram written under the portrait of Gibbon, as unquotable at 
length, as it is unjust in part of the lines which may be quoted, the 
face is said to be

                 —the likeness of one
  Who through every religion in Europe has run
  And ended at last in believing in none.

It was a base epigram which traduced the historian's political 
character for no other reason than that he was not a Whig; and it 
reproached him for that part of his conduct which was truly 
honourable,—the sincerity with which, when ill-instructed, he became a 
Roman Catholic, and the propriety with which, after full and patient 
investigation, he gave up the tenets of the Romish church as 
untenable. That he proceeded farther, and yielded that which can be 
maintained against the Gates of Hell, is to be lamented deeply for his 
own sake, and for those in whom he has sown the seeds of infidelity. 
But the process from change to change is a common one, and the cases 
are few wherein there is so much to extenuate the culpability of the 
individual. It was not in the self-sufficiency of empty ignorance that 
Gibbon and Bayle went astray; generally the danger is in proportion to 
the want of knowledge; there are more shipwrecks among the shallows 
than in the deep sea.

During the great Rebellion, when the wild beasts had trampled down the 
fences, broken into the vineyard and laid it waste, it is curious to 
observe the course taken by men who felt for various causes, according 
to their different characters, the necessity of attaching themselves 
to some religious communion. Cottington, being in Spain, found it 
convenient to be reconciled to the Romish church; the dominant 
religion being to him, as a politician, the best. Weak and plodding 
men like Father Cressey took the same turn in dull sincerity: Davenant 
because he could not bear the misery of a state of doubt, and was glad 
to rest his head upon the pillow of authority; Goring from remorse; 
Digby (a little later) from ambition, and Lambert, because he was sick 
of the freaks and follies of the sectaries.

Their “opinions and contests,” says Sir Philip Warwick, “flung all 
into chaos, and this gave the great advantages to the Romanists, who 
want not their differences among themselves, but better manage them; 
for they having retained a great part of primitive truths, and having 
to plead some antiquity for their many doctrinal errors and their 
ambitious and lucrative encroachments, and having the policy of 
flinging coloquintida into our pot, by our dissentions and follies, 
they have with the motion of the circle of the wheel, brought 
themselves who were at the Nadir, to be almost at the Zenith of our 
globe.”

In no other age (except in our own and now from a totally different 
cause) did the Papists increase their numbers so greatly in this 
kingdom. And infidelity in all its grades kept pace with popery. “Look 
but upon many of our Gentry,” says Sanderson, (writing under the 
Commonwealth,) “what they are already grown to from what they were, 
within the compass of a few years: and then _ex pede Herculem_; by 
that, guess what a few years more may do. Do we not see some, and 
those not a few, that have strong natural parts, but little sense of 
religion turned (little better than professed) Atheists. And other 
some, nor those a few, that have good affections, but weak and 
unsettled judgements, or (which is still but the same weakness) an 
overweening opinion of their own understandings, either quite turned, 
or upon the point of turning Papists? These be sad things, God 
knoweth, and we all know, not visibly imputable to any thing so much, 
as to those distractions, confusions and uncertainties that in point 
of religion have broken in upon us, since the late changes that have 
happened among us in church affairs.”

The Revolution by which the civil and religious liberties of the 
British nation were, at great cost, preserved, stopt the growth of 
popery among us for nearly an hundred years: but infidelity meanwhile 
was little impeded in its progress by the occasional condemnation of a 
worthless book; and the excellent works which were written to expose 
the sophistry, the ignorance, and the misrepresentations of the 
infidel authors seldom found readers among the persons to whom they 
might have been most useful. It may be questioned whether any of 
Jeremy Bentham's misbelieving disciples has ever read Berkeley's 
Minute Philosopher, or the kindred work of Skelton which a London 
bookseller published upon Hume's _imprimatur_.




