CHAPTER CCXXVIII.

RATS.—PLAN OF THE LAUREATE SOUTHEY FOR LESSENING THEIR NUMBER.—THE 
DOCTOR'S HUMANITY IN REFUSING TO SELL POISON TO KILL VERMIN, AFTER THE 
EXAMPLE OF PETER HOPKINS HIS MASTER.—POLITICAL RATS NOT ALLUDED 
TO.—RECIPE FOR KILLING RATS.

I know that nothing can be so innocently writ, or carried, but may be 
made obnoxious to construction; marry, whilst I bear mine innocence 
about me, I fear it not.

BEN JONSON.


The Laureate Southey proposed some years ago in one of his numerous 
and multifarious books, three methods for lessening the number of 
rats, one of which was to inoculate some of these creatures with the 
small pox or any other infectious disease, and turn them loose. 
Experiments, he said, should first be made, lest the disease should 
assume in them so new a form, as to be capable of being returned to us 
with interest. If it succeeded, man has means in his hand which would 
thin the hyenas, wolves, jackals and all gregarious beasts of prey.

Considering the direction which the March of his Intellect has long 
been taking, it would surprise me greatly if the Laureate were now to 
recommend or justify any such plan. For setting aside the contemplated 
possibility of physical danger, there are moral and religious 
considerations which ought to deter us from making use of any such 
means, even for an allowable end.

Dr. Dove, like his master and benefactor Peter Hopkins before him, 
never would sell poison for destroying vermin. Hopkins came to that 
resolution in consequence of having been called as a witness upon a 
trial for poisoning at York. The arsenic had not been bought at his 
shop; but to prevent the possibility of being innocently instrumental 
to the commission of such a crime, he made it from that time a rule 
for himself, irrevocable as the laws of the Medes and Persians, that 
to no person whatever, on any account, would he supply ingredients 
which by carelessness or even by unavoidable accident might be so 
fatally applied.

To this rule his pupil and successor, our Doctor, religiously adhered. 
And when any one not acquainted with the rule of the shop, came there 
on such an errand, he used always, if he was on the spot, to recommend 
other methods, adapting his arguments to what he knew of the person's 
character, or judged of it from his physiognomy. To an ill-conditioned 
and ill-looking applicant he simply recommended certain ways of 
entrapping rats as more convenient, and more likely to prove 
efficacious: but to those of whom he entertained a more favourable 
opinion, he would hint at the cruelty of using poison, observing that 
though we exercised a clear natural right in destroying noxious 
creatures, we were not without sin if in so doing we inflicted upon 
them any suffering more than what must needs accompany a violent 
death.

Some good natured reader who is pestered with rats in his house, his 
warehouses, or his barns, will perhaps when he comes to this part of 
our book wish to be informed in what manner our Zoophilist would have 
advised him to rid himself of these vermin.

There are two things to be considered here, first how to catch rats, 
and secondly, how to destroy them when caught. And the first of these 
questions is a delicate one, when a greater catch has recently been 
made than any that was ever heard of before, except in the famous 
adventure of the Pied Piper at Hammel. Jack Robinson had some 
reputation in his day for his professional talents in this line, but 
he was a bungler in comparison with Mr. Peel.

The second belongs to a science which Jeremy the thrice illustrious 
Bentham calls Phthisozoics, or the art of destruction applied to 
noxious animals, a science which the said Jeremy proposes should form 
part of the course of studies in his Chrestomathic school. There are 
no other animals in this country who do so much mischief now as the 
disciples of Jeremy himself.

But leaving this pestilent set, as one of the plagues with which Great 
Britain is afflicted for its sins; and intending no offence to any 
particular Bishop, Peer, Baronet, Peer-expectant, or public man 
whatever, and protesting against any application of what may here be 
said to any person who is, has been, or may be included under any of 
the forementioned denominations, I shall satisfy the good-natured 
reader's desires, and inform him in what manner our Philosopher and 
Zoophilist (philanthropist is a word which would poorly express the 
extent of his benevolence) advised those who consulted him as to the 
best manner of taking and destroying rats. Protesting therefore once 
more, as is needful in these ticklish times that I am speaking not of 
the Pro-papist or Anti-Hanoverian rat, which is a new species of the 
Parliament rat, but of the old Norway or Hanoverian one, which in the 
last century effected the conquest of our island by extirpating the 
original British breed, I inform the humane reader that the Doctor 
recommended nothing more than the common rat-catcher's receit, which 
is to lure them into a cage by oil of carroways, or of rhodium, and 
that when entrapped, the speediest and easiest death which can be 
inflicted is by sinking the cage in water.

Here Mr. Slenderwit, critic in ordinary to an established journal, 
wherein he is licensed to sink, burn and destroy any book in which his 
publisher has not a particular interest, turns down the corners of his 
mouth in contemptuous admiration, and calling to mind the anecdote of 
Grainger's invocation repeats in a tone of the softest 
self-complacence “Now Muse, let's sing of Rats!” And Mr. Slapdash who 
holds a similar appointment in a rival periodical slaps his thigh in 
exultation upon finding so good an opportunity for a stroke at the 
anonymous author. But let the one simper in accompaniment to the 
other's snarl. I shall say out my say in disregard of both. Aye 
Gentlemen,

  For if a Humble Bee should kill a Whale
  With the butt end of the Antarctic pole,
  Tis nothing to the mark at which we aim.




