CHAPTER CCXVII.

SOME ACCOUNT OF D. OLIVA SABUCO'S MEDICAL THEORIES AND PRACTICE.

  _Yo—volveré
   A nueva diligencia y paso largo,
   Que es breve el tiempo, 's grande la memoria
   Que para darla al mundo está á mi cargo._

BALBUENA.


Carew the poet speaking metaphorically of his mistress calls her foot,

          the precious root
  On which the goodly cedar grows.

Doña Oliva on the contrary thought that the human body might be called 
a tree reversed, the brain being the root, and the other the bark. She 
did not know what great authority there is for thinking that trees 
stand upon their heads, for though we use vulgarly but improperly to 
call the uppermost of the branches the top of a tree, we are 
corrected, the learned John Gregory tells us, by Aristotle in his 
books _De Animâ_,[1] where we are taught to call the root the head, 
and the top the feet.

[Footnote 1: Quære? Lib. ii. c. ii. § 6. _αἱ δὲ ρἵζαι τῷ στόματι 
ἀνάλογον κ. τ. ἑ._]

The _pia mater_ according to her theory diffuses through this bark by 
the nerves that substance, moisture, sap, or white chyle which when it 
flows in its proper course, preserves the human vegetable in a state 
of well being, but when its course is reverted it becomes the cause of 
diseases. This nervous fluid, the brain derived principally from the 
air, which she held to be water in a state of rarefaction, air being 
the chyle of the upper world, water of the inferior, and the Moon with 
air and water, as with milk, feeding like a nursing mother, all 
sublunary creatures, and imparting moisture for their increase, as the 
Sun imparteth heat and life. Clouds are the milk of the Moon, from 
which, if she may so express herself, she says it rains air and wind 
as well as water, wind being air, or rarefied water rarefied still 
farther. The mutation or rarefaction of water into air takes place by 
day, the remutation or condensation of air into water by night: this 
is shown by the dew and by this the ebbing and flowing of the sea are 
caused.

In the brain, as in the root of the animal tree, all diseases, 
according to Doña Oliva, had their origin. From this theory she 
deduced a mode of practice, which if it did not facilitate the 
patient's recovery, was at least not likely to retard it; and tended 
in no way to counteract, or interfere with the restorative efforts of 
nature. And although fanciful in its foundation, it was always so 
humane and generally so reasonable as in a great degree to justify the 
confidence with which she advanced it. She requested that a board of 
learned men might be appointed, before whom she might defend her 
system of philosophy and of therapeutics, and that her practice might 
be tried for one year, that of Hippocrates and Galen having been tried 
for two thousand with what effect was daily and miserably seen, when 
of a thousand persons there were scarcely three who reached the proper 
termination of life and died by natural decay, the rest being cut off 
by some violent disease. For, according to her, the natural 
termination of life is produced by the exhaustion of the radical 
moisture, which in the course of nature is dried, or consumed, 
gradually and imperceptibly; death therefore, when that course is not 
disturbed, being an easy passage to eternity. This gradual desiccation 
it is which gives to old age the perfection of judgment that 
distinguishes it; and for the same reason the children of old men are 
more judicious than others, young men being deficient in judgment by 
reason of the excess of radical moisture, children still more so.

She had never studied medicine, she said; but it was clear as the 
light of day that the old system was erroneous, and must needs be so, 
because its founders were ignorant of the nature of man, upon which 
being rightly understood the true system must, of necessity, be 
founded. Hope is what supports health and life; fear, the worst enemy 
of both. Among the best preservatives and restoratives she recommended 
therefore cheerfulness, sweet odours, music, the country, the sound of 
woods and waters, agreeable conversation, and pleasant pastimes. 
Music, of all external things, she held to be that which tends most to 
comfort, rejoice and strengthen the brain, being as it were a 
spiritual pleasure in which the mind sympathizes; and the first of all 
remedies, in this, her true system of medicine, was to bring the mind 
and body into unison, removing thus that discord which is occasioned 
when they are ill at ease; this was to be done by administering 
cheerfulness, content, and hope to the mind, and in such words and 
actions as produced these, the best medicine was contained. Next to 
this it imported to comfort the stomach, and to cherish the root of 
man, that is to say the brain, with its proper corroborants, 
especially with sweet odours and with music. For music was so good a 
remedy for melancholy, so great an alleviator of pain, such a soother 
of uneasy emotions, and of passion, that she marvelled wherefore so 
excellent a medicine should not be more in use, seeing that 
undoubtedly many grievous diseases, as for example epilepsy, might be 
disarmed and cured by it; and it would operate with the more effect if 
accompanied with hopeful words and with grateful odours, for Doña 
Oliva thought with Solomon that “pleasant words are as an honeycomb, 
sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.”

Consequently unpleasant sounds and ill smells, were, according to her 
philosophy injurious. The latter she confounded with noxious air, 
which was an error to be expected in those days, when nothing 
concerning the composition of the atmosphere had been discovered. Thus 
she thought it was by their ill odour that limekilns and 
charcoal-fires occasioned death; and that owing to the same cause 
horses were frequently killed when the filth of a stable was removed, 
and men who were employed in cleaning vaults. Upon the same principle, 
in recommending perfumes as alexipharmic, she fell in with the usual 
practice. The plague according to her, might be received not by the 
breath alone, but at the eyes also, for through the sight there was 
ready access to the brain; it was prudent therefore to close the 
nostrils when there might be reason to apprehend that the air was 
tainted; and when conversing with an infected person, not to talk face 
to face, but to avert the countenance. In changing the air with the 
hope of escaping an endemic disease, the place to go to should be that 
from whence the pestilence had come, rather than one whither it might 
be going.

Ill sounds were noxious in like manner, though not in like degree, 
because no discord can be so grating as to prove fatal; but any sound 
which is at once loud and discordant she held to be unwholesome, and 
that to hear any one sing badly, read ill, or talk importunately like 
a fool was sufficient to cause a defluxion from the brain; if this 
latter opinion were well founded, no Speaker of the House of Commons 
could hold his office for a single Session without being talked to 
death. With these she classed the sound of a hiccup, the whetting of a 
saw, and the cry of bitter lamentation.

Doña Oliva it may be presumed was endued with a sensitive ear and a 
quick perception of odours, as well as with a cheerful temper, and an 
active mind. Her whole course of practice was intended to cheer and 
comfort the patient, if that was possible. She allowed the free use of 
water, and fresh air, and recommended that the apartments of the sick 
should be well ventilated. She prescribed refreshing odours, among 
others that of bread fresh from the oven, and that wine should be 
placed near the pillow, in order to induce sleep. She even thought 
that cheerful apparel conduced to health, and that the fashion of 
wearing black which prevailed in her time was repugnant to reason. 
Pursuing her theory that the brain was the original seat of disease, 
she advised that the excessive moisture which would otherwise take a 
wrong course from thence, should be drawn off through the natural 
channels by sneezing powders, or by pungent odours which provoke a 
discharge from the eyes and nostrils, by sudorifics also, exercise, 
and whatever might cause a diversion to the skin. When any part was 
wounded, or painful, or there was a tumour, she recommended 
compression above the part affected, with a woollen bandage, tightly 
bound, but not so as to occasion pain. And to comfort the root of the 
animal tree she prescribes scratching the head with the fingers, or 
combing it with an ivory comb,—a general and admirable remedy she 
calls this, against which some former possessor of the book who seems 
to have been a practitioner upon the old system, and has frequently 
entered his protest against the medical heresies of the authoress, has 
written in the margin “bad advice.” She recommended also cutting the 
hair, and washing the head with white wine, which as it were renovated 
the skin, and improved the vegetation.

But Doña Oliva did not reject more active remedies, on the contrary 
she advised all such as men had learnt from animals, and this included 
a powerful list, for she seems to have believed all the fables with 
which natural history in old times abounded, and of which indeed it 
may almost be said to have consisted. More reasonably she observed 
that animals might teach us the utility of exercise, seeing how the 
young lambs sported in the field, and dogs played with each other, and 
birds rejoiced in the air. When the stomach required clearing she 
prescribed a rough practice, that the patient should drink copiously 
of weak wine and water, and of tepid water with a few drops of vinegar 
and an infusion of camomile flowers; and that he should eat also 
things difficult of digestion, such as radishes, figs, carrots, 
onions, anchovies, oil and vinegar, with plenty of Indian pepper, and 
with something acid the better to cut the phlegm which was to be got 
rid of; having thus stored the stomach well for the expenditure which 
was to be required from it, the patient was then to lay himself on a 
pillow across a chair, and produce the desired effect either by his 
fingers or by feathers dipt in oil. After this rude operation which 
was to refresh the brain and elevate the pia mater, the stomach was to 
be comforted.

To bathe the whole body with white wine was another mode of 
invigorating the pia mater; for there it was that all maladies 
originated, none from the liver; the nature of the liver, said she, is 
that it cannot err; _es docta sin doctor._

The latter treatises in her book are in Latin, but she not 
unfrequently passes, as if unconsciously, into her own language, 
writing always livelily and forcibly, with a clear perception of the 
fallacy of the established system, and with a confidence, not so well 
founded, that she had discovered the real nature of man and thereby 
laid the foundation of a rational practice, conformable to it.




