CHAPTER CCXL.

THE JESUIT GARASSE'S CENSURE OF HUARTE AND BARCLAY.—EXTRAORDINARY 
INVESTIGATION.—THE TENDENCY OF NATURE TO PRESERVE ITS OWN ARCHETYPAL 
FORMS.—THAT OF ART TO VARY THEM.—PORTRAITS.—MORAL AND PHYSICAL 
CADASTRE.—PARISH CHRONICLER AND PARISH CLERK THE DOCTOR THOUGHT MIGHT 
BE WELL UNITED.

             Is't you, Sir, that know things?

  SOOTH. In nature's infinite book of secresy,
           A little I can read.

SHAKSPEARE.


The Jesuit Garasse censured his contemporaries Huarte and Barclay for 
attempting, the one in his _Examen de los Ingenios_, the other in his 
_Icon Animorum_, to class men according to their intellectual 
characters: _ces deux Autheurs_, says he, _se sont rendus criminels 
contre l'esprit de l'homme, en ce qu'ils ont entrepris de ranger en 
cinq ou six cahiers, toutes les diversitez des esprits qui peuvent 
estre parmy les hommes, comme qui voudroit verser toute l'eau de la 
mer dans une coquille._ For his own part, he had learnt, he said, _et 
par la lecture, et par l'experience, que les hommes sont plus 
dissemblables en esprit qu'en visage._

Garasse was right; for there goes far more to the composition of an 
individual character, than of an individual face. It has sometimes 
happened that the portrait of one person has proved also to be a good 
likeness of another. Mr. Hazlitt recognized his own features and 
expression in one of Michael Angelo's devils. And in real life two 
faces, even though there be no relationship between the parties, may 
be all but indistinguishably alike, so that the one shall frequently 
be accosted for the other; yet no parity of character can be inferred 
from this resemblance. Poor Capt. Atkins, who was lost in the Defence 
off the coast of Jutland in 1811, had a double of this kind, that was 
the torment of his life; for this double was a swindler, who having 
discovered the lucky facsimileship, obtained goods, took up money, and 
at last married a wife in his name. Once when the real Capt. Atkins 
returned from a distant station, this poor woman who was awaiting him 
at Plymouth, put off in a boat, boarded the ship as soon as it came to 
anchor, and ran to welcome him as her husband.

The following Extraordinary Investigation, cut out of a Journal of the 
day, would have excited our Doctor's curiosity, and have led him on to 
remoter speculations.

“On Tuesday afternoon an adjourned inquest was held at the 
Christchurch workhouse. Boundary-row, Blackfriars-road, before Mr. R. 
Carter, on the body of Eliza Baker, aged 17, who was found drowned at 
the steps of Blackfriars-bridge, on Saturday morning, by a police 
constable. Mr. Peter Wood, an eating-house-keeper, in the Bermondsey 
New-road, near the Brick-layers Arms, having seen a paragraph in one 
of the Sunday newspapers, that the body of a female had been taken out 
of the Thames on the previous day, and carried to the workhouse to be 
owned, and, from the description given, suspecting that it was the 
body of a young female who had lived in his service, but who had been 
discharged by his wife on account of jealousy, he went to the 
workhouse and recognized the body of the unfortunate girl. He was very 
much agitated, and he cut off a lock of her hair, and kissed the 
corpse. He immediately went to an undertaker, and gave orders for the 
funeral. He then went to the deceased's parents, who reside in 
Adelaide-place, Whitecross-street, Cripplegate, and informed them of 
the melancholy fate of their daughter. They also went to the 
workhouse, and, on being shown the body, were loud in their 
lamentations.

“On the Jury having assembled on Monday evening, they proceeded to 
view the body of the deceased, and, on their return, a number of 
witnesses were examined, mostly relations, who swore positively to the 
body. From the evidence it appeared that the deceased had lived with 
Mr. Wood as a servant for four months, but his wife being jealous, she 
was discharged about a month ago, since which time Mr. Wood had 
secretly supplied her with money, and kept her from want. Mrs. Baker, 
the mother of the deceased, and other relations, in giving their 
evidence, spoke in severe terms of the conduct of Mr. Wood, and said 
that they had no doubt but that he had seduced the unfortunate girl, 
which had caused her to commit suicide.

“The Jury appeared to be very indignant, and, after five hours' 
deliberation, it was agreed to adjourn the case until Tuesday 
afternoon, when they re-assembled. Mr. Wood, the alleged seducer, was 
now present, but he was so overcome by his feelings at the melancholy 
occurrence, that nothing could be made of him; in fact, he was like a 
man in a state of stupefaction. Mrs. Wood, the wife was called in; she 
is twenty-eight years older than her husband, and shook her head at 
him, but nothing was elicited from her, her passion completely 
overcoming her reason.

“A Juryman.—The more we dive into this affair the more mysterious it 
appears against Mr. Wood.

“This remark was occasioned on account of some marks of violence on 
the body; there had been a violent blow on the nose, a black mark on 
the forehead, and a severe wound on the thigh. The Jury were 
commencing to deliberate on their verdict, when a drayman in the 
employ of Messrs. Whitbread and Co., brewers, walked into the 
jury-room, and said that, he wished to speak to the Coroner and Jury.

“Mr. Carter.—‘What is it you want?’

“Drayman.—‘I comes to say, gentlemen, that Mrs. Baker's daughter, you 
are now holding an inquest on, is now alive and in good health.’

“The Coroner and Jury (in astonishment).—‘What do you say?’

“Drayman.—‘I'll swear that I met her to-day in the streets, and spoke 
to her.’

“The Coroner, Witnesses, and Jury were all struck with amazement, and 
asked the drayman if he could bring Eliza Baker forward, which he 
undertook to do in a short time.

“In the interim the Jury and Witnesses went again to view the body of 
the deceased. Mr. Wood shed tears over the corpse, and was greatly 
affected, as well as her relations: the drayman's story was treated as 
nonsense, but the Jury, although of the same opinion, were determined 
to await his return. In about a quarter of an hour the drayman 
returned, and introduced the real Eliza Baker, a fine looking young 
woman, and in full health. To depict the astonishment of the relations 
and of Mr. Wood is totally impossible, and at first they were afraid 
to touch her. She at last went forward, and took Mr. Wood by the hand 
(who stood motionless), and exclaimed ‘How could you make such a 
mistake as to take another body for mine? Do you think I would commit 
such an act?’ Mr. Wood could not reply, but fell senseless in a fit, 
and it was with great difficulty that seven men could hold him. After 
some time he recovered, and walked away, to the astonishment of every 
one, with Eliza Baker, leaving his wife in the jury-room. Several of 
the Jurors remarked that they never saw such a strong likeness in 
their lives as there was between Eliza Baker and the deceased, which 
fully accounted for the mistake that the Witnesses had made.

“The whole scene was most extraordinary, and the countenances of 
Witnesses and Jurymen it is impossible to describe. There was no 
evidence to prove who the deceased was: and the Jury, after about 
eleven hours' investigation, returned a verdict of ‘Found drowned,’ 
but by what means the deceased came into the water there is no 
evidence to prove.”

But in such likenesses, the resemblance is probably never so exact as 
to deceive an intimate friend, except upon a cursory glance, at first 
sight: even between twins, when any other persons might be perplexed, 
the parents readily distinguish. The varieties of countenances are far 
more minute and consequently more numerous than would appear upon 
light consideration. A shepherd knows the face of every sheep in his 
flock, though to an inexperienced eye they all seem like one another.

The tendency of Nature is to preserve its own archetypal forms, the 
tendency of art and of what is called accident being to vary them. The 
varieties which are produced in plants by mere circumstances of soil 
and situation are very numerous, but those which are produced by 
culture are almost endless. Moral and physical circumstances effect 
changes as great, both externally and internally in man. Whoever 
consults the elaborate work of Dr. Prichard on the Physical History of 
Mankind, may there see it established by the most extensive research 
and the most satisfactory proofs, that the varieties of the human 
race, great and striking as they are, are all derived from one stock; 
philosophical enquiry here when fully and fairly pursued confirming 
the scriptural account, as it has done upon every subject which is 
within the scope of human investigation.

Dr. Dove in the course of his professional practise, had frequent 
opportunities of observing the stamp of family features at those times 
when it is most apparent; at birth, and in the last stage of 
decline,—for the elementary lines of the countenance come forth as 
distinctly in death as they were shaped in the womb. It is one of the 
most affecting circumstances connected with our decay and dissolution, 
that all traces of individual character in the face should thus 
disappear, the natural countenance alone remaining, and that in this 
respect the fresh corpse should resemble the new born babe. He had in 
the same way opportunities for observing that there were family 
dispositions both of body and mind, some remaining latent till the 
course of time developed them, and others till circumstances seemed as 
it were to quicken them into action. Whether these existed in most 
strength where the family likeness was strongest was a point on which 
his own observation was not extensive enough for him to form an 
opinion. Speculatively he inclined to think that moral resemblances 
were likely to manifest themselves in the countenance, but that 
constitutional ones must often exist where there could be no outward 
indication of them. Thus a family heart, (metaphorically speaking) may 
be recognized in the “life, conduct and behaviour,” though the face 
should be a false index; and hereditary tendencies in the great organs 
of life show themselves only in family diseases.

Under our Saxon Kings, a person was appointed in every great Monastery 
to record public events, register the deaths, promotions, &c., in the 
community, and enter in this current chronicle every occurrence in the 
neighbourhood which was thought worthy of notice. At the end of every 
reign, a summary record was compiled from these materials,—and to this 
we owe our Saxon Chronicle, the most ancient and authentic in Europe.

But he often regretted that in every generation so much knowledge was 
lost, and that so much experience was continually allowed to run to 
waste, many—very many of the evils which afflict mankind being 
occasioned by this neglect and perpetuated by it. Especially he 
regretted this in his own art: and this regret would not have been 
removed if Medical Journals had been as numerous in his days as they 
are at present. His wishes went much farther.

We are told that in the sixteenth century the great Lords in France 
piqued themselves upon having able and learned men for their 
secretaries, and treated them as their friends. The principal business 
of such secretaries was to keep a journal of the most interesting 
events; and the masters having witnessed or borne a part in the 
business of state were well able to inform them of the intrigues and 
tortuous policy of their own times. From such journals it is that most 
of those old Memoirs have been formed, in which French literature is 
so peculiarly rich. They usually include as much general history as is 
in any way connected with the personage whom the writer served.

Boswell, who if ever man went to Heaven for his good works, has gone 
there for his life of Johnson,—Boswell, I say thought, and Johnson 
agreed with him, that there ought to be a chronicler kept in every 
considerable family, to preserve the characters and transactions of 
successive generations. In like manner Milton's friend, Henry More the 
Platonist and Poet, would have had the stories of apparitions and 
witchcraft publicly recorded, as they occurred in every parish, 
thinking that this course would prove “one of the best antidotes 
against that earthly and cold disease of Sadducism and Atheism,” which 
he said, “if not prevented might easily grow upon us, to the hazard of 
all religion and the best kinds of philosophy.” Our philosopher had 
more comprehensive notions of what ought to be. He wished not only for 
such domestic chronicles, but that in every considerable family there 
should be a compleat set of portraits preserved in every generation, 
taken in so small a size that it might never be necessary to eject 
them in order to make room for others. When this had been done for 
some centuries, it might be seen how long a family likeness remains, 
whether Nature repeats her own forms at certain times, or after 
uncertain intervals; or whether she allows them to be continually 
modified, as families intermarry, till the original type at last may 
altogether be obliterated.

In China there are not only learned men whose business it is to record 
every thing remarkable that is either said or done by the reigning 
Emperor, (which is done for his own instruction, as well as for that 
of his successors,) but the great families, have in like manner their 
records, and these are considered as the most precious part of the 
inheritance which descends from sire to son. All who aspire to any 
high office are required to be well acquainted with the history of 
their ancestors, and in that history their indispensable 
qualifications are examined.

That excellent good man Gilpin drew up a family record of his great 
grandfather, grandfather and father, who had all been “very valuable 
men.” “I have often thought,” said he, “such little records might be 
very useful in families; whether the subjects of them were good or 
bad. A light house may serve equally the purpose of leading you into a 
haven, or deterring you from a rock.”[1]

  If it may stand with your soft blush, to hear
  Yourself but told unto yourself, and see
  In my character what your features be,
  You will not from the paper slightly pass.
  No lady, but at some time loves her glass.
  And this shall be no false one, but as much
  Removed, as you from need to have it such.[2]

[Footnote 1: WARNER'S RECOLLECTIONS.]

[Footnote 2: BEN JONSON.]

There was once a German who being poet, physician and physiognomist, 
saw in a vision of Paradise Physiognomy herself, and received from her 
a most gracious compliment, which lay buried among the Heidelberg 
Manuscripts in the Vatican, till Frederick Adelung in the year 1799, 
brought it to light some centuries after the very name of the poet had 
perished. Read the compliment, reader, if thou canst as given by the 
German antiquary, without note, comment, glossary, or punctuation. I 
can answer for the fidelity of my transcript, though not of his text.

  _Zu mir in gar glicher wise
   Quam us hymels paradyse
   Vil manich schöne frouwe name
   Jeglicher wol die kron zam
   Sie waren schöne und gecleit
   Vrauwelicher zuchte mynnekeit
   Sie ziert ine danne riche gewant
   Mir wart iglicher name bekant
   Wanne er in geschriben was
   An ir vorgespan als ich las_
   PHISONOMIA _kunstenriche
   Gutlicht redt wider mich
   Wir byden dich herre bescheiden
   Das du in gottes geleiden
   Dust machen myne lobelich kunst
   So hastu mynneclichen gunst
   Von mir und myner gespilen vil
   Der igliche dich des bidden wil
   Das du in erkennen gebest
   Und du in unser früntschaft lebest
   Alleine din cleit sy donne
   Got wil dir geben solich wonne
   Die mannich gelerter mane
   Nummer mer gewynnen kan._

There was no truth in Physiognomy when she made this promise to her 
medico-poet. Yet he deserved her gratitude for he taught that her 
unerring indications might be read not in the countenance alone, but 
in all the members of the human body.

In cases of disputed inheritance, when it is contended that the heir 
claimant is not the son of his reputed father, but a spurious, or 
supposititious child, such a series of portraits would be witnesses, 
he thought, against whose evidence no exception could be taken. Indeed 
such evidence would have disproved the impudent story of the Warming 
Pan, if any thing had depended upon legitimacy in that case; and in 
our times it might divest D. Miguel of all claim to the crown of 
Portugal, by right of birth.

But these legal and political uses he regarded as trifling when 
compared with the physiological inferences which in process of time 
might be obtained, for on this subject Mr. Shandy's views were far 
short of Dr. Dove's. The improvement of noses would be only an 
incidental consequence of the knowledge that might be gathered from 
the joint materials of the family portrait gallery, and the family 
chronicle. From a comparison of these materials it might be inferred 
with what temperaments of mind and of body, with what qualities good 
or evil, certain forms of feature, and certain characters of 
countenance were frequently found to be connected. And hence it might 
ultimately be learnt how to neutralize evil tendencies by judicious 
intermarriages, how to sweeten the disposition, cool the temper and 
improve the blood.

To be sure there were some difficulties in the way. You might expect 
from the family chronicler a faithful notice of the diseases which had 
proved dangerous or fatal; to this part of his duty there could be no 
objection. But to assure the same fidelity concerning moral and 
intellectual failings or vices, requires a degree of independence not 
to be hoped for from a writer so circumstanced. If it had still been 
the custom for great families to keep a Fool, as in old times, our  
Philosopher in his legislative character would have required that the 
Fool's more notable sayings should be recorded, well knowing that in 
his privileged freedom of speech, and the monitions and rebukes which 
he conveyed in a jest, the desiderated information would be contained. 
But in our present state of manners he could devise no better check 
upon the family historiographer,—no better provision against his sins 
both of omission and of commission, than that of the village or parish 
chronicle; for in every village or parish he would have had every 
notable event that occurred within its boundaries duly and 
authentically recorded. And as it should be the Chronicler's duty to 
keep a Remembrancer as well as a Register, in which whatever he could 
gather from tradition, or from the recollections of old persons was to 
be preserved, the real character which every person of local 
distinction had left behind him among his domestics and his neighbours 
would be found here, whatever might be recorded upon his monument.

By these means, one supplying the deficiencies of the other, our 
philosopher thought a knowledge of the defects and excellencies of 
every considerable family might be obtained, sufficient for the 
purposes of physiology, and for the public good.

There was a man in the neighbouring village of Bentley, who he used to 
say, would have made an excellent Parish Chronicler, an office which 
he thought might well be united with that of Parish Clerk.[3] This 
person went by the name of Billy Dutchman: he was a journeyman 
stone-mason, and kept a book wherein he inserted the name of every one 
by whom he had been employed, how many days he had worked in every 
week, and how many he had been idle, either owing to sickness or any 
other cause, and what money he had earned in each week, summing up the 
whole at the year's end. His earning in the course of nine and twenty 
years beginning in 1767, amounts to £583. 18_s._ 3_d._, being, he 
said, upon an average, seven shillings and ninepence a week.

[Footnote 3: Such a Chronicler is old James Long—now 77 years of 
age—50 of which he has served in the capacity of Parish Clerk of 
West-Tarring, in the County of Sussex. There is no by-gone incident in 
this, or the neighbouring Parishes,—no mere—stone or balk—with which 
he is not acquainted. Aged and truthful Chronicler!

             —Enjoy thy plainness
  It nothing ill becomes thee.—

Since the above was written the old man has been gathered to his 
fathers. _Requiescat in pace!_]

The Doctor would have approved of Jacob Abbott's extension of his own 
plan, and adaptation of it to a moral and religious purpose. Jacob 
Abbott, without any view to the physical importance of such documents, 
advises that domestic journals should be kept, “Let three or four of 
the older brothers and sisters of a family agree to write a history of 
the family, any father would procure a book for this purpose, and if 
the writers are young, the articles intended for insertion in it might 
be written first on separate paper, and then corrected and 
transcribed. The subjects suitable to be recorded in such a book will 
suggest themselves to every one; a description of the place of 
residence at the time of commencing the book, with similar 
descriptions of other places from time to time, in case of removals; 
the journies or absences of the head of the family or its members; the 
sad scenes of sickness or death which may be witnessed, and the joyous 
ones of weddings, or festivities, or holydays; the manner in which the 
members are from time to time employed; and pictures of the scenes 
which the fire-side group exhibits in the long winter evening, or the 
conversation which is heard, and the plans formed at the supper table 
or in the morning walk.

“If a family, where it is first established, should commence with such 
a record of their own efforts and plans, and the various dealings of 
Providence towards them, the father and the mother carrying it on 
jointly until the children are old enough to take the pen, they would 
find the work a source of great improvement and pleasure. It would 
tend to keep distinctly in view the great objects for which they ought 
to live; and repeatedly recognizing, as they doubtless would do, the 
hand of God, they would feel more sensibly and more constantly their 
dependence upon him.”




