CHAPTER CCXX.

DOÑA OLIVA'S PHILOSOPHY, AND VIEWS OF POLITICAL REFORMATION.

_Non vi par adunque che habbiamo ragionato a bastanza di questo?—A 
bastanza parmi, rispose il Signor Gaspar; par desidero io d'intendere 
qualche particolarita anchor._

CASTIGLIONE.


According to Doña Oliva's philosophy, the quantity of water is ten 
times greater than that of earth, air in like manner exceeding water 
in a ten fold degree, and fire in the same proportion out-measuring 
air. From the centre of the earth to the first heaven the distance by 
her computation is 36,292 leagues of three miles each and two thousand 
paces to the mile. From the surface of the earth to its centre, that 
centre being also the central point of the Infernal regions, her 
computed distance is 117,472 leagues. How far it is to the confines, 
has not been ascertained by discovery, and cannot be computed from any 
known data.

Pliny has preserved an anecdote in geological history, which relates 
to this point, and which, not without reason, he calls _exemplum 
vanitatis Græcæ maximum_. It relates to a certain philosopher, 
Dionysiodorus by name, who was celebrated for his mathematical 
attainments, and who it seems retained his attachment to that science 
after death, and continued the pursuit of it. For having died in a 
good old age, and received all fitting sepulchral rites, he wrote a 
letter from Hades to the female relations who had succeeded to his 
property, and who probably were addicted to the same studies as 
himself, for otherwise he would not have communicated with them upon 
such a subject. They found the letter in his sepulchre, wherein he had 
deposited it as at a post-office “till called for;” and whither he 
knew they would repair for the due performance of certain ceremonies, 
among others that of pouring libations through the perforated floor of 
the Tomb-chamber upon the dust below. The purport of his writing was 
not to inform them of his condition in the Shades, nor to communicate 
any information concerning the World of Spirits, but simply to state 
the scientific fact, that having arrived in the depths of the earth, 
he had found the distance from the surface to be 42,000 stadia. The 
philosophers to whom this _post-mortem_ communication was imparted, 
reasonably inferred that he had reached the very centre, and measured 
from that point; they calculated upon the data thus afforded them, and 
ascertained that the globe was exactly 250,000 stadia in 
circumference. Pliny however thought that this measurement was 12,000 
stadia short of the true amount. _Harmonica ratio_, he says, _quæ 
cogit rerum naturam sibi ipsam congruere, addit huic mensuræ stadia 
xii. millia; terramque nonagesimam sextam totius mundi partem facit._

“What is the centre of the earth?” says the melancholy Burton. “Is it 
pure element only as Aristotle decrees? Inhabited, as Paracelsus 
thinks, with creatures whose chaos is the earth? Or with Faeries, as 
the woods and waters, according to him, are with Nymphs? Or, as the 
air, with Spirits? Dionysiodorus,” he adds, “might have done well to 
have satisfied all these doubts?”

But the reason, according to Doña Oliva, wherefore the place of 
punishment for sinful souls has been appointed in the centre of this 
our habitable earth, is this; the soul being in its essence lighter 
than air, fire, or any of the ten spheres, has its natural place in 
the Empyreum or Heaven of Heavens, where the Celestial Court is fixed, 
and whither it would naturally ascend when set free from the body, as 
to its natural and proper place of rest. The punishment therefore is 
appropriately appointed in the place which is most remote from its 
native region, and most repugnant to its own nature, the pain 
therefore must needs be _fort et dure_ which it endures when confined 
within that core of the earth, to which all things that are heaviest 
gravitate.

In these fancies she only followed or applied the received opinions of 
the middle ages. A more remarkable part of her works, considering the 
time and place in which they were composed, is a Colloquy[1] upon the 
means by which the World and the Governments thereof might be 
improved. Having in her former treatises laid down a better system for 
treating the infirmities of the human microcosm, she enters nothing 
loth, and nothing doubting her own capacity, upon the maladies of the 
body politic.

[Footnote 1: _Colloquio de las Cosas que mejoraran este Mundo y sus 
Republicas._]

The first evils which occurred to her were those of the law, its 
uncertainty and its delays by which properties were wasted, families 
ruined and hearts broken. What barbarity it is, she says, that a cause 
should continue forty years in the Courts! that one Counsellor should 
tell you the right is on your side, and another should say the same 
thing to your adversary; that one decision should be given in one 
place, and another to revoke it in that; and in a third a different 
one from either, and all three perhaps equally wide of the truth and 
justice of the case, and yet each such as can be maintained by legal 
arguments, and supported by legal authorities! The cause of all this 
she ascribes to the multiplicity of laws and of legal books, which 
were more than enough to load twenty carts, and yet more were 
continually added, and all were in Latin. Could any folly exceed that 
of those lawgivers who presumed to prescribe laws for all possible 
contingencies, and for the whole course of future generations! She was 
therefore for reducing the written laws to a few fundamentals in the 
vernacular tongue, and leaving every thing else to be decided by men 
of good conscience and sincere understanding; by which the study of 
jurisprudence as a science would be abolished, and there might be an 
end to those numerous costly professorships for which so many chairs 
and universities had been founded. Ten short commandments comprised 
the law of God; but human laws by their number and by the manner in 
which they were administered occasioned more hurt to the souls of men 
than even to their lives and fortunes; for in courts of law it was 
customary, even if not openly permitted, to bear false witness against 
your neighbour, to calumniate him in writing, and to seek his 
destruction or his death. Laws which touched the life ought to be 
written, because in capital cases no man ought to be left to an 
uncertain sentence, nor to the will of a Judge, but all other cases 
should be left to the Judges, who ought always to be chosen from 
Monasteries, or some other course of retired life, and selected for 
their religious character. This she thought, with the imposition of a 
heavy fine for any direct falsehood, or false representation advanced 
either in evidence, or in pleading, and for denying the truth, or 
suppressing it, would produce the desired reformation.

Next she considered the condition of the agricultural labourers, a 
class which had greatly diminished and which it was most desirable to 
increase. Their condition was to be bettered by raising their wages 
and consequently the price of produce, and exempting their cattle, 
their stores and their persons from being taken in execution. She 
would also have them protected against their own imprudence, by 
preventing them from obtaining credit for wedding garments, that being 
one of the most prevalent and ruinous modes of extravagance in her 
days. In this rank of life it sometimes happened, that a shopkeeper 
not only seized the garments themselves, but the peasant's cattle also 
to make up the payment of a debt thus contracted.

She thought it a strange want of policy that in a country where the 
corn failed for want of rain, the waters with which all brooks and 
rivers were filled in winter should be allowed to run to waste. 
Therefore she advised that great tanks and reservoirs should be formed 
for the purposes of irrigation, and that they should be rendered 
doubly profitable by stocking them with fish, such as shad, tench and 
trout. She advised also that the seed should frequently be changed, 
and crops raised in succession, because the soil loved to embrace new 
products: and that new plants should be introduced from the Indies; 
where hitherto the Spaniards had been more intent upon introducing 
their own, than in bringing home from thence others to enrich their 
own country; the cacao in particular she recommended, noticing that 
this nut for its excellence had even been used as money.

Duels she thought the Christian Princes and the Pope might easily 
prevent, by erecting a Jurisdiction which should take cognizance of 
all affairs of honour. She would have had them also open the road to 
distinction for all who deserved it, so that no person should be 
debarred by his birth from attaining to any office or rank; this she 
said, was the way to have more Rolands and Cids, more Great Captains, 
more Hannibals and Tamerlanes.

Such were Doña Oliva's views of political reformation, the wretched 
state of law and of medicine explaining satisfactorily to her most of 
the evils with which Spain was afflicted in the reign of Philip II. 
She considered Law and Physic as the two great plagues of human life, 
according to the Spanish proverb,

  _A quien yo quiero mal,
   De le Dios pleyto y orinal._

Upon these subjects and such as these the Spanish lady might speculate 
freely; if she had any opinions which “savoured of the frying-pan,” 
she kept them to herself.




