CHAPTER CCIX.

EARLY APPROXIMATION TO THE DOCTOR'S THEORY.—GEORGE FOX.—ZACHARIAH BEN 
MOHAMMED.—COWPER.—INSTITUTES OF MENU.—BARDIC PHILOSOPHY. MILTON.—SIR 
THOMAS BROWNE.

There are distinct degrees of Being as there are degrees of Sound; and 
the whole world is but as it were a greater Gamut, or scale of music.

NORRIS.


Certain theologians, and certain theosophists, as men who fancy 
themselves inspired sometimes affect to be called, had approached so 
nearly to the Doctor's hypothesis of progressive life, and 
propensities continued in the ascending scale, that he appealed to 
them as authorities for its support. They saw the truth, he said, as 
far as they went; but it was only to a certain point: a step farther 
and the beautiful theory would have opened upon them. “How can we 
choose, said one, but remember the mercy of God in this our land in 
this particular, that no ravenous dangerous beasts do range in our 
nation, if men themselves would not be wolves and bears and lions one 
to another!” And why are they so, observed the Doctor commenting upon 
the words of the old Divine; why are they so, but because they have 
actually been lions and bears and wolves? why are they so, but 
because, as the wise heathen speaks, more truly than he was conscious 
of speaking, _sub hominum effigie latet ferinus animus_. The temper is 
congenital, the propensity innate; it is bred in the bone; and what 
Theologians call the old Adam, or the old Man, should physiologically, 
and perhaps therefore preferably, be called the old Beast.

That wise and good man William Jones of Nayland has in his sermon upon 
the nature and œconomy of Beasts and Cattle, a passage which in 
elucidating a remarkable part of the Law of Moses, may serve also as a 
glose or commentary upon the Doctor's theory.

“The Law of _Moses_, in the xith chapter of _Leviticus_, divides the 
brute creation into two grand parties, from the fashion of their feet, 
and their manner of feeding, that is, from the _parting of the hoof_, 
and the _chewing of the cud_; which properties are indications of 
their general characters, as _wild_ or _tame_. For the dividing of the 
hoof and the chewing of the cud are peculiar to those cattle which are 
serviceable to man's life, as sheep, oxen, goats, deer, and their 
several kinds. These are shod by the Creator for a peaceable and 
inoffensive progress through life; as the Scripture exhorts us to be 
_shod_ in like manner _with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace_. 
They live temperately upon herbage, the diet of students and saints; 
and after the taking of their food, chew it deliberately over again 
for better digestion; in which act they have all the appearance a 
brute can assume of pensiveness or meditation; which is, 
metaphorically, called _rumination_,[1] with reference to this 
property of certain animals.

[Footnote 1: Pallentes _ruminat_ herbas.—VIRGIL.

  Dum jacet, et lentè revocatas _ruminat_ herbas.—OVID.

It were hardly necessary to recal to an English reader's recollection 
the words of Brutus to Cassius,

  Till then, my noble friend, _chew_ upon this,—JULIUS CÆSAR.

or those of Agrippa in Antony and Cleopatra,

              Pardon what I have spoke;
  For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
  By duty _ruminated_.]

“Such are these: but when we compare the beasts of the field and the 
forest, they, instead of the harmless hoof, have feet which are _swift 
to shed blood_, (Rom. iii. 15.) sharp claws to seize upon their prey, 
and teeth to devour it; such as lions, tygers, leopards, wolves, 
foxes, and smaller vermin.

“Where one of the Mosaic marks is found, and the other is wanting, 
such creatures are of a middle character between the wild and the 
tame; as the swine, the hare, and some others. Those that part the 
hoof afford us wholesome nourishment; those that are shod with any 
kind of hoof may be made useful to man; as the camel, the horse, the 
ass, the mule; all of which are fit to travel and carry burdens. But 
when the foot is divided into many parts, and armed with claws, there 
is but small hope of the manners; such creatures being in general 
either murderers, or hunters, or thieves; the malefactors and felons 
of the brute creation: though among the wild there are all the 
possible gradations of ferocity and evil temper.

“Who can review the creatures of God, as they arrange themselves under 
the two great denominations of wild and tame, without wondering at 
their different dispositions and ways of life! sheep and oxen lead a 
sociable as well as a peaceful life; they are formed into flocks and 
herds; and as they live honestly they walk openly in the day. The time 
of darkness is to them, as to the virtuous and sober amongst men, a 
time of rest. But the beast of prey goeth about in solitude; the time 
of darkness is to him the time of action; then he visits the folds of 
sheep, and stalls of oxen, thirsting for their blood; as the thief and 
the murderer visits the habitations of men, for an opportunity of 
robbing, and destroying, under the concealment of the night. When the 
sun ariseth the beast of prey retires to the covert of the forest; and 
while the cattle are spreading themselves over a thousand hills in 
search of pasture, the tyrant of the desert is laying himself down in 
his den, to sleep off the fumes of his bloody meal. The ways of men 
are not less different than the ways of beasts; and here we may see 
them represented as on a glass; for, as the quietness of the pasture, 
in which the cattle spend their day, is to the howlings of a 
wilderness at night, such is the virtuous life of honest labour to the 
life of the thief, the oppressor, the murderer, and the midnight 
gamester, who live upon the losses and sufferings of other men.”

But how would the Doctor have delighted in the first Lesson of that 
excellent man's Book of Nature,—a book more likely to be useful than 
any other that has yet been written with the same good intent.


THE BEASTS.

“The ass hath very long ears, and yet he hath no sense of music, but 
brayeth with a frightful noise. He is obstinate and unruly, and will 
go his own way, even though he is severely beaten. The child, who will 
not be taught, is but little better; he has no delight in learning, 
but talketh of his own folly, and disturbeth others with his noise.

“The dog barketh all the night long, and thinks it no trouble to rob 
honest people of their rest.

“The fox is a cunning thief, and men, when they do not fear God, are 
crafty and deceitful. The wolf is cruel and blood-thirsty. As he 
devoureth the lamb, so do bad men oppress and tear the innocent and 
helpless.

“The adder is a poisonous snake, and hatha forked double tongue; and 
so men speak lies, and utter slanders against their neighbours, when 
_the poison of asps is under their lips_. The devil, who deceiveth 
with lies, and would destroy all mankind, is the _old serpent_, who 
brought death into the world by the venom of his bite. He would kill 
me, and all the children that are born, if God would let him; but 
Jesus Christ came to save us from his power, and to _destroy the works 
of the Devil_.

“Lord thou hast made me a man for thy service: O let me not dishonour 
thy work, by turning myself into the likeness of some evil beast: let 
me not be as the fox, who is a thief and a robber: let me never be 
cruel, as a wolf, to any of thy creatures; especially to my dear 
fellow-creatures, and my dearer fellow Christians; but let me be 
harmless as the lamb; quiet and submissive as the sheep; that so I may 
be fit to live, and be fed on thy pasture, under the good shepherd, 
Jesus Christ. It is far better to be the poorest of his flock, than to 
be proud and cruel, as the lion or the tiger, who go about seeking 
what they may devour.”


THE QUESTIONS.

“_Q_. What is the child that will not learn?

_A_. An ass, which is ignorant and unruly.

_Q_. What are wicked men, who hurt and cheat others?

_A_. They are wolves and foxes, and bloodthirsty lions.

_Q_. What are ill-natured people, who trouble their neighbours and 
rail at them?

_A_. They are dogs, who bark at every body.

_Q_. But what are good and peaceable people?

_A_. They are harmless sheep; and little children, under the grace of 
God, are innocent lambs.

_Q_. But what are liars?

_A_. They are snakes and vipers, with double tongues and poison under 
their lips.

_Q_. Who is the good shepherd?

_A_. Jesus Christ.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a passage not less apposite in Donne's Epistle to Sir Edward, 
afterwards Lord Herbert of Cherbury.

  Man is a lump where all beasts kneaded be;
  Wisdom makes him an Ark where all agree.
  The fool in whom these beasts do live at jar,
  Is sport to others and a theatre;
  Nor 'scapes he so, but is himself their prey,
  All that was man in him is ate away;
  And now his beasts on one another feed,
  Yet couple in anger and new monsters breed.
  How happy he which hath due place assign'd
  To his beasts, and disaforested his mind,
  Empaled himself to keep them out, not in;
  Can sow and dares trust corn where they have been,
  Can use his horse, goat, wolf and every beast,
  And is not ass himself to all the rest.

To this purport the Patriarch of the Quakers writes where he saith 
“now some men have the nature of Swine, wallowing in the mire: and 
some men have the nature of Dogs, to bite both the sheep and one 
another: and some men have the nature of Lions, to tear, devour and 
destroy: and some men have the nature of Wolves, to tear and devour 
the lambs and sheep of Christ: and some men have the nature of the 
Serpent (that old destroyer) to sting, envenom and poison. _He that 
hath an ear to hear, let him hear_, and learn these things within 
himself. And some men have the natures of other beasts and creatures, 
minding nothing but earthly and visible things, and feeding without 
the fear of God. Some men have the nature of an Horse, to prance and 
vapour in their strength, and to be swift in doing evil. And some men 
have the nature of tall sturdy Oaks, to flourish and spread in wisdom 
and strength, who are strong in evil, which must perish and come to 
the fire. Thus the Evil is but _one in all_, but worketh many ways; 
and whatsoever a Man's or Woman's nature is addicted to that is 
outward, the Evil one will fit him with that, and will please his 
nature and appetite, to keep his mind in his inventions, and in the 
creatures from the Creator.”

To this purport the so-called Clemens writes in the Apostolical 
Constitutions when he complains that the flock of Christ was devoured 
by Demons and wicked men, or rather not men but wild beasts in the 
shape of men, _πονηροῖς ἀνθρώποις, μᾶλλον δὲ οὐκ ἀνθρώποις, ἀλλὰ 
θηρίοις ἀνθρωποείδεσιν,_ by Heathens, Jews and godless heretics.

With equal triumph too did he read a passage in one of the numbers of 
the Connoisseur, which made him wonder that the writer from whom it 
proceeded in levity should not have been led on by it to the clear 
perception of a great truth. “The affinity,” says that writer, who is 
now known to have been no less a person than the author of the Task, 
“the affinity between chatterers and monkeys, and praters and parrots, 
is too obvious not to occur at once. Grunters and growlers may be 
justly compared to hogs. Snarlers are curs that continually shew their 
teeth, but never bite; and the spitfire passionate are a sort of wild 
cats, that will not bear stroking, but will purr when they are 
pleased. Complainers are screech-owls; and story-tellers always 
repeating the same dull note are cuckoos. Poets that prick up their 
ears at their own hideous braying are no better than asses; critics in 
general are venomous serpents that delight in hissing; and some of 
them, who have got by heart a few technical terms without knowing 
their meaning, are no better than magpies.”

So too the polyonomous Arabian philosopher Zechariah Ben Mohammed Ben 
Mahmud Al Camuni Al Cazvini. “Man,” he says, “partakes of the nature 
of vegetables, because like them he grows and is nourished; he stands 
in this farther relation to the irrational animals, that he feels and 
moves; by his intellectual faculties he resembles the higher orders of 
intelligences, and he partakes more or less of these various classes, 
as his inclination leads him. If his sole wish be to satisfy the wants 
of existence, then he is content to vegetate. If he partakes more of 
the animal than the vegetable nature, we find him fierce as the lion, 
greedy as the bull, impure as the hog, cruel as the leopard, or 
cunning as the fox; and if as is sometimes the case, he possesses all 
these bad qualities, he is then a demon in human shape.”

Gratifying as these passages were to him, some of them being mere 
sports of wit, and others only the produce of fancy, he would have 
been indeed delighted if he had known what was in his days known by no 
European scholar, that in the Institutes of Menu, his notion is 
distinctly declared as a revealed truth; there it is said, “In 
whatever occupation the Supreme Lord first employed any vital soul, 
that occupation the same soul attaches itself spontaneously, when it 
receives a new body again and again. Whatever quality, noxious or 
innocent, harsh or mild, unjust or just, false or true, he conferred 
on any being at its creation, the same quality enters it of course on 
its future births.”[2]

[Footnote 2: SIR W. JONES.]

Still more would it have gratified him if he had known (as has before 
been cursorily observed) how entirely his own theory coincided with 
the Druidical philosophy, a philosophy which he would rather have 
traced to the Patriarchs, than to the Canaanites. Their doctrine, as 
explained by the Welsh translator of the Paradise Lost, in the sketch 
of Bardism which he has prefixed to the poems of Llywarc the Aged, was 
that “the whole animated creation originated in the lowest point of 
existence, and arrived by a regular train of gradations at the 
probationary state of humanity, the intermediate stages being all 
necessarily evil, but more or less so as they were removed from the 
beginning, which was evil in the extreme. In the state of humanity, 
good and evil were equally balanced, consequently it was a state of 
liberty, in which if the conduct of the free agent preponderated 
towards evil, death gave but an awful passage whereby he returned to 
animal life, in a condition below humanity equal to the degree of 
turpitude to which he had debased himself, when free to chuse between 
good and evil: and if his life were desperately wicked, it was 
possible for him to fall to his original vileness, in the lowest point 
of existence, there to recommence his painful progression through the 
ascending series of brute being. But if he had acted well in this his 
stage of probation, death was then to the soul thus tried and 
approved, what the word by which in the language of the Druids it is 
denoted, literally means, enlargement. The soul was removed from the 
sphere wherein evil hath any place, into a state necessarily good; not 
to continue there in one eternal condition of blessedness, eternity 
being what no inferior existence could endure, but to pass from one 
gradation to another, gaining at every ascent increase of knowledge, 
and retaining the consciousness of its whole preceding progress 
through all. For the good of the human race, such a soul might again 
be sent on earth, but the human being of which it then formed the life 
was incapable of falling.” In this fancy the Bardic system approached 
that of the Bramins, this Celtic avatar of a happy soul, corresponding 
to the twice-born man of the Hindus. And the Doctor would have 
extracted some confirmation for the ground of the theory from that 
verse of the Psalm which speaks of us as “curiously wrought in the 
lowest parts of the earth.”

Young, he used to say, expressed unconsciously this system of 
progressive life, when he spoke of man as a creature

  From different natures marvellously mix'd;
  Connection exquisite of distant worlds;
  Distinguish'd link in being's endless chain,
  Midway from nothing to the Deity.

It was more distinctly enounced by Akenside.

                      The same paternal hand
  From the mute shell-fish gasping on the shore
  To men, to angels, to celestial minds,
  Will ever lead the generations on
  Through higher scenes of being: while, supplied
  From day to day with his enlivening breath,
  Inferior orders in succession rise
  To fill the void below. As flame ascends,
  As vapours to the earth in showers return,
  As the pois'd ocean toward the attracting moon
  Swells, and the ever listening planets charmed
  By the Sun's call their onward pace incline,
  So all things which have life aspire to God,
  Exhaustless fount of intellectual day!
  Centre of souls! nor doth the mastering voice
  Of nature cease within to prompt aright
  Their steps; nor is the care of heaven withheld
  From sending to the toil external aid,
  That in their stations all may persevere
  To climb the ascent of being, and approach
  For ever nearer to the Life Divine.

The Bardic system bears in itself intrinsic evidence of its antiquity; 
for no such philosophy could have been devised among any Celtic people 
in later ages; nor could the Britons have derived any part of it from 
any nation with whom they had any opportunity of intercourse, at any 
time within reach of history. The Druids, or rather the Bards, (for 
these, according to those by whom their traditionary wisdom has been 
preserved, were the superior order,) deduced as corollaries from the 
theory of Progressive Existence, these beautiful Triads.[3]

[Footnote 3: Originally quoted in the notes to Madoc to illustrate the 
lines which follow.

                        “Let the Bard,
  Exclaim'd the King, give his accustom'd lay:
  For sweet, I know, to Madoc is the song
  He loved in earlier years.
                     Then strong of voice,
  The officer proclaim'd the sovereign will,
  Bidding the hall be silent; loud he spake
  And smote the sounding pillar with his wand
  And hush'd the banqueters. The chief of Bards
  Then raised the ancient lay.
                    _Thee, Lord! he sung,
  O Father! Thee, whose wisdom, Thee, whose power,
  Whose love,—all love, all power, all wisdom. Thou!
  Tongue cannot utter, nor can heart conceive.
  He in the lowest depth of Being framed
  The imperishable mind; in every change
  Through the great circle of progressive life,
  He guides and guards, till evil shall be known,
  And being known as evil, cease to be;
  And the pure soul emancipate by death,
  The Enlarger, shall attain its end predoom'd,
  The eternal newness of eternal joy._]

“There are three Circles of Existence; the Circle of Infinity, where 
there is nothing but God, of living or dead, and none but God can 
traverse it; the Circle of Inchoation, where all things are by nature 
derived from Death,—this Circle hath been traversed by man; and the 
Circle of happiness, where all things spring from life,—this man shall 
traverse in heaven.

“Animated beings having three states of Existence; that of Inchoation 
in the Great Deep, or lowest point of Existence; that of Liberty in 
the State of Humanity; and that of Love, which is the Happiness of 
Heaven.

“All Animated Beings are subject to three Necessities; beginning in 
the Great Deep; Progression in the Circle of Inchoation; and Plenitude 
in the Circle of Happiness. Without these things nothing can possibly 
exist but God.

“Three things are necessary in the Circle of Inchoation; the least of 
all, Animation, and thence beginning; the materials of all things, and 
thence Increase, which cannot take place in any other state; the 
formation of all things out of the dead mass, and thence Discriminate 
Individuality.

“Three things cannot but exist towards all animated Beings from the 
Nature of Divine Justice: Co-sufferance in the Circle of Inchoation, 
because without that none could attain to the perfect knowledge of 
anything; Co-participation in the Divine Love; and Co-ultimity from 
the nature of God's Power, and its attributes of Justice and Mercy.

“There are three necessary occasions of Inchoation: to collect the 
materials and properties of every nature; to collect the knowledge of 
everything; and to collect power towards subduing the Adverse and the 
Devastative, and for the divestation of Evil. Without this traversing 
every mode of animated existence, no state of animation, or of any 
thing in nature, can attain to plenitude.”

“By the knowledge of three things will all Evil and Death be 
diminished and subdued; their nature, their cause, and their 
operation. This knowledge will be obtained in the Circle of 
Happiness.”

“The three Plenitudes of Happiness:—Participation of every nature, 
with a plenitude of One predominant; conformity to every cast of 
genius and character, possessing superior excellence in one; the love 
of all Beings and Existences, but chiefly concentred in one object, 
which is God; and in the predominant One of each of these, will the 
Plenitude of Happiness consist.”

Triads it may be observed are found in the Proverbs of Solomon: so 
that to the evidence of antiquity which these Bardic remains present 
in their doctrines, a presumption is to be added from the peculiar 
form in which they are conveyed.

Whether Sir Philip Sydney had any such theory in his mind or not, 
there is an approach to it in that fable which he says old Lanquet 
taught him of the Beasts desiring from Jupiter a King, Jupiter 
consented, but on condition that they should contribute the qualities 
convenient for the new and superior creature.

  Full glad they were, and took the naked sprite,
    Which straight the Earth yclothed in her clay;
  The Lion heart, the Ounce gave active might;
    The Horse, good shape; the Sparrow lust to play;
    Nightingale, voice enticing songs to say;
  Elephant gave a perfect memory,
  And Parrot, ready tongue that to apply.

  The Fox gave craft; the Dog gave flattery;
    Ass, patience; the Mole, a working thought;
  Eagle, high look; Wolf, secret cruelty;
    Monkey, sweet breath; the Cow, her fair eyes brought:
    The Ermine, whitest skin, spotted with nought.
  The Sheep, mild-seeming face; climbing the Bear,
  The Stag did give his harm-eschewing fear.

  The Hare, her slights; the Cat, her melancholy;
    Ant, industry; and Coney, skill to build;
  Cranes, order; Storks, to be appearing holy;
    Cameleons, ease to change; Duck, ease to yield;
    Crocodile, tears which might be falsely spill'd;
  Ape, great thing gave, tho' he did mowing stand,
  The instrument of instruments, the hand.

  Thus Man was made, thus Man their Lord became.

At such a system he thought Milton glanced when his Satan speaks of 
the influences of the heavenly bodies, as

  Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth
  Of creatures animate with gradual life
  Of growth, sense, reason, all summ'd up in man:

for that the lines, though capable of another interpretation, ought to 
be interpreted as referring to a scheme of progressive life, appears 
by this fuller developement in the speech of Raphaël;

  O Adam, one Almighty is, from whom
  All things proceed, and up to him return,
  If not deprav'd from good, created all
  Such to perfection, one first matter all,
  Indued with various forms, various degrees
  Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
  But more refin'd, more spiritous, and pure,
  As nearer to him plac'd, or nearer tending
  Each in their several active spheres assign'd,
  Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
  Proportion'd to each kind. So from the root
  Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
  More aery, last the bright consummate flower
  Spirits odorous breathes: flow'rs and their fruit,
  Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed,
  To vital spirits aspire, to animal,
  To intellectual; give both life and sense
  Fancy and understanding; whence the soul
  Reason received, and reason is her being
  Discursive, or intuitive; discourse
  Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
  Differing but in degree, of kind the same.[4]

[Footnote 4: Spenser in his “Hymne of Heavenly Beautie” falls into a 
similar train of thought, as is observed by Thyer.

  By view whereof it plainly may appeare
  That still as everything doth upward tend,
  And further is from earth, so still more cleare
  And faire it grows, till to his perfect end
  Of purest beautie it at last ascend;
  Ayre more than water, fire much more than ayre,
  And heaven than fire, appeares more pure and fayre.

But these are somewhat of Pythagorean speculations—caught up by 
Lucretius and Virgil.]

Whether that true philosopher, in the exact import of the word, Sir 
Thomas Browne, had formed a system of this kind, or only threw out a 
seminal idea from which it might be evolved, the Doctor, who dearly 
loved the writings of this most meditative author, would not say. But 
that Sir Thomas had opened the same vein of thought appears in what 
Dr. Johnson censured in “a very fanciful and indefensible section” of 
his Christian Morals; for there, and not among his Pseudodoxia 
Epidemica, that is to say Vulgar Errors, the passage is found. Our 
Doctor would not only have deemed it defensible, but would have proved 
it to be so by defending it. “Since the brow,” says the Philosopher of 
Norwich, “speaks often truth, since eyes and noses have tongues, and 
the countenance proclaims the heart and inclinations; let observation 
so far instruct thee in physiognomical lines, as to be some rule for 
thy distinction, and guide to for thy affection unto such as look most 
like men. Mankind methinks, is comprehended in a few faces, if we 
exclude all visages which any way participate of symmetries and 
schemes of look common unto other animals. For as though man were the 
extract of the world, in whom all were _in coagulato_, which in their 
forms were _in soluto_, and at extension, we often observe that men do 
most act those creatures whose constitution, parts and complexion, do 
most predominate in their mixtures. This is a corner-stone in 
physiognomy, and holds some truth not only in particular persons but 
also in whole nations.”

But Dr. Johnson must cordially have assented to Sir Thomas Browne's 
inferential admonition. “Live,” says that Religious Physician and 
Christian Moralist,—“live unto the dignity of thy nature, and leave it 
not disputable at last whether thou hast been a man, or since thou art 
a composition of man and beast, how thou hast predominantly passed thy 
days, to state the denomination. Un-man not, therefore, thyself by a 
bestial transformation, nor realize old fables. Expose not thyself by 
fourfooted manners unto monstrous draughts and caricature 
representations. Think not after the old Pythagorean concert what 
beast thou mayest be after death. Be not under any brutal 
metempsychosis while thou livest and walkest about erectly under that 
scheme of man. In thine own circumference, as in that of the earth, 
let the rational horizon be larger than the sensible, and the circle 
of reason than of sense: let the divine part be upward, and the region 
of beast below: otherwise it is but to live invertedly, and with thy 
head unto the heels of thy antipodes. Desert not thy title to a divine 
particle and union with invisibles. Let true knowledge and virtue tell 
the lower world thou art a part of the higher. Let thy thoughts be of 
things which have not entered into the hearts of beasts; think of 
things long past, and long to come; acquaint thyself with the 
choragium of the stars, and consider the vast expansion beyond them. 
Let intellectual tubes give thee a glance of things which visive 
organs reach not. Have a glimpse of incomprehensible, and thoughts of 
things, which thoughts but tenderly touch. Lodge immaterials in thy 
head, ascend unto invisibles; fill thy spirit with spirituals, with 
the mysteries of faith, the magnalities of religion, and thy life with 
the honour of God; without which, though giants in wealth and dignity, 
we are but dwarfs and pygmies in humanity, and may hold a pitiful rank 
in that triple division of mankind into heroes, men and beasts. For 
though human souls are said to be equal, yet is there no small 
inequality in their operations; some maintain the allowable station of 
men, many are far below it; and some have been so divine as to 
approach the apogeum of their natures, and to be in the confinium of 
spirits.”




