CHAPTER CCXXXIII.

THE PETTY GERMAN PRINCES EXCELLENT PATRONS OF LITERATURE AND LEARNED 
MEN.—THE DUKE OF SAXE WEIMAR.—QUOTATION FROM BP. HACKET.—AN OPINION OF 
THE EXCELLENT MR. BOYLE.—A TENET OF THE DEAN OF CHALON, PIERRE DE ST. 
JULIEN,—AND A VERITABLE PLANTAGENET.

_Ita nati estis, ut bona malaque vestra ad Rempublicam pertineant._

TACITUS.


“We have long been accustomed to laugh at the pride and poverty of 
petty German Princes,” says one of the most sensible and right minded 
travellers that ever published the result of his observations in 
Germany;[1] “but nothing,” he proceeds, “can give a higher idea of the 
respectability which so small a people may assume, and the quantity of 
happiness which one of these insignificant monarchs may diffuse around 
him, than the example of the little state of Weimar, with a Prince 
like the present[2] Grand Duke at its head. The mere pride of 
sovereignty frequently most prominent where there is only the title to 
justify it, is unknown to him; he is the most affable man in his 
dominions, not simply with the condescension which any prince can 
learn to practise as a useful quality, but from goodness of heart.” 
The whole population of his state little if at all exceeds that of 
Leicestershire; his capital is smaller than a third or fourth rate 
county town; so in fact it scarcely deserves the name of a town; and 
the inhabitants, vain as they are of its well earned reputation as the 
German Athens, take a pride in having it considered merely a large 
village: his revenue is less than that of many a British Peer, great 
Commoner, or commercial Millionist. Yet “while the treasures of more 
weighty potentates were insufficient to meet the necessities of their 
political relations, his confined revenues could give independence and 
careless leisure to the men who were gaining for Germany its 
intellectual reputation.” It is not too much to say that for that 
intellectual reputation, high as it is, and lasting as it will be, 
Germany is little less beholden to the Duke of Weimar's well-bestowed 
patronage, than to the genius of Wieland, and Schiller and Goëthe. “In 
these little principalities, the same goodness of disposition can work 
with more proportional effect than if it swayed the sceptre of an 
empire; it comes more easily and directly into contact with those 
towards whom it should be directed: the artificial world of courtly 
rank and wealth has neither sufficient glare nor body to shut out from 
the prince the more chequered world that lies below.”

[Footnote 1: RUSSELL.]

[Footnote 2: A. D. 1822.]

Alas no Prince either petty or great has followed the Duke of Saxe 
Weimar's example! “He dwells,” says Mr. Downes, “like an estated 
gentleman, surrounded by his tenantry.” Alas no British Peer, great 
Commoner, or commercial Millionist has given to any portion of his 
ampler revenues a like beneficent direction.

A good old Bishop[3] quoting the text “not many wise men after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called,” cautions us 
against distorting the Scripture as if it pronounced nothing but 
confusion to the rulers of the earth, “let not the honourable person,” 
said he, “hang down his head, as if power and wisdom, and noble blood, 
and dignity were causes of rejection before God: no beloved! Isaiah 
foretold that Kings should be nursing fathers, and Queens should be 
nursing mothers of the Church, but it is often seen that the benignity 
of nature and the liberality of fortune are made impediments to a 
better life; and therefore Nobles and Princes are more frequently 
threatened with judgment. I adjoin moreover that the Scriptures speak 
more flatly against illustrious Magistrates, than the common sort; for 
if God had left it to men, whose tongues are prostituted to flattery, 
they had scarce been told that their abominable sins would bring 
damnation.”

[Footnote 3: BISHOP HACKET.]

When our philosopher considered the manner in which large incomes are 
expended, (one way he had opportunities enough of observing at 
Doncaster) he thought that in these times high birth brought with it 
dangers and evils which in many or most instances, more than 
counterbalanced its advantages.

That excellent person Mr. Boyle had formed a different opinion. To be 
the son of a Peer whose prosperity had found many admirers, but few 
parallels, and not to be his eldest son, was a happiness that he used 
to “mention with great expressions of gratitude; his birth, he said, 
so suiting his inclinations and designs, that, had he been permitted 
an election, his choice would scarce have altered God's assignment. 
For as on the one side, a lower birth would have too much exposed him 
to the inconveniences of a mean descent, which are too notorious to 
need specifying; so on the other side, to a person whose humour 
indisposes him to the distracting hurry of the world, the being born 
heir to a great family is but a glittering kind of slavery, whilst 
obliging him to a public entangled course of life, to support the 
credit of his family, and tying him from satisfying his dearest 
inclinations, it often forces him to build the advantages of his house 
upon the ruins of his own contentment.”

“A man of mean extraction,” he continues, “is seldom admitted to the 
privacy and secrets of great ones promiscuously, and scarce dares 
pretend to it, for fear of being censured saucy, or an intruder. And 
titular greatness is ever an impediment to the knowledge of many 
retired truths, that cannot be attained without familiarity with 
meaner persons, and such other condescensions, as fond opinion, in 
great men, disapproves and makes disgraceful.” “But he himself,” Mr. 
Boyle said, “was born in a condition that neither was high enough to 
prove a temptation to laziness, nor low enough to discourage him from 
aspiring.” And certainly to a person that affected so much an 
universal knowledge, and arbitrary vicissitudes of quiet and 
employments, it could not be unwelcome to be of a quality, that was a 
handsome stirrup to preferment, without an obligation to court it, and 
which might at once both protect his higher pretensions from the guilt 
of ambition, and secure his retiredness from contempt.

There would be more and higher advantages in high birth than Mr. Boyle 
apprehended, if the Dean of Chalon, Pierre de St. Julien, were right 
when he maintained _contre l'opinion des Philosophes, et l'ordinaire 
des Predicamants,—que la vraye Noblesse a sa source du sang, et est 
substancielle._

_Ces mots Gentilhomme de sang, et d'armes, de race genereuse, de bonne 
part,_ &c., says the well-born Dean, who in his title pages let us 
know that he was _de la maison de Balleurré,—sont termes non de 
qualité, ny d'habitude; ains importants substance de vray, comme il 
est bien dit,_

  _veniunt cum sanguine mores;_

_et aillieurs,_

  _Qui viret in foliis venit à radicibus humor;
   Sic patrum in natos abeunt cum semine mores._

_Et comme le sang est le vehicule, et porteur des esprits de vie, 
esquels est enclose la substance de l'ame; aussi est il le comme 
chariot, qui porte et soustient celle substance qui decoule des peres, 
et des ayeulx, par long ordre de generation, et provient aux enfants, 
qui, nez de bonne et gentille semence, sont (conformement à l'opinion 
du divin Philosophe Platon) rendu tels que leurs progeniteurs, par la 
vertu des esprits enclos en la semence.—Tellement qu'on ne peut nyer, 
que comme d'une bonne Ayre sortent de bons oyseaux, d'un bon Haras de 
bons chevaux,_ &c., _aussi il importe beaucoup aux hommes d'estre nez 
de bons et valeureux parents; voire tant, que les mal nez, ennemys de 
ceste bien naissance, ne sont suffisants pour en juger._

Sir Robert Cotton once met with a man driving the plough, who was a 
true and undoubted Plantagenet. “That worthy Doctor,” (Dr. Hervey) 
says that worthy Fuller (_dignissimus_ of being so styled himself,) 
“hath made many converts in physic to his seeming paradox, maintaining 
the circulation of blood running round about the body of man. Nor is 
it less true that gentle blood fetcheth a circuit in the body of a 
nation, running from Yeomanry, through Gentry to Nobility, and so 
retrograde, returning through Gentry to Yeomanry again.”

“_Plust à Dieu_,” said Maistre François Rabelais, of facetious memory, 
“_qu'un chacun saust aussi certainement_—(as Gargantua that is,) _sa 
genealogie, depuis l'Arche de Noé, jusqu'à cet âge! Je pense que 
plusieurs sont aujourd'hui Empereurs, Roys, Ducs, Princes et Papes en 
la terre, lesquels sont descendus de quelques Porteurs de rogatons et 
de constrets. Comme au rebours plusieurs sont gueux de l'hostiere, 
souffreteux et miserables, lesquels sont descendus de sang et ligne de 
grands Roys et Empereurs; attends l'admirable transport des Regnes et 
Empires,_

  _Des Assyriens, és Medes;
   Des Medes, és Perses;
   Des Perses, és Macédoniens;
   Des Macédoniens, és Grecs;
   Des Grecs, és François._

_Et pour vous donner à entendre de moy qui vous parle, je cuide que 
suis descendu de quelque riche Roy, ou Prince, au temps jadis; car 
oncques ne vistes homme qui eust plus grande affection d'estre Roy ou 
riche que moy, afin de faire grand chere, pas ne travailler, point ne 
me soucier et bien enrichir mes amis, et tous gens de bien et de 
sçavoir._”




