CHAPTER CCIII.

WHETHER A MAN AND HIMSELF BE TWO.—MAXIM OF BAYLE'S.—ADAM LITTLETON'S 
SERMONS,—A RIGHT HEARTED OLD DIVINE WITH WHOM THE AUTHOR HOPES TO BE 
BETTER ACQUAINTED IN A BETTER WORLD.—THE READER REFERRED TO HIM FOR 
EDIFICATION.—WHY THE AUTHOR PURCHASED HIS SERMONS.

_Parolles._ Go to, thou art a witty fool, I have found thee.

_Clown._ Did you find me in yourself, Sir? or were you taught to find 
me? The search, Sir, was profitable; and much fool may you find in 
you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of laughter.

ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL.


“Whether this author means to make his Doctor more fool or 
philosopher, is more than I can discover,” says a grave reader, who 
lays down the open book, and knits his brow while he considers the 
question.

_Make_ him, good Reader! I, _make_ him!—make “the noblest work 
of”——But as the Spaniards say, _el creer es cortesia_, and it is at 
your pleasure either to believe the veracity of these biographical 
sketches, or to regard them as altogether fictitious. It is at your 
pleasure, I say; not at your peril: but take heed how you exercise 
that pleasure in cases which are perilous! The worst that can happen 
to you for disbelief in this matter is, that I shall give you little 
credit for courtesy, and less for discrimination; and in Doncaster you 
will be laughed to scorn. You might as well proclaim at Coventry your 
disbelief in the history of Lady Godiva and Peeping Tom; or tell the 
Swiss that their tale of shooting the apple on the child's head was an 
old story before William Tell was born.

But perhaps you did not mean to express any such groundless 
incredulity, your doubt may be whether I represent or consider my 
friend as having in his character a larger portion of folly or of 
philosophy?

This you might determine, Reader, for yourself, if I could succeed in 
delineating him to the life,—the inner I mean, not the outward man,

  _Et en peu de papier, comme sur un tableau,
   Vous pourtraire au naïf tout son bon, et son beau._[1]

             He was the soul of goodness,
   And all our praises of him are like streams
   Drawn from a spring, that still rise full, and leave
   The part remaining greatest.

But the Duchess of Newcastle hath decided in her philosophy that it is 
not possible for any one person thoroughly to understand the character 
of another. In her own words, “if the Mind was not joined and mixed 
with the sensitive and inanimate parts, and had not interior as well 
as exterior parts, the whole Mind of one man might perceive the whole 
Mind of another man; but that being not possible—one whole Mind cannot 
perceive another whole Mind.” By which observation we may perceive 
there are no Platonic Lovers in Nature. An odd conclusion of her 
Grace's, and from odd premises. But she was an odd personage.

[Footnote 1: PASQUIER.]

So far however the beautiful and fanciful as well as fantastic Duchess 
is right, that the more congenial the disposition of two persons who 
stand upon the same intellectual level, the better they understand 
each other. The lower any one is sunk in animal life the less is he 
capable of apprehending the motives and views of those who have 
cultivated the better part of their nature.

If I am so unfortunate as to fail in producing the moral likeness 
which I am endeavouring to pourtray, it will not be owing to any want 
of sympathy with the subject in some of the most marked features of 
his character.

It is a maxim of Bayle's _qu'il n'y a point de grand esprit dans le 
caractère du quel il n'entre un peu de folie._ And he named Diogenes 
as one proof of this. Think indeed somewhat more than a little upon 
the words folly and philosophy, and if you can see any way into a 
mist, or a stone wall, you will perceive that the same radicals are 
found in both.

This sort of mixt character was never more whimsically described than 
by Andrew Erskine in one of his letters to Boswell, in which he tells 
him, “since I saw you I received a letter from Mr. D——; it is filled 
with encomiums upon you; he says there is a great deal of humility in 
your vanity, a great deal of tallness in your shortness, and a great 
deal of whiteness in your black complexion. He says there's a great 
deal of poetry in your prose, and a great deal of prose in your 
poetry. He says that as to your late publication, there is a great 
deal of Ode in your Dedication, and a great deal of Dedication in your 
Ode. He says there is a great deal of coat in your waistcoat, and a 
great deal of waistcoat in your coat, that there is a great deal of 
liveliness in your stupidity, and a great deal of stupidity in your 
liveliness. But to write you all he says would require rather more 
fire in my grate than there is at present, and my fingers would 
undoubtedly be numbed, for there is a great deal of snow in this 
frost, and a great deal of frost in this snow.”

The Marquis de Custine in a book which in all its parts, wise or 
foolish, strikingly characterises its author, describes himself thus: 
_J'ai un mélange de gravitê et de légèreté qui m' empêchera de devenir 
autre chose qu'un vieil enfant bien triste. Si je suis destiné à 
éprouver de grands malheurs, j'aurai l'occasion de remercier Dieu de 
m' avoir fait naitre avec cette disposition à la fois sérieuse et 
frivole: le sérieux m' aidera à me passer du monde—l'enfantillage à 
supporter le douleur. C'est à quoi il réussit meux que la raison._

_Un peu de folie_, there certainly was in the _grand esprit_ of my 
dear master and more than _un peu_ there is in his faithful pupil. But 
I shall not enter into a discussion whether the gravity of which the 
Marquis speaks preponderated in his character, or whether it was more 
than counterpoised by the levity. Enough of the latter, thank Heaven 
enters into my own composition not only to preserve me from becoming 
_un vieil enfant bien triste_, but to entitle me in all innocent 
acceptance of the phrase to the appellation of a merry old boy, that 
is to say, merry at becoming times, there being a time for all things. 
I shall not enter into the discussion as it concerns my guide, 
philosopher and friend, because it would be altogether unnecessary; he 
carried ballast enough, whatever I may do. The elements were so 
happily mixed in him that though Nature did not stand up and say to 
all the world “this is a man,” because such a miracle could neither be 
in the order of Nature or of Providence;—I have thought it my duty to 
sit down and say to the public this was a Doctor.

There is another reason why I shall refrain from any such enquiry; and 
that reason may be aptly given in the words of a right-hearted old 
divine, with whom certain congenialities would lead my friend to 
become acquainted in that world, where I also hope in due season to 
meet and converse with him.

“People,” says Adam Littleton, “are generally too forward in examining 
others, and are so taken up with impertinence and things that do not 
concern them, that they have no time to be acquainted with themselves; 
like idle travellers, that can tell you a world of stories concerning 
foreign countries, and are very strangers at home. Study of ourselves 
is the most useful knowledge, as that without which we can know 
neither God nor any thing else aright, as we should know them.

“And it highly concerns us to know ourselves well; nor will our 
ignorance be pardonable, but prove an everlasting reproach, in that we 
and ourselves are to be inseparable companions in bliss or torment to 
all eternity: and if we, through neglect of ourselves here, do not in 
time provide for that eternity, so as to secure for ourselves future 
happiness, God will at last make us know ourselves, when it will be 
too late to make any good use of that knowledge, but a remediless 
repentance that we and ourselves ever met in company; when poor ruined 
self shall curse negligent sinful self to all ages, and wish direful 
imprecations upon that day and hour that first joined them together.

“Again, God has given man that advantage above all other creatures, 
that he can with reflex acts look back and pass judgement upon 
himself. But seeing examination here supposes two persons, the one to 
examine, the other to be examined, and yet seems to name but one, a 
man to examine himself; unless a man and himself be two, and thus 
every one of us have two selfs in him; let us first examine who 'tis 
here is to execute the office of examinant, and then who 'tis that is 
to be the party examined.

“Does the whole man in this action go over himself by parts? Or does 
the regenerate part call the unregenerate part to account? Or if there 
be a divided self in every man, does one self examine the other self, 
as to wit, the spiritual self, the carnal self? Or is it some one 
faculty in a man, by which a man brings all his other faculties and 
parts to trial,—such a one as the conscience may be? If so, how then 
is conscience itself tried, having no Peers to be tried by, as being 
superior to all other human powers, and calling them all to the barr?”

Here let me interpose a remark. Whether a man and himself be two must 
be all one in the end; but woe to that house in which the man and his 
wife are!

  The end of love is to have two made one
  In will, and in affection.[2]

[Footnote 2: BEN JONSON.]

The old Lexicographer answers his own question thus: “Why, yes; I do 
think 'tis the conscience of a man which examines the man, and every 
part of him, both spiritual and carnal, as well regenerate as 
unregenerate, and itself and all. For hence it was called 
_conscientia_, as being that faculty by which a man becomes conscious 
to himself, and is made knowing together with himself of all that good 
and evil that lies working in his nature, and has been brought forth 
in his actions. And this is not only the Register, and Witness and 
Judge of all parts of man, and of all that they do, but is so 
impartial an officer also, that it will give a strict account of all 
itself at any time does, _accusing_ or _excusing_ even itself in every 
motion of its own.”

Reader I would proceed with this extract, were it not for its length. 
The application which immediately follows it, is eloquently and 
forcibly made, and I exhort thee if ever thou comest into a library 
where Adam Littleton's Sermons are upon the shelf,

                             look
  Not _on_, but _in_ this Thee-concerning book![3]

Take down the goodly tome, and turn to the sermon of Self-Examination, 
preached before the (Royal) Family at Whitehall, March 3, 1677-8. You 
will find this passage in the eighty-sixth page of the second paging, 
and I advice you to proceed with it to the end of the Discourse.

[Footnote 3: SIR WILLIAM DENNY.]

I will tell the reader for what reason I purchased that goodly tome. 
It was because of my grateful liking for the author, from the end of 
whose dictionary I, like Daniel in his boyhood, derived more 
entertainment and information to boot, than from any other book which, 
in those days, came within the walls of a school. That he was a truly 
learned man no one who ever used that dictionary could doubt, and if 
there had not been oddity enough in him to give his learning a zest, 
he never could have compounded an appellation for the Monument, 
commemorating in what he calls an heptastic vocable,—which may be 
interpreted a seven-leagued word,—the seven Lord Mayors of London 
under whose mayoralities the construction of that lying pillar went on 
from its commencement to its completion. He called it, the 
Fordo-Watermanno-Hansono-Hookero-Vinero-Sheldono-Davisian pillar.

I bought the book for the author's sake,—which in the case of a living 
author is a proper and meritorious motive, and in the case of one who 
is dead, may generally be presumed to be a wise one. It proved so in 
this instance. For though there is nothing that bears the stamp of 
oddity in his sermons, there is much that is sterling. They have a 
merit of their own, and it is of no mean degree. Their manner is 
neither Latimerist nor Andrewesian, nor Fullerish, nor 
Cotton-Matherish, nor Jeremy Taylorish, nor Barrowish, nor Southish, 
but Littletonian. They are full of learning, of wisdom, of sound 
doctrine, and of benevolence, and of earnest and persuasive piety. No 
one who had ears to hear could have slept under them, and few could 
have listened to them without improvement.




