CHAPTER CCXIX.

THE ARGUMENT AGAINST CHRISTIANITY DRAWN FROM A PLURALITY OF WORLDS 
SHEWN TO BE FUTILE: REMARKS ON THE OPPOSITE DISPOSITIONS BY WHICH MEN 
ARE TEMPTED TO INFIDELITY.

                    —_ascolta
  Siccome suomo di verace lingua;
  E porgimi l'orecchio._

CHIABRERA.


The extracts with which the preceding Chapter concludes, will have put 
thee in a thoughtful mood, Reader, if thou art one of those persons 
whose brains are occasionally applied to the purpose of thinking upon 
such subjects as are worthy of grave consideration. Since then I have 
thee in this mood, let us be serious together. Egregiously is he 
mistaken who supposes that this book consists of nothing more than

  Fond Fancy's scum, and dregs of scattered thought.[1]

[Footnote 1: SIR P. SIDNEY.]

Every where I have set before thee what Bishop Reynolds calls _verba 
desiderii_,—“pleasant, delightful, acceptable words, such as are 
worthy of all entertainment, and may minister (not a few of them) 
comfort and refreshment to the hearers.” I now come to thee with 
_verba rectitudinis_,—“equal and right words; not loose, fabulous, 
amorous, impertinent, which should satisfy the itch of ear, or tickle 
only a wanton fancy; but profitable and wholesome words,—so to please 
men as that it may be unto edification and for their profit; words 
written to make men sound and upright;—to make their paths direct and 
straight, without falseness or hypocrisy.” Yea they shall be _verba 
veritatis_,—“words of truth, which will not deceive or misguide those 
that yield up themselves to the direction of them: a truth which is 
sanctifying and saving, and in these respects most worthy of our 
attention and belief.”

Make up your mind then to be Tremayned in this chapter.

The benevolent reader will willingly do this, he I mean who is 
benevolent to himself as well as towards me. The so-called philosopher 
or man of liberal opinions, who cannot be so inimical in thought to 
me, as they are indeed to themselves, will frown at it; one such 
exclaims pshaw, or pish, according as he may affect the _forté_ 
manner, or the fine, of interjecting his contemptuous displeasure; 
another already winces, feeling himself by anticipation touched upon a 
sore place. To such readers it were hopeless to say _favete_, 
“_Numquid æger laudat medicum secantem?_” But I shall say with the 
Roman Philosopher of old, who is well entitled to that then honourable 
designation, “_tacete,—et præbete vos curationi: etiam si 
exclamaveritis, non aliter audiam, quam si ad tactum vitiorum 
vestrorum ingemiscatis._”[2]

[Footnote 2: SENECA.]

My own observation has led me to believe with Mr. Miller, that some 
persons are brought by speculating upon a Plurality of Worlds to 
reason themselves out of their belief in Christianity: such 
Christianity indeed it is as has no root, because the soil on which it 
has fallen is shallow, and though the seed which has been sown there 
springs up, it soon withers away. Thus the first system of 
superstition, and the latest pretext for unbelief have both been 
derived from the contemplation of the heavenly bodies. The former was 
the far more pardonable error, being one to which men, in the first 
ages, among whom the patriarchal religion had not been carefully 
preserved, were led by natural piety. The latter is less imputable to 
the prevalence of unnatural impiety,—than to that weakness of mind and 
want of thought which renders men as easily the dupe of the infidel 
propagandist in one age, as of the juggling friar in another. These 
objectors proceed upon the gratuitous assumption that other worlds are 
inhabited by beings of the same kind as ourselves, and moreover in the 
same condition; that is having fallen, and being therefore in need of 
a Redeemer. Ask of them upon what grounds they assume this, and they 
can make no reply.

Too many alas there are who part with their heavenly birth-right at a 
viler price than Esau! It is humiliating to see by what poor 
sophistries they are deluded,—by what pitiable vanity they are led 
astray! And it is curious to note how the same evil effect is produced 
by causes the most opposite. The drunken pride of intellect makes one 
man deny his Saviour and his God: another under the humiliating sense 
of mortal insignificancy, feels as though he were “a worm and no man,” 
and therefore concludes that men are beneath the notice, still more 
beneath the care, of the Almighty. “When I consider thy Heavens, the 
work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars, which thou hast ordained; 
what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou 
visitest him?” Of those who pursue this feeling to a consequence as 
false as it is unhappy, there is yet hope; for the same arguments (and 
they are all-sufficient) by which the existence of the Deity is 
proved, prove also his infinite goodness; and he who believes in that 
goodness, if he but feelingly believe, is not far from trusting in it,

   _—σύ δέ κεν ῥεα πάντ᾽ ἐσορήσαις
  Ἄι κεν ἴδης αὐτόν._[3]

[Footnote 3: ORPHEUS.]

It is a good remark of Mr. Riland's in his Estimate of the Religion of 
the Times, that men quarrel with the Decalogue rather than with the 
Creed. But the quarrel that begins with one, generally extends to the 
other; we may indeed often perceive how manifestly men have made their 
doctrines conform to their inclinations. _Αἱ ἀκροάσεις κατὰ τὰ ἔθη 
συμβαίνουσιν· ὣς γὰρ εἰώθαμεν, οὕτως ἀξιοῦμεν λέγεσθαι._[4] They 
listen only to what they like, as Aristotle has observed, and would be 
instructed to walk on those ways only which they choose for 
themselves. But if there be many who thus make their creed conform to 
their conduct, and are led by an immoral life into irreligious 
opinions, there are not a few whose error begins in the intellect and 
from thence proceeds to their practice in their domestic and daily 
concerns. Thus if unbelief begins not in the evil heart, it settles 
there. But perhaps it is not so difficult to deal with an infidel who 
is in either of these predicaments, as with one whose disposition is 
naturally good, whose course of life is in no other respect blameless, 
or meritorious, but who owing to unhappy circumstances has either been 
allowed to grow up carelessly in unbelief, or trained in it 
systematically, or driven to seek for shelter in it from the gross 
impostures of popery, or the revolting tenets of Calvinism, the cant 
of hypocrisy, or the crudities of cold Socinianism. Such persons 
supposing themselves whole conclude that they have no need of a 
physician, and are thus in the fearful condition of those righteous 
ones of whom our Lord said that he came not to call them to 
repentance! The sinner, brave it as he may, feels inwardly the want of 
a Saviour, and this is much, though not enough to say with the poet

  _Pars sanitatis velle sanari fuit,_[5]

nor with the philosopher, _et hoc multum est velle servari_: nor with 
the Father _ὁ τὸ πρῶτον δοὺς καὶ το δεύτερον δώσει._ For if this be 
rejected, then comes that “penal induration, as the consequent of 
voluntary and contracted induration,” which one of our own great 
Christian philosophers pronounces to be “the sorest judgement next to 
hell itself.” Nevertheless it is much to feel this self-condemnation 
and this want. But he who confides in the rectitude of his intentions, 
and in his good works, and in that confidence rejects so great 
salvation, is in a more aweful state, just as there is more hope of 
him who suffers under an acute disease, than of a patient stricken 
with the dead palsy.

[Footnote 4: Bp. Reynolds quotes this same passage in his Sermon on 
“Brotherly Reconciliation,” and applies it in the same way. Works, 
vol. v. p. 158.]

[Footnote 5: SENECA IN HIPPOL.]




