CHAPTER CCXV.

FACTS AND FANCIES CONNECTING THE DOCTOR'S THEORY WITH THE VEGETABLE 
WORLD.

We will not be too peremptory herein: and build standing structures of 
bold assertions on so uncertain a foundation; rather with the 
Rechabites we will live in tents of conjecture, which on better reason 
we may easily alter and remove.

FULLER.


It may have been observed by the attentive reader—(and all my readers 
will be attentive, except those who are in love) that although the 
Doctor traced many of his acquaintance to their prior allotments in 
the vegetable creation, he did not discover such symptoms in any of 
them as led him to infer that the object of his speculations had 
existed in the form of a tree;—crabbed tempers, sour plums, 
cherry-cheeks, and hearts of oak being nothing more than metaphorical 
expressions of similitude. But it would be a rash and untenable 
deduction were we to conclude from the apparent omission that the 
arboreal world was excluded from his system. On the contrary, the 
analogies between animal and vegetable life led him to believe that 
the Archeus of the human frame, received no unimportant part of his 
preparatory education in the woods.

Steele in a playful allegory has observed “that there is a sort of 
vegetable principle in the mind of every man when he comes into the 
world. In infants, the seeds lie buried and undiscovered, till after a 
while they sprout forth in a kind of rational leaves, which are words; 
and in due season the flowers begin to appear in variety of beautiful 
colours, and all the gay pictures of youthful fancy and imagination; 
at last the fruit knits and is formed, which is green perhaps at 
first, sour and unpleasant to the taste, and not fit to be gathered; 
till ripened by due care and application, it discovers itself in all 
the noble productions of philosophy, mathematics, close reasoning and 
handsome argumentation. I reflected further on the intellectual leaves 
before mentioned, and found almost as great a variety among them as in 
the vegetable world.” In this passage, though written only as a sport 
of fancy, there was more our speculator thought, than was dreamt of in 
Steele's philosophy.

Empedocles, if the fragment which is ascribed to him be genuine, 
pretended to remember that he had pre-existed not only in the forms of 
maiden and youth, fowl and fish, but of a shrub also;

  _Ἤδη γάρ ποτ᾽ ἐγὼ γενόμην κούρη τε κόρος τε,
   Θάμνος τ᾽, οἰωνός τε, καὶ εἰν ἅλι ἔλλοπος ἰχθῦς._

But upon such authority the Doctor placed as little reliance as upon 
the pretended recollections of Pythagoras, whether really asserted by 
that philosopher or falsely imputed to him by fablers in prose or 
verse. When man shall have effected his passage from the mortal and 
terrestrial state into the sphere where there is nothing that is 
impure, nothing that is evil, nothing that is perishable, then indeed 
it is a probable supposition that he may look back into the lowest 
deep from whence he hath ascended, recall to mind his progress step by 
step, through every stage of the ascent, and understand the process by 
which it had been appointed for him, (applying to Plato's words a 
different meaning from that in which they were intended) _ἐκ πολλῶν 
ἕνα γεγονότα εὐδαίμονα ἔσεσθαι_, to become of many creatures, one 
happy one. In that sphere such a retrospect would enlarge the 
knowledge, and consequently the happiness also of the soul which has 
there attained the perfection of its nature—the end for which it was 
created and redeemed. But any such consciousness of pre-existence 
would in this stage of our mortal being be so incompatible with the 
condition of humanity, that the opinion itself can be held only as a 
speculation, of which no certainty can ever have been made known to 
man, because that alone has been revealed, the knowledge of which is 
necessary: the philosophers therefore who pretended to it, if they 
were sincere in the pretension (which may be doubted) are entitled to 
no more credit, than the poor hypochondriac who fancies himself a 
bottle or a tea-pot.

Thus our philosopher reasoned, who either in earnest or in jest, or in 
serious sportiveness, _παίζων καὶ σπουδάζων ἄμα_, was careful never to 
lean more upon an argument than it would bear. Sometimes he prest the 
lame and halt into his service, but it was with a clear perception of 
their defects, and he placed them always in positions where they were 
efficient for the service required for them, and where more valid ones 
would not have been more available. He formed therefore, no system of 
dendranthropology, nor attempted any classification in it; there were 
not facts enough whereon to found one. Yet in more than one 
circumstance which observant writers have recorded, something he 
thought might be discerned which bore upon this part of the 
theory,—some traces of

        those first affections,
  Those shadowy recollections,

on which Wordsworth (in whose mystic strains he would have delighted) 
dwells. Thus he inferred that the soul of Xerxes must once have 
animated a plane tree, and retained a vivid feeling connected with his 
arboreal existence, when he read in Evelyn how that great king 
“stopped his prodigious army of seventeen hundred thousand soldiers to 
admire the pulchritude and procerity of one of those goodly trees; and 
became so fond of it, that spoiling both himself, his concubines, and 
great persons of all their jewels, he covered it with gold, gems, 
necklaces, scarfs and bracelets, and infinite riches; in sum, was so 
enamoured of it, that for some days, neither the concernment of his 
grand expedition, nor interest of honour, nor the necessary motion of 
his portentous army, could persuade him from it. He stiled it his 
mistress, his minion, his goddess; and when he was forced to part from 
it, he caused the figure of it to be stamped on a medal of gold, which 
he continually wore about him.”

“That prudent Consul Passianus Crispus” must have been influenced by a 
like feeling, when he “fell in love with a prodigious beech of a 
wonderful age and stature, used to sleep under it, and would sometimes 
refresh it with pouring wine at the root.” Certainly as Evelyn has 
observed, “a goodly tree was a powerful attractive” to this person. 
The practice of regaling trees with such libations was not uncommon 
among the wealthy Romans; they seem to have supposed that because wine 
gladdened their own hearts, it must in like manner comfort the root of 
a tree: and Pliny assures us that it did so, _compertum id maximè 
prodesse radicibus_, he says, _docuimusque etiam arbores vina potare._ 
If this were so, the Doctor reasoned that there would be a peculiar 
fitness in fertilizing the vine with its own generous juice, which it 
might be expected to return with increase in richer and more abundant 
clusters: forgetting, ignoring, or disregarding this opinion which 
John Lily has recorded that the vine watered (as he calls it) with 
wine is soon withered. He was not wealthy enough to afford such an 
experiment upon that which clothed the garden-front of his house, for 
this is not a land flowing with wine and oil; but he indulged a 
favourite apple-tree (it was a Ribstone pippin) with cider; and when 
no sensible improvement in the produce could be perceived, he imputed 
the disappointment rather to the parsimonious allowance of that 
congenial liquor, than to any error in the theory.

But this has led me astray, and I must return to Xerxes the Great 
King. The predilection or passion which he discovered for the plane, 
the sage of Doncaster explained by deriving it from a dim reminiscence 
of his former existence in a tree of the same kind; or which was not 
less likely in the wanton ivy which had clasped one, or in the wild 
vine which had festooned its branches with greener leaves, or even in 
the agaric which had grown out of its decaying substance. And he would 
have quoted Wordsworth if the Sage of Rydal had not been of a later 
generation:

  Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
  The soul that rises with us, our life's star,
      Hath had elsewhere its setting,
          And cometh from afar.

Other examples of men who have doated upon particular trees he 
accounted for by the same philosophy. But in the case of the Consul 
Crispus he was more inclined to hold the first supposition,—to wit, 
that he had been a beech himself, and that the tree which he loved so 
dearly had sprung from his own mast, so that the feeling with which he 
regarded it was a parental one. For that man should thus unconsciously 
afford proof of his relationship to tree, was rendered more probable 
by a singular, though peradventure single fact in which a tree so 
entirely recognized its affinity with man, that a slip accidentally 
grafted on the human subject, took root in the body, grew there, 
flourished, blossomed and produced fruit after its kind. “A shepherd 
of Tarragon had fallen into a sloe tree, and a sharp point thereof 
having run into his breast, in two years time it took such root, that, 
after many branches had been cut off, there sprang up some at last 
which bare both flowers and fruit.” “Peiresc,” as Gassendi the writer 
of his life assures us, “would never be quiet till Cardinal Barberino 
procured the Archbishop of that place to testify the truth of the 
story; and Putean the knight received not only letters testifying the 
same, but also certain branches thereof, which he sent unto him.”




