CHAPTER CCVII.

FRACAS WITH THE GENDER FEMININE.—THE DOCTOR'S DEFENCE.

If there sit twelve women at the table, let a dozen of them be—as they 
are.

TIMON OF ATHENS.


“Papp-paah!” says my daughter.

“You intolerable man!” says my wife.

“You abominable creature!” says my wife's eldest sister, “you wicked 
wretch!”

“Oh Mr. Author,” says Miss Graveairs, “I did not expect this from 
you.”

“Very well, Sir, very well! This is like you!” says the Bow-Begum.

“Was there ever such an atrocious libel upon the sex,” says the Lady 
President of the Celestial Blues.

The Ladies of the Stocking unanimously agree in the sentence of 
condemnation.

Let me see, who do I know among them. There is Mrs. Lapis Lazuli and 
her daughter Miss Ultramarine,—there is Mrs. Bluestone, the most 
caustic of female critics, and her friend Miss Gentian,—Heaven protect 
me from the bitterness of her remarks,—there is Lady Turquoise, Lady 
Celestina Sky, the widow Bluebeard, Miss Mazarine, and that pretty 
creature Serena Cerulean, it does me good to look at her, she is the 
blue-bell of the party. There is Miss Sapphire, Miss Priscilla 
Prussian, Mrs. Indigo, and the Widow Woad. And Heaven knows who 
beside. Mercy on me—it were better to be detected at the mysteries of 
the Bona Dea, than be found here! Hear them how they open in 
succession—

Infamous!

Shameful!

Intolerable!

This is too bad.

He has heaped together all the slanderous and odious things that could 
be collected from musty books.

Talk of his Wife and Daughter. I do not believe any one who had wife 
and daughter would have composed such a Chapter as that. An old 
batchelor I warrant him, and mustier than his books.

Pedant!

Satirist!

Libeller!

Wretch!

Monster!

And Miss Virginia Vinegar compleats the climax by exclaiming with 
peculiar emphasis, Man!

All Indigo-land is in commotion; and Urgand the Unknown would be in as 
much danger _proh-Jupiter!_ from the Stockingers, if he fell into 
their hands, as Orpheus from the Mænades. _Tantæne animis cælestibus 
iræ?_

Why Ladies! dear Ladies! good Ladies! gentle Ladies! merciful Ladies! 
hear me,—hear me! In justice, in compassion, in charity hear me! For 
your own sakes, and for the honour of feminality hear me!

What has the wretch to say?

What _can_ he say?

What indeed _can be said_? Nevertheless let us hear him, so bad a case 
must always be made worse by any attempt at defending it.

Hear him! hear him!

Englishwomen, countrywomen, and lovelies,—lovelies I certainly may 
call you, if it be not lawful for me to say lovers,—hear me for your 
honour, and have respect to your honour that you may believe, censure 
me in your wisdom, and awake your senses that you may be better 
judges. Who is here so unfeminine that would be a male creature? if 
any, speak; for her have I offended. Who is here so coarse that would 
not be a woman! if any, speak; for her have I offended. Who is here so 
vile that will not love her sex? if any speak; for her have I 
offended. I can have offended none but those who are ashamed of their 
womanhood, if any such there be, which I am far from thinking.

Gentle Ladies do you in your conscience believe that any reasonable 
person could possibly think the worse of womankind, for any of the 
strange and preposterous opinions which my lamented and excellent 
friend used to repeat in the playfulness of an eccentric fancy? Do you 
suppose that he was more in earnest when he brought forward these 
learned fooleries, than the Devil's Advocate when pleading against a 
suit for canonization in the Papal Court?

     _questo negro inchiostro, ch'io dispenzo
  Non fu per dare, o donne, a i vostri nasi,
  Ingrato odore, o d'altro che d'incenzo._[1]

[Footnote 1: MAURO.]

Hear but to the end, and I promise you on the faith of a true man a 
Red Letter Chapter in your praise; not a mere panegyric in the manner 
of those who flatter while they despise you, but such an honest 
estimate as will bear a scrutiny,—and which you will not like the 
worse because it may perhaps be found profitable as well as pleasing.

  Forgive me, sacred sex of woman, that,
  In thought or syllable, I have declaim'd
  Against your goodness; and I will redeem it
  With such religious honouring your names,
  That when I die, some never thought-stain'd virgin
  Shall make a relic of my dust, and throw
  My ashes, like a charm, upon those men
  Whose faiths they hold suspected.[2]

[Footnote 2: SHIRLEY.]




