CHAPTER CCXXXVII.

MORE MALADIES THAN THE BEST PHYSICIANS CAN PREVENT BY REMEDIES.—THE 
DOCTOR NOT GIVEN TO QUESTIONS, AND OF THE POCO-CURANTE SCHOOL AS TO 
ALL THE POLITICS OF THE DAY.

A slight answer to an intricate and useless question is a fit cover to 
such a dish; a cabbage leaf is good enough to cover a pot of 
mushrooms.

JEREMY TAYLOR.


Yet in his serious moods the Doctor sadly confessed with that Sir 
George, whom the Scotch ungratefully call Bloody Mackenzie, that “as 
in the body natural, so likewise in the politic, Nature hath provided 
more diseases than the best of Physicians can prevent by remedies.” He 
knew that kingdoms as well as individuals have their agues and 
calentures, are liable to plethora sometimes and otherwhiles to 
atrophy, to fits of madness which no hellebore can cure, and to decay 
and dissolution which no human endeavours can avert. With the maladies 
of the State indeed he troubled himself not, for though a true-born 
Englishman, he was as to all politics of the day, of the Poco-curante 
school. But with those of the human frame his thoughts were 
continually employed; it was his business to deal with them; his duty 
and his earnest desire to heal them, under God's blessing, where 
healing was humanly possible, or to alleviate them, when any thing 
more than alleviation was beyond the power of human skill.

The origin of evil was a question upon which he never ventured. Here 
too, he said with Sir George Mackenzie, “as I am not able by the 
Jacob's Ladder of my merit to scale Heaven, so am I less able by the 
Jacob's Staff of my private ability to take up the true altitude of 
its mysteries:” and borrowing a play upon words from the same old 
Essayist, he thought the brain had too little _pia mater_, which was 
too curious in such inquiries. But the mysteries of his own profession 
afforded “ample room and verge enough” for his speculations, however 
wide and wild their excursions. Those mysteries are so many, so 
momentous, and so inscrutable that he wondered not at any 
superstitions which have been excogitated by bewildered imagination, 
and implicitly followed by human weakness in its hopes and fears, its 
bodily and its mental sufferings.

As little did he wonder at the theories advanced by men who were in 
their days, the Seraphic and Angelic and Irrefragable Doctors of the 
healing art:—the tartar of Paracelsus, the Blas and Gas of Van 
Helmont, nor in later times at the animalcular hypotheses of Langius 
and Paullinus; nor at the belief of elder nations, as the Jews, and of 
savages every-where that all maladies are the immediate work of evil 
spirits. But when he called to mind the frightful consequences to 
which the belief of this opinion has led, the cruelties which have 
been exercised, the crimes which have been perpetrated, the miseries 
which have been inflicted and endured, it made him shudder at 
perceiving that the most absurd error may produce the greatest 
mischief to society, if it be accompanied with presumption, and if any 
real or imaginary interest be connected with maintaining it.

The Doctor like his Master and benefactor Peter Hopkins, was of the 
Poco-curante school in politics. He said that the Warwickshire 
gentleman who was going out with his hounds when the two armies were 
beginning to engage at Edge-hill, was not the worst Englishman who 
took the field that day.

Local circumstances favoured this tendency to political indifference. 
It was observed in the 34th Chapter of this Opus that one of the many 
reasons for which our Philosopher thought Doncaster a very likeable 
place of residence was that it sent no Members to Parliament. And 
Yorkshire being too large a county for any of its great families to 
engage lightly in contesting it, the Election fever however it might 
rage in other towns or other parts of the county, never prevailed 
there. But the constitution of the Doctor's mind secured him from all 
excitement of this nature. Even in the days of Wilkes and Liberty, 
when not a town in England escaped the general Influenza, he was not 
in the slightest degree affected by it, nor did he ever take up the 
Public Advertiser for the sake of one of Junius's Letters.




CHAPTER CCXXXVIII.

SIMONIDES.—FUNERAL POEMS.—UNFEELING OPINION IMPUTED TO THE GREEK POET, 
AND EXPRESSED BY MALHERBE.—SENECA.—JEREMY TAYLOR AND THE DOCTOR ON 
WHAT DEATH MIGHT HAVE BEEN, AND WERE MEN WHAT CHRISTIANITY WOULD MAKE 
THEM, MIGHT BE.

  _Intendale chi può; che non è stretto
   Alcuno a creder pïu di quel che vuole._

ORLANDO INNAMORATO.


Among the lost works of antiquity, there are few poems which I should 
so much rejoice in recovering, as those of Simonides. Landor has said 
of him that he and Pindar wrote nothing bad; that his characteristics 
were simplicity, brevity, tenderness, and an assiduous accuracy of 
description. “If I were to mention,” he adds “what I fancy would give 
an English reader the best idea of his manner, I should say, the book 
of Ruth.”

One species of composition wherein he excelled was that which the 
Dutch in their straight-forward way call _Lykzangen_ or _Lykdichten_, 
but for which we have no appropriate name,—poems in commemoration of 
the dead. Beautiful specimens are to be found in the poetry of all 
countries, and this might be expected, threnodial being as natural as 
amatory verse; and as the characteristic of the latter is passion with 
little reflection, that of the former is, as naturally, to be at the 
same time passionate and thoughtful.

Our own language was rich in such poems during the Elizabethan age, 
and that which followed it. Of foreign poets none has in this 
department exceeded Chiabrera.

There is a passage among the fragments of Simonides which is called by 
his old editor consolatory, _παρηγορικόν_: but were it not for the 
authority of Seneca, who undoubtedly was acquainted with the whole 
poem, I should not easily be persuaded that so thoughtful, so pensive, 
so moralizing a poet would, in any mood of mind have recommended such 
consolation:

  _Τοῦ μὲν θανόντος οὐκ ἄν ἐνθυμοίμεθα,
   Εἴ τι φρονοῖμεν, πλεῖον ἡμέρας μιᾶς·_

let us not call to mind the dead, if we think of him at all, more than 
a single day. Indeed I am not certain from what Seneca says, whether 
the poet was speaking in his own, or in an assumed character, nor 
whether he spoke seriously or satirically; or I cannot but suspect 
that the passage would appear very differently, if we saw it in its 
place. Malherbe gives the same sort of advice in his consolation to M. 
du Périer upon the death of a daughter.

  _Ne te lasse donc plus d'inutiles complaintes;
         Mais sage à l'avenir,
   Aime une ombre comme ombre, et des cendres éteintes
         Eteins le souvenir;_

such a feeling is much more in character with a Frenchman than with 
Simonides.

Seneca himself, Stoic though he was, gave no such advice, but 
accounted the remembrance of his departed friends among his solemn 
delights, not looking upon them as lost: “_mihi amicorum defunctorum 
cogitatio dulcis ac blanda est; habui enim illos, tanquam amissurus; 
amissi tanquam habeam._”

My venerable friend was not hardened by a profession, which has too 
often the effect of blunting the feelings, even if it does not harden 
the heart. His disposition and his happy education preserved him from 
that injury; and as his religion taught him that death was not in 
itself an evil,—that for him, and for those who believed with him, it 
had no sting,—the subject was as familiar to his meditations as to his 
professional practice. A speculation which Jeremy Taylor, without 
insisting on it, offers to the consideration of inquisitive and modest 
persons, appeared to him far more probable than the common opinion 
which Milton expresses when he says that the fruit of the Forbidden 
Tree brought death into the world. That, the Bishop argues, “which 
_would have been_, had there been no sin, and that which _remains_ 
when the sin or guiltiness is gone, is not properly the punishment of 
the sin. But dissolution of the soul and body should have been, if 
Adam had not sinned; for the world would have been too little to have 
entertained those myriads of men, which must, in all reason, have been 
born from that blessing of ‘Increase and multiply,’ which was given at 
the first creation: and to have confined mankind to the pleasures of 
this world, in case he had not fallen, would have been a punishment of 
his innocence: but however, it _might have been_, though God had not 
been angry, and _shall still be_, even when the sin is taken off. The 
proper consequent of this will be, that when the Apostle says ‘Death 
came in by Sin,’ and that ‘Death is the wages of Sin,’ he primarily 
and literally means the solemnities, and causes, and infelicities, and 
untimeliness of temporal death; and not merely the dissolution, which 
is directly no evil, but an inlet to a better state.”

As our friend agreed in this opinion with Bishop Taylor; and moreover 
as he read in Scriptures that Enoch and Elijah had been translated 
from this world without tasting of death; and as he deemed it probable 
at least, that St. John, the beloved disciple, had been favoured with 
a like exemption from the common lot, he thought that Asgill had been 
hardly dealt with in being expelled from Parliament for his 
“Argument,” that according to the Covenant of Eternal Life, revealed 
in the Scriptures, man might be translated from hence, without passing 
through death. The opinion Dr. Dove thought, might be enthusiastic, 
the reasoning wild, the conclusion untenable, and the manner of the 
book indecorous, or irreverent. But he had learnt that much, which 
appears irreverent, and in reality is so, has not been irreverently 
intended; and the opinion, although groundless, seemed to him any 
thing rather than profane.

But the exemptions which are recorded in the Bible could not, in his 
judgement be considered as showing what would have been the common lot 
if our first parents had preserved their obedience. This he opined 
would more probably have been euthanasy than translation; death, not 
preceded by infirmity and decay, but as welcome, and perhaps as 
voluntary as sleep.

Or possibly the transition from a corporeal to a spiritual,—or more 
accurately in our imperfect language,—from an earthly to a celestial 
state of being, might have been produced by some developement, some 
formal mutation as visible, (adverting to a favourite fancy of his 
own) as that which in the butterfly was made by the ancients their 
emblem of immortality. Bishop Van Mildert shews us upon scriptural 
authority that “the degree of perfection at which we may arrive has no 
definite limits, but is to go on increasing as long as this state of 
probation continues.” So in the paradisiacal, and possibly in the 
millennial state, he thought, that with such an intellectual and moral 
improvement, a corresponding organic evolution might keep pace; and 
that as the child expands into man, so man might mature into Angel.




