CHAPTER CCXXVII.

SYSTEM OF PROGRESSION MARRED ONLY BY MAN'S INTERFERENCE.—THE DOCTOR 
SPEAKS SERIOUSLY AND HUMANELY AND QUOTES JUVENAL.

MONTENEGRO. How now, are thy arrows feathered?

VELASCO.    Well enough for roving.

MONTENEGRO. Shoot home then.

SHIRLEY.


It is only when Man interferes, that the system of progression which 
the All Father has established throughout the living and sentient 
world, is interrupted, and Man, our Philosopher would sorrowfully 
observe, has interrupted it, not only for himself, but for such of the 
inferior creatures as are under his controul. He has degraded the 
instincts of some, and in others, perhaps it may not be too much to 
say that he has corrupted that moral sense of which even the brute 
creation partakes in its degree; and has inoculated them with his own 
vices. Thus the decoy duck is made a traitor to her own species, and 
so are all those smaller birds which the bird-catcher trains to assist 
him in ensnaring others. The Rat, who is one of the bravest of created 
things, is in like manner rendered a villain.

Upon hunting and hawking the Doctor laid little stress, because both 
dogs and falcons in their natural state would have hunted and fowled 
on their own account. These sports according to his “poor way of 
thinking,” tended to deprave not so much the animals, as the human 
beings employed in them; for when they ceased to be necessary for the 
support or protection of man, they became culpable. But to train dogs 
for war, and flesh them upon living prisoners, as the Spaniards did, 
(and as, long since the decease of my venerable friend, Buonaparte's 
officers did in St. Domingo),—to make horses, gentle and harmless as 
well as noble in their disposition as they are, take a part in our 
senseless political contentions, charge a body of men, and trample 
over their broken limbs and palpitating bodies;—to convert the 
Elephant, whom Pope, he said, had wronged by only calling him 
half-reasoning, the mild, the thoughtful, the magnanimous Elephant, 
into a wilful and deliberate and cruel executioner, these he thought 
were acts of high treason against humanity, and of impiety against 
universal nature. Grievous indeed it is, he said, to know that the 
whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain; but more grievous to 
consider that man, who by his original sin was the guilty cause of 
their general deprivation, should continue by repeated sins to 
aggravate it;—to which he added that the lines of the Roman Satirist, 
though not exactly true, were yet humiliating and instructive.

                                        _Mundi
  Principio indulsit communis conditor illis
  Tantum animas, nobis animum quoque, mutuus ut nos
  Adfectus petere auxilium et præstare juberet,
  Dispersos trahere in populum, migrare vetusto
  De nemore, et proavis habitatas linquere silvas;
  Ædificare domos, Laribus conjungere nostris
  Tectum aliud, tutos vicino limine somnos
  Ut conlata daret fiducia; protegere armis
  Labsum, aut ingenti nutantem vulnere civem,
  Communi dare signa tubâ, defendier îsdem
  Turribus, atque unâ portarum clave teneri.
  Sed jam serpentum major concordia; parcit
  Cognatis maculis similis fera; quando leoni
  Fortior eripuit vitam leo? quo nemore unquam
  Expiravit aper majoris dentibus apri?
  Indica tigris agit rabidâ cum tigride pacem
  Perpetuam: sævis inter se convenit ursis.
  Ast homini ferrum lethale incude nefandâ
  Produxisse parum est; quum rastra et sarcula tantum
  Adsueti coquere, et marris ac vomere lassi
  Nescierint primi gladios excudere fabri.
  Adspicimus populos, quorum non sufficit iræ
  Occidisse aliquem: sed pectora, brachia, vultum
  Crediderint genus esse cibi. Quid diceret ergo
  Vel quo non fugerit, si nunc hæc monstra videret
  Pythagoras: cunctis animalibus abstinuit qui
  Tanquam homine, et ventri indulsit non omne legumen._[1]

[Footnote 1: The reader may call to mind the commencement of the Third 
Canto of Rokeby.

  The hunting tribes of air and earth
  Respect the brethren of their birth;
  Nature, who loves the claim of kind,
  Less cruel, chase to each assigned.
  The falcon, poised on soaring wing,
  Watches the wild-duck by the spring;
  The slow-hound wakes the fox's lair;
  The greyhound presses on the hare;
  The eagle pounces on the lamb;
  The wolf devours the fleecy dam:
  Even tiger fell and sullen bear
  Their likeness and their lineage spare.
  Man, only, mars kind Nature's plan
  And turns the fierce pursuit on man;
  Plying war's desultory trade,
  Incursion, flight, and ambuscade,
  Since Nimrod, Cush's mighty son
  At first the bloody game begun.]




