CHAPTER CCXXXIX.

THE DOCTOR DISSENTS FROM A PROPOSITION OF WARBURTON'S AND SHEWS IT TO 
BE FALLACIOUS.—HUTCHINSON'S REMARKS ON THE POWERS OF BRUTES.—LORD 
SHAFTESBURY QUOTED.—APOLLONIUS AND THE KING OF BABYLON.—DISTINCTION IN 
THE TALMUD BETWEEN AN INNOCENT BEAST AND A VICIOUS ONE.—OPINION OF 
ISAAC LA PEYRESC.—THE QUESTION DE ORIGINE ET NATURA ANIMARUM IN BRUTIS 
AS BROUGHT BEFORE THE THEOLOGIANS OF SEVEN PROTESTANT ACADEMIES IN THE 
YEAR 1635 BY DANIEL SENNERTUS.

_Toutes veritez ne sont pas bonnes à dire serieusement._

GOMGAM.


Warburton has argued that “from the _nature_ of any action morality 
cannot arise, nor from its effects;—not from the first, because being 
only reasonable or unreasonable, nothing follows but a fitness in 
doing one, and an absurdity in doing the other;—not from the second, 
because did the good or evil produced make the action _moral_, brutes 
from whose actions proceed both good and evil, would have morality.” 
But Warburton's proposition is fallacious, and his reasoning is 
inconclusive; there is an essential difference between right and 
wrong, upon which the moral law is founded; and in the _reductio ad 
absurdum_ upon which he relies, there is no absurdity. The language of 
the people is sometimes true to nature and philosophy when that of the 
learned departs widely from the one, and is mistaken in the other. 
When we call a beast vicious, we mean strictly what the word implies; 
and if we never speak of one as virtuous, it is because man reserves 
the praise of virtue to his own kind. The word good supplies its 
place. A horse that has any vice in him is never called good.

“In this case alone it is,” says Lord Shaftesbury, “we call any 
creature worthy or virtuous, when it can have the notion of a public 
interest, and can attain the speculation or science of what is morally 
good or ill, admirable or blameable, right or wrong. For though we may 
vulgarly call a horse _vicious_, yet we never say of a good one, nor 
of any mere beast, idiot, or changeling, though ever so good-natured, 
that he is _worthy_ or _virtuous_.

“So that if a creature be generous, kind, constant, compassionate, yet 
if he cannot reflect on what he himself does, or sees others do, so as 
to take notice of what is _worthy_ or _honest_; and make that notice 
or conception of _worth_ and _honesty_ to be an object of his 
affection, he has not the character of being virtuous; for thus, and 
no otherwise, he is capable of having a sense of right and wrong; a 
sentiment or judgement of what is done through just, equal and good 
affection, or the contrary.”

The Jews upon this subject agree with the common and natural opinion; 
and the Talmud accordingly, when any mischief has been done by an 
animal, distinguishes between an innocent beast and a vicious one, the 
owner of an innocent one being required to pay only half the amount of 
an injury thus, as it was deemed, casually incurred. There have been 
cases in which the laws have considered a beast as guilty of a crime, 
and amenable therefore to penal justice. In the year 1403 Simon de 
Baudemont, Lieutenant at Meulont of Jhean Lord of Maintenon the 
Bailiff of Mantes and Meulont, signed an attestation making known the 
expences, which had been incurred in order to execute justice on a Sow 
that had eaten a child. “For expences with the jail the charge was six 
_sols_. Item, to the executioner who came from Paris to Meulont to put 
the sentence in execution by the command of our Lord the Bailiff and 
of the king's Attorney, 54 _sols_. Item, for the carriage that 
conveyed her to execution, 6 _sols_. Item, for ropes to tie and haul 
her up, 2 _sols_, 8 _deniers_. Item, for gloves 12 _deniers_; 
amounting in the whole to 69 _sols_, 8 _deniers_.” It must be supposed 
the Executioner insisted upon the gloves, as a point of honour, that 
no one might reproach him with having sullied his hands by performing 
upon such a subject.

When Apollonius was introduced to the King of Babylon, the King 
invited him to sacrifice with him, for he was about to offer a Nisean 
horse to the Sun, selected for its beauty and adorned with all pomp 
for the occasion. But the Philosopher replied, “O King do you 
sacrifice after your manner, and give me leave to sacrifice after 
mine.” He then took frankincense, and prayed, saying, “O Sun, conduct 
me so far as it seemeth good to me and to thee. And let me become 
acquainted with virtuous men; but as for the wicked, let me neither 
know them nor they me.” And throwing the frankincense in the fire he 
observed the smoke, how it ascended and which way it bent, and just 
touching the fire when it seemed that he had sacrificed enough, he 
said to the King that he had performed the rites of his country, and 
forthwith withdrew that he might have nothing to do with blood and 
slaughter. Afterwards when the King took him where were many lions, 
bears and panthers reserved for sport, invited him to go with him and 
hunt them, Apollonius replied, “King, you should remember, that I did 
not chuse to be present at your sacrifice, much less should I like to 
see animals wounded, and by the pain of their wounds rendered more 
ferocious than nature has made them.”

Isaac la Peyresc thought differently from the Talmudists and the 
French Lawyers. He says, quoting the Apostle, _Ubi non est lex, neque 
prævaricatio est._ Where ‘no law is, there is no transgression.’ 
_Prævaricatio autem eadem est, quæ transgressio legis: illa ipsa 
proprie quæ peccatum imputationis labe infecit. Quod ut compingatur in 
oculos: pecudes actualiter et materialiter eadem faciunt, quæ 
transgrediuntur homines; incestant, rapiunt, occidunt; non erit tamen 
uspiam adeo supinus qui dicat, pecudes peccare ad similitudinem 
transgressionis hominum; quia pecudes quæ hæc peccant, sequuntur 
tantum suam naturam et suam materiam; neque legum transgrediuntur 
ullam, quia nulla eis data est cujus transgressione formetur in eis et 
imputetur peccatum._

Yet it cannot be doubted that in such a case Peyresc himself, 
disregarding his own arguments would have ordered the Sow to be put to 
death.

This author derives _peccatum_ from _pecus_, for, says he, “as often 
as a man wilfully departs from that right reason which constitutes him 
man,—as often as under the impulse of that brute matter which he has 
in common with beasts, he commits any action fitting in a beast, but 
unworthy in man, so often he seems to fall below his own species, and 
sink into that of a brute.” “_Latini nomen peccati mutuati sunt à 
pecore. Quoties enim homo delirat à rectâ ratione illa quæ hominem 
constituit; quoties impulsu materiæ suæ quam habet communem cum 
brutis, quid agit dignum pecore, et indignum homine, toties cadere 
videtur à specie suâ, et incidere in speciem pecoris sive bruti._”

_Pecunia_ is known to be derived from _Pecus_, wealth, of which money 
is the representative, having originally consisted in cattle. As money 
is proverbially the root of all evil, this etymological connection 
might be remarkable enough to be deemed mysterious by those who are 
fond of discovering mysteries in words.

“Brutes,” Hutchinson says, “are made in scripture objects to inculcate 
the duties in society, and even emblems of spiritual and divine 
perfections. Many of them are more strictly bound in pairs than is 
common between men and women; many both males and females take greater 
care and pains, and run greater risques for the education and defence 
of their young, than any of our species. Many of them excel us in 
instructing their young, so in policy, in industry, in mechanical arts 
and operations. And there are other species among them, examples to 
deter men from the vices in society.” “The power in brutes,” he says, 
“is by the same agent as that in the body of man, and they are made of 
the same species of dust; most of them are guided by what is called 
instinct; some of them are tamed and disciplined and their powers made 
serviceable to men, and all of them are subject to the immediate power 
of God, when he pleases to direct them. Mechanism is carried so far in 
them, that in the parts or degrees of sensation they excel man; that 
by every one of their actions man might see the _ne plus ultra_ of 
sense, and know how to distinguish the difference between them and the 
decayed image in him, to value it accordingly, and excite a 
proportionate zeal in him to recover the first perfections in that 
image, and augment them to secure the pleasure of exercising them upon 
the most desirable objects to all eternity.” So far so good, but this 
once influential writer makes an erroneous conclusion when he says, 
“if you allow anything farther than mechanism to Brutes, imagine that 
they have souls, or think, or act the part of souls: you either begin 
to think that you have no soul, or that it is, such as are in Brutes, 
mortal.”

The question _de Origine et Naturâ Animarum in Brutis_ was brought 
before the Theologians of seven Protestant Academies in the year 1635, 
by Daniel Sennertus Professor of Medicine at Wittemberg, of whose 
Institutes Sir Thomas Browne says to a student in that art, “assure 
yourself that when you are a perfect master of them you will seldom 
meet with any point in physic to which you will not be able to speak 
like a man.” It was the opinion of this very learned professor that 
what in scholastic language is called the _form_ of every perfect 
thing, (distinguished from _figure,—forma est naturæ bonum, figura, 
artis opus_) though it is not a soul, yet even in precious stones is 
something altogether different from the four elements, and that every 
soul, or living principle, is a certain quintessence; the wonderful 
operations in plants, and the more wonderful actions of brute 
creatures, far exceeding all power of the elements, had convinced him 
of this. But for asserting it, Freitagius the medical Professor at 
Groninghen attacked him fiercely as a blasphemer and a heretic. 
Sennertus being then an old man was more moved by this outrage than 
became one of his attainments and high character. So he laid the case 
before the Universities of Leipsic, Rostock, Basle, Marpurg, 
Konigsberg, Jena, Strasburg, and Altorff, and he requested their 
opinion upon these two propositions, whether what he had affirmed, 
that the souls of brute creatures had been created at first from 
nothing by the Deity, and were not of an elementary nature, but of 
something different, was blasphemous and heretical, or whether it were 
not an ignorant opinion of his assailant, that brute animals consisted 
wholly of elementary matter, both as to their body and soul?

They all answered the questions more or less at large, the Leipsic 
Doctors saying _officii nostri duximus esse ut in timore Domini ea sub 
diligentem disquisitionem vocaremus._ They saw nothing irreligious in 
the opinion that God at the creation had formed the bodies of brutes 
from elementary matter, and created their souls _ex nihilo_; after 
which both were reproduced in the natural course of generation; these 
souls however were not immortal, nor so separable from the matter with 
which they were united, as to survive it, and exist without it, or 
return again into their bodies; but when the animals died, the animal 
soul died also. Thus the excellence of man was unimpaired, and the 
privilege of the human soul remained inviolate, the prerogative of man 
being that God had breathed into him the breath of life, whereby he 
became a living soul. Thus they fully acquitted Sennertus of the 
charge brought against him; and waiving any such direct condemnation 
of his accuser as he had desired, condemned in strong terms the 
insolent manner in which the accusation had been preferred.

The Theologians of Rostock replied more briefly. Dismissing at once 
the charge of blasphemy and heresy as absurd, they treated the 
question as purely philosophical, saying, “_Quod de elementari naturâ 
animarum brutorum dicitur, de illo nostrum non est disserere. 
Arbitramur, hæc non solum Philosophorum, sed et libertati, super his 
modestè, veritatis inveniendæ studio, philosophantium permittenda; 
quos nimium constringere, et unius hominis, Aristotelis, alteriusve, 
velle alligare opinioni, pugnare videtur cum naturâ intellectus 
humani, quem nulli opinioni servum Deus esse voluit._” Concerning the 
second question, they were not willing, they said, to draw the saw of 
contention with any one; “_Si tamen, quod sentimus dicendum est, 
respondemus, illum qui cœlum et terram ex nihilo creavit, non eguisse 
ullâ materiâ, ex quâ brutorum animas produceret; sed illi placuisse 
iis quæ Moses recitat verbis compellare terram et aquam, et ad solius 
Omnipotentis nutum et imperium, ex subjectis quæ compellârit, animas 
emersisse._” This answer Sennertus obtained through his friend 
Lauremberg the Horticulturist and Botanist, who advised him at the 
same time to disregard all invidious attacks; “_Turbas tibi dari quòd 
liberè philosophari satagis, id ipse nôsti, neque novum esse, neque 
insolens, hâc ætate. Eandem tecum sortem experiuntur omnes eleganter 
et solidè eruditi, quibus qui paria facere non valet, invidet et 
oblatrat. Tu verò noli hoc nomine te quicquam macerare neu 
obtrectationem illam gravius vocare ad animum. Nota est orbi tua 
eruditio, tua virtus et ingenuitas, quæ ea propter nullam patietur 
jacturam. Tu modo, ut hactenus fecisti, pergito bene mereri de 
Republicâ literariâ, et mihi favere, certò tibi persuasus, habere te 
hîc loci hominem tui amantem, et observantem maxime._”

Zuinger answered more at large for the Faculty at Basle. They bade him 
not to marvel that he should be accused of heresy and blasphemy, 
seeing that the same charge has been brought against their 
Theologians, who when they taught according to Scripture that God 
alone was the Father of the spirits as their parents were of their 
bodies, and that the reasonable soul therefore was not derived from 
their parents, but infused and concreated _θύραθεν à Deo ἀμέσως_ were 
accused either of Pelagianism, as if they had denied Original Sin, or 
of blasphemy, as if they had made God the author of sin. They 
admonished him to regard such calumnies more justly and quietly, for 
evil and invidious tongues could never detract from that estimation 
which he had won for him in the Republic of Letters. Nevertheless as 
he had asked for their opinion, they would freely deliver it.

First then as to the postulate which he had premised in the Epistle 
accompanying his Questions, that wherever there is creation, something 
is produced from nothing, _(ubicunque creatio est, ibi aliquid ex 
nihilo producitur)_ if by this he intended, that in no mode of 
creation, whether it were _κτίσις_, or _ποίησις_, or _πλᾶσις_ there 
was no substrate matter out of which something was made by the 
omnipotent virtue of the Deity, in that case they thought, that his 
opinion was contrary to Scripture, forasmuch as it plainly appeared in 
the book of Genesis, that neither the male nor female were created 
from nothing, but the man from the dust of the ground, and the woman 
from one of his ribs, _tanquam præcedentibus corporum materieribus_. 
But though it is indubitable that the creation of the soul in either 
parent was immediately _ex nihilo_, as was shewn in the creation of 
Adam we see nevertheless that the name of creation has been applied by 
Moses to the formation _(plasmationi)_ of their bodies. But if 
Sennertus's words were to be understood as intending that wherever 
there was a creation, something was produced in this either _ex 
nihilo_ absolutely, or relatively and _κατά τι_ out of something, some 
preceding matter, which though certainly in itself something, yet 
relatively,—that which is made out of it, is nothing, _(nihil, aut non 
ens)_ because it hath in itself no power, liability, or aptitude that 
it should either be, or become that which God by his miraculous and 
omnipotent virtue makes it, they had no difficulty in assenting to 
this. As for example, the dust of which God formed the body of Adam 
was something and nothing. Something in itself, for it was earth; 
nothing in respect of that admirable work of the human body which God 
formed of it.

As for the question whether his opinion was blasphemous and heretical, 
it could be neither one nor the other, for it neither derogated from 
the glory of God, nor touched upon any fundamental article of faith. 
Some there were who opined that Chaos was created _ex nihilo_, which 
they understood by Tohu Vabohu, from which all things celestial and 
elementary were afterwards mediately created by God. Others exploding 
Chaos held that heaven, earth, water and air, were created _ex 
nihilo_. But they did not charge each other with blasphemy, and heresy 
because of this disagreement, and verily they who thought that the 
souls of brutes were originally created by God _ex nihilo_ appeared no 
more to derogate from the might, majesty and glory of God, than those 
who held that brutes were wholly created from the element. The virtue 
of an omnipotent God became in either case presupposed.

There was no heresy they said in his assertion that the souls of 
brutes were not of an elementary nature, but of something different: 
provided that a just distinction were made between the rational soul 
and the brute soul, the difference being not merely specific but 
generic. For the rational soul is altogether of a spiritual nature and 
essence, _adeòque Ens uti vocant transcendens_, bearing the image of 
God in this, that properly speaking it is a spirit, as God is a 
Spirit. 2d. The rational soul as such, as Aristotle himself testifies, 
has no bodily energies, or operations; its operations indeed are 
performed in the body but not by the body, nor by bodily organs; but 
the contrary is true concerning the souls of brutes. 3dly. The 
rational soul, though it be closely conjoined with the body and 
hypostatically united therewith, nevertheless is separable therefrom, 
so that ever out of the body _sit ὑφιστάμενον aliquod_; but the souls 
of brutes are immersed in matter and in bodies, so that they cannot 
subsist without them. Lastly, the rational soul alone hath the 
privilege of immortality, it being beyond all controversy that the 
souls of brutes are mortal and corruptible. These differences being 
admitted, and saving the due prerogative, excellence, and as it were 
divinity of the rational soul, the Theological Faculty of Basil 
thought it of little consequence if any one held that the souls of 
brutes were of something different from elementary matter.

They delivered no opinion in condemnation of his assailant's doctrine, 
upon the ground that the question was not within their province. 
“_Certum est,_” they said, “_uti formas rerum omnium difficulter, et 
non nisi a posteriori, et per certas περιστάσεις, cognoscere possumus; 
ita omnium difficillimè Animarum naturam nos pervestigare posse, 
nostramque, uti in aliis, ita in hac materiâ, scientiam esse, ut scitè 
Scaliger loquitur, umbram in sole. Ac non dubium, Deum hic vagabundis 
contemplationibus nostris ponere voluisse, ut disceremus 
imbecillitatis et cæcitatis nostræ conscientiâ humiliari, cum stupore 
opera ejus admirari, atque cum modestia et sobrietate philosophari._” 
They declared however that the rational soul differed from that of 
brutes in its nature, essence, properties and actions, and that this 
was not to be doubted of by Christians: that the soul of brutes was 
not spiritual, not immaterial, that all its actions were merely 
material, and performed by corporeal organs, and they referred to 
Sennertus's own works as rightly affirming that it was partible, _et 
dividatur ad divisionem materiæ, ita ut cum corporis parte aliquid 
animæ possit avelli_, inferring here as it seems from a false analogy 
that animal life was like that of vegetables, _quæ ex parte a plantâ 
avulsâ propagantur_.

They entered also into some curious criticism metaphysical and 
philological upon certain texts pertinent to the questions before 
them. When the dust became lice throughout all the land of Egypt, the 
mutation of the dust into lice was to be understood: so too in the 
creation of Adam, and the formation of Eve, there could be no doubt 
concerning the matter from which both were made. But when water was 
miraculously produced from the rock, and from the hollow place in the 
jaw, _ibi sanè nemo sanus dicet, aquam è petrâ aut maxillâ à Deo ita 
fuisse productam, ut petra aut maxilla materiam aquæ huic præbuerit._

The answer from Marpurg was short and satisfactory. There also the 
Professors waived the philosophical question, saying _Nos falcem in 
alienam messem non mittemus, nec Morychi in alieno choro pedem nostrum 
ponemus, sed nostro modulo ac pede nos metiemur, nobis id etiam dictum 
putantes, τὰ ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡμᾶς. Nobis nostra vendicabimus, 
Philosophis philosophica relinquentes._ Tertullian they said had 
asserted that Philosophers were the Patriarchs of Heretics, 
nevertheless a philosophical opinion, while it keeps within its own 
circles, and does not interfere with the mysteries of faith, is no 
heresy. They adduced a subtle argument to show that upon the point in 
question there was no real difference between something and nothing. 
_Creatio ex nihilo intelligitur fieri tum ratione sui principii, quod 
est nihilum negativum; tum ratione indispositionis, ob quam materia, 
ex quâ aliquid fit, in productione pro nihilo habetur. Quamvis igitur 
animæ bestiarum dicerentur in Creatione ex potentiâ materiæ eductæ, 
nihilominus ob indispositionem materiæ quam formæ eductæ multum 
superant, ex nihilo creatæ essent._ And they agreed with Luther and 
with those other Divines who held that the words in the first Chapter 
of Genesis whereby the Earth was bade to bring forth grass, herbs, 
trees and living creatures after their kind, and the water to bring 
forth fishes, were to be strictly understood, the earth and the waters 
having _ex Dei benedictione, activè et verè_ produced them.

The answer from Konigsberg was not less favourable. The dispute which 
Freitagius had raised, _infelix illa σύῤῥαξις_ they called it, ought 
to have been carried on by that Professor with more moderation. 
Granting that the souls of brutes were not created separately like 
human souls but conjointly with the body, it still remained doubtful 
_quomodo se habuerit divinum partim ad aquam et terram factum 
mandatum, partim simultanea brutalium animarum cum corporibus 
creatio._ For earth and water might here be variously considered, 1, 
as the element, 2, as the matter, 3, as the subject, and 4, _ut mater 
vel vivus uterus ad animalium productionem immediatâ Dei operatione 
exaltatus._ Water and earth themselves were first created, and on the 
fifth the vital and plastic power was communicated to them, in which 
by virtue of the omnipotent word they still consist. They were of 
opinion that the souls of brutes and of plants also, were divinely 
raised above an elementary condition, it being always understood that 
the human soul far transcended them. The expression of Moses that 
formed every beast and every fowl out of the ground, proved not the 
matter whereof, but the place wherein they were formed.

The Faculty at Jena returned a shorter reply. The ingratitude of the 
world toward those who published their lucubrations upon such abstruse 
points, reminded them they said of Luther's complaint in one of his 
Prefaces: _Sæpe recordor boni Gersonis dubitantis num quid boni 
publicè scribendmn et proferendum sit. Si scriptio omittitur, multæ 
animæ negliguntur, quæ liberari potuissent; si verò illa præstatur, 
statim Diabolus præstò est cum linguis pestiferis et calumniarum 
plenis, quæ omnia corrumpunt et inficiunt._ What was said of the 
production of fish, plants and animals might be understood 
synecdochically, _salvâ verborum Mosaicorum integritate,_ as the text 
also was to be understood concerning the creation of man, where it is 
said that the Lord formed him of the dust of the earth, and 
immediately afterwards that he breathed into his nostrils the breath 
of life.

The Strasburg Divines entered upon the subject so earnestly that their 
disquisition far exceeds in length the whole of the communications 
from the other Universities. Sennertus could not have wished for a 
more elaborate or a more gratifying reply. The Faculty at Altdorff 
said that the question was not a matter of faith, and therefore no one 
could be obnoxious to the charge of heresy for maintaining or 
controverting either of the opposite opinions. They seem however to 
have agreed with neither party; not with Freitagius because they 
denied that brute souls were of an elementary nature, not with 
Sennertus, because they denied that they were created at first from 
nothing. It is manifest, said they, that they are not now created from 
nothing, because it would follow from thence that they subsist of 
themselves, and are not dependent upon matter, and are consequently 
immortal, which is absurd. It remained therefore that the souls of 
brutes, as they do not now receive their existence from mere nothing, 
so neither did they at the first creation, but from something 
pre-supposed, which the Peripatetics call the power of matter or of 
the subject, which from the beginning was nothing else and still is 
nothing else, than its propension or inclination to this or that form. 
_Quæ forma multiplex, cum etiam in potentia primi subjecti passiva 
præcesserit, per miraculosam Dei actionem ex illa fuit educta, 
actumque essendi completum in variis animalium speciebus accepit._

Sennertus either published these papers or prepared them for 
publication just before his death. They were printed in octavo at 
Wittenberg, with the title _De Origine et Natura Animarum in Brutis, 
Sententiæ Cl. Theologorum in aliquot Germaniæ Academiis, 1638_. 
Sprengel observes that none of the Historians of Philosophy have 
noticed,—

  _Cætera desunt._




