CHAPTER CCXXIV.

CHARLEMAGNE, CASIMIR THE POET, MARGARET DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE, 
NOCTURNAL REMEMBRANCER.—THE DOCTOR NOT AMBITIOUS OF FAME.—THE AUTHOR 
IS INDUCED BY MR. FOSBROOKE AND NORRIS OF BEMERTON TO EJACULATE A 
HEATHEN PRAYER IN BEHALF OF HIS BRETHREN.

  _Tutte le cose son rose et viole
   Ch' io dico ò ch' io dirò de la virtute._

FR. SANSOVINO.


It is recorded of Charlemagne by his secretary Eginhart, that he had 
always pen, ink and parchment beside his pillow, for the purpose of 
noting down any thoughts which might occur to him during the night: 
and lest upon waking he should find himself in darkness, a part of the 
wall, within reach from the bed was prepared, like the leaf of a 
tablet, with wax, on which he might indent his memoranda with a style.

The Jesuit poet Casimir had a black tablet always by his bedside, and 
a piece of chalk, with which to secure a thought, or a poetical 
expression that might occur to him, _si quid insomnis noctu non 
infeliciter cogitabat ne id sibi periret._ In like manner it is 
related of Margaret Duchess of Newcastle that some of her young ladies 
always slept within call, ready to rise at any hour in the night, and 
take down her thoughts, lest she should forget them before morning.

Some threescore years ago a little instrument was sold by the name of 
the Nocturnal Remembrancer; it consisted merely of some leaves of what 
is called asses-skin, in a leathern case wherein there was one 
aperture from side to side, by aid of which a straight line could be 
pencilled in the dark: the leaf might be drawn up, and fixed at 
measured distances, till it was written on from top to bottom.

_Our_ Doctor, (—now that thou art so well acquainted with him and 
likest him so cordially, Reader, it would be ungenerous in me to call 
him mine)—_our_ Doctor needed no such contrivances. He used to say 
that he laid aside all his cares when he put off his wig, and that 
never any were to be found under his night cap. Happy man, from whom 
this might be believed! but so even had been the smooth and noiseless 
tenour of his life that he could say it truly. Anxiety and 
bereavements had brought to him no sleepless nights, no dreams more 
distressful than even the realities that produce and blend with them. 
Neither had worldly cares or ambitious hopes and projects ever 
disquieted him, and made him misuse in midnight musings the hours 
which belong to sleep. He had laid up in his mind an inexhaustible 
store of facts and fancies, and delighted in nothing more than in 
adding to these intellectual treasures; but as he gathered knowledge 
only for its own sake, and for the pleasure of the pursuit, not with 
any emulous feelings, or aspiring intent

          —to be for ever known,
  And make the years to come his own,

he never said with the studious Elder Brother in Fletcher's comedy,

                           the children
  Which I will leave to all posterity,
  Begot and brought up by my painful studies
  Shall be my living issue.

And therefore—_voilà un homme qui était fort savant et fort eloquent, 
et neanmoins_—(altering a little the words of Bayle),—_il n'est pas 
connu dans la république des lettres, et il y a eu une infinité de 
gens beaucoup moins habile que lui, qui sont cent fois plus connus; 
c'est qu'ils ont publié des livres, et que la presse n'a point roulé 
sur ses productions. Il importe extrêmement aux hommes doctes, qui ne 
veulent pas tomber dans l'oubli après leur mort, de s'ériger en 
auteurs; sans cela leur nom ne passe guère la première génération; res 
erat unius ætatis. Le commun des lecteurs ne prend point garde au nom 
des savans qu'ils ne connaissent que par le témoignage d'autrui; on 
oublie bientôt un homme, lorsque l'eloge qu'en font les autres finit 
par—le public n'a rien ou de lui._

Bayle makes an exception of men who like Peiresc distinguish 
themselves _d'un façon singulière_.

“I am not sure,” says Sir Egerton Brydges, “that the life of an author 
is an happy life; but yet if the seeds of authorship be in him, he 
will not be happy except in the indulgence of this occupation. Without 
the culture and free air which these seeds require, they will wither 
and turn to poison.” It is no desirable thing, according to this 
representation, to be born with such a predisposition to the most 
dangerous of all callings. But still more pitiable is the condition of 
such a person if Mr. Fosbrooke has described it truly: “the mind of a 
man of genius,” says he, (who beyond all question is a man of genius 
himself) “is always in a state of pregnancy, or parturition; and its 
power of bearing offspring is bounded only by supervening disease, or 
by death.” Those who are a degree lower in genius are in a yet worse 
predicament; such a sort of man, as Norris of Bemerton describes, who 
“although he conceives often, yet by some chance or other, he always 
miscarries, and the issue proves abortive.”

  JUNO LUCINA _fer opem!_

This invocation the Doctor never made metaphorically for himself, 
whatever serious and secret prayers he may have preferred for others, 
when exercising one branch of his tripartite profession.

Bernardin de Saint Pierre says in one of his letters, when his _Etudes 
de la Nature_ were in the press, _Je suis a present dans les douleurs 
de l'enfantement, car il n'y a point de mère qui souffre autant en 
mettant un enfant au monde, et qui craigne plus qu'on ne l'ecorche ou 
qu'on ne les crève un œil, qu'un auteur qui revoit les épreuves de son 
ouvrage._




