CHAPTER CCXXII.

ETYMOLOGY.—UN TOUR DE MAÎTRE GONIN.—ROMAN DE VAUDEMONT AND THE LETTER 
C.—SHENSTONE.—THE DOCTOR'S USE OF CHRISTIAN NAMES.

  _Πρᾶγμα, πρᾶγμα μέγα κεκίνηται, μέγα._

ARISTOPHANES.


_Magnus thesaurus latet in nominibus,_ said Strafford, then Lord 
Deputy Wentworth, when noticing a most unwise scheme which was 
supposed to proceed from Sir Abraham Dawes, he observes, it appeared 
most plainly that he had not his name for nothing! In another letter, 
he says, “I begin to hope I may in time as well understand these 
customs as Sir Abraham Dawes. Why should I fear it? for I have a name 
less ominous than his.”

_Gonin_, Court de Gebelin says, is a French word or rather name which 
exists only in these proverbial phrases, _Maître Gonin_,—_un tour de 
Maître Gonin_; it designates _un Maître passé en ruses et artifices; 
un homme fin et rusé._ The origin of the word, says he, was altogether 
unknown. Menage rejects with the utmost contempt the opinion of those 
who derive it from the Hebrew ץובנ, _Gwunen_ a diviner, an enchanter. 
It is true that this etymology has been advanced too lightly, and 
without proofs: Menage however ought to have been less contemptuous, 
because he could substitute nothing in its place.

It is remarkable that neither Menage nor Court de Gebelin should have 
known that Maistre Gounin was a French conjurer, as well known in his 
day as Katterfelto and Jonas, or the Sieur Ingleby Emperor of 
Conjurors in later times. He flourished in the days of Francis the 
first, before whom he is said to have made a private exhibition of his 
art in a manner perfectly characteristic of that licentious King and 
his profligate court. Thus he effected “_par ses inventions, illusions 
et sorcelleries et enchantements,—car il estoit un homme fort expert 
et subtil en son art,_ says Brântome; _et son petit-fils, que nous 
avons veu, n'y entendoit rien au prix de luy._” Grandfather and 
grandson having been at the head of their worshipful profession, the 
name past into a proverbial expression, and survived all memory of the 
men.

Court de Gebelin traced its etymology far and wide. He says, it is 
incontestable that this word is common to us with the ancient Hebrews 
though it does not come to us from them. We are indebted for it to the 
English. Cunning _designe chez eux un homme adroit, fin, rusé._ Master 
Cunning _a fait Maître Gonin_. This word comes from the primitive 
_Cen_ pronounced _Ken_, which signifies ability, (_habilité_) art, 
power. The Irish have made from it _Kanu_, I know; _Kunna_, to know; 
_Kenning_, knowledge, (_science_); _Kenni_-mann, wise men (_hommes 
savans_), Doctors, Priests.

It is a word common to all the dialects of the Celtic and Teutonic; to 
the Greek in which _Konne-ein_[1] signifies to know (_savoir_) to be 
intelligent and able &c., to the Tartar languages &c.

[Footnote 1: So in the MS.]

_Les Anglois associant_ Cunning _avec_ Man, _homme, en font le mot_ 
Cunning-Man, _qui signifie Devin, Enchanteur, homme qui fait de 
grandes choses, et qui est habile: c'est donc le correspondant du mot 
Hebreu_ Gwunen, _Enchanteur, Devin;_ Gwuna, _Magicienne, Devineresse; 
d'où le verbe_ Gwunen, _deviner, observer les Augures, faire des 
prestiges. Ne soyons par étonnés,_ says the author, bringing this 
example to bear upon his system, _de voir ce mot commun à tant de 
Peuples, et si ancien: il vint chez tous d'une source commune, de la 
haute Asie, berceau de tous ces Peuples et de leur Langue._

If Mr. Canning had met with the foregoing passage towards the close of 
his political life, when he had attained the summit of his wishes, how 
would it have affected him, in his sober mind? Would it have tickled 
his vanity, or stung his conscience? Would he have been flattered by 
seeing his ability prefigured in his name? or would he have been 
mortified at the truth conveyed in the proverbial French application 
of it, and have acknowledged in his secret heart that cunning is as 
incompatible with self-esteem as it is with uprightness, with 
magnanimity, and with true greatness?

His name was unlucky not only in its signification, but according to 
Roman de Vaudemont, in its initial.

  _Maudit est nom qui par C se commence,
     Coquin, cornard, caignard, coqu, caphard:
     Aussi par B, badaud, badin, bavard,
   Mais pire est C, si j'ay bien remembrance._

Much as the Doctor insisted upon the virtues of what he called the 
divine initial, he reprehended the uncharitable sentiment of these 
verses, and thought that the author never could have played at “I love 
my Love with an A,” or that the said game perhaps was not known among 
the French; for you must get to x, y, and z before you find it 
difficult to praise her in any letter in the alphabet, and to 
dispraise her in the same.

Initials therefore, he thought, (always with one exception) of no 
other consequence than as they pleased the ear, and combined 
gracefully in a cypher, upon a seal or ring. But in names themselves a 
great deal more presents itself to a reflecting mind.

Shenstone used to bless his good fortune that his name was not 
obnoxious to a pun. He would not have liked to have been complimented 
in the same strain as a certain Mr. Pegge was by an old epigrammatist.

  What wonder if my friendship's force doth last
  Firm to your goodness? You have pegg'd it fast.

Little could he foresee, as Dr. Southey has observed that it was 
obnoxious to a rhyme in French English. In the gardens of Ermenonville 
M.     placed this inscription to his honour.

    This plain stone
    To William Shenstone.
  In his writings he display'd
    A mind natural;
  At Leasowes he laid
    Arcadian greens rural.

Poor Shenstone hardly appears more ridiculous in the frontispiece to 
his own works, where, in the heroic attitude of a poet who has won the 
prize and is about to receive the crown, he stands before Apollo in a 
shirt and boa, as destitute of another less dispensible part of dress 
as Adam in Eden, but like Adam when innocent, not ashamed: while the 
shirtless God holding a lyre in one hand prepares with the other to 
place a wreath of bay upon the brow of his delighted votary.

The father of Sir Joshua Reynolds fancied that if he gave his son an 
uncommon Christian name, it might be the means of bettering his 
fortune; and therefore he had him christened Joshua. It does not 
appear however that the name ever proved as convenient to the great 
painter as it did to Joshua Barnes. He to whose Barnesian labours 
Homer and Queen Esther, and King Edward III. bear witness, was a good 
man and a good scholar, and a rich widow who not imprudently inferred 
that he would make a good husband, gave him an opportunity by 
observing to him one day that Joshua made the Sun and Moon stand 
still, and significantly adding that nothing could resist Joshua. The 
hint was not thrown away;—and he never had cause to repent that he had 
taken, nor she that she had given it.

A Spanish gentleman who made it his pastime to write books of 
chivalry, being to bring into his work a furious Giant, went many days 
devising a name which might in all points be answerable to his 
fierceness, neither could he light upon any; till playing one day at 
cards in his friend's house, he heard the master of the house say to 
the boy—muchacho—_tra qui tantos_. As soon as he heard Traquitantos he 
laid down his cards and said that now he had found a name which would 
fit well for his Giant.[2]

[Footnote 2: HUARTE.]

I know not whether it was the happy-minded author of the Worthies and 
the Church History of Britain who proposed as an epitaph for himself 
the words “Fuller's Earth,” or whether some one proposed it for him. 
But it is in his own style of thought and feeling.

Nor has it any unbeseeming levity, like this which is among Browne's 
poems.

  Here lieth in sooth
  Honest John Tooth,
  Whom Death on a day
  From us drew away.

Or this upon a Mr. Button,

  Here lieth one, God rest his soul
  Whose grave is but a button-hole.

No one was ever punned to death, nor, though Ditton is said to have 
died in consequence of “the unhappy effect” which Swift's verses 
produced upon him, can I believe that any one was ever rhymed to 
death.

A man may with better reason bless his godfathers and godmothers if 
they chuse for him a name which is neither too common nor too 
peculiar.[3]

[Footnote 3: It is said of an eccentric individual that he never 
forgave his Godfathers and Godmother for giving him the name of Moses, 
for which the short is Mo.]

It is not a good thing to be Tom'd or Bob'd, Jack'd or Jim'd, Sam'd or 
Ben'd, Natty'd or Batty'd, Neddy'd or Teddy'd, Will'd or Bill'd, 
Dick'd or Nick'd, Joe'd or Jerry'd as you go through the world. And 
yet it is worse to have a christian name, that for its oddity shall be 
in every body's mouth when you are spoken of, as if it were pinned 
upon your back, or labelled upon your forehead. Quintin Dick for 
example, which would have been still more unlucky if Mr. Dick had 
happened to have a cast in his eye. The Report on Parochial 
Registration contains a singular example of the inconvenience which 
may arise from giving a child an uncouth christian name. A gentleman 
called Anketil Gray had occasion for a certificate of his baptism: it 
was known at what church he had been baptized, but on searching the 
register there, no such name could be found: some mistake was presumed 
therefore not in the entry, but in the recollection of the parties, 
and many other registers were examined without success. At length the 
first register was again recurred to, and then upon a closer 
investigation, they found him entered as Miss Ann Kettle Grey.

“_Souvent_,” says Brântome, “ceux qui portent le nom de leurs ayeuls, 
leur _ressemblent volontiers, comme je l'ay veu observer et en 
discourir à aucuns philosophes._” He makes this remark after observing 
that the Emperor Ferdinand was named after his grandfather Ferdinand 
of Arragon, and Charles V. after his great grandfather Charles the 
Bold. But such resemblances are as Brântome implies, imitational where 
they exist. And Mr. Keightley's observation, that “a man's name and 
his occupation have often a most curious coincidence,” rests perhaps 
on a similar ground, men being sometimes designated by their names for 
the way of life which they are to pursue. Many a boy has been called 
Nelson in our own days, and Rodney in our fathers', because he was 
intended for the sea service, and many a seventh son has been 
christened Luke in the hope that he might live to be a physician. In 
what other business than that of a lottery-office would the name 
Goodluck so surely have brought business to the house? Captain Death 
could never have practised medicine or surgery, unless under an alias; 
but there would be no better name with which to meet an enemy in 
battle. Dr. Damman was an eminent physician and royal professor of 
midwifery at Ghent in the latter part of the last century. He ought to 
have been a Calvinistic divine.

The Ancients paid so great a regard to names, that whenever a number 
of men were to be examined on suspicion, they began by putting to the 
torture the one whose name was esteemed the vilest. And this must not 
be supposed to have had its origin in any reasonable probability, such 
as might be against a man who being apprehended for a riot, should say 
his name was Patrick Murphy, or Dennis O'Connor, or Thady O'Callaghan; 
or against a Moses Levi, or a Daniel Abrahams for uttering bad money; 
it was for the import of the name itself, and the evidence of a base 
and servile origin which it implied.

“_J'ai été tousjours fort etonné_,” says Bayle, “_que les familles qui 
portent un nom odieux ou ridicule, ne le quitent pas._” The 
Leatherheads and Shufflebottoms, the Higgenses and Huggenses, the 
Scroggses and the Scraggses, Sheepshanks and Ramsbottoms, Taylors and 
Barbers, and worse than all, Butchers, would have been to Bayle as 
abominable as they were to Dr. Dove. I ought, the Doctor would say, to 
have a more natural dislike to the names of Kite, Hawk, Falcon and 
Eagle; and yet they are to me (the first excepted) less odious than 
names like these: and even preferable to Bull, Bear, Pig, Hog, Fox or 
Wolf.

What a name, he would say, is Lamb for a soldier, Joy for an 
undertaker, Rich for a pauper, or Noble for a taylor: Big for a lean 
and little person, and Small for one who is broad in the rear and 
abdominous in the van. Short for a fellow six feet without his shoes, 
or Long for him whose high heels hardly elevate him to the height of 
five. Sweet for one who has either a vinegar face, or a foxey 
complection. Younghusband for an old batchelor. Merryweather for any 
one in November and February, a black spring, a cold summer or a wet 
autumn. Goodenough for a person no better than he should be: Toogood 
for any human creature, and Best for a subject who is perhaps too bad 
to be endured.

Custom having given to every Christian name its _alias_, he always 
used either the baptismal name or its substitute as it happened to 
suit his fancy, careless of what others might do. Thus he never called 
any woman Mary, though _Mare_ he said being the sea was in many 
respects but too emblematic of the sex. It was better to use a 
synonyme of better omen, and Molly therefore was to be preferred as 
being soft. If he accosted a vixen of that name in her worst temper he 
_mollyfied_ her. On the contrary he never could be induced to 
substitute Sally for Sarah.—Sally he said had a salacious sound, and 
moreover it reminded him of rovers, which women ought not to be. 
Martha he called Patty, because it came pat to the tongue. Dorothy 
remained Dorothy, because it was neither fitting that women should be 
made Dolls, nor Idols. Susan with him was always Sue, because women 
were to be sued, and Winifred Winny because they were to be won.




