CHAPTER CCXIII.

BIRDS OF PARADISE.—THE ZIZ.—STORY OF THE ABBOT OF ST. SALVADOR DE 
VILLAR.—HOLY COLETTE'S NONDESCRIPT PET.—THE ANIMALCULAR 
WORLD.—GIORDANO BRUNO.

  And so I came to Fancy's meadows, strow'd
            With many a flower;
  Fain would I here have made abode,
  But I was quickened by my hour.

HERBERT.


Hindoos and Mahommedans have stocked their heavens not only with 
mythological monsters but with beautiful birds of celestial kind. They 
who have read Thalaba will remember the

  Green warbler of the bowers of Paradise:

and they who will read the history of the Nella-Rajah,—which whosoever 
reads or relates, shall (according to the author) enjoy all manner of 
happiness and planetary bliss,—that is to say, all the good fortune 
that can be bestowed by the nine great luminaries which influence 
human events,—they who read that amusing story will find that in the 
world of Daivers, or Genii, there are milk white birds called Aunnays, 
remarkable for the gracefulness of their walk, wonderfully endowed 
with knowledge and speech, incapable of deceit, and having power to 
look into the thoughts of men.

These creatures of imagination are conceived in better taste than the 
Rabbis have displayed in the invention of their great bird Ziz, whose 
head when he stands in the deep sea reaches up to Heaven; whose wings 
when they are extended darken the sun; and one of whose eggs happening 
to fall crushed three hundred cedars and breaking in the fall, drowned 
sixty cities in its yolk. That fowl is reserved for the dinner of the 
Jews in heaven, at which Leviathan is to be the fish, and Behemoth the 
roast meat. There will be cut and come again at all of them; and the 
carvers of whatever rank in the hierarchy they may be, will have no 
sinecure office that day.

The monks have given us a prettier tale;—praise be to him who 
composed,—but the lyar's portion to those who made it pass for truth. 
There was an Abbot of S. Salvador de Villar who lived in times when 
piety flourished, and Saints on earth enjoyed a visible communion with 
Heaven. This holy man used in the intervals of his liturgical duties 
to recreate himself by walking in a pine forest near his monastery, 
employing his thoughts the while in divine meditations. One day when 
thus engaged during his customary walk, a bird in size and appearance 
resembling a black bird alighted before him on one of the trees, and 
began so sweet a song, that in the delight of listening the good Abbot 
lost all sense of time and place, and of all earthly things, remaining 
motionless and in extasy. He returned not to the Convent at his 
accustomed hour, and the Monks supposed that he had withdrawn to some 
secret solitude; and would resume his office when his intended 
devotion there should have been compleated. So long a time elapsed 
without his reappearance that it was necessary to appoint a substitute 
for him _pro tempore_; his disappearance and the forms observed upon 
this occasion being duly registered. Seventy years past by, during all 
which time no one who entered the pine forest ever lighted upon the 
Abbot, nor did he think of any thing but the bird before him, nor hear 
any thing but the song which filled his soul with contentment, nor 
eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor feel either want or weariness or 
exhaustion. The bird at length ceased to sing and took flight: and the 
Abbot then as if he had remained there only a few minutes returned to 
the monastery. He marvelled as he approached at certain alterations 
about the place, and still more when upon entering the house, he knew 
none of the brethren whom he saw, nor did any one appear to know him. 
The matter was soon explained, his name being well known, and the 
manner of his disappearance matter of tradition there as well as of 
record: miracles were not so uncommon then as to render any proof of 
identity necessary, and they proposed to reinstate him in his office. 
But the holy man was sensible that after so great a favour had been 
vouchsafed him, he was not to remain a sojourner upon earth: so he 
exhorted them to live in peace with one another, and in the fear of 
God, and in the strict observance of their rule, and to let him end 
his days in quietness; and in a few days, even as he expected, it came 
to pass, and he fell asleep in the Lord.

The dishonest monks who for the honour of their Convent and the lucre 
of gain palmed this lay (for such in its origin it was) upon their 
neighbours as a true legend, added to it, that the holy Abbot was 
interred in the cloisters; that so long as the brethren continued in 
the observance of their rule, and the place of his interment was 
devoutly visited, the earth about it proved a certain cure for many 
maladies, but that in process of time both church and cloisters became 
so dilapidated through decay of devotion, that cattle strayed into 
them, till the monks and the people of the vicinity were awakened to a 
sense of their sin and of their duty, by observing that every animal 
which trod upon the Abbot's grave, fell and broke its leg.[1] The 
relics therefore were translated with due solemnity, and deposited in 
a new monument, on which the story of the miracle, _in perpetuam rei 
memoriam_, was represented in bas-relief.

[Footnote 1: Superstition is confined to no country, but is spread, 
more or less, over all. The classical reader will call to mind what 
Herodotus tells happened in the territory of Agyllæi. _Clio. c. 167, 
ἐγίνετο διάστροφα καὶ ἔμπηρα καὶ ἀπόπληκτα, ὁμοίως πρόβατα καὶ 
ὑποζύγια καὶ ἄνθρωποι._]

The Welsh have a tradition concerning the Birds of Rhianon,—a female 
personage who hath a principal part in carrying on the spells in Gwlad 
yr Hud or the Enchanted Land of Pembrokeshire. Whoso happened to hear 
the singing of her birds, stood seven years listening, though he 
supposed the while that only an hour or two had elapsed. Owen Pughe 
could have told us more of these Birds.

Some Romish legends speak of birds which were of no species known on 
earth and who by the place and manner of their appearances were 
concluded to have come from Paradise, or to have been celestial 
spirits in that form. Holy Colette of portentous sanctity, the 
Reformeress of the Poor Clares, and from whom a short-lived variety of 
the Franciscans were called Colettines, was favoured, according to her 
biographers, with frequent visits by a four-footed pet, which was no 
mortal creature. It was small, resembling a squirrel in agility, and 
an ermine in the snowy whiteness of its skin, but not in other 
respects like either; and it had this advantage over all earthly pets, 
that it was sweetly and singularly fragrant. It would play about the 
saint, and invite her attention by its gambols. Colette felt a 
peculiar and mysterious kind of pleasure when it showed itself; and 
for awhile not supposing that there was anything supernatural in its 
appearance, endeavoured to catch it, for she delighted in having lambs 
and innocent birds to fondle: but though the Nuns closed the door, and 
used every art and effort to entice or catch it, the little 
nondescript always either eluded them, or vanished; and it never 
tasted of any food which they set before it. This miracle being unique 
in its kind is related with becoming admiration by the chroniclers of 
the Seraphic Order; as it well may, for, for a monastic writer to 
invent a new miracle of any kind evinces no ordinary power of 
invention.

If this story be true, and true it must be unless holy Colette's 
reverend Roman Catholic biographers are liars, its truth cannot be 
admitted _sans tirer à consequence_; and it would follow as a 
corollary not to be disputed, that there are animals in the world of 
Angels. And on the whole it accorded with the general bearing of the 
Doctor's notions (notions rather than opinions he liked to call them 
where they were merely speculative) to suppose that there may be as 
much difference between the zoology of that world, and of this, as is 
found in the zoology and botany of widely distant regions here, 
according to different circumstances of climate: and rather to imagine 
that there were celestial birds, beasts, fishes, and insects, exempt 
from evil, and each happy in its kind to the full measure of its 
capacity for happiness, than to hold the immortality of brutes. 
Cudworth's authority had some weight with him on this subject, where 
the Platonical divine says that as “human souls could not possibly be 
generated out of matter, but were sometime or other created by the 
Almighty out of nothing preexisting, either in generations, or before 
them,” so if it be admitted that brute animals are “not mere machines, 
or _automata_ (as some seem inclinable to believe), but conscious and 
thinking beings; then from the same principle of reason, it will 
likewise follow, that their souls cannot be generated out of matter 
neither, and therefore must be derived from the fountain of all life, 
and created out of nothing by Him: who, since he can as easily 
annihilate as create, and does all for the best, no man need at all to 
trouble himself about their permanency, or immortality.”

Now though the Doctor would have been pleased to think, with the rude 
Indian, that when he was in a state of existence wherein no evil could 
enter

  His faithful dog should bear him company,

he felt the force of this reasoning; and he perceived also that 
something analogous to the annihilation there intended, might be 
discerned in his own hypothesis. For in what may be called the visible 
creation he found nothing resembling that animalcular world which the 
microscope has placed within reach of our senses; nothing like those 
monstrous and prodigious forms which Leeuwenhoeck, it must be 
believed, has faithfully delineated.—Bishop has a beautiful epigram 
upon the theme _καλὰ πέφανται_

  When thro a chink,[2] a darkened room
      Admits the solar beam,
  Down the long light that breaks the gloom,
      Millions of atoms stream.

  In sparkling agitation bright,
      Alternate dies they bear;
  Too small for any sense but sight,
      Or any sight, but _there_.

  Nature reveals not all her store
      To human search, or skill;
  And when she deigns to shew us more
      She shows us Beauty still.

But the microscopic world affords us exceptions to this great moral 
truth. The forms which are there discovered might well be called

  Abominable, inutterable, and worse
  Than fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceived,
  Gorgons and Hydras, and Chimæras dire.

Such verily they would be, if they were in magnitude equal to the 
common animals by which we are surrounded. But Nature has left all 
these seemingly misformed creatures in the lowest stage of 
existence,—the circle of inchoation; neither are any of the hideous 
forms of insects repeated in the higher grades of animal life; the sea 
indeed contains creatures marvellously uncouth and ugly, _beaucoup 
plus de monstres, sans comparaison, que la terre,_ and the Sieur de 
Brocourt, who was as curious in collecting the opinions of men as our 
philosopher, though no man could make more dissimilar uses of their 
knowledge, explains it _à cause de la facilité de la generation qui 
est en elle, dont se procreent si diverses figures, à raison de la 
grande chaleur qui se trouve en la mer, l'humeur y estant gras, et 
l'aliment abondant; toute generation se faisant par chaleur et 
humidité, qui produisent toutes choses._ With such reasoning our 
Doctor was little satisfied; it was enough to know that as the sea 
produces monsters, so the sea covers them, and that fish are evidently 
lower in the scale of being than the creatures of earth and air. It is 
the system of Nature then that whatever is unseemly should be left in 
the earliest and lowest stages; that life as it ascends should cast 
off all deformity, as the butterfly leaves its _exuviæ_ when its 
perfect form is developed; and finally that whatever is imperfect 
should be thrown off, and nothing survive in immortality but what is 
beautiful as well as good.

[Footnote 2: The Reader may not be displeased to read the following 
beautiful passage from Jeremy Taylor.

“If God is glorified in the sun and moon, in the rare fabric of the 
honeycombs, in the discipline of bees, in the economy of pismires, in 
the little houses of birds, in the curiosity of an eye, God being 
pleased to delight in those little images and reflexes of himself from 
those pretty mirrors, which, _like a crevice in the wall, through a 
narrow perspective, transmit the species of a vast excellency_: much 
rather shall God be pleased to behold himself in the glasses of our 
obedience, in the emissions of our will and understanding; these being 
rational and apt instruments to express him, far better than the 
natural, as being near communications of himself.”—_Invalidity of a 
late or Death-bed Repentance_, _Vol. v. p. 464_.]

He was not acquainted with the speculation, or conception (as the 
Philotheistic philosopher himself called it) of Giordano Bruno, that 
_deformium animalium formæ, formosæ sunt in cœlo_. Nor would he have 
assented to some of the other opinions which that pious and high 
minded victim of papal intolerance, connected with it. That 
_metallorum in se non lucentium formæ, lucent in planetis suis_, he 
might have supposed, if he had believed in the relationship between 
metals and planets. And if Bruno's remark applied to the Planets only, 
as so many other worlds, and did not regard the future state of the 
creatures of this our globe, the Doctor might then have agreed to his 
assertion that _non enim homo, nec animalia, nec metalla ut hic sunt, 
illic existunt_. But the Philotheist of Nola, in the remaining part of 
this his twelfth _Conceptus Idearum_ soared above the Doctor's pitch: 
_Quod nempe hic discurrit_, he says, _illic actu viget, discursione 
superiori. Virtutes enim quæ versus materiam explicantur: versus actum 
primum uniuntur, et complicantur. Unde patet quod dicunt Platonici, 
ideam quamlibet rerum etiam non viventium, vitam esse et 
intelligentiam quandam. Item et in Primâ Mente unam esse rerum omnium 
ideam. Illuminando igitur, vivificando, et uniendo est quod te 
superioribus agentibus conformans, in conceptionem et retentionem 
specierum efferaris._ Here the Philosopher of Doncaster would have 
found himself in the dark, but whether because “blinded by excess of 
light,” or because the subject is within the confines of uttermost 
darkness, is not for me his biographer to determine.




