CHAPTER CCXLIII.

BREVITY BEING THE SOUL OF WIT THE AUTHOR STUDIES CONCISENESS.

You need not fear a surfeit, here is but little, and that light of 
digestion.

QUARLES.


Who was Pompey?

“The Dog will have his day,” says Shakespeare. And the Dog must have 
his Chapter say I. But I will defer writing that Chapter till the 
Dog-days.




CHAPTER CCXLIV.

THE AUTHOR VENTURES TO SPEAK A WORD ON CHRISTIAN CHEERFULNESS:—QUOTES 
BEN SIRACH,—SOLOMON,—BISHOP HACKET,—WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR,—BISHOP 
REYNOLDS,—MILTON,—&C.

  --_Ἀλλὰ σὺ ταῦτα μαθὼν, βιότου ποτί τέρμα
  ψυχῇ τῶν ἀγαθῶν τλῆθι χαριζόμενος._

SIMONIDES.


In the thirtieth chapter of the Book called Ecclesiasticus, and at the 
twenty-fifth verse, are these words

  “A cheerful and a good heart will have a care of his meat and diet.”

This is not the text to a sermon, but the beginning of a Chapter. 
There is no reason why a Chapter as well as a sermon, should not be 
thus impressively introduced: and if this Chapter should neither be so 
long as a sermon, nor so dull as those discourses which perchance and 
(I fear) per-likelihood, it may be thy fortune to hear, O Reader, at 
thy parish church, or in phrase nonconformist, to sit under at the 
conventicle, it will be well for thee: for having began to read it, I 
dare say thou wilt peruse it orally, or ocularly to the end.

A cheerful and a good heart, the Doctor had; aye as cheerful and good 
a one as ever man was blest with. He held with Bishop Hacket, that 
melancholy was of all humours the fittest to make a bath for the 
Devil, and that cheerfulness and innocent pleasure preserve the mind 
from rust, and the body from putrifying with dulness and distempers; 
wherefore that Bishop of good and merry memory would sometimes say, he 
did not like to look upon a sour man at dinner, and if his guests were 
pleased within, would bid them hang out the white flag in their 
countenance.

  _Udite, udite amici, un cor giocondo
           E Rey del Mondo._

And if the poet says true (which I will be sworn he does) our Doctor 
might be more truly King of the World, than Kehama after he had 
performed his sacrifice.

His cheerfulness he would not have exchanged for all the bank-bills 
which ever bore the signature of Abraham Newland, or his successor 
Henry Hase; he thanked his Maker for it; and that it had been kept 
from corruption and made so far good as (with all Christian humility) 
to be self approved; he thanked his heavenly Father also for the free 
grace vouchsafed him, and his earthly one for having trained him in 
the way that he should go.

  Cheerful and grateful takers the Gods love
  And such as wait their pleasures with full hopes;
  The doubtful and distrustful man Heaven frowns at.[1]

[Footnote 1: BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.]

Being thus cheerful and good, he had that care of his meat and diet 
which the son of Sirach commends in the text, and notices as an 
indication of cheerfulness and goodness.

Understand me, Reader: and understand the author of the Wisdom. It was 
not such a care of his meat and diet as Apicius has been infamed for 
in ancient, and Darteneuf in modern times; not such as Lucullus was 
noted for, or Sir William Curtis, with whom Lucullus had he been an 
English East Indian Governor, instead of a Roman Prætor, might have 
been well pleased to dine. Read Landor's conversation between Lucullus 
and Cæsar, if thou art a scholar Reader, and if any thing can make 
thee think with respect and admiration of Lucullus, it will be the 
beautiful strain of feeling and philosophy that thou wilt find there. 
Wouldst thou see another work of first-rate genius, not less masterly 
in its kind, go and see Chantrey's bust of Sir William Curtis: and 
when thou shalt have seen what he hath made of that countenance, thou 
wilt begin to think it not impossible that a silk purse may be made of 
a sow's ear. Shame on me that in speaking of those who have gained 
glory by giving good dinners, I should have omitted the name of 
Michael Angelo Taylor, he having been made immortal for this his great 
and singular merit!

Long before the son of Sirach, Solomon had spoken to the same effect: 
“there is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink, 
and that he should make his soul enjoy good in its labour. This also I 
saw that it was from the hand of God.” “Go thy way said the wisest of 
monarchs and of men, in his old age, when he took a more serious view 
of his past life; the honours, pleasures, wealth, wisdom he had so 
abundantly enjoyed; the errors and miscarriages which he had fallen 
into; the large experience and many observations he had made, of 
things natural, moral, domestical: civil, sensual, divine: the curious 
and critical inquiry he had made after true happiness, and what 
contribution all things under the sun could afford thereunto:”—“Go thy 
way,” he said, “eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a 
merry heart!”

“Inasmuch,” says Bishop Reynolds in his commentary upon this passage, 
“as the dead neither know, nor enjoy any of these worldly blessings; 
and inasmuch as God gives them to his servants in love, and as 
comfortable refreshments unto them in the days of their vanity, 
therefore he exhorteth unto a cheerful fruition of them, while we have 
time and liberty so to do; that so the many other sorrows and 
bitterness which they shall meet with in this life, may be mitigated 
and sweetened unto them. He speaketh not of sensual, epicurean and 
brutish excess; but of an honest, decent, and cheerful enjoyment of 
blessings, with thankfulness, and in the fear of God.” “A _merry_ 
heart” the Bishop tells us might in this text have been rendered a 
_good_ one; as in other parts of scripture a _sad_ heart is called an 
_evil_ heart. “It is pleasing unto God,” says the Bishop, “that when 
thou hast in the fear of his name, and in obedience to his ordinance, 
laboured, and by his blessing gotten thee thine appointed portion, 
then thou shouldst, after an honest, cheerful, decent and liberal 
manner, without further anxiety or solicitousness, enjoy the same. 
This is the principal boundary of our outward pleasures and delights, 
still to keep ourselves within such rules of piety and moderation, as 
that our ways may be pleasing unto God. And this shows us the true way 
to find sweetness in the creature, and to feel joy in the fruition 
thereof; namely, when our persons and our ways are pleasing unto God: 
for piety doth not exclude, but only moderate earthly delights; and so 
moderate them, that though they be not so excessive as the luxurious 
and sensual pleasures of foolish epicures, yet they are far more pure, 
sweet and satisfactory, as having no guilt, no gall, no curse, nor 
inward sorrow and terrors attending on them.”

Farther the Bishop observes, that food and raiment being the 
substantiall of outward blessings, Solomon has directed unto 
cheerfulness in the one, and unto decency and comeliness in the other. 
He hath advised us also to let the head lack no ointment, such 
perfumes being an expression of joy used in feasts; “the meaning is,” 
says the Bishop, “that we should lead our lives with as much freeness, 
cheerfulness and sweet delight, in the liberal use of the good 
blessings of God, as the quality of our degree, the decency of our 
condition, and the rules of religious wisdom, and the fear of God do 
allow us; not sordidly or frowardly denying ourselves the benefit of 
those good things which the bounty of God hath bestowed upon us.”

It is the etiquette of the Chinese Court for the Emperor's physicians 
to apply the same epithet to his disease as to himself—so they talk of 
his most high and mighty diarrhœa.

At such a point of etiquette the Doctor would laugh—but he was all 
earnestness when one like Bishop Hacket said, “Do not disgrace the 
dignity of a Preacher, when every petty vain occasion doth challenge 
the honour of a sermon before it. If ever there were _τὸ δέον οὐκ ἐν 
τῶ δεόντι_,—a good work marred for being done unreasonably,”—(in the 
Doctor's own words, _Grace before a sluttish meal, a dirty table 
cloth_)—“now it is when grace before meat will not serve the turn, but 
every luxurious feast must have the benediction of a preacher's pains 
before it. _Quis te ferat cœnantem ut Lucullus, concionantem ut Cato?_ 
Much less is it to be endured, that some body must make a sermon, 
before Lucullus hath made a supper. It is such a flout upon our 
calling methinks, as the Chaldeans put upon the Jews in their 
captivity,—they in the height of their jollity must have _one of the 
Songs of Sion_.”

The Doctor agreed in the main with Lord Chesterfield in his opinion 
upon political dieteticks.

“The Egyptians who were a wise nation,” says that noble author, 
“thought so much depended upon diet, that they dieted their kings, and 
prescribed by law both the quality and quantity of their food. It is 
much to be lamented, that those bills of fare are not preserved to 
this time, since they might have been of singular use in all 
monarchical governments. But it is reasonably to be conjectured, from 
the wisdom of that people, that they allowed their kings no aliments 
of a bilious or a choleric nature, and only such as sweetened their 
juices, cooled their blood, and enlivened their faculties,—if they had 
any.”

He then shews that what was deemed necessary for an Egyptian King is 
not less so for a British Parliament. For, “suppose,” he says, “a 
number of persons, not over-lively at best, should meet of an evening 
to concert and deliberate upon public measures of the utmost 
consequence, grunting under the load and repletion of the strongest 
meats, panting almost in vain for breath, but quite in vain for 
thought, and reminded only of their existence by the unsavoury returns 
of an olio; what good could be expected from such a consultation? The 
best one could hope for would be, that they were only assembled for 
shew, and not for use; not to propose or advise, but silently to 
submit to the orders of some one man there, who, feeding like a 
rational creature, might have the use of his understanding.

“I would therefore recommend it to the consideration of the 
legislature, whether it may not be necessary to pass an act, to 
restrain the licentiousness of eating, and assign certain diets to 
certain ranks and stations, I would humbly suggest the strict 
vegetable as the properest ministerial diet, being exceedingly tender 
of those faculties in which the public is so highly interested, and 
very unwilling they should be clogged, or incumbered.”

“The Earl of Carlisle,” says Osborne, in his Traditional Memorials, 
“brought in the vanity of ante-suppers, not heard of in our 
forefathers' time, and for ought I have read, or at least remember, 
unpractised by the most luxurious tyrants. The manner of which was, to 
have the board covered at the first entrance of the guests, with 
dishes, as high as a tall man could well reach, filled with the 
choicest viands sea or land could afford: and all this once seen, and 
having feasted the eyes of the invited, was in a manner thrown away, 
and fresh set on to the same height, having only this advantage of the 
other, that it was hot.

“I cannot forget one of the attendants of the King, that at a feast 
made by this monster in excess, eats to his single share a whole pye, 
reckoned to my Lord at ten pounds, being composed of ambergreece, 
magisteriall of pearl, musk, &c., yet was so far, (as he told me) from 
being sweet in the morning, that he almost poisoned his whole family, 
flying himself, like the Satyr, from his own stink. And after such 
suppers huge banquets no less profuse, a waiter returning his servant 
home with a cloak-bag full of dried sweetmeats and confects, valued to 
his Lordship at more than ten shillings the pound.”

But, gentle and much esteemed Reader, and therefore esteemed because 
gentle, instead of surfeiting thy body, let me recreate thy mind, with 
the annexed two Sonnets of Milton, which tell of innocent mirth, and 
the festive but moderate enjoyment of the rational creature.

TO MR. LAWRENCE.

   LAWRENCE, of virtuous father virtuous son,
         Now that the fields are dank, and ways are mire,
         Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
         Help waste a sullen day, what may be won
   From the hard season, gaining? time will run
         On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
         The frozen earth, and clothe in fresh attire
         The lily and rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.
   What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
         Of Attic taste, with wine, whence we may rise
         To hear the lute well touch'd, or artful voice
   Warble immortal notes of Tuscan air?
        _He who of these delights can judge, and spare
         To interpose them oft, is not unwise._

TO SYRIAC SKINNER.

   CYRIAC, whose grandsire on the royal bench
         Of British Themis, with no mean applause
         Pronounc'd, and in his volumes taught our laws,
         Which others at their bar so often wrench;
   To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
        _In mirth, that after no repenting draws:_
         Let Euclid rest, and Archimedes pause,
         And what the Swede intends, and what the French.
   To measure life learn thou betimes, and know
         Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;
         For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,
  _And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
         That with superfluous burden loads the day
         And when God sends a cheerful hour refrains._




     _Thou canst cure the body and the mind,
      Rare Doctor, with thy two-fold soundest art;
  Hippocrates hath taught thee the one kind,
      Apollo and the Muse the other part;
  And both so well that thou well both dost please,
  The mind with pleasure, and the corpse with ease._

DAVIES OF HEREFORD.




FRAGMENTS TO THE DOCTOR.


A LOVE FRAGMENT FOR THE LADIES,—INTRODUCED BY A CURIOUS INCIDENT WHICH 
THE AUTHOR BEGS THEY WILL EXCUSE.

  Now will ye list a little space,
  And I shall send you to solace;
  You to solace and be blyth,
  Hearken! ye shall hear belyve
  A tale that is of verity.

ROSWALL AND LILLIAN.


A story was told me with an assurance that it was literally true, of a 
Gentleman who being in want of a wife, advertised for one, and at the 
place and time appointed was met by a Lady. Their stations in life 
entitled them to be so called, and the Gentleman as well as the Lady 
was in earnest. He however unluckily seemed to be of the same opinion 
as King Pedro was with regard to his wife Queen Mary of Aragon, that 
she was not so handsome as she might be good, so the meeting ended in 
their mutual disappointment. Cœlebs advertised a second time, 
appointing a different Square for the place of meeting, and varying 
the words of the advertisement. He met the same Lady,—they recognized 
each other, could not chuse but smile at the recognition, and perhaps 
neither of them could chuse but sigh. You will anticipate the event. 
The persevering Batchelor tried his lot a third time in the 
newspapers, and at the third place of appointment he met the equally 
persevering Spinster. At this meeting neither could help laughing. 
They began to converse in good humour, and the conversation became so 
agreeable on both sides, and the circumstance appeared so remarkable, 
that this third interview led to a marriage, and the marriage proved a 
happy one.

When Don Argentes Prince of Galdasse had been entrapped into the hands 
of a revengeful woman whose husband he had slain in fair combat, he 
said to two handsome widows who were charged every day to punish him 
with stripes, _que par raison là on se se voit une grande beauté n'a 
pas lieu la cruauté ou autre vice_—and the Chronicler of this 
generation of the house of Amadis, observes that this assertion _fut 
bien verifié en ces deux jeunes veufues douées de grande beauté, 
lesquelles considerans la beauté et disposition de ce jeune chevalier 
et la vertu de sa personne, presterent l'oreille aux raisons qu'il 
alleguoit pour son excuse, et aux louanges qu'il leur donnoit de rare 
et singuliere beauté, de maniere qu'elles eurent pitié de luy._

“I can hardly forbear fancying,” says Lord Shaftesbury, “that if we 
had a sort of Inquisition, or formal Court of Judicature, with grave 
Officers and Judges, erected to restrain poetical licence, and in 
general to suppress that fancy and humour of versification, but in 
particular that most extravagant passion of Love, as it is set out by 
Poets, in its heathenish dress of Venus's and Cupids; if the Poets, as 
ringleaders and teachers of this heresy, were under grievous penalties 
forbid to enchant the people by their vein of rhyming; and if the 
People, on the other side, were under proportionable penalties, forbid 
to hearken to any such charm, or lend their attention to any 
love-tale, so much as in a play, a novel, or a ballad; we might 
perhaps see a new Arcadia arising out of this heavy persecution. Old 
people and young would be seized with a versifying spirit; we should 
have field conventicles of Lovers and Poets; forests would be filled 
with romantic Shepherds and Shepherdesses; and rocks resound with 
echoes of hymns and praises offered to the powers of Love. We might 
indeed have a fair chance, by this management, to bring back the whole 
train of Heathen Gods, and set our cold Northern Island burning with 
as many altars to Venus and Apollo, as were formerly in Cyprus, Delos, 
or any of those warmer Grecian climates.”

But I promised you, dear Ladies, more upon that subject which of all 
subjects is and ought to be the most interesting to you, because it is 
the most important. You have not forgotten that promise, and the time 
has now come for fulfilling it.

  Venus, unto thee for help, good Lady, I do call,
  For thou wert wont to grant request unto thy servants all;
  Even as thou didst help always Æneas thine own child,
  Appeasing the God Jupiter with countenance so mild
  That though that Juno to torment him on Jupiter did preace,
  Yet for the love he bare to thee, did cause the winds to cease;
  I pray thee pray the Muses all to help my memory,
  That I may have ensamples good in defence of feminye.[1]

Something has been said upon various ways which lead to love and 
matrimony; but what I have to say concerning imaginative love was 
deferred till we should arrive at the proper place for entering upon 
it.

[Footnote 1: EDWARD MORE.]

More or less, imagination enters into all loves and friendships, 
except those which have grown with our growth, and which therefore are 
likely to be the happiest because there can be no delusion in them. 
Cases of this kind would not be so frequent in old romances, if they 
did not occur more frequently in real life than unimaginative persons 
could be induced to believe, or made to understand.

Sir John Sinclair has related a remarkable instance in his 
Reminiscences. He was once invited by Adam Smith to meet Burke and Mr. 
Windham, who had arrived at Edinburgh with the intention of making a 
short tour in the Highlands. Sir John was consulted concerning their 
route; in the course of his directions he dwelt on the beauty of the 
road between Dunkeld and Blair;—and added, that instead of being 
cooped up in a post-chaise, they would do well to get out and walk 
through the woods and beautiful scenes through which the road passes, 
especially some miles beyond Dunkeld.

Some three years afterwards Mr. Windham came up to Sir John in the 
House of Commons and requested to speak to him for a few moments 
behind the Speaker's chair. “Do you recollect,” said he, “our meeting 
together at Adam Smith's at dinner?” “Most certainly I do.”

“Do you remember having given us directions for our Highland tour, and 
more especially to stroll through the woods between Dunkeld and 
Blair?” “I do.”

Mr. Windham then said, “In consequence of our adopting that advice, an 
event took place of which I must now inform you. Burke and I were 
strolling through the woods about ten miles from Dunkeld, when we saw 
a young female sitting under a tree, with a book in her hand. Burke 
immediately exclaimed, ‘Let us have a little conversation with this 
solitary damsel, and see what she is about.’ We accosted her 
accordingly and found that she was reading a recent novel from the 
London press. We asked her how she came to read novels, and how she 
got such books at so great a distance from the metropolis, and more 
especially one so recently published. She answered that she had been 
educated at a boarding-school at Perth, where novels might be had from 
the circulating library, and that she still procured them through the 
same channel. We carried on the conversation for some time, in the 
course of which she displayed a great deal of smartness and talent; 
and at last we were obliged, very reluctantly, to leave her, and 
proceed on our journey. We afterwards found that she was the daughter 
of a proprietor of that neighbourhood who was known under the name of 
the Baron Maclaren. I have never been able,” continued Mr. Windham, 
“to get this beautiful mountain nymph out of my head; and I wish you 
to ascertain whether she is married or single.” And he begged Sir John 
Sinclair to clear up this point as soon as possible, for much of his 
future happiness depended upon the result of the inquiry.

If not the most important communication that ever took place behind 
the Speaker's chair, this was probably the most curious one. Sir John 
lost no time in making the desired inquiry. He wrote to a most 
respectable clergyman in the neighbourhood where Miss Maclaren lived, 
the Rev. Dr. Stewart, minister of Moulin; and was informed in reply, 
that she was married to a medical gentleman in the East Indies of the 
name of Dick. “Upon communicating this to Mr. Windham,” says Sir John, 
“he seemed very much agitated. He was soon afterwards married to the 
daughter of a half-pay officer. I have no doubt, however, that had 
Miss Maclaren continued single, he would have paid her his addresses.”

This is an example of purely imaginative love. But before we proceed 
with that subject, the remainder of Sir John Sinclair's story must be 
given. Some years afterward he passed some days at Duneira in 
Perthshire, with the late Lord Melville, and in the course of 
conversation told him this anecdote of Mr. Windham. Upon which Lord 
Melville said, “I am more interested in that matter than you imagine. 
You must know that I was riding down from Blair to Dunkeld in company 
with some friend, and we called at Baron Maclaren's, where a most 
beautiful young woman desired to speak with me. We went accordingly to 
the bank of a river near her father's house, when she said, ‘Mr. 
Dundas, I hear that you are a very great man, and what is much better, 
a very good man, I will venture therefore to tell you a secret. There 
is a young man in this neighbourhood who has a strong attachment to 
me, and to confess the truth, I have a great regard for him. His name 
is William Dick; he has been bred to the medical profession; and he 
says, that if he could get to be a surgeon in the East Indies, he 
could soon make his fortune there, and would send for me to marry him. 
Now I apply to you, Mr. Dundas, as a great and good man, in hopes that 
you can do something for us: and be assured that we shall be for ever 
grateful, if you will procure him an appointment.’”

Mr. Dundas was so much struck with the impressive manner of her 
address, that he took her by the hand and said, “my good girl, be 
assured that if an opportunity offers, I shall not forget your 
application.” The promise was not forgotten. It was not long before an 
East India Director with whom he was dining, told him that he had then 
at his disposal an appointment of surgeon in the East India Company's 
service, and offered it to him for any one whom he would wish to serve 
in that line. Dundas immediately related his adventure, much to the 
amusement of the Director. Mr. Dick obtained the appointment, and was 
soon able to send for his betrothed. She had several offers in the 
course of the voyage and after her arrival, but she refused to listen 
to any one. Her husband attained to great eminence in his profession, 
made a handsome fortune, came home and purchased an estate in the 
neighbourhood where he was born.

There is no man among those who in that generation figured in public 
life, of whom a story like this could be so readily believed as of 
Windham. He was one whose endowments and accomplishments would have 
recommended him at the Court of Elizabeth,—and whose speeches, when he 
did not abase himself to the level of his hearers, might have 
commanded attention in the days of Charles I.

       *       *       *       *       *

A FRAGMENT ON BEARDS.

Yet have I more to say which I have thought upon, for I am filled as 
the moon at the full!

ECCLESIASTICUS.


The reader must not expect that we have done with our beards yet; 
shaving, as he no doubt knows but too well, is one of those things at 
which we may cut and come again, and in the present Chapter

  To shave, or not to shave, that is the question;

a matter which, hath not hitherto been fully considered. The question 
as relates to the expenditure of time, has been, profitably I trust, 
disposed of; and that of its effect upon health has been, as Members 
of Parliament say, poo-pooh'd. But the propriety of the practice is 
yet to be investigated upon other grounds.

Van Helmont tells us that Adam was created without a beard, but that 
after he had fallen and sinned, because of the sinful propensities 
which he derived from the fruit of the forbidden Tree, a beard was 
made part of his punishment and disgrace, bringing him thus into 
nearer resemblance with the beasts towards whom he had made his nature 
approximate; “_ut multorum quadrupedum compar, socius et similis 
esset, eorundem signaturam præ se ferret, quorum more ut salax, ita et 
vultum pilis hirtum ostenderet._” The same stigma was not inflicted 
upon Eve, because even in the fall she retained much of her original 
modesty, and therefore deserved no such opprobrious mark.

Van Helmont observes also that no good Angel ever appears with a 
beard, and this, he says, is a capital sign by which Angels may be 
distinguished,—a matter of great importance to those who are in the 
habit of seeing them. “_Si apparuerit barbatus Angelus, malus esto. 
Eudæmon enim nunquam barbatus apparuit, memor casus ob quem viro barba 
succrevit._” He marvelled therefore that men should suppose the beard 
was given them for an ornament, when Angels abhor it, and when they 
see that they have it in common with he-goats. There must be something 
in his remark; for take the most beautiful Angel that ever Painter 
designed, or Engraver copied, put him on a beard, and the celestial 
character will be so entirely destroyed, that the simple appendage of 
a tail will cacodemonize the Eudæmon.

This being the belief of Van Helmont, who declares that he had 
profited more by reveries and visions than by study, though he had 
studied much and deeply, ought he, in conformity to his own belief, to 
have shaved, or not? Much might be alleged on either side: for to wear 
the beard might seem in a person so persuaded, a visible sign of 
submission to the Almighty will, in thus openly bearing the badge of 
punishment, the mark of human degradation which the Almighty has been 
pleased to appoint: but, on the other hand, a shaven face might seem 
with equal propriety, and in like manner denote, a determination in 
the man to put off, as far as in him lay this outward and visible sign 
of sin and shame, and thereby assert that fallen nature was in him 
regenerate,

  _Belle est vraiment l'opinion premiere;
   Belle est encores l'opinion derniere;
   A qui des deux est-ce doncq' que je suis?_[1]

[Footnote 1: PASQUIER.]

Which of the two opinions I might incline to is of no consequence, 
because I do not agree with Van Helmont concerning the origin of the 
beard; though as to what he affirms concerning good Angels upon his 
own alleged knowledge, I cannot contradict him upon mine, and have 
moreover freely confessed that when we examine our notions of Angels 
they are found to support him. But he himself seems to have thought 
both opinions probable, and therefore, according to the casuists, 
safe; so, conforming to the fashion of his times, without offence to 
his own conscience, he neither did the one thing, nor the other; or 
perhaps it may be speaking more accurately to say that he did both; 
for he shaved his beard, and let his mustachios grow.

Upon this subject, P. Gentien Hervet, Regent of the College at Orleans 
printed three discourses in the year 1536. In the first of these _De 
radendâ barbâ_, he makes it appear that we are bound to shave the 
beard. In the second _De alendâ barbâ_, he proves we ought to let the 
beard grow. And in the third _De vel radendâ vel alendâ barbâ_ he 
considers that it is lawful either to shave or cultivate the beard at 
pleasure. “_Si bien_,” says the Doctor in Theology, M. Jean Baptiste 
Thiers, in his grave and erudite _Histoire des Perruques_, published 
_aux depens de l'Autheur_, at Paris in 1690,—_si bien, que dans la 
pensée de ce sçavant Theologien, le question des barbes, courtes ou 
longues, est une question tout-a-fait problematique, et où par 
consequent on peut prendre tel party que l'on veut, pour ou contre._


[The following Extracts were to have been worked up in this Chapter.]

D'Israeli quotes an author who, in his Elements of Education, 1640, 
says, “I have a favourable opinion of that young gentleman who is 
curious in fine mustachios. The time he employs in adjusting, dressing 
and curling them, is no lost time: for the more he contemplates his 
mustachios, the more his mind will cherish, and be animated by, 
masculine and courageous notions.”


There are men whose beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to 
stuff a botcher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's packsaddle.

SHAKSPEARE.


“Human felicity,” says Dr. Franklin, “is produced not so much by great 
pieces of good fortune that seldom happen, as by little advantages 
that occur every day. Thus if you teach a poor young man to shave 
himself and keep his razor in order, you may contribute more to the 
happiness of his life than in giving him a thousand guineas. This sum 
may be soon spent, the regret only remaining of having foolishly 
consumed it: but in the other case he escapes the frequent vexation of 
waiting for barbers, and of their sometimes dirty fingers, offensive 
breaths and dull razors; he shaves when most convenient to him, and 
enjoys daily the pleasure of its being done with a good instrument.”


                 By Jupiter,
  Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard
  I would not shave 't to day.

SHAKSPEARE.


D'Israeli says that a clergyman who had the longest and largest beard 
of any Englishman in Elizabeth's reign, gave as a reason for wearing 
it the motive it afforded “that no act of his life might be unworthy 
the gravity of his appearance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT ON MORTALITY.


When Fuller in his Pisgah Sight of Palestine, comes to the city of 
Aigalon, where Elon, Judge of Israel, was buried, “of whom nothing 
else is recorded save his name, time of his rule (ten years), and 
place of his interment; slight him not he says, because so little is 
reported of him, it tending much to the praise of his policy in 
preventing foreign invasions, and domestic commotions, so that the 
land enjoyed peace, as far better than victory, as health is to be 
preferred before a recovery from sickness. Yea, times of much doing 
are times of much suffering, and many martial achievements are rather 
for the Prince's honour, than the people's ease.”

“To what purpose,” says Norris, “should a man trouble both the world's 
and his own rest, to make himself great? For besides the emptiness of 
the thing, the Play will quickly be done, and the Actors must all 
retire into a state of equality, and then it matters not who 
personated the Emperor, or who the Slave.”

The Doctor's feelings were in unison with both these passages;—with 
the former concerning the quiet age in which it was his fortune to 
flourish; and with the latter in that it was his fortune to flourish 
in the shade. “It is with times,” says Lord Bacon, “as it is with 
ways; some are more up hill and down hill, and some are more flat and 
plain; and the one is better for the liver, and the other for the 
writer.”

He assented also to the Christian-Platonist of Bemerton when he asked, 
“to what purpose should a man be very earnest in the pursuit of Fame? 
He must shortly die, and so must those too who admire him.” But 
nothing could be more opposed to his way of thinking than what follows 
in that philosopher,—“Nay, I could almost say, to what purpose should 
a man lay himself out upon study and drudge so laboriously in the 
mines of learning? He is no sooner a little wiser than his brethren, 
but Death thinks him ripe for his sickle; and for aught we know, after 
all his pains and industry, in the next world, an ideot, or a mechanic 
will be as forward as he.” In the same spirit Horace Walpole said in 
his old age, “What is knowledge to me, who stand on the verge, and 
must leave my old stores as well as what I may add to them,—and how 
little could that be!”

When Johnson was told that Percy was uneasy at the thought of leaving 
his house, his study, his books—when he should die,—he replied—“a man 
need not be uneasy on these grounds, for as he will retain his 
consciousness, he may say with the Philosopher, _omnia mea mecum 
porto._”

“Let attention,” says the thoughtful John Miller in his Bampton 
Lectures, which deserve to be side by side with those of the lamented 
Van Mildert, “let attention be requested to what seems here an 
accessory sign of the adaptation of all our heavenly Father's dealings 
to that which he ‘knows to be in man’—I mean his merciful shortening 
of the term of this present natural life, subsequently to the period 
when all-seeing justice had been compelled to destroy the old world 
for its disobedience.

“I call it merciful, because, though we can conceive no length of day 
which could enable man with his present faculties to exhaust all that 
is made subject to his intellect, yet observing the scarcely credible 
rapidity of some minds and the no less wonderful retention of others, 
we may well conceive a far severer, nay too severe a test of 
resignation and patience to arise from length of years. To learn is 
pleasant; but to be ‘ever learning, and never able to come to sure 
knowledge of the truth,’ (if it were only in matters of lawful and 
curious and ardent speculation,) is a condition which we may well 
imagine to grow wearisome by too great length of time. ‘Hope delayed’ 
might well ‘make the heart sick’ in many such cases. We may find an 
infidel amusing himself on the brink of the grave with many imaginary 
wishes for a little longer respite, that he might witness the result 
of this or that speculation; but I am persuaded that the heart which 
really loves knowledge most truly and most wisely will be affected 
very differently. From every fresh addition to its store (as far as 
concerns itself,) it will only derive increase to that desire 
wherewith it longs to become disentangled altogether from a state of 
imperfection, and to be present in the fulness of that light, wherein 
‘every thing that is in part shall be done away.’ Here, then, in one 
of the most interesting and most important of all points (the 
shortening of human life) we find a representation in Scripture which 
may be accounted favourable to its credibility and divine authority on 
the safest grounds of reason and experience. For certainly, as to the 
bare matter of fact, such representation corresponds in the strictest 
manner (as far as we have known and have seen) with the state of life 
as at present existing; and accepting it as true, we can perceive at 
once, a satisfactory explanation of it by referring it, as a provision 
for man's well being, to the wisdom and mercy of an Omnipotent Spirit 
who knew, and knows ‘what is in man.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT OF SIXTH VOLUME.


Reader, we are about to enter upon the sixth volume of this our Opus; 
and as it is written in the forms of Herkeru, Verily the eye of Hope 
is upon the high road of Expectation.

Well begun, says the Proverb, is half done. Horace has been made to 
say the same thing by the insertion of an apt word which pentametrizes 
the verse,

  _Dimidium facti qui bene cæpit habet._

D. Juan de Villagutierre Soto-Mayor in setting forth the merits of 
Columbus for having discovered the New World, and thereby opened the 
way for its conquest by the Spaniards, observes that _el principio en 
todas las operaciones humanas es el mas dificultoso estado; y assi una 
vez vencido, se reputa y debe reputarse por la mitad della obra, ò por 
la principal de ella; y el proseguir despues en lo comenzado no 
contiene tanta dificultad._

When Gabriel Chappuis dedicated the eighteenth book of Amadis, by him 
translated from the Spanish, to the Noble and Virtuous Lord Jan 
Anthoine Gros, Sieur de S. Jouere, &c., he says, after a preamble of 
eulogies upon the Dedicates and the Book, _Vous recevrez donc, s'il 
vous plaist ce petit livre d'aussy bon œil que ont fait ceux ausquels 
j'ay dedié les trois livres precedens, m'asseurant que s'il vous 
plaist en avoir la lecture, vous y trouverez grande delectation, comme 
à la verité l'histoire qui y est descrite, et mesmes en tous les 
precedens et en ceux qui viendront apres, a esté inventée pour 
delecter; mais avec tant de beaux traits, et une infinité de divers 
accidens et occurrences qu'il est impossible qu'avec le plaisir et le 
delectation, l'on n'en tire un grand proffet, comme vous 
experementerez, moyennant la grace de Dieu._

       *       *       *       *       *

_J'ay fait le précédent Chapitre un peu court; peut-être que celui-ce 
sera plus long; je n'en suis pourtant pas bien assuré, nous l'allons 
voir._

SCARRON.


Deborah's strong affection for her father was not weakened by 
marriage; nor his for her by the consequent separation. Caroline 
Bowles says truly, and feelingly and beautifully,

  It is not love that steals the heart from love;
  'Tis the hard world and its perplexing cares,
  Its petrifying selfishness, its pride,
  Its low ambition, and its paltry aims.

There was none of that “petrifying selfishness” in the little circle 
which lost so much when Deborah was removed from her father's 
parsonage. In order that that loss might be less painfully felt, it 
was proposed by Mr. Allison that Sunday should always be kept at the 
Grange when the season or the weather permitted. The Doctor came if he 
could; but for Mrs. Dove it was always to be a holiday.

“The pleasures of a volatile head,” says Mrs. Carter, “are much less 
liable to disappointment, than those of a sensible heart.” For such as 
can be contented with rattles and raree-shows, there are rattles and 
raree-shows in abundance to content them; and when one is broken it is 
mighty easily replaced by another. But the pleasures arising from the 
endearments of social relations, and the delicate sensibilities of 
friendly affection, are more limited, and their objects 
incontrovertible; they are accompanied with perpetual tender 
solicitude, and subject to accidents not to be repaired beneath the 
Sun. It is no wonder however that the joys of folly should have their 
completion in a world with which they are to end, while those of 
higher order must necessarily be incompleat in a world where they are 
only to begin.[1]

[Footnote 1: From the writing of the latter paragraph I should judge 
this to be one of the latest sentences Southey ever wrote.—In the MS. 
it was to have followed c. cxxxv. vol. iv. p. 361.]

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT WHICH WAS TO HAVE ANSWERED THE QUESTION PROPOSED IN THE TWO 
HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND CHAPTER.

_Io udii già dire ad un valente uomo nostro vicino, gli uomini abbiano 
molte volte bisogno sì di lagrimare, come di ridere; e per tal cagione 
egli affermava essere state da principio trovate le dolorose favole, 
che si chiamarono Tragedie, accioche raccontate ne' teatri, come in 
qual tempo si costumava di fare, tirassero le lagrime agli occhi di 
coloro, che avevano di ciò mestiere; e cosi eglino piangendo della 
loro infirmita guarissero. Ma come ciò sia a noi non istà bene di 
contristare gli animi delle persone con cui favelliamo; massimamente 
colà dove si dimori per aver festa e sollazzo, e non per piagnere; che 
se pure alcuno è, che infermi per vaghezza di lagrimare, assai leggier 
cosa fia di medicarlo con la mostarda forte, o porlo in alcun luogo al 
fumo._

GALATEO, DEL M. GIOVANNI DELLA CASA.


The Reader may remember, when he is thus reminded of it, that I 
delayed giving an account of Pompey, in answer to the question who he 
was, till the Dog-days should come. Here we are, (if _here_ may be 
applied to time) in the midst of them, July 24, 1830.

Horace Walpole speaks in a letter of two or three Mastiff-days so much 
fiercer were they that season than our common Dog-days. This year they 
might with equal propriety be called Iceland-Dog-days. Here we are 
with the thermometer every night and morning below the temperate 
point, and scarcely rising two degrees above it at middle day. And 
then for weather;—as Voiture says, _Il pleut pla-ple-pli-plo-plus._

If then as Robert Wilmot hath written, “it be true that the motions of 
our minds follow the temperature of the air wherein we live, then I 
think the perusing of some mournful matter, tending to the view of a 
notable example, will refresh your wits in a gloomy day, and ease your 
weariness of the louring night:” and the tragical part of my story 
might as fitly be told now in that respect, as if “weary winter were 
come upon us, which bringeth with him drooping days and weary nights.” 
But who does not like to put away tragical thoughts? Who would not 
rather go to see a broad farce than a deep tragedy? Sad thoughts even 
when they are medicinal for the mind, are as little to the mind's 
liking, as physic is grateful to the palate when it is needed most.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT ON HUTCHINSON'S WORKS.[1]

[Footnote 1: A Chapter was to have been devoted to the Hutchinsonian 
philosophy, and I am inclined to believe that this was a part of it.]


These superstitions are unquestionably of earlier date than any 
existing records, and commenced with the oldest system of idolatry, 
the worship of the heavenly bodies. Hutchinson's view is that when 
Moses brought the Jews out of their captivity, all men believed that 
“Fire, Light, or the Operation of the Air, did every thing in this 
material system:” those who believed rightly in God, knew that these 
secondary causes acted as his instruments, but “those who had fallen 
and lost communication with the Prophets and the truth of tradition, 
and were left to reason, (though they reasoned as far as reason could 
reach) thought the Heavens of a divine nature, and that they not only 
moved themselves and the heavenly bodies but operated all things on 
earth; and influenced the bodies, and governed the minds and fortunes 
of men: and so they fell upon worshipping them, and consulting them 
for times and seasons.” “The Devil,” he says, “chose right; this was 
the only object of false worship which gave any temptation; and it had 
very specious inducements.” And it was because he thus prevailed over 
“the Children of disobedience,” that the Apostle stiles him “the 
Prince of the Powers of the Air.” “This made the Priests and 
Physicians of the antient heathen cultivate the knowledge of these 
Powers, and afterwards made them star-gazers and observe the motions 
of those bodies for their conjunctions and oppositions, and all the 
stuff of their lucky and unlucky days and times, and especially to 
make advantage of their eclipses, for which they were stiled Magi, and 
looked upon as acquaintance of their Gods; and so much of the latter 
as is of any use, and a great deal more, we are obliged to them for.” 
“But these,” he says, “who thought that the Heavens ordered the events 
of things by their motions and influences, and that they were to be 
observed and foreseen by men, robbed God of his chief attributes, and 
were ordered then, and ought still, to be punished with death.”

Hutchinson is one of the most repulsive writers that ever produced any 
effect upon his contemporaries. His language is such as almost 
justified Dr. Parr in calling it the Hutchinsonian jargon; and his 
system is so confusedly brought forward that one who wishes to obtain 
even a general knowledge of it, must collect it as he can from 
passages scattered through the whole of his treatises. Add to these 
disrecommendations that it is propounded in the coarsest terms of 
insolent assumption, and that he treats the offence of those who 
reject the authority of scripture,—that is of his interpretation of 
Hebrew, and his exposition of the Mosaic philosophy, as “an infectious 
scurvy or leprosy of the soul which can scarcely be cured by any thing 
but eternal brimstone.”

The Paradise Lost, he calls, “that cursed farce of Milton, where he 
makes the Devil his hero:” and of the ancient poets and historians he 
says that “the mischief which these vermin did by praising their 
heroes in their farces or princes for conquering countries, and 
thereby inciting other princes to imitate them were the causes of the 
greatest miseries that have befallen mankind.” But Sir Isaac Newton 
was the great object of his hatred. “Nothing but villainy,” he said, 
“was to be expected from men who had made a human scheme, and would 
construe every text concerning it, so as to serve their purpose; he 
could only treat them as the most treacherous men alive. I hope,” he 
says, “I have power to forgive any crimes which are committed only 
against myself; I am not required, nor have I any power to forgive 
treason against the king, much less to forgive any crimes whereby any 
attempt to dispossess Jehovah Aleim. Nay, if I know of them and do not 
reveal them, and do not my endeavour to disappoint them in either, I 
am accessary. I shall put these things where I can upon the most 
compassionate side; the most favourable wish I can make for them is, 
that they may prove their ignorance so fully, that it may abate their 
crimes; but if their followers will shew that he or his accomplices 
knew anything, I must be forced to make Devils of them. There are many 
other accidents besides design or malice, which make men 
atheists,—studying or arguing to maintain a system, forged by a man 
who does not understand it, and in which there must be some things 
false, makes a man a villain whether he will or no.

“He, (Newton) first framed a philosophy, which is two thirds of the 
business of the real scriptures, and struck off the rest. And when he 
found his philosophy was built upon, and to be supported by emptiness, 
he was forced to patch up a God to constitute space. His equipage 
appears to have been the translation of the apostate Jews, and some 
blind histories of the modern heathen _Deus_, and an empty head to 
make his _Deus_; Kepler's banter of his powers, and some tacit 
acknowledgements as he only supposed, of the ignorantest heathens; an 
air-pump to make, and a pendulum or swing to prove a vacuum; a 
loadstone, and a bit of amber, or jet, to prove his philosophy; a 
telescope, a quadrant, and a pair of compasses to make infinite 
worlds, circles, crooked lines, &c.; a glass bubble, prisms and 
lenses, and a board with a hole in it, to let light into a dark room 
to form his history of light and colours; and he seems to have spent 
his time, not only when young, as some boys do, but when he should 
have set things right, in blowing his phlegm through a straw, raising 
bubbles, and admiring how the light would glare on the sides of them.”

No mention of Hutchinson is made in Dr. Brewster's Life of Newton, his 
system was probably thought too visionary to deserve notice, and the 
author unworthy of it because he had been the most violent and 
foul-mouthed of all Sir Isaac's opponents. The Mathematical Principles 
of Natural philosophy, he called a cobweb of circles and lines to 
catch flies. “Mathematics,” he said, “are applicable to any _data_, 
real or imaginary, true or false, more pestilent and destructive 
positions had been fathered upon that science than upon all others put 
together, and mathematicians had been put to death, both by Heathens 
and Christians for attributing much less to the heavenly bodies than 
Newton had done.” He compared his own course of observations with 
Newton's. His had been in the dark bowels of the earth, with the 
inspired light of scripture in his hand,—there he had learnt his 
Hebrew, and there he had studied the causes and traced the effects of 
the Deluge. “The opportunities,” he said, “were infinitely beyond what 
any man can have by living in a box, peeping out at a window, or 
letting the light in at a hole: or in separating and extracting the 
spirit from light, which can scarce happen in nature, or from 
refracting the light, which only happens upon the rainbow, bubbles, 
&c., or by making experiments with the loadstone, talc or amber, which 
differ in texture from most other bodies, and are only found in masses 
of small size; or by arranging a pendulum, which perhaps has not a 
parallel case in nature: or by the effects produced by spirit or light 
upon mixing small parcels of extracted fluids or substances, scarce 
one of which ever happened, or will happen in nature: or by taking 
cases which others have put, or putting cases which never had, nor 
ever will have any place in nature: or by forming figures or lines of 
crooked directions of motions or things, which most of them have no 
place, so the lines no use in nature, other than to serve hypotheses 
of imaginary Powers, or courses, which always have been useless, when 
any other Powers, though false, have been assigned and received; and 
must all finally be useless, when the true Powers are shewn.”

Such passages show that Hutchinson was either grossly incapable of 
appreciating Newton's discoveries, or that he wilfully and maliciously 
depreciated them. His own attainments might render the first of these 
conclusions improbable, and the second would seem still more so upon 
considering the upright tenour of his life. But the truth seems to be, 
that having constructed a system with great labour, and no little 
ability, upon the assumption that the principles of natural philosophy 
as well as of our faith, are contained in the scriptures, and that the 
true interpretation of scripture depended upon the right understanding 
of the Hebrew primitives, which knowledge the apostate Jews had lost, 
and he had recovered, his belief in this system had all the 
intolerance of fanaticism or supposed infallibility; and those who 
strongly contravened it, deserved in his opinion the punishments 
appointed in the Mosaic law for idolatry and blasphemy. Newton and 
Clarke were in this predicament. Both, in his judgement, attributed so 
much to secondary causes,—those Powers which had been the first 
objects of idolatry, that he considered their Deity to be nothing more 
than the Jupiter of the philosophizing heathens; and he suspects that 
their esoteric doctrine resolved itself into Pantheism. Toland indeed 
had told him that there was a scheme in progress for leading men 
through Pantheism and Atheism, and made him acquainted with all their 
designs, divine or diabolical, and political or anarchical! and all 
the villanies and forgeries they had committed to accomplish them. 
First they sought to make men believe in a God who could not punish, 
and then—that there was no God, and Toland was engaged, for pay, in 
this scheme of propagandism, “because he had some learning, and more 
loose humour than any of them.” The Pantheisticon was written with 
this view. Toland was only in part the author, other hands assisted, 
and Hutchinson says, he knew “there was a physician, and a patient of 
his a divine, who was very serviceable in their respective stations in 
prescribing proper doses, even to the very last.” But they “carried 
the matter too far,” “they discovered a secret which the world had not 
taken notice of, and which it was highly necessary the world should 
know.” For “though it be true to a proverb, that a man should not be 
hanged for being a fool, they shewed the principles of these men so 
plainly, which were to have no superior, to conform to any religion, 
laws, oaths, &c., but be bound by none, and the consequences of 
propagating them, that they thereby shewed the wisdom of the heathen 
people, who because they could not live safely, stoned such men; and 
the justice of the heathen Emperors and Kings, who put such to death, 
because they could have no security from them, and if their doubts, or 
notions had prevailed, all must have gone to anarchy or a 
commonwealth, as it always did, when and where they neglected to cut 
them off.”

That atheism had its propagandists then as it has now is certain, and 
no one who has watched the course of opinion among his contemporaries 
can doubt that Socinianism, or semi-belief, gravitates towards 
infidelity. But to believe that Newton and Clarke were engaged in the 
scheme which is here imputed to them, we must allow more weight to 
Toland's character than to theirs, and to Hutchinson's judgement.

What has here been said of Hutchinson exhibits him in his worst 
light,—and it must not hastily be concluded that because he breathed 
the fiercest spirit of intolerance, he is altogether to be disliked as 
a man, or despised as an author. Unless his theory, untenable as it 
is, had been constructed with considerable talent, and supported with 
no common learning,—he could never have had such men as Bishop Horne 
and Jones of Nayland among his disciples. Without assenting to his 
system, a biblical student may derive instruction from many parts of 
his works.

There is one remarkable circumstance in his history. When he was a 
mere boy a stranger came to board with his father, who resided at 
Spennythorn in the North-Riding of Yorkshire, upon an estate of forty 
pounds a year. The father's intention was to educate this son for the 
office of steward to some great landed proprietor, and this stranger 
agreed to instruct him in every branch of knowledge requisite for such 
an employment, upon condition of being boarded free of expence, 
engaging at the same time to remain till he had completed the boy's 
education. What he had thus undertaken he performed well; “he was, 
perhaps,” says Hutchinson, “as great a mathematician as either of 
those whose books he studied, and taught me as much as I could see any 
use for, either upon the earth or in the heavens, without poisoning me 
with any false notions fathered upon the mathematics.” The curious 
part of this story is that it was never known who this scientific 
stranger was, for he carefully and effectually concealed every thing 
that could lead to a discovery. Hutchinson was born in 1674, and his 
education under this tutor was completed at the age of nineteen.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT RELATIVE TO THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL AT DONCASTER AND THE LIVING OF 
ROSSINGTON.[1]

[Footnote 1: The Parish of Rossington in the union and soke of 
Doncaster was for many generations the seat of the Fossard and Mauley 
families. In the reign of Henry VII., it was granted by that monarch 
to the corporation of Doncaster.

The following extract is from Mr. John Wainwright's History and 
Antiquities of Doncaster and Conisbro'.

“Connected with the history of this village, is a singular and curious 
specimen of Egyptian manners, as practised by the itinerant gypsies of 
the British Empire. In a letter, which we had the pleasure of 
receiving from the Rev. James Stoven, D.D. the worthy and learned 
rector of this place, it is remarked, that about one hundred and 
twenty years ago, the gypsies commenced here a curious custom, which 
they practised once in almost every year, occasioned by the interment, 
in the churchyard of this place, (of) one of their principal leaders, 
Mr. Charles Bosville, on the 30th of June, 1708 or 9. Having, from a 
boy, been much acquainted with this village, I have often heard of 
their (the gypsies) abode here, and with them Mr. James Bosville, 
their king, under whose authority they conducted themselves with great 
propriety and decorum, never committing the least theft or offence. 
They generally slept in their farmers' barns, who, at those periods, 
considered their property to be more safely protected than in their 
absence. Mr. Charles Bosville (but how related to the king does not 
appear,) was much beloved in this neighbourhood, having a knowledge of 
medicine, was very attentive to the sick, well bred in manners, and 
comely in person. After his death, the gypsies, for many years, came 
to visit his tomb, and poured upon it hot ale; but by degrees they 
deserted the place,—(These circumstances must yet hang on their 
remembrance; as, only a year ago, 1821, an ill drest set of them 
encamped in our lanes, calling themselves Boswell's.)—These words in 
the parentheses came within my own knowledge.”

It is added in a note—“_Boswell's Gang_, is an appellation, very 
generally applied to a collection of beggars, or other idle 
itinerants, which we often see encamped in groups in the lanes and 
ditches of this part of England.”

In quoting this, I by no means assent to the statement that Gypsies 
are Egyptians.—They are of Hindostanee origin.]


The Grammar school was next door to Peter Hopkins's, being kept in one 
of the lower apartments of the Town Hall. It was a free school for the 
sons of freemen, the Corporation allowing a salary of £50. _per annum_ 
to the schoolmaster, who according to the endowment must be a 
clergyman. That office was held by Mr. Crochley, who had been bred at 
Westminster, and was elected from thence to Christ Church, Oxford in 
1742. He came to Doncaster with a promise from the Corporation that 
the living of Rossington, which is in their gift and is a valuable 
benefice, should be given him provided he had fifty scholars when it 
became vacant. He never could raise their numbers higher than 
forty-five; the Corporation adhered to the letter of their agreement; 
the disappointment preyed on him, and he died a distressed and 
broken-hearted man.

Yet it was not Crochley's fault that the school had not been more 
flourishing. He was as competent to the office as a man of good 
natural parts could be rendered by the most compleat course of 
classical education. But in those days few tradesmen ever thought of 
bestowing upon their sons any further education than was sufficient to 
qualify them for trade; and the boys who were desirous to be placed 
there, must have been endued with no ordinary love of learning, for a 
grammar school is still any thing rather than a _Ludus Literarius_.

Two or three years before the Doctor's marriage a widow lady came to 
settle at Doncaster, chiefly for the sake of placing her sons at the 
Grammar School there, which though not in high repute was at least 
respectably conducted. It was within five minutes walk of her own 
door, and thus the boys had the greatest advantage that school-boys 
can possibly enjoy, that of living at home, whereby they were saved 
from all the misery and from most of the evil with which 
boarding-schools, almost without an exception, abounded in those days, 
and from which it may be doubted whether there are any yet that are 
altogether free. Her name was Horseman, she was left with six 
children, and just with such means as enabled her by excellent 
management to make what is called a respectable appearance, the boys 
being well educated at the cheapest rate, and she herself educating 
two daughters who were fortunately the eldest children. Happy girls! 
they were taught what no Governess could teach them, to be useful as 
soon as they were capable of being so; to make their brother's shirts 
and mend their stockings; to make and mend for themselves, to cipher 
so as to keep accounts; to assist in household occupations, to pickle 
and preserve, to make pastry, to work chair-bottoms, to write a fair 
hand, and to read Italian. This may seem incongruous with so practical 
a system of domestic education. But Mrs. Horseman was born in Italy, 
and had passed great part of her youth there.

The father, Mr. Duckinton, was a man of some fortune, whose delight 
was in travelling, and who preferred Italy to all other countries. 
Being a whimsical person he had a fancy for naming each of his 
children, after the place where it happened to be born. One daughter 
therefore was baptized by the fair name of Florence, Mrs. Horseman, 
was christened Venetia, like the wife of Sir Kenelm Digby, whose 
husband was more careful of her complexion than of her character. 
Fortunate it was that he had no daughter born at Genoa or at Nantes, 
for if he had, the one must have concealed her true baptismal name 
under the alias of Jenny; and the other have subscribed herself Nancy, 
that she might not be reproached with the brandy cask. The youngest of 
his children was a son, and if he had been born in the French capital 
would hardly have escaped the ignominious name of Paris, but as Mr. 
Duckinton had long wished for a son, and the mother knowing her 
husband's wishes had prayed for one, the boy escaped with no worse 
name than Deodatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT OF INTERCHAPTER.


Kissing has proverbially been said to go by favour. So it is but too 
certain, that Preferment does in Army and Navy, Church and State; and 
so does Criticism.

That Kissing should do so is but fair and just; and it is moreover in 
the nature of things.

That Promotion should do so is also in the nature of things—as they 
are. And this also is fair where no injustice is committed. When other 
pretensions are equal, favour is the feather which ought to be put 
into the scale. In cases of equal fitness, no wrong is done to the one 
party, if the other is preferred for considerations of personal 
friendship, old obligations, or family connection; the injustice and 
the wrong would be if these were overlooked.

To what extent may favour be reasonably allowed in criticism?

If it were extended no farther than can be really useful to the person 
whom there is an intention of serving, its limits would be short 
indeed. For in that case it would never proceed farther than truth and 
discretion went with it. Far more injury is done to a book and to an 
author by injudicious or extravagant praise, than by intemperate or 
malevolent censure.

Some persons have merrily surmised that Job was a reviewer because he 
exclaimed “Oh that mine enemy had written a book!” Others on the 
contrary have inferred that reviewing was not known in his days, 
because he wished that his own words had been printed and published.

       *       *       *       *       *

[The timbers were laid for a Chapter on wigs, and many notes and 
references were collected.—This Fragment is all that remains.]

Bernardin St. Pierre, who with all his fancies and oddities, has been 
not undeservedly a popular writer in other countries as well as in his 
own, advances in the most extravagant of his books, (the _Harmonies de 
la Nature_,) the magnificent hypothesis that men invented great wigs 
because great wigs are _semblables aux criniers des lions_, like 
lion's manes. But as wigs are rather designed to make men look grave 
than terrible, he might with more probability have surmised that they 
were intended to imitate the appearance of the Bird of Wisdom.

The Doctor wore a wig: and looked neither like a Lion, nor like an Owl 
in it. Yet when he first put it on, and went to the looking-glass, he 
could not help thinking that he did not look like a Dove.

But then he looked like a Doctor, which was as it became him to look. 
He wore it professionally.

It was not such a wig as Dr. Parr's, which was of all contemporary 
wigs _facile princeps_. Nor was it after the fashion of that which may 
be seen in “immortal buckle,” upon Sir Cloudesley Shovel's monument in 
Westminster Abbey——&c.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEMOIRS OF CAT'S EDEN.

[The following Fragments were intended to be worked up into an 
Interchapter on the History of Cats. The first fairly written out was 
to have been, it would appear, the commencement. The next is an 
Extract from Eulia Effendi. “That anecdote about the King of the Cats, 
Caroline, you must write out for me, as it must be inserted,” said the 
lamented Author of the Doctor, &c. to Mrs. Southey. The writer of the 
lines is not known, they were forwarded to the Author when at 
Killerton. The “Memoirs of Cats of Greta Hall” was to have furnished 
the particulars, which the first fragment states had got abroad.

What was to have been the form of the Interchapter the Editor does not 
know, neither does Mrs. Southey. The playful letter is given exactly 
as it was written. A beautiful instance, as will be acknowledged by 
all, of that confidence which should exist between a loving father and 
a dutiful daughter. Sir Walter Scott wrote feelingly when he said,

  Some feelings are to mortals given
  With less of earth in them than heaven:
  And if there be a human tear
  From passion's dross refined and clear,
  A tear so limpid and so meek,
  It would not stain an angel's cheek,
  'Tis that which pious fathers shed
  Upon a duteous daughter's head!]


FRAGMENT OF INTERCHAPTER.

  More than prince of cats, I can tell you.

ROMEO AND JULIET.


An extract from the Register of Cat's Eden has got abroad, whereby it 
appears that the Laureate, Dr. Southey, who is known to be a 
philofelist, and confers honours upon his Cats according to their 
services, has raised one to the highest rank in peerage, promoting him 
through all its degrees by the following titles, His Serene Highness 
the Arch-Duke Rumpelstilzchen, Marquis Macbum, Earl Tomlemagne, Baron 
Raticide, Waowlher and Skaratchi.

The first of these names is taken from the German Collection of 
_Kinder und Haus-Märchen_. A Dwarf or Imp so called was to carry off 
the infant child of the Queen as the price of a great service which he 
had rendered her, but he had consented to forego his right if in the 
course of three days she could find out what was his name. This she 
never could have done, if the King had not on the first day gone 
hunting, and got into the thickest part of the wood, where he saw a 
ridiculous Dwarf hopping about before a house which seemed by its 
dimensions to be his home, and singing for joy; these were the words 
of his song,

     _Heute back ich, morgen brau ich,
  Ubermorgen hohl ich der Frau Konigin ihr kind,
      Ach wie gut ist, das niemand weiss
      Dass ich Rumpelstilzchen heiss._

  I bake to-day, and I brew to-morrow,
  Mrs. Queen will see me the next day to her sorrow,
    When according to promise her child I shall claim,
      For none can disclose, because nobody knows
        That Rumpelstilzchen is my name.

Now if Rumpelstilzchen had had as many names as a Spanish Infante, the 
man must have a good memory who could have carried them away upon 
hearing them once.

       *       *       *       *       *

“The Cats of Diorigi are celebrated all over Greece, for nowhere are 
to  be found cats so pretty, so vigilant, so caressing and well-bred 
as at Diorigi. The Cats of the Oasis in Egypt, and of Sinope are 
justly renowned for their good qualities, but those of Diorigi are 
particularly fat, brilliant, and playing different colours. They are 
carried from here to Persia, to Ardebeil where they are shut up in 
cages, proclaimed by the public criers and sold for one or two 
_tomans_. The Georgians also buy them at a great price, to save their 
whiskers which are commonly eaten up by mice. The criers of Ardebeil, 
who cry these cats have a particular melody to which they sing their 
cry in these words,

  O you who like a Cat
  That catches mouse and rat,
  Well-bred, caressing, gay
  Companion to sport and play,
  Amusing and genteel,
  Shall never scratch and steal.

Singing these words they carry the cats on their head and sell them 
for great prices, because the inhabitants of Ardebeil are scarce able 
to save their woollen cloth from the destruction of mice and rats. 
Cats are called Hurre, Katta, Senorre, Merabe, Matshi, Weistaun, 
Wemistaun, but those of Diorigi are particularly highly esteemed. 
Notwithstanding that high reputation and price of the Cats of Diorigi, 
they meet with dangerous enemies in their native place, where 
sometimes forty or fifty of them are killed secretly, tanned, and 
converted into fur for the winter time. It is a fur scarce to be 
distinguished from Russian ermelin, and that of the red cats is not to 
be distinguished from the fox that comes from Ozalov.”[1]

[Footnote 1: EVLIA EFFENDI.]

A labouring man returning to his cottage after night-fall, passed by a 
lone house in ruins, long uninhabited. Surprized at the appearance of 
light within, and strange sounds issuing from the desolate interior, 
he stopt and looked in through one of the broken windows, and there in 
a large old gloomy room, quite bare of furniture except that the 
cobwebs hung about its walls like tapestry, he beheld a marvellous 
spectacle. A small coffin covered with a pall stood in the midst of 
the floor, and round and round and round about it with dismal 
lamentations in the feline tongue, marched a circle of Cats, one of 
them, being covered from head to foot with a black veil, and walking 
as chief mourner. The man was so frightened with what he saw that he 
waited to see no more, but went straight home, and at supper told his 
wife what had befallen him.

Their own old Cat, who had been sitting, as was her wont, on the elbow 
of her Master's chair, kept her station very quietly, till he came to 
the description of the chief Mourner, when, to the great surprize and 
consternation of the old couple, she bounced up, and flew up the 
chimney exclaiming—“Then I am King of the Cats.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Keswick, January 9th._

DEAR MASTER,

                    Let our boldness not offend,
  If a few lines of duteous love we send;
  Nor wonder that we deal in rhyme, for long
  We've been familiar with the founts of song;
  Nine thorougher tabbies you would rarely find,
  Than those who laurels round your temples bind:
  For how, with less than nine lives to their share,
  Could they have lived so long on poet's fare?
  Athens surnamed them from their mousing powers,
  And Rome from that harmonious MU of ours,
  In which the letter U, (as we will trouble you
  To say to TODD) should supersede ew—
  This by the way—we now proceed to tell,
  That all within the bounds of home are well;
  All but your faithful cats, who inly pine;
  The cause your Conscience may too well divine.
  Ah! little do you know how swiftly fly
  The venomed darts of feline jealousy;
  How delicate a task to deal it is
  With a Grimalkin's sensibilities,
  When Titten's tortoise fur you smoothed with bland
  And coaxing courtesies of lip and hand,
  We felt as if, (poor Puss's constant dread)
  Some school-boy stroked us both from tail to head;
  Nor less we suffer'd while with sportive touch
  And purring voice, you played with grey-backed Gutch;
  And when with eager step, you left your seat,
  To get a peep at Richard's snow-white feet,
  Himself all black; we long'd to stop his breath
  With something like his royal namesake's death;
  If more such scenes our frenzied fancies see,
  Resolved we hang from yonder apple tree—
  And were not that a sad catastrophe!
  O! then return to your deserted lake,
  Dry eyes that weep, and comfort hearts that ache;
  Our mutual jealousies we both disown,
  Content to share, rather than lose a throne.
  The Parlour, Rumples undisputed reign,
  Hurley's the rest of all your wide domain.
  Return, return, dear Bard _κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν_,
  Restore the happy days that once have been,
  Resign yourself to Home, the Muse and us.

(_Scratch'd_)

RUMPLESTITCHKIN,
HURLYBURLYBUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEMOIR OF THE CATS OF GRETA HALL.


For as much, most excellent Edith May, as you must always feel a 
natural and becoming concern in whatever relates to the house wherein 
you were born, and in which the first part of your life has thus far 
so happily been spent, I have for your instruction and delight 
composed these Memoirs of the Cats of Greta Hall: to the end that the 
memory of such worthy animals may not perish, but be held in deserved 
honour by my children, and those who shall come after them. And let me 
not be supposed unmindful of Beelzebub of Bath, and Senhor Thomaz de 
Lisboa, that I have not gone back to an earlier period, and included 
them in my design. Far be it from me to intend any injury or 
disrespect to their shades! Opportunity of doing justice to their 
virtues will not be wanting at some future time, but for the present I 
must confine myself within the limits of these precincts.

In the autumn of the year 1803 when I entered upon this place of 
abode, I found the hearth in possession of two cats whom my nephew 
Hartley Coleridge, (then in the 7th year of his age,) had named Lord 
Nelson, and Bona Marietta. The former, as the name implies, was of the 
worthier gender: it is as decidedly so in Cats, as in grammar and in 
law. He was an ugly specimen of the streaked-carrotty, or 
Judas-coloured kind; which is one of the ugliest varieties. But 
_nimium ne crede colori_. In spite of his complection, there was 
nothing treacherous about him. He was altogether a good Cat, 
affectionate, vigilant and brave; and for services performed against 
the Rats was deservedly raised in succession to the rank of Baron, 
Viscount and Earl. He lived to a good old age; and then being quite 
helpless and miserable, was in mercy thrown into the river. I had more 
than once interfered to save him from this fate; but it became at 
length plainly an act of compassion to consent to it. And here let me 
observe that in a world wherein death is necessary, the law of nature 
by which one creature preys upon another is a law of mercy, not only 
because death is thus made instrumental to life, and more life exists 
in consequence, but also because it is better for the creatures 
themselves to be cut off suddenly, than to perish by disease or 
hunger,—for these are the only alternatives.

There are still some of Lord Nelson's descendants in the town of 
Keswick. Two of the family were handsomer than I should have supposed 
any Cats of this complection could have been; but their fur was fine, 
the colour a rich carrot, and the striping like that of the finest 
tyger or tabby kind. I named one of them William Rufus; the other 
Danayn le Roux, after a personage in the Romance of Gyron le Courtoys.

Bona Marietta was the mother of Bona Fidelia, so named by my nephew 
aforesaid. Bona Fidelia was a tortoise-shell cat. She was filiated 
upon Lord Nelson, others of the same litter having borne the 
unequivocal stamp of his likeness. It was in her good qualities that 
she resembled him, for in truth her name rightly bespoke her nature. 
She approached as nearly as possible in disposition, to the ideal of a 
perfect cat:—he who supposes that animals have not their difference of 
disposition as well as men, knows very little of animal nature. Having 
survived her daughter Madame Catalani, she died of extreme old age, 
universally esteemed and regretted by all who had the pleasure of her 
acquaintance.

Bona Fidelia left a daughter and a granddaughter; the former I called 
Madame Bianchi—the latter Pulcheria. It was impossible ever to 
familiarize Madame Bianchi, though she had been bred up in all 
respects like her gentle mother, in the same place, and with the same 
persons. The nonsense of that arch-philosophist Helvetius would be 
sufficiently confuted by this single example, if such rank folly 
contradicted as it is by the experience of every family, needed 
confutation. She was a beautiful and singular creature, white, with a 
fine tabby tail, and two or three spots of tabby, always delicately 
clean; and her wild eyes were bright and green as the Duchess de 
Cadaval's emerald necklace. Pulcheria did not correspond as she grew 
up to the promise of her kittenhood and her name; but she was as fond 
as her mother was shy and intractable. Their fate was extraordinary as 
well as mournful. When good old Mrs. Wilson died, who used to feed and 
indulge them, they immediately forsook the house, nor could they be 
allured to enter it again, though they continued to wander and moan 
around it, and came for food. After some weeks Madame Bianchi 
disappeared, and Pulcheria soon afterwards died of a disease endemic 
at that time among cats.

For a considerable time afterwards, an evil fortune attended all our 
attempts at re-establishing a Cattery. Ovid disappeared and Virgil 
died of some miserable distemper. You and your cousin are answerable 
for these names: the reasons which I could find for them were, in the 
former case the satisfactory one that the said Ovid might be presumed 
to be a master in the Art of Love; and in the latter, the probable one 
that something like Ma-ro—might be detected in the said Virgil's notes 
of courtship. There was poor Othello: most properly named, for black 
he was, and jealous undoubtedly he would have been, but he in his 
kittenship followed Miss Wilbraham into the street, and there in all 
likelihood came to an untimely end. There was the Zombi—(I leave the 
Commentators to explain that title, and refer them to my History of 
Brazil to do it)—his marvellous story was recorded in a letter to 
Bedford,—and after that adventure he vanished. There was Prester John, 
who turned out not to be of John's gender, and therefore had the name 
altered to Pope Joan. The Pope I am afraid came to a death of which 
other Popes have died. I suspect that some poison which the rats had 
turned out of their holes, proved fatal to their enemy. For some time 
I feared we were at the end of our Cat-a-logue: but at last Fortune as 
if to make amends for her late severity sent us two at 
once,—the-never-to-be-enough-praised Rumpelstilzchen, and the 
equally-to-be-admired Hurlyburlybuss.

And “first for the first of these” as my huge favourite, and almost 
namesake Robert South, says in his Sermons.

When the Midgeleys went away from the next house, they left this 
creature to our hospitality, cats being the least moveable of all 
animals because of their strong local predilections;—they are indeed 
in a domesticated state the serfs of the animal creation, and properly 
attached to the soil. The change was gradually and therefore easily 
brought about, for he was already acquainted with the children and 
with me; and having the same precincts to prowl in was hardly sensible 
of any other difference in his condition than that of obtaining a 
name; for when he was consigned to us he was an anonymous cat; and I 
having just related at breakfast with universal applause the story of 
Rumpelstilzchen from a German tale in Grimm's Collection, gave him 
that strange and magnisonant appellation; to which upon its being 
ascertained that he came when a kitten from a bailiff's house, I added 
the patronymic of Macbum. Such is his history, his character may with 
most propriety be introduced after the manner of Plutarch's parallels 
when I shall have given some previous account of his great compeer and 
rival Hurlyburlybuss,—that name also is of Germanic and Grimmish 
extraction.

Whence Hurlyburlybuss came was a mystery when you departed from the 
Land of Lakes, and a mystery it long remained. He appeared here, as 
Mango Capac did in Peru, and Quetzalcohuatl among the Aztecas, no one 
knew from whence. He made himself acquainted with all the philofelists 
of the family—attaching himself more particularly to Mrs. Lovell, but 
he never attempted to enter the house, frequently disappeared for 
days, and once since my return for so long a time that he was actually 
believed to be dead and veritably lamented as such. The wonder was 
whither did he retire at such times—and to whom did he belong; for 
neither I in my daily walks, nor the children, nor any of the servants 
ever by any chance saw him anywhere except in our own domain. There 
was something so mysterious in this, that in old times it might have 
excited strong suspicion, and he would have been in danger of passing 
for a Witch in disguise, or a familiar. The mystery however was solved 
about four week's ago, when as we were returning from a walk up the 
Greta, Isabel saw him on his transit across the road and the wall from 
Shulicrow, in a direction toward the Hill. But to this day we are 
ignorant who has the honour to be his owner in the eye of the law; and 
the owner is equally ignorant of the high favour in which 
Hurlyburlybuss is held, of the heroic name which he has obtained, and 
that his fame has extended far and wide—even unto Norwich in the East, 
and Escott and Crediton and Kellerton in the West, yea—that with 
Rumpelstilzchen he has been celebrated in song, by some hitherto 
undiscovered poet, and that his glory will go down to future 
generations.

The strong enmity which unhappily subsists between these otherwise 
gentle and most amiable cats, is not unknown to you. Let it be imputed 
as in justice it ought, not to their individual characters (for Cats 
have characters,—and for the benefit of philosophy, as well as 
_felisophy_, this truth ought generally to be known) but to the 
constitution of Cat nature,—an original sin, or an original necessity, 
which may be only another mode of expressing the same thing:

  Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
  Nor can one purlieu brook a double reign
  Of Hurlyburlybuss and Rumpelstilzchen.

When you left us, the result of many a fierce conflict was that Hurly 
remained master of the green and garden, and the whole of the out of 
door premises. Rumpel always upon the appearance of his victorious 
enemy retiring into the house as a citadel or sanctuary. The conqueror 
was perhaps in part indebted for this superiority to his hardier 
habits of life, living always in the open air, and providing for 
himself; while Rumpel (who though born under a bum-bailiff's roof was 
nevertheless kittened with a silver spoon in his mouth) past his hours 
in luxurious repose beside the fire, and looked for his meals as 
punctually as any two-legged member of the family. Yet I believe that 
the advantage on Hurly's side is in a great degree constitutional 
also, and that his superior courage arises from a confidence in his 
superior strength, which as you well know is visible in his make. What 
Bento and Maria Rosa used to say of my poor Thomaz, that he was _muito 
fidalgo_ is true of Rumpelstilzchen, his countenance, deportment and 
behaviour being such that he is truly a gentleman-like Tom-cat. Far be 
it from me to praise him beyond his deserts,—he is not beautiful, the 
mixture, tabby and white, is not good (except under very favourable 
combinations) and the tabby is not good of its kind. Nevertheless he 
is a fine cat, handsome enough for his sex, large, well-made, with 
good features, and an intelligent countenance, and carrying a splendid 
tail, which in Cats and Dogs is undoubtedly the seat of honour. His 
eyes which are soft and expressive are of a hue between chrysolite and 
emerald. Hurlyburlybuss's are between chrysolite and topaz. Which may 
be the more esteemed shade for the _olho de gato_ I am not lapidary 
enough to decide. You should ask my Uncle. But both are of the finest 
water. In all his other features Hurly must yield the palm, and in 
form also; he has no pretensions to elegance, his size is ordinary and 
his figure bad: but the character of his face and neck is so 
masculine, that the Chinese who use the word bull as synonymous with 
male, and call a boy a bull-child, might with great propriety 
denominate him a bull-cat. His make evinces such decided marks of 
strength and courage that if cat-fighting were as fashionable as 
cock-fighting, no Cat would stand a fairer chance for winning a Welsh 
main. He would become as famous as the Dog Billy himself, whom I look 
upon as the most distinguished character that has appeared since 
Buonaparte.

Some weeks ago Hurlyburlybuss was manifestly emaciated and enfeebled 
by ill health, and Rumpelstilzchen with great magnanimity made 
overtures of peace. The whole progress of the treaty was seen from the 
parlour window. The caution with which Rumpel made his advances, the 
sullen dignity with which they were received, their mutual uneasiness 
when Rumpel after a slow and wary approach, seated himself 
whisker-to-whisker with his rival, the mutual fear which restrained 
not only teeth and claws, but even all tones of defiance, the mutual 
agitation of their tails which, though they did not expand with anger, 
could not be kept still for suspense and lastly the manner in which 
Hurly retreated, like Ajax still keeping his face toward his old 
antagonist were worthy to have been represented by that painter who 
was called the Rafaelle of Cats. The overture I fear was not accepted 
as generously as it was made; for no sooner had Hurlyburlybuss 
recovered strength than hostilities were recommenced with greater 
violence than ever, Rumpel who had not abused his superiority while he 
possessed it, had acquired mean time a confidence which made him keep 
the field. Dreadful were the combats which ensued as their ears, faces 
and legs bore witness. Rumpel had a wound which went through one of 
his feet. The result has been so far in his favour that he no longer 
seeks to avoid his enemy, and we are often compelled to interfere and 
separate them. Oh it is aweful to hear the “dreadful note of 
preparation” with which they prelude their encounters!—the long low 
growl slowly rises and swells till it becomes a high sharp yowl,—and 
then it is snapt short by a sound which seems as if they were spitting 
fire and venom at each other. I could half persuade myself that the 
word felonious is derived from the feline temper as displayed at such 
times. All means of reconciling them and making them understand how 
goodly a thing it is for cats to dwell together in peace, and what 
fools they are to quarrel and tear each other are in vain. The 
proceedings of the Society for the Abolition of War are not more 
utterly ineffectual and hopeless.

All we can do is to act more impartially than the Gods did between 
Achilles and Hector, and continue to treat both with equal regard.

And thus having brought down these Memoirs of the Cats of Greta Hall 
to the present day, I commit the precious memorial to your keeping, 
and remain

  Most dissipated and light-heeled daughter,
  Your most diligent and light-hearted father,

  ROBERT SOUTHEY.

  _Keswick, 18 June, 1824_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRAGMENT OF INTERCHAPTER.

[The following playful effusion was likewise, as the “Memoirs of Cat's 
Eden,” intended for “THE DOCTOR, &C.,” but how it was to have been 
moulded, so as to obscure the incognito, I do not know. It will tend, 
if I mistake not, to shew the easy versatility,—the true 
_εὐτραπελία_,—of a great and a good man's mind. “Fortune,” says 
Fluellen, “is turning and inconstant, and variations, and 
mutabilities,”—but one who, in the midst of constant and laborious 
occupations, could revel in such a recreation as this “Chapter on the 
Statues” was Fortune's master, and above her wheel.

  ARS UTINAM MORES ANIMUMQUE EFFINGERE POSSET:
    PULCHRIOR IN TERRIS NULLA TABELLA FORET.[1]

[Footnote 1: MART. EPIGR.]

It may be added that there was another very curious collection of 
Letters intended for “THE DOCTOR, &C.,” but they have not come to my 
hand. They were written in a peculiar dialect and would have required 
much mother wit and many vocabularies to have decyphered them. She who 
suggested them,—a woman “of infinite jest,—of most excellent fancy,”—a 
good woman, and a kind,—is now gathered to her rest!]


ΕΙΣ ΤΟΥΣ ΑΔΡΙΑΝΤΑΣ.

_Ὁ μὲν διάβολος ἐνέπνενσέ τισι παρανόμοις ἀνθρώποις, καὶ εἰς τοὺς τῶν 
βασιλέων ὕβρισαν ἀνδριάντας._

CHRYSOST. HOM. AD POPUL. ANTIOCHEN.


My dear daughter,

Having lately been led to compose an inscription for one of our Garden 
statues, an authentic account of two such extraordinary works of art 
has appeared to me so desirable that I even wonder at myself for 
having so long delayed to write one. It is the more incumbent on me to 
do this, because neither of the artists have thought proper to 
inscribe their names upon these master-pieces,—either from that 
modesty which often accompanies the highest genius, or from a 
dignified consciousness that it was unnecessary to set any mark upon 
them, the works themselves sufficiently declaring from what hands they 
came.

I undertake this becoming task with the more pleasure because our 
friend Mrs. Keenan has kindly offered to illustrate the intended 
account by drawings of both Statues,—having as you may well suppose 
been struck with admiration by them. The promise of this co-operation 
induces me not to confine myself to a mere description, but to relate 
on what occasion they were made, and faithfully to record the very 
remarkable circumstances which have occurred in consequence; 
circumstances I will venture to say, as well attested and as well 
worthy of preservation as any of those related in the History of the 
Portuguese Images of Nossa Senhora, in ten volumes quarto,—a book of 
real value, and which you know I regard as one of the most curious in 
my collection. If in the progress of this design I should sometimes 
appear to wander in digression, you will not impute it to any habitual 
love of circumlocution; and the speculative notions which I may have 
occasion to propose, you will receive as mere speculations and judge 
of them accordingly.

Many many years ago I remember to have seen these popular and rustic 
rhymes in print,

  God made a great man to plough and to sow,
  God made a little man to drive away the crow;

they were composed perhaps to make some little man contented with that 
office, and certain it is that in all ages and all countries it has 
been an object of as much consequence to preserve the seed from birds 
when sown, as to sow it. No doubt Adam himself when he was driven to 
cultivate the ground felt this, and we who are his lineal descendants 
(though I am sorry to say we have not inherited a rood of his estates) 
have felt it also, in our small but not unimportant concern, the 
Garden. Mrs. L., the Lady of that Garden used to complain grievously 
of the depredations committed there, especially upon her pease. Fowls 
and Ducks were condemned either to imprisonment for life, or to the 
immediate larder for their offences of this kind; but the magpies (my 
protegées) and the sparrows, and the blackbirds and the thrushes bade 
defiance to the coop and the cook. She tried to fright them away by 
feathers fastened upon a string, but birds were no more to be 
frightened by feathers than to be caught by chaff. She drest up two 
mopsticks; not to be forgotten, because when two youths sent their 
straw hats upon leaving Keswick to K. and B., the girls consigned the 
hats to these mopsticks and named the figures thus attired in due 
honour of the youths, L. N., and C. K. These mopsticks however were 
well drest enough to invite thieves from the town,—and too well to 
frighten the birds. Something more effectual was wanted, and Mrs. L. 
bespoke a man of Joseph Glover.

Such is the imperfection of language that write as carefully and 
warily as we can it is impossible to use words which will not 
frequently admit of a double construction, upon this indeed it is that 
the Lawyers have founded the science of the Law, which said science 
they display in extracting any meaning from any words, and generally 
that meaning that shall be most opposite to the intention for which 
they were used. When I say that your Aunt L. bespoke a man of Joseph 
Glover, I do not mean that she commissioned him to engage a labourer: 
nor that she required him actually to make a man like 
Frankenstein,—though it must be admitted that such a man as 
Frankenstein made, would be the best of all scarecrows, provided he 
were broken in so as to be perfectly manageable. To have made a man 
indeed would have been more than even Paracelsus would have undertaken 
to perform; for according to the receipt which that illustrious 
Bombast ab Hohenheim has delivered to posterity, an homunculus cannot 
be produced in a hot-bed in less than forty weeks and forty days; and 
this would not have been in time to save the pease; not to mention 
that one of his homunculi had it been ready could not have served the 
purpose, for by his account, when it was produced, it was smaller even 
than Mark Thumb. Such an order would have been more unreasonable than 
any of those which Juno imposed upon Hercules; whereas the task 
imposed by Mrs. L. was nothing more than Glover thought himself 
capable of executing, for he understood the direction plainly and 
simply in its proper sense, as a carpenter ought to understand it.

An ordinary Carpenter might have hesitated at undertaking it, or 
bungled in the execution. But Glover is not an ordinary Carpenter. He 
says of himself that he should have been a capital singer, only the 
pity is, that he has no voice. Whether he had ever a similar 
persuasion of his own essential but unproducible talents for sculpture 
or painting I know not:—but if ever genius and originality were 
triumphantly displayed in the first effort of an untaught artist, it 
was on this occasion. Perhaps I am wrong in calling him untaught;—for 
there is a supernatural or divine teaching;—and it will appear 
presently that if there be any truth in heathen philosophy, or in that 
of the Roman Catholicks (which is very much the same in many respects) 
some such assistance may be suspected in this case.

With or without such assistance, but certainly _con amore_, and with 
the aid of his own genius, if of no other, Glover went to work: ere 
long shouts of admiration were heard one evening in the kitchen, so 
loud and of such long continuance that enquiry was made from the 
parlour into the cause, and the reply was that Mrs. L.'s man was 
brought home. Out we went, father, mother and daughters, (yourself 
among them,—for you cannot have forgotten that memorable hour), My 
Lady and the Venerabilis,—and Mrs. L. herself, as the person more 
immediately concerned. Seldom as it happens that any artist can embody 
with perfect success the conceptions of another, in this instance the 
difficult and delicate task had been perfectly accomplished. But I 
must describe the Man,—calling him by that name at present, the power, 
_æon_ or intelligence which had incorporated itself with that ligneous 
resemblance of humanity not having at that time been suspected.

Yet methinks more properly might he have been called youth than man, 
the form and stature being juvenile. The limbs and body were slender, 
though not so as to convey any appearance of feebleness, it was rather 
that degree of slenderness which in elegant and refined society is 
deemed essential to grace. The countenance at once denoted strength 
and health and hilarity, and the incomparable carpenter had given it 
an expression of threatful and alert determination, suited to the 
station for which he was designed and the weapon which he bore. The 
shape of the face was rather round than oval, resembling methinks the 
broad harvest moon; the eyes were of the deepest black, the eyebrows 
black also; and there was a blackness about the nose and lips, such as 
might be imagined in the face of Hercules, while he was in the act of 
lifting and strangling the yet unsubdued and struggling Antæus. On his 
head was a little hat, low in the crown and narrow in the brim. His 
dress was a sleeved jacket without skirts,—our ancestors would have 
called it a gipion, _jubon_ it would be rendered if ever this 
description were translated into Spanish, _gibão_ in Portuguese, 
_jupon_ or _gippon_ in old French. It was fastened from the neck 
downward with eight white buttons, two and two, and between them was a 
broad white stripe, the colour of the gipion being brown: whether the 
strype was to represent silver lace, or a white facing like that of 
the naval uniform, is doubtful and of little consequence. The lower 
part of his dress represented innominables and hose in one, of the 
same colour as the gipion. And he carried a fowling-piece in his hand.

Great was the satisfaction which we all expressed at beholding so 
admirable a man; great were the applauses which we bestowed upon the 
workman with one consent; and great was the complacency with which 
Glover himself regarded the work of his own hands. He thought, he 
said, this would please us. Please us indeed it did, and so well did 
it answer that after short trial Mrs. L. thinking that a second image 
would render the whole garden secure, and moreover that it was not 
good for her Man to be alone, directed Glover to make a woman also. 
The woman accordingly was made. Flesh of his flesh and bone of his 
bone, she could not be, the Man himself not being made of such 
materials; but she was wood of his wood and plank of his plank,—which 
was coming as nearly as possible to it, made of the same tree and 
fashioned by the same hand.

The woman was in all respects a goodly mate for the man, except that 
she seemed to be a few years older; she was rather below the mean 
stature, in that respect resembling the Venus de Medicis; slender 
waisted yet not looking as if she were tight-laced, nor so thin as to 
denote ill health. Her dress was a gown of homely brown, up to the 
neck. The artist had employed his brightest colours upon her face, 
even the eyes and nose partook of that brilliant tint which is 
sometimes called the roseate hue of health or exercise, sometimes the 
purple light of love. The whites of her eyes were large. She also was 
represented in a hat, but higher in the crown and broader in the rim 
than the man's, and where his brim was turned up, her's had a downward 
inclination giving a feminine character to that part of her dress.

She was placed in the garden; greatly as we admired both pieces of 
workmanship, we considered them merely as what they seemed to be; they 
went by the names of Mrs. L.'s Man and Woman; and even when you 
departed for the south they were still known only by that vague and 
most unworthy designation. Some startling circumstances after awhile 
excited a more particular attention to them. Several of the family 
declared they had been frightened by them; and K. one evening, came in 
saying that Aunt L.'s woman had _given her_ a jump. Even this did not 
awaken any suspicion of their supernatural powers as it ought to have 
done, till on a winter's night, one of the maids hearing a knock at 
the back door opened it; and started back when she saw that it was the 
woman with a letter in her hand! This is as certain as that Nosso 
Senhor dos Passes knocked at the door of S. Roque's convent in Lisbon 
and was not taken in,—to the infinite regret of the monks when they 
learnt that he had gone afterwards to the Graça Convent and been 
admitted there. It is as certain that I have seen men, women and 
children of all ranks kissing the foot of the said Image in the 
Church, and half Lisbon following his procession in the streets. It is 
as certain as all the miracles in the Fasti, the Metamorphoses, and 
the Acta Sanctorum.

Many remarkable things were now called to mind both of the man and 
woman;—how on one occasion they had made Miss C.'s maid miscarry 
of—half a message; and how at another time when Isaac was bringing a 
basket from Mr. C.'s, he was frightened into his wits by them. But on 
Sunday evening last the most extraordinary display of wonderful power 
occurred, for in the evening the woman instead of being in her place 
among the pease, appeared standing erect on the top of Mr. Fisher's 
haymow in the forge field, and there on the following morning she was 
seen by all Keswick, who are witnesses of the fact.

You may well suppose that I now began to examine into the mystery, and 
manifold were the mysteries which I discovered, and many the analogies 
in their formation of which the maker could never by possibility have 
heard; and many the points of divine philosophy and theurgic science 
which they illustrated. In the first place two Swedenborgian 
correspondencies flashed upon me in the material whereof they were 
constructed. They were intended to guard the Garden. There is a 
proverb which says, set a thief to catch a thief, and therefore it is 
that they were _fir_ statues. Take it in English and the 
correspondence is equally striking; they were made of _deal_, because 
they were to do a _deal_ of good. The dark aspect of the male figure 
also was explained; for being stationed there contra _fures_, it was 
proper that he should have a furious countenance. Secondly, there is 
something wonderful in their formation:—they are bifronted, not merely 
bifaced like Janus, but bifronted from top to toe. Let the thief be as 
cunning as he may he cannot get behind them.—They have no backs, and 
were they disposed to be indolent and sit at their posts it would be 
impossible. They can appear at the kitchen door, or on the haymow, 
they can give the children and even the grown persons of the family a 
jump, but to sit is beyond their power however miraculous it may be; 
for impossibilities cannot be effected even by miracle, and as it is 
impossible to see without eyes, or to walk without legs,—or for a ship 
to float without a bottom, so is it for a person in the same 
predicament as such a ship—to sit.

Yet farther mysteries; both hands of these marvellous statues are 
right hands and both are left hands, they are at once ambidexter and 
ambisinister. It was said by Dryden of old Jacob Tonson that he had 
two left legs: but these marvellous statues have two left legs and two 
right legs each, and yet but four legs between them, that is to say 
but two a-piece. In the whole course of my reading I have found no 
account of any statues so wonderful as these. For though the Roman 
Janus was bifronted, and my old acquaintance Yamen had in like manner 
a double face, and many of the Hindoo and other Oriental Deities have 
their necks set round with heads, and their elbows with arms, yet it 
is certain that all these Gods have backs, and sides to them also. In 
this point no similitude can be found for our Images. They may be 
likened to the sea as being bottomless,—but as being without a back 
and in the mystery of having both hands and legs at once right and 
left they are unequalled; none but themselves can be their parallel.

Now my daughter I appeal to you and to all other reasonable persons,—I 
put the question to your own plain sense,—is it anyways likely that 
statues so wonderful, so inexpressibly mysterious in their properties 
should be the mere work of a Keswick carpenter, though aided as he was 
by Mrs. L.'s directions? Is it not certain that neither he, nor Mrs. 
L., had the slightest glimpse, the remotest thought of any such 
properties,—she when she designed, he when he executed the marvellous 
productions? Is it possible that they should? Would it not be 
preposterous to suppose it?

This supposition therefore being proved to be absurd, which in 
mathematics is equal to a demonstration that the contrary must be 
true, it remains to enquire into the real origin of their stupendous 
qualities. Both the ancient Heathens and the Romanists teach that 
certain Images of the Gods or of the Saints have been made without the 
aid of human hands, and that they have appeared no one knew whence or 
how. The Greeks called such images Diopeteis, as having fallen from 
the sky, and I could enumerate were it needful sundry Catholic Images 
which are at this day venerated as being either of angelic workmanship 
or celestial origin. We cannot however have recourse to this solution 
in the present case; for Glover is so veracious a man that if he had 
found these figures in his workshop without knowing how they came 
there,—or if he had seen them grow into shape while he was looking 
on,—he would certainly not have concealed a fact so extraordinary. All 
Keswick would have known it. It must have become as notorious as 
Prince Hohenloe's miracles.

There remains then another hypothesis, which is also common to the 
ancient Pagans and the Romanists;—that some superior powers finding a 
congruity in the Images have been pleased to communicate to them a 
portion of their influence, and even of their presence, and so if I 
may be allowed the word, have actually become _inligneate_ in them. 
Were my old acquaintance, Thomas Taylor, here, who entirely believes 
this, he would at once determine which of his Heathen Deities have 
thus manifested their existence. Who indeed that looks at the Youth 
but must be reminded of Apollo? Said I that his face resembled in its 
rotundity the Moon? the Sun would have been the fitter similitude,—the 
sun shorn of its beams;—Phœbus,—such as he appeared when in the 
service of Admetus. And for his female companion, her beauty and the 
admiration which it excites in all beholders, identify her with no 
less certainty for Venus. We have named them therefore the Apollo de 
L., and the Venus de Glover; in justice to both artists; and in 
farther honour of them and of the Images themselves have composed the 
following inscription:

  No works of Phidias we; but Mrs. L.
    Designed, and we were made by Joseph Glover.
  Apollo, I, and yonder Venus stands,
    Behold her, and you cannot chuse but love her.
  If antient sculptors could behold us here
    How would they pine with envy and abhorrence!
  For even as I surpass their Belvedere
    So much doth she excel the pride of Florence.




EPILUDE OF MOTTOES.


Careless! bring your apprehension along with you.

CONGREVE.


If I have written a sentence, or a word, that can bear a captious or 
unreasonable construction, I earnestly intreat a more lenient 
interpretation. When a man feels acutely, he may perhaps speak at 
times more pointedly than he ought; yet, in the present instance, I am 
conscious of no sentiment which I could wish to alter.

BISHOP JEBB.


  _νὴ τὸν Ποσειδῶ, καὶ λέγει γ᾽, ἅπερ λέγει,
   δίκαια πάντα, κοὐδὲν αὐτῶν ψεύδεται._

ARISTOPHANES.


                              Will you be true?

TRO. Who, I? alas, it is my vice, my fault.
     While others fish with craft for great opinion,
     I with great truth catch mere simplicity.
     Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
     With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
     Fear not my truth; the moral of my wit
     Is—‘plain and true;’ there's all the reach of it.

SHAKESPEARE.


  —_come augel che pria s'avventa e teme
  Stassi fra i rami paventoso e solo
  Mirando questo ed or quell' altro colle;
  Cosi mi levo e mi ritengo insieme,
  L'ale aguzzando al mio dubbioso volo._

GIUSTO DE' CONTI.


Whosoever be reader hereof maie take it by reason for a riche and a 
newe labour; and speciallie princes and governours of the common 
wealth, and ministers of justice, with other. Also the common people 
eche of theim maie fynd the labour conveniente to their estate. And 
herein is conteigned certaine right highe and profounde sentences, and 
holsome counsaylles, and mervaillous devyses agaynste the encumbraunce 
of fortune; and ryght swete consolacions for theim that are 
overthrowen by fortune. Finally it is good to them that digeste it, 
and thanke God that hath given such grace to the Auctour in gevyng us 
example of vertuous livyng, with hye and salutary doctrynes, and 
marvailous instructions of perfectness.—A ryght precious meale is the 
sentences of this boke; but fynally the sauce of the saied swete style 
moveth the appetyte. Many bookes there be of substanciall meates, but 
they bee so rude and so unsavery, and the style of so small grace, 
that the first morcell is lothsome and noyfull; and of suche bookes 
foloweth to lye hole and sounde in lybraries; but I trust this will 
not. Of trouth great prayse is due to the auctour of his travayle.

LORD BERNERS.


  The current that with gentle murmur glides,
  Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage;
  But when his fair course is not hindered,
  He makes sweet music with the enamel'd stones,
  Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
  He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
  And so by many winding nooks he strays,
  With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
  Then let me go, and hinder not my course;
  I'll be as patient as a gentle stream,
  And make a pastime of each weary step,
  Till the last step have brought me to my rest.

SHAKESPEARE.


Sith you have long time drawn the weeds of my wit and fed yourselves 
with the cockle of my conceits, I have at last made you gleaners of my 
harvest, and partakers of my experience.—Here shall you find the style 
varying according to the matter, suitable to the style, and all of 
these aimed to profit. If the title make you suspect, compare it with 
the matter, it will answer you; if the matter, apply it with the 
censures of the learned, they will countenance the same; of the 
handling I repent me not, for I had rather you should condemn me for 
default in rhetorick, than commend my style and lament my judgement. 
Thus resolved both of the matter, and satisfied in my method, I leave 
the whole to your judgements; which, if they be not depraved with 
envy, will be bettered in knowledge, and if not carried away with 
opinion, will receive much profit.

THOMAS LODGE.


This good Wine I present, needs no Ivy-bush. They that taste thereof 
shall feel the fruit to their best content, and better understanding. 
The learned shall meet with matter to refresh their memories; the 
younger students, a directory to fashion their discourse; the weakest 
capacity, matter of wit, worth and admiration.

           T. L. D. M. P's. Epistle Prefatory to the Learned Summarie
           upon the famous Poem of William of Salust, Lord of BARTAS.


  This fellow pecks up wit, as pigeon's pease,
  And utters it again when Jove doth please;
  He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares.

LOVE'S LABOUR LOST.


  Imagination thro' the trick
  Of Doctors, often makes us sick;
  And why, let any sophist tell,
  May it not likewise make us well!

CHURCHILL.


                  His mind fastens
  On twenty several objects, which confound
  Deep sense with folly.

WEBSTER.


  It is a crown unto a gentle breast,
    To impart the pleasure of his flowing mind,
  (Whose sprightly motion never taketh rest)
    To one whose bosom he doth open find.

THOMAS SCOTT.


              —Be prepared to hear:
  And since you know you cannot see yourself
  So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
  Will modestly discover to yourself
  That of yourself which you yet know not of.

SHAKESPEARE.


And whereas in my expression I am very plain and downright, and in my 
teaching part seem to tautologize, it should be considered, (and 
whoever has been a teacher will remember) that the learners must be 
plainly dealt with, and must have several times renewed unto them the 
same thing.—Therefore I have chosen so to do in several places, 
because I had rather (in such cases) speak three words too many, than 
one syllable too few.

THOMAS MACE.


  _Lire et repasser souvent
     Sur Athenes et sur Rome,
   C'est dequoy faire un Sçavant,
     Mais, non pas un habile homme._

  _Meditez incessamment,
     Devorez livre apres livre,
   D'est en vivant seulement
     Que vous apprendrez à vivre._

  _Avant qu'en sçavoir les loix,
     La clarté nous est ravie:
   Il faudroit vivre deux fois
     Pour bien conduire sa vie._

DE CHARLEVAL.


  If we could hit on't, gallants, there are due
  Certain respects from writers, and from you.

PROLOGUE TO THE ADVENTURES OF FIVE HOURS.


  —Here you have a piece so subtly writ
  Men must have wit themselves to find the wit.

EPILOGUE TO THE ADVENTURES OF FIVE HOURS.


  All puddings have two ends, and most short sayings
  Two handles to their meaning.

LORD DIGBY.


Reader, Now I send thee like a Bee to gather honey out of flowers and 
weeds; every garden is furnished with either, and so is ours. Read and 
meditate; thy profit shall be little in any book, unless thou read 
alone, and unless thou read all and record after.

HENRY SMITH.


The most famous of the Pyramids was that of Hermes.—Through each door 
of this Pyramid was an entrance into seven apartments, called by the 
names of the Planets. In each of them was a golden Statue. The biggest 
was in the apartment of Osiris, or the Sun. It had a book upon its 
forehead, and its hand upon its mouth. Upon the outside of the Book 
was written this inscription. _I must be read in a profound silence._

TRAVELS OF CYRUS.


—_Facio ego ut solent, qui quanto plus aliquem mirantur et explicare 
volunt quod sentiunt, eo minus id assequuntur quod volunt, ut quamquam 
magnum aliquid animo concipiunt, verba tamen desint, et moliri potius 
quàm dicere potuisse videantur._

HERMOLAUS BARBARUS JO. PICO MIRANDULÆ.


_Nihil mihi potest esse beatius quam scire; discendum verò ut sciamus. 
Ego quidem sapientiæ ambitum, tanquam animi nostri ærarium quoddam 
semper judicavi, id quod communia commentationum nostrarum vectigalia 
inferenda censeo, sed proba; unde sibi suum quisque in usum sumat sine 
invidia atque simultate._

J. C. SCALIGER.


  _Feliz yerba es la yedra, si se enrama
   A un muro altivo, á quien no alcanza el corte
   De la envidia; puer queda con su altura,
   El mas vistoso, y ella mas segura._

BALBUENA, EL BERNARDO.


  —_en poco tiempo te he dicho
  lo que passò en mucho tiempo._

CALDERON, EL MAESTRO DE DANZAR.


  I'll range the plenteous intellectual field,
  And gather every thought of sovereign power
  To chase the moral maladies of man;
  Thoughts which may bear transplanting to the skies,
  Nor wholly wither there where Seraphs sing,
  Refined, exalted,—not annull'd—in heaven.

YOUNG.


  Let every man enjoy his whim;
  What's he to me, or I to him.

CHURCHILL.


And whereas I may seem too smart or satyrical in some particular 
places, I do not at all repent me, as thinking what is said to such 
ill-deserving persons much too little.

THOMAS MACE.


             —Play the fool with wits,
  'Gainst fools be guarded, 'tis a certain rule
  Wits are safe things; there's danger in a fool.

CHURCHILL.


  And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
  Bearing their own misfortune on the back
  Of such as have before endured the like.

RICHARD II.


  Our life indeed has bitterness enough
    To change a loving nature into gall:
  Experience sews coarse patches on the stuff
    Whose texture was originally all
  Smooth as the rose-leaf's, and whose hues were bright
    As are the colours of the weeping cloud
  When the sun smiles upon its tears.

MRS. LENOX CONYNGHAM.


  Thus much we know, eternal bliss and pure,
  By God's unfailing promise, is secure
  To them who their appointed lot endure
      Meekly, striving to fulfil,
    In humble hopefulness, God's will.

MRS. LENOX CONYNGHAM.


  I thowt how hard it is to denye
  A ladye's preyer, wych after the entent
  Of the poete is a myghty comaundement;
  Wherfore me thoht as in this caas
  That my wyt war lakkyd bettyr it was
  That my wyl, and therfore to do
  My ladyes preyer I assentyd to.

OSBERN BOKENAM.


  _Al peco de los años
   lo eminente se rinde;
   que à lo facil del tiempo
   no ay conquista dificil._

CALDERON.


                 We only meet on earth
  That we may know how sad it is to part:
  And sad indeed it were, if in the heart
  There were no store reserved against a dearth,
  No calm Elysium for departed Mirth,
  Haunted by gentle shadows of past pleasure,
  Where the sweet folly, the light-footed measure,
  And graver trifles of the shining hearth
  Live in their own dear image.

HARTLEY COLERIDGE.


  Sweet are the thoughts that smother from conceit:
  For when I come and sit me down to rest,
  My chair presents a throne of majesty;
  And when I set my bonnet on my head,
  Methinks I fit my forehead for a crown;
  And when I take a truncheon in my fist,
  A sceptre then comes tumbling in my thoughts.

ROBERT GREENE.


_Quandquam verò hoc mihi non polliceri possum, me ubique veritatem 
quam sectatus sum, assecutum esse; sed potius eo fine ea proposui, ut 
et alios ad veritatis investigationem invitarem: tamen ut rectè 
Galenus habet, τολμητέον τε καὶ ξητητεὸν τὸ ἀληθὲς, εἰ γὰρ καὶ μὴ 
τύχομεν αὐτοῦ πάντως, δήπου πλησιέστερον ἢ νῦν ἐσμὲν ἀφιζόμεθα. 
Audendum est, et veritas investiganda, quam etiamsi non assequamur, 
omnino tamen propius quam nunc sumus, ad eam perveniemus. Quo verò ego 
animo ad scribendum accessi, eo ut alii ad legendum accedant, opto._

SENNERTUS.


I do confess the imperfect performance. Yet I must take the boldness 
to say, I have not miscarried in the whole; for the mechanical part of 
it is regular. That I may say with as little vanity, as a builder may 
say he has built a house according to the model laid down before him, 
or a gardener that he has set his flowers in a knot of such or such a 
figure.

CONGREVE.


As wheresoever these leaves fall, the root is in my heart, so shall 
they have ever true impressions thereof. Thus much information is in 
very leaves, that they can tell what the Tree is; and these can tell 
you I am a friend and an honest man.

DONNE.


  _On ne recognoistroit les monts, sans les valees;
   Et les tailles encor artistement meslees
   En œuvre mosaÿque, ont, pour plus grand beauté,
   Divers prix, divers teint, diverse quantité.
   Dieu veuille qu'en mes chants la plus insigne tache
   Semble le moucheron qu'une pucelle attache
   A sa face neigeuse, et que bien peu d'erreurs
   Donnent lustre aux beaux traicts de mes hautes fureurs._

DU BARTAS, LA MAGNIFICENCE.


  Hills were not seen but for the vales betwixt;
  The deep indentings artificial mixt
  Amid mosaicks, for mere ornament,
  Have prizes, sizes and dyes different.
  And, Oh, God grant, the greatest spot you spy
  In all my frame, may be but as the fly,
  Which on her ruff, (whiter than whitest snows)
  To whiten white, the fairest virgin sows,
  (Or like the velvet on her brow, or like
  The dunker mole on Venus' dainty cheek,)
  And that a few faults may but lustre bring
  To my high furies where I sweetest sing.

SYLVESTER.


Be as capricious and sick-brained as ignorance and malice can make 
thee, here thou art rectified; or be as healthful as the inward calm 
of an honest heart, learning, and temper can state thy disposition, 
yet this book may be thy fortunate concernment and companion.

SHIRLEY.


  Humble and meek befitteth men of years,
  Behold my cell, built in a silent shade,
  Holding content for poverty and peace,
  And in my lodge is fealty and faith,
  Labour and love united in one league.
  I want not, for my mind affordeth wealth,
  I know not envy, for I climb not high;
  Thus do I live, and thus I mean to die.

ROBERT GREENE.


The events of to-day make us look forward to what will happen 
to-morrow; those of yesterday carry our views into another world.

DANBY.


Mine earnest intent is as much to profit as to please, _non tam ut 
populo placerem, quam ut populum juvarem:_ and these my writings shall 
take, I hope like gilded pills, which are so composed as well to tempt 
the appetite and deceive the palate, as to help and medicinally work 
upon the whole body. My lines shall not only recreate, but rectify the 
mind.

BURTON.


         —Sit thou a patient looker on;
  Judge not the play, before the play is done,
  Her plot has many changes; every day
  Speaks a new scene, the last act crowns the play.

QUARLES.


        Lord, if thy gracious bounty please to fill
        The floor of my desires, and teach me skill
  To dress and chuse the corn, take those the chaff that will.

QUARLES.


_Je n'ay pas plus faict mon livre, que mon livre m'a faict,—livre 
consubstantiel à son autheur._

MONTAIGNE.


—_se le parole che usa lo scrittore portan seco un poco, non dirà di 
difficultà, ma d'acutezza recondita, et non cosi nota, come quelle che 
si dicono parlando ordinariamente, danno una certa maggior auttorità 
alla scrittura, et fanno che il lettore va piu ritenuto, et sopra di 
se, et meglio considera, et si diletta dell' ingegno et dottrina di 
chi scrive; et col buon giudicio affaticandosi un poco gusta quel 
piacere, che s'ha nel conseguir le cose difficili. Et se l'ignorantia 
di chi legge è tanta, che non posse superar quella difficultà, non è 
la colpa dello scrittore._

CASTIGLIONE, IL CORTIGIANO.


_Certo estava eu que o Doutor sabia de tudo o que disse, nao só os 
termos e fundamentos, mas acuda o mas difficultoza, e substancial;—mas 
o praticar dellas de modo, que eu as entendesse, he graça de seu 
saber, e naõ sufficiencia do meu ingenho._

FRANCISCO RODRIGUES LOBO.


Sir, Our greatest business is more in our power than the least, and we 
may be surer to meet in Heaven than in any place upon earth; and 
whilst we are distant here, we may meet as often as we list in God's 
presence, by soliciting in our prayers for one another.

DONNE.


  _Or ti riman, Lettor, sovra 'l tuo banco,
     Dietro pensando a ciò che si preliba,
     S'esser vuoi lieto assai prima che stanco.
   Messo t'ho innanzi; omai per te li ciba;
     Che a se ritorce tutta la mia cura
     Quella materia ond'io son fatto scriba._

DANTE.


I have been often told that nobody now would read any thing that was 
plain and true;—that was accounted dull work, except one mixed 
something of the sublime, prodigious, monstrous, or incredible; and 
then they would read the one for the sake of the other.—So rather than 
not be read, I have put in a proportionable little of the monstrous. 
If any thing be found fault with, it is possible I may explain and 
add.

HUTCHINSON.


  Who seeketh in thee for profit and gain
  Of excellent matter soon shall attain.

T. H.


Pay me like for like; give me good thoughts for great studies; and at 
leastwise shew me this courtly courtesy to afford me good words, which 
cost you nothing, for serious thoughts hatched up with much 
consideration. Thus commending my deserts to the learned, and 
committing my labour to the instruction of the ignorant, I bid you all 
heartily farewell.

LAZARUS PIOT.


Even at this time, when I humbly thank God, I ask and have his comfort 
of sadder meditations, I do not condemn in myself that I have given my 
wit such evaporations as these.

DONNE.




L'ENVOY.


Gentle Reader—for if thou art fond of such works as these, thou are 
like to be the Gentleman and the Scholar—I take upon me to advertise 
thee that the Printer of THE DOCTOR, &C. is William Nicol of the 
Shakspeare Press—the long tried Friend of the lamented Southey, and of 
their mutual Friend, the late Grosvenor Bedford, of Her Majesty's 
Exchequer—

  _Felices animæ, et quales neque candidiores
   Terra tulit!_

The Sonnet following, Gentle Reader, I do thee to wit, is the 
composition of the above kind hearted and benevolent William Nicol—and 
I wish it to be printed, because on Grosvenor Bedford's last short 
visit to Southey in 1836, he expressed himself much pleased with it. 
May be, if thou art fond of the gentle craft, it may please thee too, 
and so I wish thee heartily farewell!

  Who wrote THE DOCTOR? Who's the scribe unknown?—
      Time may discover, when the grave has closed
      Its earthy jaws o'er us, who now are posed
      To father that which greatest pen might own;
  Learning diffuse, quaint humour, lively wit,
      Satire severe and bold, or covert, sly,
      Turning within itself the mental eye
      To fancies strange that round its orbit flit,
  Unknown to others and by self scarce seen;
      Teaching, in sweetest English, England's plan,—
      When England was herself, her laurels green—
  Honour to God and charity to man:
      Who wrote the Doctor? her best Son, I ween,
      Whether his works, or his fair life you scan.


THE EDITOR.




W. NICOL, 60, PALL MALL.




