CHAPTER CCXVIII.

THE MUNDANE SYSTEM AS COMMONLY HELD IN D. OLIVA'S AGE.—MODERN 
OBJECTIONS TO A PLURALITY OF WORLDS BY THE REV. JAMES MILLER.

  _Un cerchio immaginato ci bisogna,
     A voler ben la spera contemplare;
   Cosi chi intender questa storia agogna
     Conviensi altro per altro immaginare;
   Perchè qui non si canta, e finge, e sogna;
     Venuto è il tempo da filosofare._

PULCI.


One of Doña Oliva's treatises is upon the _Compostura del Mundo_, 
which may best be interpreted the Mundane System; herein she laid no 
claim to the merit of discovery, only to that of briefly explaining 
what had been treated of by many before her. The mundane system she 
illustrates by comparing it to a large ostrich's egg, with three 
whites and eleven shells, our earth being the yolk. The water which 
according to this theory surrounded the globe she likened to the first 
or innermost _albumen_, the second and more extensive was the air; the 
third and much the largest consisted of fire. The eleven shells, were 
so many leaves one inclosing the other, circle within circle, like a 
nest of boxes. The first of these was the first heaven wherein the 
Moon hath her appointed place, the second that of the planet Mercury, 
the third that of Venus; the fourth was the circle of the Sun; Mars, 
Jupiter and Saturn moved in the fifth, sixth and seventh; the eighth 
was the starry sky; the ninth the chrystalline; the tenth the _primum 
mobile_, which imparted motion to all; and the eleventh was the 
_immobile_, or empyreum, surrounding all, containing all, and bounding 
all; for beyond this there was no created thing, either good or evil.

A living writer of no ordinary powers agrees in this conclusion with 
the old philosophers whom Doña Oliva followed; and in declaring his 
opinion he treats the men of science with as much contempt as they 
bestow upon their unscientific predecessors in astronomy.

Reader if thou art capable of receiving pleasure from such 
speculations, (and if thou art not, thou art little better than an 
Oran-Otang) send for a little book entitled the Progress of the Human 
Mind, its objects, conditions and issue: with the relation which the 
Progress of Religion bears to the general growth of mind; by the Rev. 
James Miller. Send also for the “Sibyl's Leaves, or the Fancies, 
Sentiments and Opinions of Silvanus, miscellaneous, moral and 
religious,” by the same author, the former published in 1823, the 
latter in 1829. Very probably you may never have heard of either: but 
if you are a buyer of books, I say unto you, buy them both.

“Infinity,” says this very able and original thinker, “is the 
retirement in which perfect love and wisdom only dwell with God.

“In Infinity and Eternity the sceptic sees an abyss in which all is 
lost, I see in them the residence of Almighty Power, in which my 
reason and my wishes find equally a firm support.—Here holding by the 
pillars of Heaven, I exist—I stand fast.

“Surround our material system with a void, and mind itself becoming 
blind and impotent in attempting to travel through it, will return to 
our little lights, like the dove which found no rest for the sole of 
her foot. But when I find Infinity filled with light and life and 
love, I will come back to you with my olive branch: follow me, or 
farewell! you shall shut me up in your cabins no more.”

“In stretching our view through the wide expanse which surrounds us, 
we perceive a system of bodies receding behind one another, till they 
are lost in immeasureable distance. This region beyond though to us 
dark and unexplored, from the impossibility of a limit, yet gives us 
its infinity as the most unquestionable of all principles. But though 
the actual extent to which this infinite region is occupied by the 
bodies of which the universe is composed, is far beyond our measure 
and our view, and though there be nothing without to compel us 
anywhere to stop in enlarging its bounds, Nature herself gives us 
other principles not less certain, which prove that she must have 
limits, and that it is impossible her frame can fill the abyss which 
surrounds her. Her different parts have each their fixed place, their 
stated distance. You may as well measure infinity by mile-stones as 
fill it with stars. To remove any one from an infinite distance from 
another, you must in fixing their place, set limits to the infinity 
you assume. You can advance from unity as far as you please, but there 
is no actual number at an infinite distance from it. You may in the 
same manner, add world to world as long as you please, only because no 
number of them can fill infinity, or approach nearer to fill it. We 
have the doctrine of Nature's abhorrence of a _vacuum_; it is from a 
_plenum_ like this she shrinks, as from a region in which all her 
substance would be dissipated into nothing. Her frame is composed of 
parts which have each their certain proportion and relation. It 
subsists by mutual attractions and repulsions, lessening and 
increasing with distance; by a circulation which, actually passing 
through, every part rejects the idea of a space which it could never 
pervade. Infinity cannot revolve; the circulation of Nature cannot 
pervade infinity. The globe we inhabit, and all its kindred planets, 
revolve in orbits which embrace a common power in the centre which 
animates and regulates their motions, and on the influence of which 
their internal energies evidently depend. That we may not be lost in 
looking for it in the boundless regions without, our great physical 
power is all within, in the bosom of our own circle; and the same 
facts which prove the greatness of this power to uphold, to penetrate, 
to enliven at such a distance, shew in what manner it might at last 
become weak,—become nothing. Whatever relations we may have to bodies 
without, or whatever they may have to one another, their influence is 
all directed to particular points,—to given distances. Material Nature 
has no substance, can make no effort, capable of pervading infinity. 
The light itself of all her powers the most expansive, in diffusing 
itself through her own frame, shews most of all her incapacity to 
occupy the region beyond, in which (as the necessary result of its own 
effort) it soon sinks, feeble and faint, where all its motion is but 
as rest, in an extent to which the utmost possible magnitude of Nature 
is but a point.”

The reader will now be prepared for the remarks of this free thinker 
upon the Plurality of Worlds. Observe I call him free thinker not in 
disparagement, but in honour; he belongs to that service in which 
alone is perfect freedom.

“Perceiving,” he says, “as it is easy to do, the imperfection of our 
present system, instead of contemplating the immense prospect opened 
to our view in the progress of man, in the powers and the means he 
possesses, the philosopher sees through his telescope worlds and 
scales of being to his liking. By means of these, without the least 
reference to the Bible, or the human heart, Pope, the pretty talking 
parrot of Bolingbroke, with the assistance of his pampered goose, 
finds it easy to justify the ways of God to man. From worlds he never 
saw, he proves ours is as it should be.”

“To form the children of God for himself, to raise them to a capacity 
to converse with him, to enjoy all his love, this grand scenery is not 
unnecessary,—not extravagant. A smaller exhibition would not have 
demonstrated his wisdom and power. You would make an orrery serve 
perhaps! By a plurality of Gods, error degraded the Supreme Being in 
early ages; by a plurality of worlds it would now degrade his 
children, deprive them of their inheritance.”

“What are they doing in these planets? Peeping at us through 
telescopes? We may be their Venus or Jupiter. They are perhaps praying 
to us, sending up clouds of incense to regale our nostrils. Hear them, 
far-seeing Herschel! gauger of stars. I will pray to One only, who is 
above them all; and if your worlds come between me and Him, I will 
kick them out of my way. In banishing your new ones, I put more into 
the old than is worth them all put together.”

“These expanding heavens, the residence of so many luminous bodies of 
immeasurable distance and magnitude, and which the philosopher thinks 
must be a desert if devoted to man, at present possessing but so small 
a portion of his own globe, shall yet be too little for him,—the womb 
only in which the infant was inclosed, incapable of containing the 
mature birth.”

“We shall yet explore all these celestial bodies more perfectly than 
we have hitherto done our own globe, analyse them better than the 
substances we can shut up in our retorts, count their number, tell 
their measure.”

“As nature grows, mind grows. It grows to God, and in union with him 
shall fill, possess all.”

“Our rank among worlds is indeed insignificant if we are to receive it 
from the magnitude of our globe compared with others, compared with 
space. Put Herschel with his telescope on Saturn, he would scarcely 
think us worthy of the name of even a German prince. We may well be 
the sport of Jupiter, the little spot round which Mars and Venus 
coquette with one another. Little as it is however,—pepper-corn, clod 
of clay as it is, with its solitary satellite, and all its spots and 
vapours, I prefer it to them all. I am glad I was born in it, I love 
its men, and its women, and its laws. It's people shall be my people; 
it's God shall be my God. Here I am content to lodge and here to be 
buried. What Abanas and Pharphars may flow in these planets I know 
not: there is Jordan, here is the river of life. From this world I 
shall take possession of all these; while those, who in quest of 
strange worlds have forsaken God, shall be desolate.”

“This globe is large enough to contain man; man will yet grow large 
enough to fill Heaven.”

“Fear not, there is no empty space in the universe, none in eternity: 
nothing lost. God possesses all, and there is room for nothing but the 
objects of his affections.”




