CHAPTER CCX.

A QUOTATION FROM BISHOP BERKELEY, AND A HIT AT THE SMALL CRITICS.

_Plusieurs blameront l'entassement de passages que l'on vient de voir; 
j'ai prévu leurs dédains, leurs dégoûts, et leurs censures 
magistrales; et n'ai pas voulu y avoir égard._

BAYLE.


Here I shall inform the small critic, what it is, “a thousand pounds 
to one penny,” as the nursery song says, or as the newspaper reporters 
of the Ring have it, Lombard Street to a China Orange,—no small critic 
already knows, whether he be diurnal, hebdomadal, monthly or 
trimestral,—that a notion of progressive Life is mentioned in Bishop 
Berkeley's Minute Philosopher, not as derived from any old system of 
philosophy or religion, but as the original speculation of one who 
belonged to a club of Freethinkers. Another member of that worshipful 
society explains the system of his acquaintance, thus:

“He made a threefold partition of the human species into Birds, Beasts 
and Fishes, being of opinion that the Road of Life lies upwards in a 
perpetual ascent, through the scale of Being: in such sort, that the 
souls of insects after death make their second appearance in the shape 
of perfect animals, Birds, Beasts or Fishes; which upon their death 
are preferred into human bodies, and in the next stage into Beings of 
a higher and more perfect kind. This man we considered at first as a 
sort of heretic, because his scheme seemed not to consist with our 
fundamental tenet, the Mortality of the Soul: but he justified the 
notion to be innocent, inasmuch as it included nothing of reward or 
punishment, and was not proved by any argument which supposed, or 
implied either incorporeal spirit, or Providence, being only inferred, 
by way of analogy, from what he had observed in human affairs, the 
Court, the Church, and the Army, wherein the tendency is always 
upwards, from lower posts to higher. According to this system, the 
Fishes are those men who swim in pleasure, such as _petits maitres_, 
_bons vivans_, and honest fellows. The Beasts are dry, drudging, 
covetous, rapacious folk, and all those addicted to care and business 
like oxen, and other dry land animals, which spend their lives in 
labour and fatigue. The Birds are airy, notional men, Enthusiasts, 
Projectors, Philosophers, and such like; in each species every 
individual retaining a tincture of his former state, which constitutes 
what is called genius.”

The quiet reader who sometimes lifts his eyes from the page (and 
closes them perhaps) to meditate upon what he has been reading, will 
perhaps ask himself wherefore I consider it to be as certain that no 
small critic should have read the Minute Philosopher, as that children 
can not be drowned while “sliding on dry ground?”—My reason for so 
thinking is, that small critics never read any thing so good. Like 
town ducks they dabble in the gutter, but never purify themselves in 
clear streams, nor take to the deep waters.




CHAPTER CCXI.

SOMETHING IN HONOUR OF BISHOP WATSON.—CUDWORTH.—JACKSON OF OXFORD AND 
NEWCASTLE.—A BAXTERIAN SCRUPLE.

_S'il y a des lecteurs qui se soucient peu de cela, on les prie de se 
souvenir qu'un auteur n'est pas obligé à ne rien dire que ce qui est 
de leur goût._

BAYLE.


Had my ever-by-me-to-be-lamented friend, and from this time forth, I 
trust, ever-by-the-public-to-be-honoured-philosopher, been a Welshman; 
or had he lived to become acquainted with the treasures of Welsh lore 
which Edward Williams, William Owen, and Edward Davies, the Curate of 
Olveston, have brought to light; he would have believed in the Bardic 
system as heartily as the Glamorganshire and Merionethshire Bards 
themselves, and have fitted it, without any apprehension of heresy, to 
his own religious creed. And although he would have perceived with the 
Curate of Olveston (worthy of the best Welsh Bishoprick for his 
labours; O George the Third, why did no one tell thee that he was so, 
when he dedicated to thee his Celtic Researches?)—although (I say) he 
would have perceived that certain of the Druidical rites were derived 
from an accursed origin,—a fact authenticated by their abominations, 
and rendered certain by the historical proof that the Celtic language 
affords in both those dialects wherein any genuine remains have been 
preserved,—that knowledge would still have left him at liberty to 
adopt such other parts of the system as harmonized with his own 
speculations, and were not incompatible with the Christian faith. How 
he would have reconciled them shall be explained when I have taken 
this opportunity of relating something of the late Right Reverend 
Father in God, Richard Watson, Lord Bishop of Llandaff, which is more 
to his honour than anything that he has related of himself. He gave 
the Curate of Olveston, upon George Hardinge's recommendation, a Welsh 
Rectory, which though no splendid preferment, placed that patient, and 
learned, and able and meritorious _poor_ man, in a respectable 
station, and conferred upon him (as he gratefully acknowledged) the 
comfort of independence.

My friend had been led by Cudworth to this reasonable conclusion that 
there was a theology of divine tradition, or revelation, or a divine 
cabala, amongst the Hebrews first, and from them afterward 
communicated to the Egyptians and other nations. He had learnt also 
from that greater theologian Jackson of Corpus (whom the Laureate 
Southey (himself to be commended for so doing,) loses no opportunity 
of commending)[1] that divine communion was not confined to the 
Israelites before their distinction from other nations and that 
“idolatry and superstition could not have increased so much in the old 
world, unless there had been evident documents of a divine power in 
ages precedent;” for “strange fables and lying wonders receive being 
from notable and admirable decayed truths, as baser creatures do life 
from the dissolution of more noble bodies.” These were the deliberate 
opinions of men not more distinguished among their contemporaries and 
eminent above their successors, for the extent of their erudition than 
remarkable for capacity of mind and sobriety of judgment. And with 
these the history of the Druidical system entirely accords. It arose 
“from the gradual or accidental corruption of the patriarchal 
religion, by the abuse of certain commemorative honours which were 
paid to the ancestors of the human race, and by the admixture of 
Sabæan idolatry;” and on the religion thus corrupted some Canaanite 
abominations were engrafted by the Phœnicians. But as in other 
apostacies, a portion of original truth was retained in it.

[Footnote 1: Since Southey's death, Jackson's Works, to the much 
satisfaction of all sound theologians, have been reprinted at the 
Clarendon Press. I once heard Mr. Parker the Bookseller—the Uncle of 
the present Mr. Parker—say, that he recollected the sheets of the 
Folio Edition being used as wrappers in the shops! Alexander's dust as 
a bung to a beer-barrel, quotha!]

Indeed just as remains of the antediluvian world are found everywhere 
in the bowels of the earth, so are traces not of scriptural history 
alone, but of primæval truths to be discovered in the tradition of 
savages, their wild fables, and their bewildered belief; as well as in 
the elaborate systems of heathen mythology and the principles of what 
may deserve to be called divine philosophy. The farther our researches 
are extended the more of these collateral proofs are collected, and 
consequently the stronger their collective force becomes. Research and 
reflection lead also to conclusions as congenial to the truly 
christian heart as they may seem startling to that which is christian 
in every thing except in charity. Impostors acting only for their own 
purposes have enunciated holy truths, which in many of their followers 
have brought forth fruits of holiness. True miracles have been worked 
in false religions. Nor ought it to be doubted that prayers which have 
been directed to false Gods in erring, but innocent, because 
unavoidable misbelief, have been heard and accepted by that most 
merciful Father, whose eye is over all his creatures, and who hateth 
nothing that he hath made.—Here be it remarked that Baxter has 
protested against this fine expression in that paper of exceptions 
against the Common Prayer which he prepared for the Savoy Meeting, and 
which his colleagues were prudent enough to set aside, lest it should 
give offence, they said, but probably because the more moderate of 
them were ashamed of its frivolous and captious cavillings; the 
Collect in which it occurs, he said, hath no reason for appropriation 
to the first day of Lent, and this part of it is unhandsomely said, 
being true only in a formal sense _quâ talis_, for “he hateth all the 
works of iniquity.” Thus did he make iniquity the work of God, a 
blasphemy from which he would have revolted with just abhorrence if it 
had been advanced by another person: but dissent had become in him a 
cachexy of the intellect.




