CHAPTER CCXXI.

THE DOCTOR'S OPINION OF DOÑA OLIVA'S PRACTICE AND HUMANITY.

  _Anchor dir si potrebber cose assai
   Che la materia è tanto piena et folta,
   Che non se ne verrebbe à capo mai,
   Dunque fia buono ch'io suoni à raccolta._

FR. SANSOVINO.


The Doctor's opinion of Doña Oliva's practice was that no one would be 
killed by it, but that many would be allowed to die whom a more active 
treatment might have saved. It would generally fail to help the 
patient, but it would never exasperate the disease; and therefore in 
her age it was an improvement, for better is an inert treatment than a 
mischievous one.

He liked her similitude of the tree, but wondered that she had not 
noted as much resemblance to the trunk and branches in the bones and 
muscles, as in the vascular system. He admired the rational part of 
her practice, and was disposed to think some parts of it not 
irrational which might seem merely fanciful to merely practical men.

She was of opinion that more persons were killed by affections of the 
mind, than by intemperance, or by the sword; this she attempts to 
explain by some weak reasoning from a baseless theory; but the proofs 
which she adduces in support of the assertion are curious. Many 
persons she says, who in her own time had fallen under the King's 
displeasure, or even received a harsh word from him, had taken to 
their beds and died. It was not uncommon for wives who loved their 
husbands dearly, to die a few days after them; two such instances had 
occurred within the same week in the town in which she resided: and 
she adds the more affecting fact that the female slaves of the better 
kind (_esclavas abiles_) meaning perhaps those upon whom any care had 
been bestowed, were frequently observed to pine away as they grew up, 
and perish; and that this was still more frequent with those who had a 
child born to an inheritance of slavery. Mortified ambition, 
irremediable grief, and hopeless misery, had within her observation, 
produced the same fatal effect. The general fact is supported by 
Harvey's testimony. That eminent man said to Bishop Hacket that during 
the Great Rebellion, more persons whom he had seen in the course of 
his practice died of grief of mind than of any other disease. In 
France it was observed not only that nervous diseases of every kind 
became much more frequent during the revolution but cases of cancer 
also,—moral causes producing in women a predisposition to that most 
dreadful disease.

Our friend was fortunate enough to live in peaceful times, when there 
were no public calamities to increase the sum of human suffering. Yet 
even then, and within the limits of his own not extensive circle, he 
saw cases enough to teach him that it is difficult to minister to a 
mind diseased, but that for a worm in the core there is no remedy 
within the power of man.

He liked Doña Oliva for the humanity which her observations upon this 
subject implies. He liked her also for following the indications of 
nature in part of her practise; much the better he liked her for 
prescribing all soothing circumstances and all inducements to 
cheerfulness that were possible; and nothing the worse for having 
carried some of her notions to a whimsical extent. He had built an 
Infirmary in the air himself, others he said, might build Castles 
there.

It was not such an Infirmary as the great Hospital at Malta, where the 
Knights attended in rotation and administered to the patients, and 
where every culinary utensil was made of solid silver, such was the 
ostentatious magnificence of the establishment. The Doctor provided 
better attendance, for he had also built a Beguinage in the air, as an 
auxiliary institution; and as to the utensils he was of opinion that 
careful neatness was very much better than useless splendour. But here 
he would have given Doña Oliva's soothing system a fair trial, and 
have surrounded the patients with all circumstances that could 
minister to the comfort or alleviation of either a body or a mind 
diseased. The principal remedy in true medicine, said that Lady 
practitioner, is to reconcile the mind and body, or to bring them in 
accord with each other,—(_componer el anima con el cuerpo:_) to effect 
this you must administer contentment and pleasure to the mind, and 
comfort to the stomach and to the brain; the mind can only be reached 
by judicious discourse and pleasing objects; the stomach is to be 
comforted by restoratives; the brain by sweet odours and sweet sounds. 
The prospect of groves and gardens, the shade of trees, the flowing of 
water, or its gentle fall, music and cheerful conversation, were 
things which she especially advised. How little these circumstances 
would avail in the fiercer forms of acute diseases, or in the 
protracted evils of chronic suffering, the Doctor knew but too well. 
But he knew also that medical art was humanely and worthily employed, 
when it alleviated what no human skill could cure.

“So great,” says Dr. Currie, “are the difficulties of tracing out the 
hidden causes of the disorders to which this frame of ours is subject, 
that the most candid of the profession have allowed and lamented how 
unavoidably they are in the dark; so that the best medicines, 
administered by the wisest heads, shall often do the mischief they 
intend to prevent.” There are more reasons for this than Dr. Currie 
has here assigned. For not only are many of the diseases which flesh 
is heir to, obscure in their causes, difficultly distinguishable by 
their symptoms, and altogether mysterious in their effect upon the 
system, but constitutions may be as different as tempers, and their 
varieties may be as many and as great as those of the human 
countenance. Thus it is explained wherefore the treatment which proves 
successful with one patient, should fail with another, though 
precisely in the same stage of the same disease. Another and not 
unfrequent cause of failure is that the life of a patient may depend 
as much upon administering the right remedy at the right point of 
time, as the success of an alchemist was supposed to do upon seizing 
the moment of projection. And where constant attendance is not 
possible, or where skill is wanting, it must often happen that the 
opportunity is lost. This cause would not exist in the Columbian 
Infirmary, where the ablest Physicians would be always within instant 
call, and where the Beguines in constant attendance would have 
sufficient skill to know when that call became necessary.

A ship-captain, the Doctor used to say, when he approaches the coast 
of France from the Bay of Biscay, or draws near the mouth of the 
British Channel, sends down the lead into the sea, and from the 
appearance of the sand which adheres to its tallowed bottom, he is 
enabled to find upon the chart where he is, with sufficient precision 
for directing his course. Think, he would say, what an apparently 
impossible accumulation of experience there must have been, before the 
bottom of that sea, everywhere within soundings could be so accurately 
known, as to be marked on charts which may be relied on with perfect 
confidence! No formal series of experiments was ever instituted for 
acquiring this knowledge; and there is nothing in history which can 
lead us to conjecture about what time sailors first began to trust to 
it. The boasted astronomy of the Hindoos and Egyptians affords a 
feebler apparent proof in favour of the false antiquity of the world, 
than might be inferred from this practice. Now if experience in the 
Art of Healing had been treasured up with equal care, it is not too 
much to say that therapeutics might have been as much advanced, as 
navigation has been by preserving the collective knowledge of so many 
generations?[1]

[Footnote 1: The following fragments belong to the chapters which were 
to have treated on the Medical Science. They may therefore 
appropriately be appended to these chapters on Doña Oliva. I have only 
prefixed a motto from Butler.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                   “—The prince
  Of Poets, Homer, sang long since,
  A skilful leech is better far
  Than half a hundred men of war.”


Such prescriptions as were composed of any part of the human body were 
reprobated by Galen, and he severely condemned Xenocrates for having 
introduced them, as being worse than useless in themselves, and wicked 
in their consequences. Yet these abominable ingredients continued in 
use till what may be called the Reformation of medicine in the 
Seventeenth Century. Human bones were administered internally as a 
cure for ulcers, and the bones were to be those of the part affected. 
A preparation called Aqua Divina was made by cutting in pieces the 
body of a healthy man who had died a violent death, and distilling it 
with the bones and intestines. Human blood was prescribed for 
epilepsy, by great authorities, but others equally great with better 
reason condemned the practice, for this among other causes, that it 
might communicate the diseases of the person from whom it was taken. 
Ignorant surgeons when they bled a patient used to make him drink the 
warm blood that he might not lose the life which it contained. The 
heart dried, and taken in powder was thought good in fevers, but 
consciencious practitioners were of opinion that it ought not to be 
used, because of the dangerous consequences which might be expected if 
such a remedy were in demand. It is not long since a Physician at 
Heidelberg prescribed human brains to be taken inwardly in violent 
fevers, and boasted of wonderful cures. And another German 
administered cat's entrails as a panacea!

       *       *       *       *       *

The Egyptian physicians, each being confined to the study and 
treatment of one part of the body, or one disease, were bound to 
proceed in all cases according to the prescribed rules of their art. 
If the patient died under this treatment, no blame attached to the 
physician; but woe to the rash practitioner who ventured to save a 
life by any means out of the regular routine; the success of the 
experiment was not admitted as an excuse for the transgression and he 
was punished with death; for the law presumed that in every case the 
treatment enjoined was such as by common consent of the most learned 
professors had been approved because by long experience it had been 
found beneficial. The laws had some right to interfere because 
physicians received a public stipend.

Something like this prevails at this day in China. It is enacted in 
the Ta Tsing Leu Lee, that “when unskilful practitioners of medicine 
or surgery, administer drugs, or perform operations with the 
puncturing needle, contrary to the established rules and practice, and 
thereby kill the patient, the Magistrates shall call in other 
practitioners to examine the nature of the medicine, or of the wound, 
as the case may be, which proved mortal; and if it shall appear upon 
the whole to have been simply an error without any design to injure 
the patient, the practitioner shall be allowed to redeem himself from 
the punishment of homicide, as in cases purely accidental, but shall 
be obliged to quit his profession for ever. If it shall appear that a 
medical practitioner intentionally deviates from the established rules 
and practice, and while pretending to remove the disease of his 
patient, aggravates the complaint, in order to extort more money for 
its cure, the money so extorted shall be considered to have been 
stolen, and punishment inflicted accordingly, in proportion to the 
amount. If the patient dies, the medical practitioner who is convicted 
of designedly employing improper medicines, or otherwise contriving to 
injure his patient, shall suffer death by being beheaded after the 
usual period of confinement.”

       *       *       *       *       *

No man ever entertained a higher opinion of medical science, and the 
dignity of a Physician than Van Helmont. What has been said of the 
Poet, ought in his opinion to be said of the Physician also, 
_nascitur, non fit_, and in his relation to the Creator, he was more 
Poet, or Prophet, whom the word VATES brings under one 
predicament,—more than Priest. _Scilicet Pater Misericordiarum, qui 
Medicum ab initio, ceu Mediatorem inter Deum et hominem, constituit, 
immo sibi in deliciis posuit, à Medico vinci velle, nimirum, ad hoc se 
creasse peculiari elogio, et elegisse testatur. Ita est sane. Non enim 
citius hominem punit Deus, infirmat, aut interimere minatur, sibi quam 
optet opponentem Medicum, ut se Omnipotentem, etiam meritas immittendo 
pœnas, vincat propriis clementiæ suæ donis. Ejusmodi autem Medici sunt 
in ventre matris præparati,—suo fungentes munere, nullius lucri 
intuitu, nudèque reflectuntur super beneplacitum (immo mandatum) 
illius, qui solus, verè misericors, nos jubet, sub indictione pœnæ 
infernalis, fore Patri suo similes._—Obedite præpositis _præceptum 
quidem: sed_ honora parentes, honora Medicum, _angustius est quam 
obedire, cum cogamur etiam obedire minoribus. Medicus enim Mediator 
inter Vitæ Principem et Mortem._

“To wit,”—this done into English by J. C. sometime of M. H. Oxon.—“the 
Father of mercies, he who appointed a Physician, or Mediator between 
God and man from the beginning, yea He made it his delight that he 
would be overcome by a Physician, indeed he testifieth that he created 
and chose him to this end—for a peculiar testimony of his praise. It 
is so in truth. For no sooner doth He punish, weaken, and threaten to 
kill man, but he desireth a Physician opposing himself, that He may 
conquer himself, being Omnipotent, and even in sending deserved 
punishments, by the proper gifts of his clemency.—Of this sort are 
Physicians, which are fitted from their Mothers wombs, exercise their 
gift with respect to no gain; and they are nakedly cast upon the good 
pleasure,—yea the command—of him, who alone being truly merciful 
commands us that, under pain of infernal punishment, we be like to his 
father.—_Obey those that sit over you,_ is a precept indeed; but 
honour thy Parents, honour the Physician, is more strict than to obey, 
seeing we are constrained even to obey our youngers. For the Physician 
is a Mediator between the Prince of life and Death.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the Floridian tribes had a high opinion of medical virtue. 
They buried all their dead, except the Doctors; them they burnt, 
reduced their bones to powder and drank it in water.

       *       *       *       *       *

A century ago the Lions in the Tower were named after the different 
Sovereigns then reigning, “and it has been observed that when a King 
dies, the Lion of that name dies also.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the great Place at Delhi the poor Astrologers sit, as well 
Mahometan as Heathen. These Doctors, forsooth, sit there in the sun 
upon a piece of tapistry, all covered with dust, having about them 
some old mathematical instruments, which they make shew of to draw 
passengers, and a great open book representing the animals of the 
Zodiack. These men are the oracles of the vulgar, to whom they pretend 
to give for one _Payssa_, that is a penny, good luck, and they are 
they that looking upon the hands and face, turning over their books 
and making a shew of calculation, determine the fortunate moment when 
a business is to be begun, to make it successful. The mean women, 
wrapt up in a white sheet from head to foot, come to find them out, 
telling them in their ear their most secret concerns, as if they were 
their confessors, and intreat them to render the stars propitious to 
them, and suitable to their designs, as if they could absolutely 
dispose of their influences.

The most ridiculous of all these astrologers in my opinion was a 
mongrel Portugueze from Goa, who sat with much gravity upon his piece 
of tapistry, like the rest, and had a great deal of custom, though he 
could neither read nor write; and as for instruments and books was 
furnished with nothing but an old sea-compass, and an old Romish 
prayer-book in the Portugueze language, of which he shewed the 
pictures for figures of the Zodiac. “_As taes bestias tal 
Astrologo_—for such beasts, such an Astrologer,” said he to father 
Buze a Jesuit, who met him there.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. Rondeau in 1780, opened a large tumour which had grown behind a 
woman's left ear, at Brussels, and found in it a stone, in form and 
size like a pigeon's egg, which all the experiments to which it was 
subject proved to be a real Bezoar, of the same colour, structure, 
taste and substance with the oriental and occidental Bezoars. This, 
however was a fact which the Doctor could not exactly accommodate to 
his theory, though it clearly belonged to it; the difficulty was not 
in this, that there are those animals in which the Bezoar is produced, 
the goat in which it is most frequent, the cow, in which it is of less 
value, and the ape, in which it is very seldom found, but is of most 
efficacy. Through either of these forms the Archeus might have passed. 
But how the Bezoar which is formed in the stomach of these animals 
should have concreted in a sort of wen upon the woman's head was a 
circumstance altogether anomalous.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Mistra, a town built from the ruins of Sparta, the sick are daily 
brought and laid at the doors of the metropolitan Church, as at the 
gates of the ancient temples, that those who repair thither to 
worship, may indicate to them the remedies by which their health may 
be recovered.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is well remarked of the Spaniards by the Abbé de Vayrac _que d'un 
trop grand attachment pour les Anciens en matiere de Philosophie et de 
Medecine, et de trop de negligence pour eux en matiere de Poësie, il 
arrive presque toujours qu'ils ne sont ni bons Philosophes, ni bons 
Medicins, ni bons Poëtes._

       *       *       *       *       *

The desire of having something on which to rely, as dogmatical truths, 
“as it appears,” says Donne, “in all sciences, so most manifestly in 
Physic, which for a long time considering nothing but plain curing, 
and that by example and precedent, the world at last longed for some 
certain canons and rules how these cures might be accomplished; and 
when men are inflamed with this desire, and that such a fire breaks 
out, it rages and consumes infinitely by heat of argument, except some 
of authority interpose. This produced Hippocrates his Aphorisms; and 
the world slumbered, or took breath, in his resolution divers hundreds 
of years. And then in Galen's time, which was not satisfied with the 
effect of curing, nor with the knowledge how to cure, broke out 
another desire of finding out the causes why those simples wrought 
those effects. Then Galen rather to stay their stomachs than that he 
gave them enough, taught them the qualities of the four Elements, and 
arrested them upon this, that all differences of qualities proceeded 
from them. And after, (not much before our time,) men perceiving that 
all effects in physic could not be derived from these beggarly and 
impotent properties of the Elements, and that therefore they were 
driven often to that miserable refuge of specific form, and of 
antipathy and sympathy, we see the world hath turned upon new 
principles, which are attributed to Paracelsus, but indeed too much to 
his honour.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“This indenture made 26 Apr. 18 Hen. 8, between Sir Walter Strickland, 
knight, of one part, and Alexander Kenet, Doctor of Physic, on the 
other part, witnesseth, that the said Alexander permitteth, granteth, 
and by these presents bindeth him, that he will, with the grace and 
help of God, render and bring the said Sir Walter Strickland to 
perfect health of all his infirmities and diseases contained in his 
person, and especially stomach and lungs and breast, wherein he has 
most disease and grief; and over to minister such medicines truly to 
the said Sir Walter Strickland, in such manner and ways as the said 
Master Alexander may make the said Sir Walter heal of all infirmities 
and diseases, in as short time as possible may be, with the grace and 
help of God. And also the said Master Alexander granteth he shall not 
depart at no time from the said Sir Walter without his license, unto 
the time the said Sir Walter be perfect heal, with the grace and help 
of God. For the which care the said Sir Walter Strictland granteth by 
these presents, binding himself to pay or cause to be paid to the said 
Mr. Alexander or his assigns £20. sterling monies of good and lawful 
money of England, in manner and form following: that is, five marks to 
be paid upon the first day of May next ensuing, and all the residue of 
the said sum of £20. to be paid parcel by parcel as shall please the 
said Sir Walter, as he thinks necessary to be delivered and paid in 
the time of his disease, for sustaining such charges as the said Mr. 
Alexander must use in medicine for reducing the said Sir Walter to 
health; and so the said payment continued and made, to the time the 
whole sum of £20. aforesaid be fully contented and paid. In witness 
whereof, either to these present indentures have interchangeably set 
their seals, the day and year above mentioned.”

Sir Walter however died on the 9th of January following.

       *       *       *       *       *

“_Je voudrois de bon cœur_,” says an interlocutor in one of the 
evening conversation parties of Guillaume Bouchet, Sieur de Brocourt, 
“_qu'il y eust des Medecins pour remedier aux ennuis et maladies de 
l'esprit, ne plus ne moins qu'il en y a qui guerissent les maladies et 
douleurs du corps; comme it se trouve qu'il y en avoit en Grece; car 
il est escrit que Xenophon ayant faict bastir une maison à Corinthe, 
il mit en un billet sur la porte, qu'il faisoit profession, et avoit 
le moyen de guerir de paroles ceux qui estoient ennuyez et faschez; et 
leur demandant les causes de leurs ennuis, il les guerissoit, les 
recomfortant, et consolant de leurs douleurs et ennuis._”

       *       *       *       *       *

Under barbarous governments the most atrocious practices are still in 
use. It was reported in India that when Hyder Aly was suffering with a 
malignant bile on his back common in that country, and which 
occasioned his death, an infant's liver was applied to it every day. 
An Englishman in the service of Phizal Beg Cawn was on an embassy at 
Madras when this story was current; the Governor asked him whether he 
thought it likely to be true, and he acknowledged his belief in it, 
giving this sufficient reason, that his master Phizal Beg had tried 
the same remedy, but then he begged leave to affirm in behalf of his 
master, that the infants killed for his use, were slaves, and his own 
property.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of odd notions concerning virginity I do not remember a more curious 
one than that virgin mummy was preferred in medicine.




INTERCHAPTER XXV.

A WISHING INTERCHAPTER WHICH IS SHORTLY TERMINATED, ON SUDDENLY 
RECOLLECTING THE WORDS OF CLEOPATRA,—“WISHERS WERE EVER FOOLS.”

  Begin betimes, occasion's bald behind,
  Stop not thine opportunity, for fear too late
  Thou seek'st for much, but canst not compass it.

MARLOWE.


“_Plust a Dieu que j'eusse presentement cent soixante et dixhuit 
millions d'or!_” says a personage in Rabelais: “_ho, comment je 
triumpherois!_”

It was a good, honest, large, capacious wish; and in wishing, it is as 
well to wish for enough. By enough in the way of riches, a man is said 
to mean always something more than he has. Without exposing myself to 
any such censorious remark, I will like the person above quoted, limit 
my desires to a positive sum, and wish for just one million a year.

And what would you do with it? says Mr. Sobersides.

“_Attendez encores un peu, avec demie once de patience._”

  I now esteem my venerable self
  As brave a fellow, as if all that pelf
  Were sure mine own; and I have thought a way
  Already how to spend.

And first for my private expenditure, I would either buy a house to my 
mind, or build one; and it should be such as a house ought to be, 
which I once heard a glorious agriculturist define “a house that 
should have in it every thing that is voluptuous, and necessary and 
right.” In my acceptation of that felicitous definition, I request the 
reader to understand that every thing which is right is intended, and 
nothing but what is perfectly so: that is to say I mean every possible 
accommodation conducive to health and comfort. It should be large 
enough for my friends, and not so large as to serve as an hotel for my 
acquaintance, and I would live in it at the rate of five thousand a 
year, beyond which no real and reasonable enjoyment is to be obtained 
by money.

I would neither keep hounds, nor hunters, nor running horses.

I would neither solicit nor accept a peerage. I would not go into 
Parliament. I would take no part whatever in what is called public 
life, farther than to give my vote at an election against a Whig, or 
against any one who would give his in favour of the Catholic Question.

I would not wear my coat quite so threadbare as I do at present: but I 
would still keep to my old shoes, as long as they would keep to me.

But stop—Cleopatra adopted some wizard's words when she said “Wishers 
were ever fools!”




