CHAPTER CCXXVI.

THE AUTHOR DIGRESSES A LITTLE, AND TAKES UP A STITCH WHICH WAS DROPPED 
IN THE EARLIER PART OF THIS OPUS.—NOTICES CONCERNING LITERARY AND 
DRAMATIC HISTORY, BUT PERTINENT TO THIS PART OF OUR SUBJECT.

  _Jam paululum digressus a spectantibus,
   Doctis loquar, qui non adeo spectare quam
   Audire gestiunt, logosque ponderant,
   Examinant, dijudicantque pro suo
   Candore vel livore; non latum tamen
   Culmum (quod aiunt) dum loquar sapientibus
   Loco movebor._

MACROPEDIUS.


The boy and his schoolmaster were not mistaken in thinking that some 
of Textor's Moralities would have delighted the people of Ingleton as 
much as any of Rowland Dixon's stock pieces. Such dramas have been 
popular wherever they have been presented in the vernacular tongue. 
The progress from them to the regular drama was slow, perhaps not so 
much on account of the then rude state of most modern languages, as 
because of the yet ruder taste of the people. I know not whether it 
has been observed in literary history how much more rapid it was in 
schools, where the Latin language was used, and consequently fit 
audience was found, though few.

George von Langeveldt, or Macropedius as he called himself, according 
to the fashion of learned men in that age, was contemporary with 
Textor, and like him one of the pioneers of literature, but he was a 
person of more learning and greater intellectual powers. He was born 
about the year 1475, of a good family in the little town or village of 
Gemert, at no great distance from Bois-le-Duc. As soon as his juvenile 
studies were compleated he entered among the _Fratres Vitæ Communis_; 
they employed him in education, first as Rector in their college at 
Bois-le-duc, then at Liege, and afterwards at Utrecht from whence in 
1552, being infirm and grievously afflicted with gout, he returned to 
Bois-le-duc there to pass the remainder of his days, as one whose work 
was done. Old and enfeebled however as he was, he lived till the year 
1558, and then died not of old age, but of a pestilential fever.

There is an engraved portrait of him in the hideous hood and habit of 
his order; the countenance is that of a good-natured, intelligent, 
merry old man: underneath are these verses by Sanderus the 
topographer.

  _Tu Seneca, et nostri potes esse Terentius ævi,
     Seu struis ad faciles viva theatra pedes,
   Sen ploras tragicas, Macropedi, carmine clades,
     Materiam sanctis adsimilante modis.
   Desine jam Latios mirari Roma cothurnos;
     Nescio quid majus Belgica scena dabit._

Macropedius published Rudiments both of the Greek and Latin languages; 
he had studied the Hebrew and Chaldee; had some skill in mathematics, 
and amused his leisure in making mathematical instruments, a branch of 
art in which he is said to have been an excellent workman. Most of the 
men who distinguished themselves as scholars in that part of the Low 
Countries, toward the latter part of the 16th century had been his 
pupils: for he was not more remarkable for his own acquirements than 
for the earnest delight which he took in instructing others. There is 
some reason for thinking that he was a severe disciplinarian, perhaps 
a cruel one. Herein he differed widely from Textor, who took every 
opportunity for expressing his abhorrence of magisterial cruelty. In 
one of these Dialogues with which Guy and young Daniel were so well 
acquainted, two schoolmasters after death are brought before 
Rhadamanthus for judgement; one for his inhumanity is sent to be 
tormented in Tartarus, part of his punishment in addition to those 
more peculiarly belonging to the region, being that

  _Verbera quæ pueris intulit, ipse ferat:_

the other who indulged his boys and never maltreated them is ordered 
to Elysium, the Judge saying to him

       —_tua te in pueros clementia salvum
  Reddit, et æternis persimilem superis._

That Textor's description of the cruelty exercised by the pedagogues 
of his age was not overcharged, Macropedius himself might be quoted to 
prove, even when he is vindicating and recommending such discipline as 
Dr. Parr would have done. I wish Parr had heard an expression which 
fell from the honest lips of Isaac Reid, when a school, noted at that 
time for its consumption of birch, was the subject of conversation; 
the words would have burnt themselves in. I must not commit them to 
the press; but this I may say, that the Recording Angel entered them 
on the creditor side of that kind-hearted old man's account.

Macropedius, like Textor, composed dramatic pieces for his pupils to 
represent. The latter, as has been shown in a former chapter, though 
he did not exactly take the Moralities for his model, produced pieces 
of the same kind, and adapted his conceptions to the popular facts, 
while he clothed them in the language of the classics. His aim at 
improvement proceeded no farther, and he never attempted to construct 
a dramatic fable. That advance was made by Macropedius, who in one of 
his dedicatory epistles laments that among the many learned men who 
were then flourishing, no Menander, no Terence was to be found, their 
species of writing, he says, had been almost extinct since the time of 
Terence himself, or at least of Lucilius. He regretted this because 
comedy might be rendered useful to persons of all ages, _quid enim 
plus pueris ad eruditionem, plus adolescentibus ad honesta studia, 
plus provectioribus, immò omnibus in commune ad virtutem conducat?_

Reuchlin, or Capnio (as he who was one of the lights of his generation 
was misnamed and misnamed himself,) who had with his other great and 
eminent merits that of restoring or rather introducing into Germany 
the study of Hebrew, revived the lost art of comedy. If any one had 
preceded him in this revival, Macropedius was ignorant of it, and by 
the example and advice of this great man he was induced to follow him, 
not only as a student of Hebrew, but as a comic writer. Hrosvitha 
indeed, a nun of Gandersheim in Saxony, who lived in the tenth century 
and in the reign of Otho II. composed six Latin comedies _in 
emulation_ of Terence, but in praise of virginity; and these with 
other of her poems were printed at Nuremberg in the year 1501. The 
book I have never seen, nor had De Bure, nor had he been able (such is 
its rarity) to procure any account of it farther than enabled him to 
give its title. The name of Conrad Celtes, the first German upon whom 
the degree of Poet Laureate was conferred, appears in the title, as if 
he had discovered the manuscript; _Conrado Celte inventore_. De Bure 
says the volume was _attribué au même Conradus Celtes_. It is rash for 
any one to form an opinion of a book which he has never examined, 
unless he is well acquainted with the character and capacity of its 
author; nevertheless I may venture to observe that nothing can be less 
in unison with the life and conversation of this Latin poet, as far as 
these may be judged of by his acknowledged poems, than the subjects of 
the pieces published under Hrosvitha's name; and no reason can be 
imagined why if he had written them himself, he should have palmed 
them upon the public as her composition.

It is remarkable that Macropedius when he spoke of Reuchlin's comedies 
should not have alluded to these, for that he must have seen them 
there can be little or no doubt. One of Reuchlin's is said to have 
been imitated from _la Farce de Pathelin_, which under the title of 
the Village Lawyer has succeeded on our own stage, and which was so 
deservedly popular that the French have drawn from it more than one 
proverbial saying. The French Editor who affirms this says that 
Pathelin was printed in 1474, four years before the representation of 
Reuchlin's comedy, but the story is one of those good travellers which 
are found in all countries, and Reuchlin may have dramatised it 
without any reference to the French drama, the existence of which may 
very probably have been unknown to him, as well as to Macropedius. 
Both his pieces are satirical. His disciple began with a scriptural 
drama upon the Prodigal Son, Asotus is its title. It must have been 
written early in the century, for about 1520 he laid it aside as a 
juvenile performance, and faulty as much because of the then 
comparatively rude state of learning, as of his own inexperience.

  _Scripsi olim adolescens, trimetris versibus,
   Et tetrametris, eâ phrasi et facundiâ
   Quæ tum per adolescentiam et mala tempora
   Licebat, evangelicum Asotum aut Prodigum
   Omnis quidem mei laboris initium._

After it had lain among his papers for thirty years, he brought it to 
light, and published it. In the prologue he intreats the spectators 
not to be offended that he had put his sickle into the field of the 
Gospel, and exhorts them while they are amused with the comic parts of 
the dialogue, still to bear in mind the meaning of the parable.

  _Sed orat author carminis vos res duas:
   Ne ægre feratis, quod levem falcem tulit
   Sementem in evangelicam, eamque quod audeat
   Tractare majestatem Iambo et Tribracho;
   Neve insuper nimis hæreatis ludicris
   Ludisque comicis, sed animum advortite
   Hic abdito mysterio, quod eruam._

After these lines he proceeds succinctly to expound the parable.

Although the grossest representations were not merely tolerated at 
that time in the Miracle Plays, and Mysteries, but performed with the 
sanction and with the assistance of the clergy, it appears that 
objections were raised against the sacred dramas of this author. They 
were composed for a learned audience,—which is indeed the reason why 
the Latin or as it may more properly be called the Collegiate drama, 
appeared at first in a regular and respectable form, and received 
little or no subsequent improvement. The only excuse which could be 
offered for the popular exhibitions of this kind, was that they were 
if not necessary, yet greatly useful, by exciting and keeping up the 
lively faith of an ignorant, but all-believing people. That apology 
failed, where no such use was needed. But Macropedius easily 
vindicated himself from charges which in truth were not relevant to 
his case; for he perceived what scriptural subjects might without 
impropriety be represented as he treated them, and he carefully 
distinguished them from those upon which no fiction could be engrafted 
without apparent profanation. In the prologue to his Lazarus he makes 
this distinction between the Lazarus of the parable, and the Lazarus 
of the Gospel History: the former might be thus treated for 
edification, the latter was too sacred a theme,

                      —_quod is sine
  Filii Dei persona agi non possiet._

Upon this distinction he defends himself, and carefully declares what 
were the bounds which ought not to be overpassed.

  _Fortassis objectabit illi quispiam
   Quod audeat sacerrimam rem, et serio
   Nostræ saluti a Christo Jesu proditam
   Tractare comicè, et facere rem ludicram.
   Fatetur ingenuè, quod eadem ratio se
   Sæpenumero deterruit, ne quid suum,
   Vel ab aliis quantumlibet scriptum, piè
   Doctève, quod personam haberet Christi Jesu
   Agentis, histrionibus seu ludiis
   Populo exhibendum ex pulpito committeret._

From this passage I am induced to suspect that the Jesus Scholasticus, 
and the tragedy De Passione Christi, which are named in the list of 
his works, have been erroneously ascribed to him. No date of time or 
place is affixed to either, by the biographers. After his judicious 
declaration concerning such subjects it cannot be thought he would 
have written these tragedies; nor that if he had written them before 
he seriously considered the question of their propriety, he would 
afterwards have allowed them to appear. It is more probable that they 
were published without an author's name, and ascribed to him, because 
of his reputation. No inference can be drawn from their not appearing 
in the two volumes of his plays; because that collection is entitled 
_Omnes Georgii Macropedii Fabulæ_ COMICÆ, and though it contains 
pieces which are deeply serious, that title would certainly preclude 
the insertion of a tragedy. But a piece upon the story of Susanna 
which the biographers have also ascribed to him is not in the 
collection;[1] the book was printed after his retirement to 
Bois-le-duc, when from his age and infirmities he was most unlikely to 
have composed it, and therefore I conclude, that like the tragedies, 
it is not his work.

[Footnote 1: This must be a comic drama.—R. S.]

Macropedius was careful to guard against anything which might give 
offence and therefore he apologizes for speaking of the _fable_ of his 
Nama:

  _Mirabitur fortasse vestrûm quispiam,
   Quod fabulam rem sacrosanctam dixerim.
   Verum sibi is persuasum habebit, omne quod
   Tragico artificio comicovè scribitur,
   Dici poetis fabulam; quod utique non
   Tam historia veri texitur, quod proprium est,
   Quam imago veri fingitur, quod artis est.
   Nam comicus non propria personis solet,
   Sed apta tribuere atque verisimilia, ut
   Quæ pro loco vel tempore potuere agi
   Vel dicier._

For a very different reason he withdrew from one of these dramas 
certain passages, by the advice of his friends, he says, _qui rem 
seriam fabulosius tractandum dissuaserunt._ These it seems related to 
the first chapter of St. Luke, but contained circumstances derived not 
from that Gospel, but from the legends engrafted upon it, and 
therefore he rejects them as _citra scripturæ authoritatem_.

From the scrupulousness with which Macropedius in this instance 
distinguishes between the facts of the Gospel history, and the fables 
of man's invention, it may be suspected that he was not averse at 
heart to those hopes of a reformation in the church which were at that 
time entertained. This is still further indicated in the drama called 
Hecastus (_ἕκαστος_,—Every one,) in which he represents a sinner as 
saved by faith in Christ and repentance. He found it necessary to 
protest against the suspicion which he had thus incurred, and to 
declare that he held works of repentance, and the sacraments appointed 
by the Church necessary for salvation.[2]

[Footnote 2: Hecastus was represented by the schoolboys in 1538 _non 
sine magno spectantium plausu_. It was printed in the ensuing year; 
and upon reprinting it, in 1550, the author offers his apology. He 
says, “_fuere multi quibus (fabulæ scopo recte considerato) per omnia 
placuit; fuere quibus in ea nonnulla offenderunt; fuere quoque, quibus 
omnino displicuit, ob hoc præcipue, quod erroribus quibusdam nostri 
temporis connivere et suffragari videretur. Inprimis illi, quod citra 
pænitentiæ opera (satisfactionem dicimus) et ecclesiæ sacramenta, per 
solam in Christum fidem et cordis contritionem, condonationem criminum 
docere, vel asserere videretur: et quod quisque certo se fore 
servandum credere teneretur: Id quod nequaquam nec mente concepi, nec 
unquam docere volui, licet quibusdam fortassis fabulæ scopum non 
exactè considerantibus, primâ (quod aiunt) fronte sic videri potuerit. 
Si enim rei scopum, quem in argumento indicabam, penitus observassent, 
secus fortassis judicaturi fuissent._”—R. S.]

Hecastus is a rich man, given over to the pomps and vanities of the 
world, and Epicuria his wife is of the same disposition. They have 
prepared a great feast, when Nomodidascalus arrives with a summons for 
him to appear before the Great King for Judgment. Hecastus calls upon 
his son Philomathes who is learned in the law for counsel; the son is 
horror-stricken, and confesses his ignorance of the language in which 
the summons is written:

  _Horror, pater, me invadit, anxietas quoque
   Non mediocris; nam elementa quanquam barbara
   Miram Dei potentiam præ se ferunt,
   Humaniores literas scio; barbaras
   Neque legere, neque intelligere, pater, queo._

The father is incensed that a son who had been bred to the law for the 
purpose of pleading his cause at any time should fail him thus; but 
Nomodidascalus vindicates the young man, and reads a severe lecture to 
Hecastus, in which Hebrew words of aweful admonishment are introduced 
and interpreted. The guests arrive, he tells them what has happened, 
and entreats them to accompany him, and assist him when he appears 
before the Judge; they plead other engagements, and excuse themselves. 
He has no better success with his kinsmen; though they promise to look 
after his affairs, and say that they will make a point of attending 
him with due honour as far as the gate. He then calls upon his two 
sons to go with him unto the unknown country whereto he has been 
summoned. The elder is willing to fight for his father, but not to 
enter upon such a journey; the lawyer does not understand the practice 
of those courts, and can be of no use to him there; but he advises his 
father to take his servants with him, and plenty of money.

Madam Epicuria, who is not the most affectionate of wives, refuses to 
accompany him upon this unpleasant expedient, and moreover requests 
that her maids may be left with her; let him take his man servants 
with him, and gold and silver in abundance. The servants bring out his 
wealth. Plutus, _ex arcâ loquens_ is one of the Dramatis Personæ, and 
the said Plutus when brought upon the stage in a chest, or strong box, 
complains that he is shaken to pieces by being thus moved. Hecastus 
tells him he must go with him to the other world and help him there, 
which Plutus flatly refuses. If he will not go of his own accord he 
shall be carried whether he will or no, Hecastus says. Plutus stands 
stiffly to his refusal.

           _Non transferent; prius quidem
  Artus et ilia ruperint, quam transferant.
  In morte nemini opitulor usquam gentium,
  Quin magis ad alienum dominum transeo._

Hecastus on his part is equally firm, and orders his men to fetch some 
strong poles, and carry off the chest, Plutus and all. Having sent 
them forward, he takes leave of his family, and Epicuria protests that 
she remains like a widowed dove, and his neighbours promise to 
accompany him as far as the gate.

Death comes behind him now:

  _Horrenda imago, larva abominabilis,
   Figura tam execranda, ut atrum dæmona
   Putetis obvium._[3]

[Footnote 3: The reader should by all means consult Mr. Sharpe's 
“Dissertation on the Pageants or Dramatic Mysteries anciently 
performed in Coventry.” “The Devil,” he observes, “was a very favorite 
and prominent character in our Religious Mysteries, wherein he was 
introduced as often as was practicable, and considerable pains taken 
to furnish him with appropriate habiliments, &c.” p. 31. also pp. 
57-60. There are several plates of “_Hell-Mought and Sir Sathanas_” 
which will not escape the examination of the curious. The bloody Herod 
was a character almost as famous as “_Sir Sathanas_”—hence the 
expression “_to out-herod Herod_” _e.g._ in Hamlet, Act iii. Sc. ii. 
With reference to the same personage Charmian says to the Soothsayer 
in Antony and Cleopatra, “Let me have a child at fifty, to whom _Herod 
of Jewry_ may do homage.” Act i. Sc. ii., and Mrs. Page asks in the 
Merry Wives of Windsor, “What _Herod of Jewry_ is this?” Act ii. Sc. 
i.]

This dreadful personage is with much difficulty intreated to allow him 
the respite of one short hour, after which Death declares he will 
return, and take him, will he or nill he before the Judge, and then to 
the infernal regions. During this interval who should come up but an 
old and long-neglected friend of Hecastus, Virtue by name; a poor 
emaciated person, in mean attire, in no condition to appear with him 
before the Judge, and altogether unfit to plead his desperate cause. 
She promises however to send him a Priest to his assistance and says 
moreover that she will speak to her sister Faith, and endeavour to 
persuade her to visit him.

Meantime the learned son predicts from certain appearances the 
approaching end of his father.

  _Actum Philocrate, de patris salute, uti
   Plane recenti ex lotio prejudico,
   Nam cerulea si tendit ad nigredinem
   Urina mortem proximam denunciat._

He has been called on, he says, too late,

  _Sero meam medentis admisit manum._

The brothers begin to dispute about their inheritance, and declare law 
against each other; but they suspend the dispute when Hieronymus the 
Priest arrives, that they may look after him lest he should prevail 
upon the dying to dispose of too large a part of his property in 
charitable purposes.

  _Id cautum oportet maximè. Novimus enim
   Quàm tum sibi, tum cæteris quibus favent,
   Legata larga extorqueat id hominum genus,
   Cum morte ditem terminandum viderint._

Virtue arrives at this time with his sister Faith; they follow 
Hieronymus into the chamber into which Hecastus has been borne; and as 
they go in up comes Satan to the door, and takes his seat there to 
draw up a bill of indictment against the dying man, he must do it 
carefully, he says, that there may be no flaw in it.

  _Causam meam scripturus absolutius
   Adversum Hecastum, hic paululum desedero;
   Ne si quid insit falsitatis maximis
   Facinoribus, res tota veniat in gravem
   Fœdamque controversiam. Abstinete vos,
   Quotquot theatro adestis, à petulantiâ,
   Nisi si velitis et hos cachinnos scribier._

Then he begins to draw up the indictment, speaking as he writes,

  _Primum omnium superbus est et arrogans,—
   Superbus est et arrogans,—et arrogans;—
   Tum in ædibus,—tum in ædibus; tum in vestibus,—
   Tum in vestibus. Jam reliqua tacitus scripsero,
   Loquaculi ne exaudiant et deferant._

While Satan is thus employed at the door, the priest Hieronymus within 
is questioning the patient concerning his religion. Hecastus possesses 
a very sound and firm historical belief. But this the Priest tells him 
is not enough, for the Devils themselves believe and tremble, and he 
will not admit Faith into the chamber till Hecastus be better 
instructed in the true nature of a saving belief.

  _Credis quod omnia quæ patravit Filius
   Dei unicus, tibi redimendo gesserit?
   Tibi natus est? tibi vixerit? tibi mortuus
   Sit? tibi sepultus? et tibi surrexerit?
   Mortemque tibi devicerit?_

Hecastus confesses in reply that he is a most miserable sinner, 
unworthy of forgiveness, and having brought him into this state of 
penitence the Priest calls Fides in.

Then says Fides,

  _Hæc tria quidem, cognitio nempe criminis,
   Horror gehennæ, et pœnitentia, læta sunt
   Veræ salutis omnium primordia,
   Jam perge, ut in Deum excites fiduciam._

When this trust has been given him, and he has declared his full 
belief, he confesses that still he is in fear,

  —_est quod adhuc parit mihi scrupulum;
  Mors horrida, atque aspectus atri Dæmonis,
  Queis terribilius (inquiunt) nil hominibus,
  Post paululum quos adfuturos arbitros._

But Hieronymus assures him that Fides and Virtus will defend him from 
all danger, and under their protection he leaves him.

The scene is now again at the door, Mors arrives. Satan abuses her for 
having made him wait so long, and the _improba bestia_ in return 
reproaches him for his ingratitude and imprudence. However they make 
up their quarrel. Satan goes into the house expecting to have a long 
controversy with his intended victim, and Mors amuses herself in the 
mean time with sharpening her dart. Satan, however, finds that his 
controversy is not to be with Hecastus himself, but with his two 
advocates Fides and Virtus, and they plead their cause so provokingly 
that the old Lawyer tears his bill, and sculks into a corner to see 
how Mors will come off.

Now comes his son the Doctor and prognosticates speedy dissolution _ex 
pulsu et atro lotio_. And having more professional pride than filial 
feelings he would fain persuade the Acolyte who is about to assist in 
administering extreme unction, that he has chosen a thankless calling, 
and would do wisely if he forsook it for more gainful studies. The 
youth makes a good defence for his choice, and remains master in the 
argument, for the Doctor getting sight of Death brandishing the 
sharpened dart, takes fright and runs off. Having put the Doctor to 
flight, Death enters the sick chamber, and finding Fides there calls 
in Satan as an ally: their joint force avails nothing against Virtus, 
Fides and Hieronymus, and these dismiss the departing Spirit under a 
convoy of Angels to Abraham's bosom.

Three supplementary scenes conclude the two dramas; in the two first 
the widow and the sons and kinsmen lament the dead, and declare their 
intention of putting themselves all in mourning, and giving a funeral 
worthy of his rank. But Hieronymus reproves them for the excess of 
their grief, and for the manner by which they intended to show their 
respect for the dead. The elder son is convinced by his discourse, and 
replies

  _Recte mones vir omnium piissime,
   Linquamus omnem hunc apparatum splendidum,
   Linquamus hæcce cuncta in usum pauperum,
   Linquamus omnem luctum inanem et lachrymas;
   Moresque nostros corrigamus pristinos.
   Si multo amœniora vitæ munia,
   Post hanc calamitatem, morantur in fide
   Spe ut charitate mortuos, quid residuum est
   Nisi et hunc diem cum patre agamus mortuo
   Lætissimum? non in cibis et poculis
   Gravioribus, natura quam poposcerit;
   Nec tympanis et organis, sed maximas
   Deo exhibendo gratias. Viro pio
   Congaudeamus intimis affectibus;
   Et absque pompâ inituli exequias pias
   Patri paremus mortuo._

The Steward then concludes the drama by dismissing the audience in 
these lines;

     _Vos qui advolastis impigri ad
  Nostra hæc theatra, tum viri, tum fœminæ,
  Adite nunc vestras domos sine remorâ.
  Nam Hecastus hic quem Morte cæsum exhibuimus,
  Non ante tertium diem tumulandus est,
  Valete cuncti, et si placuimus, plaudite._

We have in our own language a dramatic piece upon the same subject, 
and of the same age. It was published early in Henry the Eighth's 
reign, and is well known to English philologists by the name of Every 
Man. The title page says, “Here begynneth a treatyse how the hye Fader 
of Heven sendeth Dethe to somon every creature to come and gyve a 
counte of theyr lyves in this worlde, and is in maner of a moralle 
Playe.”

The subject is briefly stated in a prologue by a person in the 
character of a Messenger, who exhorts the spectators to hear with 
reverence.

  This mater is wonders precyous;
  But the extent of it is more gracyous,
    And swete to here awaye.
  The story sayth, Man, in the begynnynge
  Loke well and take good heed to the endynge,
    Be you never so gay.

God (the Son) speaketh at the opening of the piece, and saying that 
the more He forbears the worse the people be from year to year, 
declares his intention to have a reckoning in all haste of every man's 
person, and do justice on every man living.

  Where art thou, Deth, thou mighty messengere?

                    Dethe.
  Almighty God, I am here at your wyll
  Your commaundement to fulfyll.

                    God.
  Go thou to Every-man
  And shewe hym in my name,
  A pylgrymage he must on hym take,
  Whiche he in no wyse may escape:
  And that he brynge with him a sure rekenynge,
  Without delay or ony taryenge.

                    Dethe.
  Lorde, I wyll in the world go renne over all
  And cruelly out serche bothe grete and small.

The first person whom Death meets is Every-man himself, and he summons 
him in God's name to take forthwith a long journey and bring with him 
his book of accounts. Every-man offers a thousand pounds to be spared, 
and says that if he may but have twelve years allowed him, he will 
make his accounts so clear that he shall have no need to fear the 
reckoning. Not even till to-morrow is granted him. He then asks if he 
may not have some of his acquaintances to accompany him on the way, 
and is told yes, if he can get them. The first to whom he applies, is 
his old boon-companion Fellowship, who promises to go with him 
anywhere,—till he hears what the journey is on which Every-man is 
summoned: he then declares that he would eat, drink and drab, with 
him, or lend him a hand to kill any body, but upon such a business as 
this he will not stir a foot; and with that bidding him God speed, he 
departs as fast as he can.

Alack, exclaims Every-man, when thus deserted,

  Felawship herebefore with me wolde mery make,
  And now lytell sorowe for me dooth he take.
  Now wheder for socoure shall I flee
  Syth that Felawship hath forsaken me?
  To my kynnesmen I wyll truely,
  Prayenge them to helpe me in my necessyte.
  I byleve that they wyll do so;
  For kynde wyll crepe where it may not go.

But one and all make their excuses; they have reckonings of their own 
which are not ready, and they cannot and will not go with him. Thus 
again disappointed he breaks out in more lamentations; and then 
catches at another fallacious hope.

  Yet in my mynde a thynge there is;
  All my lyfe I have loved Ryches;
  If that my good now helpe me myght
  He wolde make my herte full lyght.
  I wyll speke to hym in this distresse,
  Where art thou, my Goodes, and Ryches?

                    Goodes.
  Who calleth me? Every-man? What hast thou haste?
  I lye here in corners, trussed and pyled so hye,
  And in chestes I am locked so fast,
  Also sacked in bagges, thou mayst se with thyn eye
  I cannot styrre; in packes low I lye.
  What wolde ye have? lightly me saye,—
  Syr, an ye in the worlde have sorowe or adversyte
  That can I helpe you to remedy shortly.

                    Every-man.
  In this world it is not, I tell thee so,
  I am sent for an other way to go,
  To gyve a strayte counte generall
  Before the hyest Jupiter of all:
  And all my life I have had joye and pleasure in the,
  Therefore, I pray the, go with me:
  For paraventure, thou mayst before God Almighty
  My rekenynge helpe to clene and puryfye;
  For it is said ever amonge
  That money maketh all ryght that is wrong.

                    Goodes.
  Nay, Every-man, I synge an other songe;
  I folowe no man in such vyages.
  For an I wente with the,
  Thou sholdes fare moche the worse for me.

Goodes then exults in having beguiled him, laughs at his situation and 
leaves him. Of whom shall he take council? He bethinks him of Good 
Dedes.

  But alas she is so weke
  That she can nother go nor speke.
  Yet wyll I venter on her now
  My Good Dedes, where be you?

                    Good Dedes.
  Here I lye colde on the grounde,
  Thy sinnes hath me sore bounde
  That I cannot stere.

                    Every-man.
  I pray you that ye wyll go with me.

                    Good Dedes.
  I wolde full fayne, but I can not stand veryly.

                    Every-man.
  Why, is there any thynge on you fall?

                    Good Dedes.
  Ye, Sir; I may thanke you of all.
  If ye had parfytely sheved me,
  Your boke of counte full redy had be.
  Loke, the bokes of your workes and dedes eke,
  A! se how they lye under the fete,
  To your soules hevynes.

                    Every-man.
  Our Lorde Jesus helpe me,
  For one letter here I cannot se!

                    Good Dedes.
  There is a blynde rekenynge in tyme of dystres!

                    Every-man.
  Good-Dedes, I pray you, helpe me in this nede,
  Or elles I am for ever dampned in dede.

Good Dedes calls in Knowledge to help him to make his reckoning; and 
Knowledge takes him lovingly to that holy man Confession; and 
Confession gives him a precious jewel called Penance, in the form of a 
scourge.

  When with the scourge of Penance man doth hym bynde,
  The oyl of forgyvenes than shall he fynde,—
  Now may you make your rekenynge sure.

                    Every-man.
  In the name of the holy Trynyte,
  My body sore punyshed shall be.
  Take this, Body, for the synne of the flesshe!
  Also thou delytest to go gay and fresshe,
  And in the way of dampnacyon thou dyd me brynge,
  Therefore suffre now strokes of punysshynge.
  Now of penaunce I wyll wede the water clere
  To save me from Purgatory, that sharpe fyre.

                    Good Dedes.
  I thanke God, now I can walke and go;
  And am delyvered of my sykenesse and wo,
  Therfore with Every-man I wyll go and not spare;
  His good workes I wyll helpe hym to declare.

                    Knowlege.
  Now Every-man, be mery and glad,
  Your Good Dedes cometh now, ye may not be sad.
  Now is your Good Dedes hole and sounde,
  Goynge upryght upon the grounde.

                    Every-man.
  My herte is lyght, and shall be evermore,
  Now wyll I smyte faster than I dyde before.

Knowledge then makes him put on the garment of sorrow called 
contrition, and makes him call for his friends Discretion, Strength 
and Beauty to help him on his pilgrimage, and his Five Wits to counsel 
him. They come at his call and promise faithfully to help him.

                    Strength.
  I Strength wyll by you stande in dystres,
  Though thou wolde in batayle fyght on the grownde.

                    Fyve-Wyttes.
  And thought it were thrugh the world rounde,
  We wyll not depart for swete ne soure.

                    Beaute.
  No more wyll I unto dethes howre,
  Watsoever therof befall.

He makes his testament, and gives half his goods in charity. 
Discretion and Knowledge send him to receive the holy sacrament and 
extreme unction, and Five-Wits expatiates upon the authority of the 
Priesthood, to the Priest he says,

  God hath—more power given
  Than to ony Aungell that is in Heven,
  With five wordes he may consecrate
  Goddes body in flesshe and blode to make,
  And handeleth his maker bytwene his handes.
  The preest byndeth and unbyndeth all bandes
  Both in erthe and in heven.—
  No remedy we fynde under God
  But all-onely preesthode.
  —God gave Preest that dygnyte,
  And setteth them in his stede among us to be:
  Thus they be above Aungelles in degree.

Having received his viaticum Every-man sets out upon this mortal 
journey: his comrades renew their protestations of remaining with him; 
till when he grows faint on the way, and his limbs fail,—they fail him 
also.

                    Every-man.
  —into this cave must I crepe,
  And tourne to erth, and there to slepe.

What, says Beauty; into this Grave?

                          —adewe by saynt Johan,
  I take my tappe in my lappe and am gone.

Strength in like manner forsakes him; and Discretion says that “when 
Strength goeth before, he follows after ever more.” And Fyve-Wyttes, 
whom he took for his best friend, bid him, “farewell and then an end.”

                    Every-man.
  O Jesu, helpe! all hath forsaken me!

                    Good Dedes.
  Nay, Every-man, I wyll byde with the,
  I wyll not forsake the in dede;
  Thou shalt fynde me a good frende at nede.

Knowledge also abides him till the last; the song of the Angel who 
receives his spirit is heard, and a Doctour concludes the piece with 
an application to the audience.

  This morall men may have in mynde,
  —forsake Pryde for he deceyveth you in the ende,
  And remembre Beaute, Fyve-Wyttes, Strength and Dyscrecyon
  They all at the last do Every-man forsake,
  Save his Good Dedes, these doth he take:
  But be ware, an they be small,
  Before God he hath no helpe at all!




