CHAPTER CCXXXV.

THE SHORTEST AND PLEASANTEST WAY FROM DONCASTER TO JEDDAH, WITH MANY 
MORE, TOO LONG.

  _Πόνος πόνῳ πόνον φέρει
   Πᾶ πᾶ γὰρ οὐκ ἔβαν ἐγώ._

SOPHOCLES.


We have got from the West Riding of Yorkshire, to the Eastern shore of 
the Red Sea, without the assistance of mail-coach, steam-packet, or 
air-balloon, the magical carpet, the wishing-cap, the shoes of 
swiftness, or the seven-leagued boots. From Mr. Bacon's vicarage we 
have got to Eve's grave, not _per saltum_, by any sudden, or violent 
transition; but by following the stream of thought. We shall get back 
in the same easy manner to that vicarage, and to the quiet churchyard 
wherein the remains of one of the sweetest and for the few latter 
years of her short life, one of the happiest of Eve's daughters, were 
deposited in sure and certain hope. If you are in the mood for a 
Chapter upon Churchyards, go reader to those which Caroline Bowles has 
written;—you will find in them every thing that can touch the heart, 
every thing that can sanctify the affections, unalloyed by anything 
that can offend a pure taste and a masculine judgement.

But before we find our way back we must tarry awhile among the tombs, 
and converse with the fablers of old.

A young and lovely Frenchwoman after visiting the _Columbarium_ near 
the Villa Albani, expressed her feeling strongly upon our custom of 
interring the dead, as compared with the non-burial of the ancients, 
_usage odieux_, said she, _qui rend la mort horrible! Si les anciens 
en avaient moins d'effroi, c'est que la coutume de brûler les corps 
dérobait au trépas tout ce qu'il a de hideux. Qu'il était consolant et 
doux de pouvoir pleurer sur des cendres chéries! Qu'il est 
épouvantable et déchirant aujourd'hui de penser que celui qu'on a tant 
aimé n'offre plus qu'une image affreuse et décharnée dont on ne 
pourrait supporter la vue._

The lady in whose journal these lines were written lies buried in the 
Campo Santo at Milan, with the following inscription on her tomb; 
_Priez pour une jeune Française que la mort a frappée à vingt ans, 
comme elle allait, après un voyage de huit mois avec un epoux chéri, 
revoir son enfant, son pere et sa mere, qui venaient joyeux au-devant 
d'elle._ Her husband wished to have her remains burnt, in conformity 
to her own opinion respecting the disposal of the dead, and to his own 
feelings at the time, that he might have carried her ashes to his own 
country, and piously have preserved them there, to weep over them, and 
bequeath them to his son; _mais les amis qui m'entouraient_, he says, 
_combatterent mon desir, comme une inspiration insensée de la 
douleur._

There can be no doubt that our ghastly personification of Death has 
been derived from the practice of interment; and that of all modes in 
which the dead have ever been disposed of, cremation is in some 
respects the best. But this mode, were it generally practicable, would 
in common use be accompanied with more revolting circumstances than 
that which has now become the Christian usage. Some abominations 
however it would have prevented, and though in place of those 
superstitions which it precluded others would undoubtedly have arisen, 
they would have been of a less loathsome character.

The Moors say that the dead are disturbed if their graves be trodden 
on by Christian feet; the Rabbis that they feel the worms devouring 
them.

On the south side of the city of Erzeroom is a mountain called Eyerli, 
from the same likeness which has obtained for one of the English 
mountains the unpoetical name of Saddleback. The Turkish traveller 
Evlia Effendi saw on the top of this mountain a tomb eighty paces in 
length, with two columns marking the place of the head and of the 
feet. “I was looking on the tomb,” he says, “when a bad smell occurred 
very hurtfully to my nose, and to that of my servant who held the 
horses; and looking near, I then saw that the earth of the grave, 
which was greasy and black, was boiling, like gruel in a pan. I 
returned then, and having related my adventures in the evening in 
company with the Pashaw, Djaafer Effendi of Erzeroom, a learned man 
and an elegant writer, warned me not to visit the place again, for it 
was the grave of Balaam the son of Beor, who died an infidel, under 
the curse of Moses, and whose grave was kept always in this state by 
subterraneous fires.”

When Wheler was at Constantinople, he noticed a monument in the 
fairest and largest street of that city, the cupola of which was 
covered with an iron grating. It was the tomb of Mahomet Cupriuli, 
father to the then Grand Vizier. He had not been scrupulous as to the 
means by which he settled the government during the Grand Seignior's 
minority, and carried it on afterwards, quelling the discontents and 
factions of the principal Agas, and the mutinies of the Janizaries. 
Concerning him after his decease, says this traveller, “being buried 
here, and having this stately monument of white marble covered with 
lead erected over his body, the Grand Seigneur and Vizier had this 
dream both in the same night, to wit, that he came to them and 
earnestly begged of them a little water to refresh him, being in a 
burning heat. Of this the Grand Seigneur and Vizier told each other in 
the morning, and thereupon thought fit to consult the Mufti what to do 
concerning it. The Mufti, according to their gross superstition, 
advised that the roof of his sepulchre should be uncovered, that the 
rain might descend on his body, thereby to quench the flames which 
were tormenting his soul. And this remedy the people who smarted under 
his oppression think he had great need of, supposing him to be 
tormented in the other world for his tyrannies and cruelties committed 
by him in this.”

If Cupriuli had been a Russian instead of a Turk, his body would have 
been provided with a passport before it was committed to the grave. 
Peter Henry Bruce in his curious memoirs gives the form of one which 
in the reign of Peter the Great, always before the coffin of a Russian 
was closed, was put between the fingers of the corpse:—“We N. N. do 
certify by these presents that the bearer hereof hath always lived 
among us as became a good Christian, professing the Greek religion; 
and although he may have committed some sins, he hath confessed the 
same, whereupon he hath received absolution, and taken the communion 
for the remission of sins: That he hath honoured God and his Saints, 
that he hath not neglected his prayers; and hath fasted on the hours 
and days appointed by the Church: That he hath always behaved himself 
towards me, his Confessor, in such a manner that I have no reason to 
complain of him, or to refuse him the absolution of his sins. In 
witness whereof I have given him these testimonials, to the end that 
St. Peter upon sight of them, may not deny him the opening of the gate 
to eternal bliss!”

The custom evidently implies an opinion that though soul and body were 
disunited by death, they kept close company together till after the 
burial; otherwise a passport which the Soul was to present at Heaven's 
gate, would not have been placed in the hands of the corpse. In the 
superstitions of the Romish church a re-union is frequently supposed, 
but that there is an immediate separation upon death is an article of 
faith, and it is represented by Sir Thomas More as one of the 
punishments for a sinful soul to be brought from Purgatory and made to 
attend, an unseen spectator, at the funeral of its own body, and feel 
the mockery of all the pomps and vanities used upon that occasion. The 
passage is in his Supplycacyon of Soulys. One of the Supplicants from 
Purgatory speaks:

“Some hath there of us, while we were in health, not so much studied 
how we might die penitent, and in good christian plight, as how we 
might solemnly be borne out to burying, have gay and goodly funerals, 
with heralds at our herses, and offering up our helmets, setting up 
our scutcheons and coat-armours on the wall, though there never came 
harness on our backs, nor never ancestor of ours ever bare arms 
before. Then devised we some Doctor to make a sermon at our mass in 
our month's mind, and then preach to our praise with some fond fantasy 
devised of our name; and after mass, much feasting, riotous and 
costly; and finally, like madmen, made men merry at our death, and 
take our burying for a brideale. For special punishment whereof, some 
of us have been by our Evil Angels brought forth full heavily, in full 
great despight to behold our own burying, and so, stand in great pain, 
invisible among the press, and made to look on our carrion corpse, 
carried out with great pomp, whereof our Lord knoweth we have taken 
heavy pleasure!”

In opposition to this there is a Rabbinical story which shows that 
though the Jews did not attribute so much importance to the rights of 
sepulture as the ancient Greeks, they nevertheless thought that a 
parsimonious interment occasioned some uncomfortable consequences to 
the dead.

A pious descendant of Abraham, whom his wife requited with a curtain 
lecture for having, as she thought improvidently, given alms to a poor 
person in a time of dearth, left his house, and went out to pass the 
remainder of the night among the tombs, that he might escape from her 
objurgations. There he overheard a conversation between the Spirits of 
two young women, not long deceased. The one said, “come let us go 
through the world, and then listen behind the curtain and hear what 
chastisements are decreed for it.” The other made answer, “I cannot 
go, because I have been buried in a mat made of reeds, but go you, and 
bring me account of what you hear.” Away went the Ghost whose 
grave-clothes were fit to appear in: and when she returned, “well 
friend, what have you heard behind the curtain,” said the ghost in the 
reed-mat. “I heard,” replied the gad-about, “that whatever shall be 
sown in the first rains, will be stricken with hail.” Away went the 
alms-giver; and upon this intelligence which was more certain than any 
prognostication in the Almanack, he waited till the second rains 
before he sowed his field; all other fields were struck with hail, but 
according as he had expected his crop escaped.

Next year, on the anniversary of the night which had proved so 
fortunate to him, he went again to the Tombs: and overheard another 
conversation between the same ghosts to the same purport. The well 
drest ghost went through the world, listened behind the curtain, and 
brought back information that whatever should be sown in the second 
rains would be smitten with rust. Away went the good man, and sowed 
his field in the first rains; all other crops were spoilt with the 
rust, and only his escaped. His wife then enquired of him how it had 
happened that in two successive years he had sown his fields at a 
different time from every body else, and on both occasions his were 
the only crops that had been saved. He made no secret to her of his 
adventures, but told her how he had come to the knowledge which had 
proved so beneficial. Ere long his wife happened to quarrel with the 
mother of the poor ghost who was obliged to keep her sepulchre; and 
the woman of unruly tongue, among other insults, bade her go and look 
at her daughter, whom she had buried in a reed-mat! Another 
anniversary came round, and the good man went again to the Tomb; but 
he went this time in vain, for when the well-dressed Ghost repeated 
her invitation, the other made answer, “let me alone, my friend, the 
words which have past between you and me have been heard among the 
living.”

The learned Cistercian[1] to whom I owe this legend, expresses his 
contempt for it; nevertheless he infers from it that the spirits of 
the dead know what passes in this world; and that the doctrine of the 
Romish Church upon that point, is proved by this tradition to have 
been that of the Synagogue also.

[Footnote 1: BERTOLACCI.]

The Mahommedans who adopted so many of the Rabbinical fables, 
dispensed in one case for reasons of obvious convenience, with all 
ceremonies of sepulchral costume. For the funeral of their martyrs, by 
which appellation all Musselmen who fell in battle against the 
unbelievers were honoured, none of those preparations were required, 
which were necessary for those who die a natural death. A martyr needs 
not to be washed after his death, nor to be enveloped in 
grave-clothes; his own blood with which he is besmeared serves him for 
all legal purification, and he may be wrapt in his robe, and buried 
immediately after the funeral prayer, conformably to the order of the 
Prophet, who has said, “bury them as they are, in their garments, and 
in their blood! Wash them not, for their wounds will smell of musk on 
the Day of Judgement.”

A man of Medina, taking leave of his wife as he was about to go to the 
wars commended to the Lord her unborn babe. She died presently 
afterwards, and every night there appeared a brilliant light upon the 
middle of her tomb. The husband hearing of this upon his return, 
hastened to the place; the sepulchre opened of itself; the wife sate 
up in her winding sheet, and holding out to him a boy in her arms, 
said to him take “that which thou commendedst to the Lord. Hadst thou 
commended us both, thou shouldest have found us both alive.” So saying 
she delivered to him the living infant, and laid herself down, and the 
sepulchre closed over her.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARS IMPERFECTA MANEBAT.—VIRG. ÆN.

_The following materials, printed verbatim from the MS. Collection, 
were to have completed the Chapter. It has been thought advisable in 
the present instance to shew how the lamented Southey worked up the 
collection of years. Each extract is on a separate slip of paper, and 
some of them appear to have been made from thirty to forty years ago, 
more or less._

       *       *       *       *       *

  And so the virtue of his youth before
  Was in his age the ground of his delight.

JAMES I.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _Ἔνθεν δὲ Σθενέλον τάφον ἔδρακον Ἀκτορίδαο·
   Ὅς ῥά τ Ἀμαζονίδων πολυθαρσέος ἐκ πολέμοιο
   Ἄψ ἀνιὼν (δὴ γὰρ συνανήλυθεν Ἡρὰκλῆΐ)
   Βλήμενος ἰῷ κεῖθεν ᾽επ᾽ ἀγχιάλον θάνεν ἀκτῆς.
   Ὀυ μέν θην προτέρω ἀνεμέρεον· ἧκε γὰρ αὐτὴ
   Φερσεφόνη ψυχὴν πολυδάκρυον Ἀκτορίδαο
   Λισσομένην, τυτθόν περ ὁμήθεας ἄνδρας ἰδέσθαι.
   Τύμβου δὲ στεφάνης ἐπιβὰς σκοπιάζετο νῆα,
   Τοῖος ἐὼν οἷος πόλεμονδ᾽ ἴεν· ἀμφὶ δὲ καλὴ
   Τετράφαλος φοίνικι λόφῳ ἐπελάμπετο πήληξ,
   Καὶ ῥ᾽ ὁ μὲν αὖτις ἔδυνε μέγαν ζόφον· οἱ δ᾽ ἐσιδόντες
   Θάμβησαν. τοὶς δ᾽ ὦρσε θεοπροπέων ἐπικελσαι
   Αμπυκίδης Μόψος, λοιβῆσί τε μειλίξασθαι.
   Ὃι δ᾽ ἀνὰ μὲν κραιπνῶς λαῖφος σπάσαν, ἐκ δὲ βαλόντες
   Πείσματ᾽ ἐν αἰγιαλῷ Σθενέλου τάφον ἀμφεπένοντο,
   Χύτλα τέ οἱχεύαντο, καὶ ἥγνισαν ἔντομα μήλων._

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Abaza (a Circassian tribe) have a strange way of burying their 
Beys. They put the body in a coffin of wood, which they nail on the 
branches of some high trees and made a hole in the coffin by the head, 
that the Bey as they say, may look unto Heaven. Bees enter the coffin, 
and make honey, and cover the body with their comb: If the season 
comes they open the coffin, take out the honey and sell it, therefore 
much caution is necessary against the honey of the Abazas.

EVLIA EFFENDI.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once in their life time, the Jews say, they are bound by the Law of 
Moses to go to the Holy Land, if they can, or be able, and the bones 
of many dead Jews are carried there, and there burnt. We were 
fraughted with wools from Constantinople to Sidon, in which sacks, as 
most certainly was told to me, were many Jew's bones put into little 
chests, but unknown to any of the ship. The Jews our Merchants told me 
of them at my return from Jerusalem to Saphet, but earnestly intreated 
me not to tell it, for fear of preventing them another time.

Going on, one of my companions said, if you will take the trouble of 
going a little out of the way, you will see a most remarkable thing. 
Well, said I, what should be the object of all pains taken in 
travelling, if it were not to admire the works of God. So we went on 
for an hour to the north, but not taking the great road leading to the 
Plain of Moosh, we advanced to a high rock that is a quarter of an 
hour out of the road. To this rock, high like a tower, a man was 
formerly chained, whose bones are yet preserved in the chains. Both 
bones and chains are in a high state of preservation. The bones of the 
arms are from seven to eight cubits in length, of an astonishing 
thickness. The skull is like the cupola of a bath, and a man may creep 
in and out without pain through the eye-holes. Eagles nestle in them. 
These bones are said to be those of a faithful man who in Abraham's 
time was chained by Nimrod to this rock, in order to be burnt by fire. 
The fire calcined part of his body, so that it melted in one part with 
the rock; but the arms and legs are stretching forth to the example of 
posterity. We have no doubt that they will rise again into life at the 
sound of the trumpet on the day of judgement.

EVLIA EFFENDI.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Magistrates of Leghorn have authority to issue out orders for 
killing dogs if they abound too much in the streets, and molest the 
inhabitants. The men entrusted with the execution of these orders go 
through the city in the night, and drop small bits of poisoned bread 
in the streets. These are eaten by the dogs and instantaneously kill 
them. Before sunrise the same men go through the streets with a cart, 
gather hundreds of the dead dogs, and carry them to the Jew's burying 
ground without the town.

HASSELQUIST.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the ROMANCE OF MERLIN it is said that before the time of Christ, 
Adam and Eve and the whole ancient world were (not in Limbo) but 
actually in Hell. And that when the Prophets comforted the souls under 
their sufferings by telling them of the appointed Redeemer, the Devils 
for that reason tormented these Prophets more than others. The Devils 
themselves tell the story, _et les tourmentions plus que les autres. 
Et ilz faisoyent semblant que nostre tourment ne les grevoit riens; 
ainçois comfortoyent les aultres pecheurs et disoyent. Le Saulveur de 
tout le monde viendra qui tous nous delivrera._

       *       *       *       *       *

At the time of the deluge the wife of Noah being pregnant, was through 
the hardships of the voyage delivered of a dead child to which the 
name of Tarh was given, because the letters of this word form the 
number 217 which was the number of days he was carried by his mother 
instead of the full time of 280 days, or nine months. This child was 
buried in the district now called Djezere Ibn Omar, the Island or 
Peninsula of the son of Omar, and this was the first burial on earth 
after the deluge. And Noah prayed unto the Lord, saying, Oh God thou 
hast given me a thousand years of life, and this child is dead before 
it began to live on earth! And he begged of the Lord as a blessing 
given to the burial-place of his child, that the women of this town 
might never miscarry, which was granted; so that since that time 
women, and female animals of every kind in this town are all blessed 
with births in due time and long living. The length of the grave of 
this untimely child of Noah is 40 feet and it is visited by pilgrims.

EVLIA EFFENDI.

       *       *       *       *       *

They suppose that a few souls are peculiarly gifted with the power of 
quitting their bodies, of mounting into the skies, visiting distant 
countries, and again returning and resuming them; they call the 
mystery or prayer by which this power is obtained, the _Mandiram_.

CRAUFURD.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plain of Kerbela is all desert, inhabited by none but by the dead, 
and by roving wild hounds, the race of the dogs which licked the blood 
of the martyrs, and which since are doomed to wander through the 
wilderness.

EVLIA EFFENDI.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shi whang, the K. of Tsin becoming Emperor, he chose for his sepulchre 
the mountain Li, whose foundation he caused to dig, if we may so 
speak, even to the centre of the earth. On its surface he erected a 
mausoleum which might pass for a mountain. It was five hundred feet 
high, and at least half a league in circumference. On the outside was 
a vast tomb of stone, where one might walk as easily as in the largest 
hall. In the middle was a sumptuous coffin, and all around there were 
lamps and flambeaux, whose flames were fed by human fat. Within this 
tomb, there was upon one side a pond of quicksilver, upon which were 
scattered birds of gold and silver; on the other a compleat magazine 
of moveables and arms; here and there were the most precious jewels in 
thousands.

DU HALDE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emududakel, the Messenger of Death, receives the Soul as 'tis breathed 
out of the body into a kind of a sack, and runs away with it through 
briars and thorns and burning whirlwinds, which torment the Soul very 
sensibly, till he arrives at the bank of a fiery current, through 
which he is to pass to the other side in order to deliver the soul to 
Emen, the God of the Dead.

LETTERS TO THE DANISH MISSIONARIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

A curious story concerning the power which the Soul has been supposed 
to possess of leaving the body, in a visible form, may be found in the 
notes to the Vision of the Maid of Orleans. A more extraordinary one 
occurs in the singularly curious work of Evlia Effendi.

“Sultan Bajazet II. was a saint-monarch, like Sultan Orkhaun, or 
Sultan Mustapha I. There exist different works relating his miracles 
and deeds, but they are rare. The last seven years of his life he ate 
nothing which had blood and life. One day longing much to eat calf's 
or mutton's feet, he struggled long in that glorious contest with the 
Soul, and as at last a well-seasoned dish of feet was put before him, 
he said unto his Soul, ‘See my Soul, the feet are before thee, if thou 
wantest to enjoy them, leave the body and feed on them.’ In the same 
moment a living creature was seen to come out of his mouth, which 
drank of the juice in the dish and having satisfied its appetite 
endeavoured to return into the mouth from whence it came. But Bajazet 
having prevented it with his hand to re-enter his mouth, it fell on 
the ground, and the Sultan ordered it to be beaten. The Pages arrived 
and kicked it dead on the ground. The Mufti of that time decided that 
as the Soul was an essential part of man, this dead Soul should be 
buried: prayers were performed over it, and the dead Soul was interred 
in a small tomb near Bajazet's tomb. This is the truth of the famous 
story of Bajazet II. having died twice and having been twice buried. 
After this murder of his own soul, the Sultan remained melancholy in 
the corner of retirement, taking no part or interest in the affairs of 
government.”

The same anecdote of the Soul coming out of the mouth to relish a most 
desired dish, had already happened to the Sheik Bajazet Bostaumi, who 
had much longed to eat _Mohallebi_ (a milk-dish) but Bajazet Bostaumi 
permitted it to re-enter, and Sultan Bajazet killed it; 
notwithstanding which he continued to live for some time longer.

See _Josselyn_ for a similar tale.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mohammed took his journey upon Alborach, Gabriel (said he) led me 
to the first Heaven, and the Angels in that Heaven graciously received 
me, and they beheld me with smiles and with joy, beseeching for me 
things prosperous and pleasant. One alone among the Angels there sat, 
who neither prayed for my prosperity, nor smiled; and Gabriel when I 
enquired of him who he was, replied, never hath that Angel smiled, nor 
will smile, he is the Keeper of the Fire, and I said to him is this 
the Angel who is called the well beloved of God? and he replied, this 
is that Angel. Then said I bid him that he show me the Fire, and 
Gabriel requesting him, he removed the cover of the vessel of Fire, 
and the Fire ascending I feared lest all things whatever that I saw 
should be consumed, and I besought Gabriel that the Fire again might 
be covered. And so the fire returned to its place, and it seemed then 
as when the Sun sinks in the West, and the gloomy Angel, remaining the 
same, covered up the Fire.

RODERICI XIMENES, ARC. TOL. HIST. ARAB.

       *       *       *       *       *

Should a Moslem when praying, feel himself disposed to gape, he is 
ordered to suppress the sensation as the work of the Devil, and to 
close his mouth, lest the father of iniquity should enter and take 
possession of his person. It is curious that this opinion prevails 
also among the Hindoos who twirl their fingers close before their 
mouths when gaping, to prevent an evil spirit from getting in that 
way.

GRIFFITHS.

       *       *       *       *       *

In what part soever of the world they die and are buried, their bodies 
must all rise to judgement in the Holy Land, out of the valley of 
Jehosophat, which causeth that the greater and richer sort of them, 
have their bones conveyed to some part thereof by their kindred or 
friends. By which means they are freed of a labour to scrape thither 
through the ground, which with their nails they hold they must, who 
are not there buried, nor conveyed thither by others.

SANDERSON. PURCHAS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Russians in effecting a practicable road to China, discovered in 
lat. 50 N., between the rivers Irtish and Obalet, a desert of very 
considerable extent, overspread in many parts with Tumuli, or Barrows, 
which have been also taken notice of by Mr. Bell and other writers. 
This desert constitutes the southern boundary of Siberia. It is said 
the borderers on the desert, have for many years, continued to dig for 
the treasure deposited in these tumuli, which still however remain 
unexhausted. We are told that they find considerable quantities of 
gold, silver and brass, and some precious stones, among ashes and 
remains of dead bodies: also hilts of swords, armour, ornaments for 
saddles and bridles, and other trappings, with the bones of those 
animals to which the trappings belonged, among which are the bones of 
elephants. The Russian Court, says Mr. Demidoff, being informed of 
these depredations, sent a principal officer, with sufficient troops, 
to open such of these tumuli, as were too large for the marauding 
parties to undertake and to secure their contents. This Officer on 
taking a survey of the numberless monuments of the dead spread over 
this great desert, concluded that the barrow of the largest dimensions 
most probably contained the remains of the prince or chief; and he was 
not mistaken; for, after removing a very deep covering of earth and 
stones, the workmen came to three vaults, constructed of stones, of 
rude workmanship; a view of which is exhibited in the engraving. That 
wherein the prince was deposited, which was in the centre, and the 
largest of the three, was easily distinguished by the sword, spear, 
bow, quiver and arrow which lay beside him. In the vault beyond him, 
towards which his feet lay, were his horse, bridle, saddle and 
stirrups. The body of the prince lay in a reclining posture, on a 
sheet of pure gold, extending from head to foot, and another sheet of 
gold, of the like dimensions, was spread over him. He was wrapt in a 
rich mantle, bordered with gold and studded with rubies and emeralds. 
His head, neck, breast and arms naked, and without any ornament. In 
the lesser vault lay the princess, distinguished by her female 
ornaments. She was placed reclining against the wall, with a gold 
chain of many links, set with rubies, round her neck, and gold 
bracelets round her arms. The head, breast and arms were naked. The 
body was covered with a rich robe, but without any border of gold or 
jewels, and was laid on a sheet of fine gold, and covered over with 
another. The four sheets of gold weighed 40 lb. The robes of both 
looked fair and complete; but on touching, crumbled into dust. Many 
more of the tumuli were opened, but this was the most remarkable. In 
the others a great variety of curious articles were found.

MONTHLY REVIEW, Vol. 49.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following story I had from Mr. _Pierson_, factor here for the 
_African_ company, who was sent here from _Cape Coree_ to be second to 
Mr. _Smith_ then chief factor. Soon after his arrival Mr. _Smith_ fell 
very ill of the country malignant fever; and having little prospect of 
recovery, resigned his charge of the company's affairs to _Pierson_. 
This Mr. _Smith_ had the character of an obliging, ingenious young 
gentleman, and was much esteemed by the King, who hearing of his 
desperate illness, sent his _Fatishman_ to hinder him from dying; who 
coming to the factory went to Mr. _Smith's_ bed-side, and told him, 
that his King had such a kindness for him, that he had sent to keep 
him alive, and that he should not die. Mr. _Smith_ was in such a 
languishing condition, that he little regarded him. Then the 
_Fatishman_ went from him to the hog-yard, where they bury the white 
men; and having carried with him some brandy, rum, oil, rice, &c., he 
cry'd out aloud, _O you dead white men that lie here, you have a mind 
to have this factor that is sick to you, but he is our king's friend, 
and he loves him, and will not part with him as yet._ Then he went to 
captain _Wiburn's_ grave who built the factory, and cry'd, _O you 
captain of all the dead white men that lie here, this is your doings; 
you would have this man from us to bear you company, because he is a 
good man, but our king will not part with him, nor you shall not have 
him yet._ Then making a hole in the ground over his grave, he poured 
in the brandy, rum, oil, rice, &c., telling him, _If he wanted those 
things, there they were for him, but the factor he must not expect, 
nor should not have,_ with more such nonsense; then went to _Smith_, 
and assured him he should not die; but growing troublesome to the sick 
man, _Pierson_ turned him out of the factory, and in two days after 
poor _Smith_ made his _exit_.

Mr. Josiah Relph to Mr. Thomas Routh, in Castle Street, Carlisle.

June 20, 1740.

       *       *       *       *       *

“The following was sent me a few months ago by the minister of 
Kirklees in Yorkshire, the burying place of Robin Hood. My 
correspondent tells me it was found among the papers of the late Dr. 
Gale of York, and is supposed to have been the genuine epitaph of that 
noted English outlaw. He adds that the grave stone is yet to be seen, 
but the characters are now worn out.

  Here undernead dis laitl Stean
  Laiz Robert Earl of Huntingtun.
  Nea Arcir ver az hie sa geud,
  An Piple kauld im Robin Heud.
  Sick utlawz az hi and is men
  Vil england nivr si agen.

Obiit 24. Kal. Dehembris, 1247.

I am, dear Sir, your most faithful and humble Servant,

JOSIAH RELPH.”

_Note in Nichols_.—See the stone engraved in the Sepulchral Monuments, 
vol. i. p. cviii. Mr. Gough says the inscription was never on it; and 
that the stone must have been brought from another place, as the 
ground under it, on being explored, was found to have been never 
before disturbed.[2]

[Footnote 2: On the disputed question of the genuineness of the above 
epitaph, see the Notes and Illustrations to Ritson's Robin Hood, pp. 
xliv—1. Robin Hood's Death and Burial is the last Ballad in the second 
volume.

  “And there they buried bold Robin Hood,
       Near to the fair Kirkleys.”]

       *       *       *       *       *

Lord Dalmeny, son of the E. of Rosebery, married about eighty years 
ago a widow at Bath for her beauty. They went abroad, she sickened and 
on her death-bed requested that she might be interred in some 
particular church-yard, either in Sussex or Suffolk I forget which. 
The body was embalmed, but at the custom-house in the port where it 
was landed the officer suspected smuggling and insisted on opening it. 
They recognized the features of the wife of their own clergyman,—who 
having been married to him against her own inclination had eloped. 
Both husbands followed the body to the grave. The Grandfather of Dr. 
Smith of Norwich knew the Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a melancholy notion of the Stoics that the condition of the 
Soul, and even its individual immortality, might be affected by the 
circumstances of death: for example, that if any person were killed by 
a great mass of earth falling upon him, or the ruins of a building, 
the Soul as well as the body would be crushed, and not being able to 
extricate itself would be extinguished there: _existimant animam 
hominis magno pondere extriti permeare non posse, et statim spargi, 
quia non fuerit illi exitus liber._

Upon this belief, the satirical epitaph on Sir John Vanbrugh would 
convey what might indeed be called a heavy curse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of the Greenlanders, for even in Greenland there are sects, 
suppose the soul to be so corporeal that it can increase or decrease, 
is divisible, may lose part of its substance, and have it restored 
again. On its way to Heaven which is five days dreadful journey, all 
the way down a rugged rock, which is so steep that they must slide 
down it, and so rough that their way is tracked with blood, they are 
liable to be destroyed, and this destruction, which they call the 
second death, is final, and therefore justly deemed of all things the 
most terrible. It is beyond the power of their Angekoks to remedy this 
evil; but these impostors pretend to the art of repairing a maimed 
soul, bringing home a strayed or runaway one, and of changing away one 
that is sickly, for the sound and sprightly one of a hare, a rein 
deer, a bird, or an infant.

       *       *       *       *       *

“This is the peevishness of our humane wisdom, yea, rather of our 
humane folly, to earn for tidings from the dead, as if a spirit 
departed could declare anything more evidently than the book of God, 
which is the sure oracle of life? This was Saul's practise,—neglect 
Samuel when he was alive, and seek after him when he was dead. What 
says the Prophet, _Should not a people seek unto their God? Should the 
living repair to the dead? (Isai. viij. 19.)_ Among the works of 
Athanasius I find (though he be not the author of the questions to 
Antiochus,) a discourse full of reason, why God would not permit the 
soul of any of those that departed from hence to return back unto us 
again, and to declare the state of things in hell unto us. For what 
pestilent errors would arise from thence to seduce us? Devils would 
transform themselves into the shapes of men that were deceased, 
pretend that they were risen from the dead (for what will not the 
Father of lies feign?) and so spread in any false doctrines, or incite 
us to many barbarous actions, to our endless error and destruction. 
And admit they be not Phantasms, and delusions, but the very men, yet 
all men are liars, but God is truth. I told you what a Necromancer 
Saul was in the Old Testament, he would believe nothing unless a 
prophet rose from the grave to teach him. There is another as good as 
himself in the New Testament, and not another pattern in all the 
Scripture to my remembrance, Luke xvi. 27. The rich man in hell urged 
Abraham to send Lazarus to admonish his brethren of their wicked life; 
Abraham refers to Moses and the Prophets. He that could not teach 
himself when he was alive, would teach Abraham himself being in hell, 
_Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they 
will repent._

“The mind is composed with quietness to hear the living; the 
apparitions of dead men, beside the suspicion of delusion, would fill 
us with gastly horror, and it were impossible we should be fit 
scholars to learn if such strong perturbation of fear should be upon 
us. How much better hath God ordained for our security, and 
tranquillity, _that the priest's lips should preserve knowledge_? I 
know, if God shall see it fit to have us disciplined by such means, he 
can stir up the spirits of the faithful departed to come among us: So, 
after Christ's resurrection many dead bodies of the Saints which slept 
arose, and came out of their graves, and went into the Holy City, and 
appeared unto many. This was not upon a small matter, but upon a brave 
and renowned occasion: But for the Spirits of damnation, that are tied 
in chains of darkness, there is no repassage for them, and it makes 
more to strengthen our belief that never any did return from hell to 
tell us their woeful tale, than if any should return. It is among the 
severe penalties of damnation that there is no indulgence for the 
smallest respite to come out of it. The heathen put that truth into 
this fable. The Lion asked the Fox, why he never came to visit him 
when he was sick: Says the Fox, because I can trace many beasts by the 
print of their foot that have gone toward your den, Sir Lion, but I 
cannot see the print of one foot that ever came back:

              _Quia me vestigia terrent
  Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum._

So there is a beaten, and a broad road that leads the reprobate to 
hell, but you do not find the print of one hoof that ever came back. 
When I have given you my judgment about apparitions of the dead in 
their descending from Heaven, or ascending from hell, I must tell you 
in the third place, I have met with a thousand stories in Pontifician 
writings concerning some that have had repassage from Purgatory to 
their familiars upon earth. Notwithstanding the reverence I bear to 
Gregory the Great, I cannot refrain to say; He was much to blame to 
begin such fictions upon his credulity; others have been more to blame 
that have invented such Legends; and they are most to be derided that 
believe them. _O miserable Theology!_ if, thy tenets must be confirmed 
by sick men's dreams, and dead men's phantastical apparitions!”

BP. HACKETT.

       *       *       *       *       *

“It is a morose humour in some, even ministers, that they will not 
give a due commendation to the deceased: whereby they not only offer a 
seeming unkindness to the dead, but do a real injury to the living, by 
discouraging virtue, and depriving us of the great instruments of 
piety, good examples: which usually are far more effective methods of 
instruction, than any precepts: These commonly urging only the 
necessity of those duties, while the other shew the possibility and 
manner of performing.

“But then, 'tis a most unchristian and uncharitable mistake in those, 
that think it unlawful to commemorate the dead, and to celebrate their 
memories: whereas there is no one thing does so much uphold and keep 
up the honour and interest of religion amongst the multitude, as the 
due observance of those Anniversaries which the Church has, upon this 
account, scattered throughout the whole course of the year, would do: 
and indeed to our neglect of this in a great part the present decay of 
religion may rationally be imputed.

“Thus in this age of our's what Pliny saith of his, _Postquam desimus 
facere laudanda, laudari quoque ineptum putamus._ Since people have 
left off doing things that are praiseworthy, they look upon praise 
itself as a silly thing.

“And possibly the generality of hearers themselves are not free from 
this fault; who peradventure may fancy their own life upbraided, when 
they hear another's commended.

“But that the servants of God, which depart this life in his faith and 
fear, may and must be praised, I shall endeavour to make good upon 
these three grounds.

“_In common justice to the deceased themselves._ Ordinary civility 
teaches us to speak well of the dead. _Nec quicquam sanctius habet 
reverentia superstitum, quàm ut amissos venerabiliter recordetur,_ 
says Ausonius, and makes this the ground of the Parentalia, which had 
been ever since Numa's time.

“_Praise_, however it may become the living, is a just debt to the 
deserts of the dead, who are now got clear out of the reach of envy; 
which, if it have anything of the generous in it, will scorn, 
vulture-like, to prey upon carcass.

“Besides, Christianity lays a greater obligation upon us; _The 
Communion of Saints_ is a _Tenet_ of our faith. Now, as we ought not 
_pray_ to or for them, so we may and must _praise_ them.

“This is the least we can do in return for those great offices, they 
did the Church Militant, while they were with us, and now do, they are 
with God; nor have we any other probable way of communicating with 
them.

“The Philosopher in his Morals makes it a question, whether the dead 
are in any way concerned in what befals them or their posterity after 
their decease; and whether those honours and reproaches, which 
survivors cast upon them, reach them or no? and he concludes it after 
a long debate in the affirmative; not so, he says, as to alter their 
state, but, _συμβάλλεσθαί τι_, to contribute somewhat to it.

“Tully, though not absolutely persuaded of an immortal soul, as 
speaking doubtfully and variously of it, yet is constant to this, that 
he takes a good name and a reputation, we leave behind us, to be a 
kind of immortality.

“But there is more in it than so. Our remembrance of the Saints may be 
a means to improve their bliss, and heighten their rewards to all 
eternity. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, hath his bosom thus 
daily enlarged for new comers.

“Whether the heirs of the kingdom are, at their first admission, 
instated into a full possession of all their glory, and kept to that 
stint, I think may be a doubt. For if the faculty be perfected by the 
object, about which 'tis conversant; then the faculties of those 
blessed ones being continually employed upon an infinite object, must 
needs be infinitely perficible, and capable still of being more and 
more enlarged, and consequently of receiving still new and further 
additions of glory.

“Not only so, (this is in Heaven:) but even the influence of that 
example, they leave behind them on earth, drawing still more and more 
souls after them to God, will also add to those improvements to the 
end of the world, and bring in a revenue of accessory joys.

“And would it not be unjust in us then to deny them those glorious 
advantages, which our commemoration and inclination may and ought to 
give them.”[3]

ADAM LITTLETON.

[Footnote 3: “Five Sermons formerly printed,” p. 61., at the end of 
the volume. The one from which the above passage is extracted is that 
preached at the obsequies of the Right Honorable the Lady Jane 
Cheyne.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Circles and right lines limit and close all bodies, and the mortal 
right lined circle, must conclude to shut up all. There is no Antidote 
against the Opinion of Time, which, temporally considereth all things; 
Our Fathers find their Graves in our short memories and sadly tell us 
how we may be buried in our survivors. Grave-stones tell truth scarce 
forty years: Generations pass while some Trees stand, and old families 
last not three oaks. To be read by bare Inscriptions like many in 
Gruter, to hope for Eternity by Ænigmatical Epithetes, or first 
Letters of our names to be studied by Antiquaries, who we were, and 
have new names given us like many of the Mummies, are cold 
consolations unto the students of perpetuity even by everlasting 
Languages.

SIR T. BROWNE.




