CHAPTER CCXLI.

THE DOCTOR'S UTOPIA DENOMINATED COLUMBIA.—HIS SCHEME ENTERED UPON—BUT 
‘LEFT HALF TOLD’ LIKE ‘THE STORY OF CAMBUSCAN BOLD.’

I will to satisfy and please myself, make an Utopia of mine own, a new 
Atlantis, a poetical commonwealth of mine own, in which I will freely 
domineer, build cities, make laws, statutes, as I list myself. And why 
may I not?

BURTON.


The Doctor's plan would have provided materials for a moral and 
physiological Cadastre, or Domesday Book. This indeed is the place for 
stating what the reader, knowing as much as he knows of our 
Philosopher, will not be surprised to hear, that Dr. Dove had 
conceived an Utopia of his own. He fixed it an island, thinking the 
sea to be the best of all neighbours, and he called it Columbia, not 
as pretending that it had been discovered by his “famous namesake,” 
but for a reason which the sagacious may divine.

The scheme of his government had undergone many changes, although from 
the beginning it was established upon the eternal and immutable 
principles of truth and justice. Every alteration was intended to be 
final; yet it so happened that, notwithstanding the proposed 
perpetuity of the structure, and the immutability of the materials, he 
frequently found cause to exercise the imperscriptible and inalienable 
right of altering and improving his own work. He justified this, as 
being himself sole legislator, and moreover the only person in 
existence whose acceptance of the new constitution was necessary for 
its full establishment; and no just objection, he said, could be 
advanced against any of these changes, if they were demonstrably for 
the better, not merely innovations, but improvements also; for no 
possible revolution however great, or however suddenly effected, could 
occasion the slightest evil to his Commonwealth. Governments _in 
nubibus_ being mended as easily as they are made, for which, as for 
many other reasons, they are so much better than any that are now 
actually existing, have existed, or ever will exist.

At first he denominated his Commonwealth an Iatrarchy, and made the 
Archiatros, or Chief Physician, head of the state. But upon after 
consideration he became convinced that the cares of general 
government, after all the divisions and subdivisions which could be 
made, were quite enough for any one head, however capacious and 
however strong, and however ably assisted. Columbia therefore was made 
an absolute monarchy, hereditary in the male line, according to the 
Salic law.

  How did he hold sweet dalliance with his crown,
  And wanton with dominion, how lay down,
  Without the sanction of a precedent,
  Rules of most large and absolute extent,
  Rules which from sense of public virtue spring,
  And all at once commence a Patriot King![1]

O Simon Bolivar, once called the Liberator, if thou couldst have 
followed the example of this less practical but more philosophical 
statesman, and made and maintained thyself as absolute monarch of thy 
Columbia, well had it been for thy Columbians and for thee! better 
still for thyself, it may be feared, if thou hadst never been born.

[Footnote 1: CHURCHILL.]

There was an order of hereditary nobles in the Doctor's Columbia; men 
were raised to that rank as a just reward for any signal service which 
they had rendered to the state; but on the other hand an individual 
might be degraded for any such course of conduct as evinced depravity 
in himself, or was considered as bringing disgrace upon his order. The 
chiefs of the Hierarchy, the Iatrarchy, the Nomarchy and the Hoplarchy 
(under which title both sciences, naval and military, were comprised) 
were like our Bishops, Peers of the realm by virtue of their station, 
and for life only.

I do not remember what was the scheme of representation upon which his 
House of Commons was elected, farther than it commenced with universal 
suffrage and ascended through several stages, the lowest assembly 
chusing electors for the next above it, so that the choice ultimately 
rested with those who from their education and station of life might 
be presumed to exercise it with due discretion. Such schemes are 
easily drawn up; making and mending constitutions, to the entire 
satisfaction of the person so employed, being in truth among the 
easiest things in the world. But like most Utopianizers the legislator 
of this Columbia had placed his Absolute King and his free People 
under such strict laws, and given such functions to the local 
authorities, and established such complete and precise order in every 
tything, that the duties of the legislative body were easy indeed; 
this its very name imported; for he called it the Conservative 
Assembly.

  Nor is Crown-wisdom any quintessence
  Of abstract truth, or art of Government,
  More than sweet sympathy, or counterpease
  Of humours, temper'd happily to please.[2]

[Footnote 2: LORD BROOKE.]

The legislator of Columbia considered good policy as a very simple 
thing. He said to his King, his Three Estates and his collective 
nation, with the inspired lawgiver “and now Israel what doth the Lord 
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all 
his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart and with all thy soul: to keep the commandments of the Lord and 
his statutes, which I command thee, this day, for thy good?” And he 
added with St. Paul, “now the end of the commandment is charity, out 
of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.”

Take care of the pennies, says the frugal old Proverb, and the pounds 
will take care of themselves. “_Les petites choses_,” says M. de 
Custine, _sont tout ce qu'on_ sent _de l'existence; les grandes se_ 
savent, _ce qui est très-différent._ Take care of little things, was 
the Doctor's maxim as a legislator, and great ones will then proceed 
regularly and well. He was not ignorant that legislators as well as 
individuals might be penny-wise and pound foolish; proofs enough he 
had seen in the conduct of the English Government, and many more and 
more glaring ones he would have seen if he had lived to behold the 
progress of œconomical reform and liberal legislation. He also knew 
that an over-attention to trifles was one sure indication of a little 
mind; but in legislation as in experimental philosophy, he argued, 
that circumstances which appeared trifling to the ignorant, were 
sometimes in reality of essential importance, that those things are 
not trifles upon which the comfort of domestic life, the peace of a 
neighbourhood, and the stability of a state depend, and yet all these 
depend mainly upon things apparently so trifling as common schools and 
parochial government.

“I have ever observed it,” says Ben Jonson, “to have been the office 
of a wise patriot, among the greatest affairs of the state, to take 
care of the commonwealth of learning. For schools they are the 
seminaries of state; and nothing is worthier the study of a statesman, 
than that part of the republic which we call the advancement of 
letters.”




