CHAPTER CCXVI.

A SPANISH AUTHORESS.—HOW THE DOCTOR OBTAINED HER WORKS FROM 
MADRID.—THE PLEASURE AND ADVANTAGES WHICH THE AUTHOR DERIVES FROM HIS 
LANDMARKS IN THE BOOKS WHICH HE HAD PERUSED.

ALEX. _Quel es D. Diego aquel Arbol,
       que tiene la copa en tierra
       y las raizes arriba?_

DIEG. _El hombre._

EL LETRADO DEL CIELO.


  Man is a Tree that hath no top in cares,
  No root in comforts.[1]

This is one of the many poetical passages in which the sound is better 
than the sense;—yet it is not without its beauty. The same similitude 
has been presented by Henry More in lines which please the ear less, 
but satisfy the understanding.

  The lower man is nought but a fair plant
  Whose grosser matter is from the base ground.

“A plant,” says Jones of Nayland, “is a system of life, but 
insensitive and fixed to a certain spot. An animal hath voluntary 
motion, sense, or perception, and is capable of pain and pleasure. Yet 
in the construction of each there are some general principles which 
very obviously connect them. It is literally as well as metaphorically 
true, that trees have limbs, and an animal body branches. A vascular 
system is also common to both, in the channels of which life is 
maintained and circulated. When the trachea, with its branches in the 
lungs, or the veins and arteries, or the nerves, are separately 
represented, we have the figure of a tree. The leaves of trees have a 
fibrous and fleshy part; their bark is a covering which answers to the 
skin in animals. An active vapour pervades them both, and perspires 
from both, which is necessary for the preservation of health and 
vigour. The _vis vitæ_, or involuntary, mechanical force of animal 
life, is kept up by the same elements which act upon plants for their 
growth and support.”[2]

[Footnote 1: CHAPMAN.]

[Footnote 2: The reader of Berkeley will naturally turn to the Siris 
of that author—called by Southey in his life of Wesley “one of the 
best, wisest, and greatest men whom Ireland, with all its fertility of 
genius, has produced.” Vol. ii. 260., 2nd _Edit._]

“Plants,” says Novalis, “are Children of the Earth; we are Children of 
the Æther. Our lungs are properly our root; we live when we breathe; 
we begin our life with breathing.” Plato also compared man to a Tree, 
but his was a physical similitude, he likened the human vegetable to a 
tree inverted, with the root above and the branches below. Antonio 
Perez allegorized the similitude in one of his epistles to Essex, 
thus, _unde credis hominem inversam arborem appellari? Inversam 
nostris oculis humanis et terrenis; rectam verò verè, viridemque, si 
radicem defixam habuerit in suo naturali loco, cœlo, unde orta._ And 
Rabelais pursues the resemblance farther, saying that trees differ 
from beasts in this, _qu'elles ont la teste, c'est le tronc, en bas; 
les cheveulx, ce sont les racines, en terre; et les pieds, ce sont les 
rameaulx, contremont; comme si un homme faisoit le chesne fourchu._

The thought that man is like a tree arose in the Doctor's mind more 
naturally when he first saw the representation of the veins and 
arteries in the old translation of Ambrose Paré's works. And when in 
course of time he became a curious enquirer into the history of her 
art, he was less disposed to smile at any of the fancies into which 
Doña Oliva Sabuco Barrera had been led by this resemblance than to 
admire the novelty and ingenuity of the theory which she deduced from 
it.

Bless ye the memory of this Spanish Lady, all ye who bear, or aspire 
to, the honour of the bloody hand as Knights of Esculapius! For from 
her, according to Father Feyjoo, the English first, and afterwards the 
physicians of other countries learnt the theory of nervous 
diseases;—never therefore did any other individual contribute so 
largely to the gratification of fee-feeling fingers!

Feyjoo has properly enumerated her among the women who have done 
honour to their country: and later Spaniards have called her the 
immortal glory not of Spain alone, but of all Europe: She was born, 
and dwelt in the city of Alcaraz, and flourished in the reign of 
Philip II. to whom she dedicated in 1587 her “New Philosophy of the 
Nature of Man,”[3] appealing to the ancient law of chivalry, whereby 
great Lords and high born Knights were bound always to favour women in 
their adventures. In placing under the eagle wings of his Catholic 
Majesty this child which she had engendered, she told the King that he 
was then receiving from a woman greater service than any that men had 
rendered him, with whatever zeal and success they had exerted 
themselves to serve him. The work which she laid before him would 
better the world, she said, in many things, and if he could not attend 
to it, those who came after him, peradventure would. For though they 
were already all too-many books in the world, yet this one was 
wanting.

[Footnote 3: It should seem by her name, as suffixed to the Carta 
Dedicatorie, that she was of French or Breton extraction, for she 
signs herself, Oliva de Nantes, Sabuco Barrera. _R. S._]

The brief and imperfect notices of this Lady's system, which the 
Doctor had met with in the course of his reading, made him very 
desirous of procuring her works: this it would not be easy to do in 
England at this time, and then it was impossible. He obtained them 
however through the kindness of Mason's friend, Mr. Burgh, whom he 
used to meet at Mr. Copley's at Netterhall, and who in great or in 
little things was always ready to render any good office in his power 
to any person. Burgh procured the book through the Rev. Edward Clarke 
(father of Dr. Clarke the traveller) then Chaplain to the British 
Embassador in Spain. The volume came with the despatches from Madrid, 
it was forwarded to Mr. Burgh in an official frank, and the Doctor 
marked with a white stone the day on which the York carrier delivered 
it at his house. That precious copy is now in my possession;[4] my 
friend has noted in it, as was his custom, every passage that seemed 
worthy of observation, with the initial of his own name—a small 
capital, neatly written in red ink. Such of his books as I have been 
able to collect are full of these marks, showing how carefully he had 
read them. These notations have been of much use to me in my perusal, 
leading me to pause where he had paused, to observe what he had noted 
and to consider what had to him seemed worthy of consideration. And 
though I must of necessity more frequently have failed to connect the 
passages so noted with my previous knowledge as he had done, and for 
that reason to see their bearings in the same point of view, yet 
undoubtedly I have often thus been guided into the same track of 
thought which he had pursued before me. Long will it be before some of 
these volumes meet with a third reader; never with one in whom these 
vestiges of their former owner can awaken a feeling like that which 
they never fail to excite in me!

[Footnote 4: This curious book I unluckily missed at the Sale of 
Southey's Library. I was absent at the time, and it passed into 
private hands. It sold for thirteen shillings only. See No. 3453. The 
title is as follows;—_Sabuco (Olivia) Nueva Filosofia de la Naturaleza 
del hombre, no conocida ni alcançada de los Grandes Filosofos 
Antiguos_. FIRST EDITION. _Madrid, 1587_.]

But the red letters in this volume have led me from its contents; and 
before I proceed to enter upon them in another chapter, I will 
conclude this, recurring to the similitude at its commencement, with 
an extract from one of Yorick's Sermons. “It is very remarkable,” he 
says, “that the Apostle St. Paul calls a bad man a wild olive _tree_, 
not barely a branch,” (as in the opposite case where our Saviour told 
his disciples that He was the vine, and that they were only 
branches)—“but a Tree, which having a root of its own supports itself, 
and stands in its own strength, and brings forth its own fruit. And so 
does every bad man in respect of the wild and sour fruit of a vicious 
and corrupt heart. According to the resemblance, if the Apostle 
intended it, he is a Tree,—has a root of his own, and fruitfulness 
such as it is, with a power to bring it forth without help. But in 
respect of religion and the moral improvements of virtue and goodness, 
the Apostle calls us, and reason tells us, we are no more than a 
_branch_, and all our fruitfulness, and all our support, depend so 
much upon the influence and communications of God, that without Him we 
can do nothing, as our Saviour declares.”




