CHAPTER CCIV.

ADAM LITTLETON'S STATEMENT THAT EVERY MAN IS MADE UP OF THREE 
EGOS,—DEAN YOUNG—DISTANCE BETWEEN A MAN'S HEAD AND HIS HEART.

Perhaps when the Reader considers the copiousness of the argument, he 
will rather blame me for being too brief than too tedious.

DR JOHN SCOTT.


In the passage quoted from Adam Littleton in the preceding chapter, 
that good old divine enquired whether a man and himself were two. A 
Moorish prince in the most extravagant of Dryden's extravagant 
tragedies, (they do not deserve to be called romantic,) agrees with 
him, and exclaims to his confidential friend,

  Assist me Zulema, if thou wouldst be
  The friend thou seem'st, assist me against me.

Machiavel says of Cosmo de Medici that who ever considered his gravity 
and his levity might say there were two distinct persons in him.

“There is often times,” says Dean Young, (father of the poet) “a 
prodigious distance betwixt a man's head and his heart; such a 
distance that they seem not to have any correspondence; not to belong 
to the same person, not to converse in the same world. Our heads are 
sometimes in Heaven, contemplating the nature of God, the blessedness 
of Saints, the state of eternity; while our hearts are held captive 
below in a conversation earthly, sensual, devilish. 'Tis possible we 
may sometimes commend virtue convincingly, unanswerably; and yet our 
own hearts be never affected by our own arguments; we may represent 
vice in her native dress of horror, and yet our hearts be not at all 
startled with their own menaces: We may study and acquaint ourselves 
with all the truths of religion, and yet all this out of curiosity, or 
hypocrisy, or ostentation; not out of the power of godliness, or the 
serious purpose of good living. All which is a sufficient proof that 
the consent of the Head and of the Heart are two different things.”

Dean Young may seem in this passage to have answered Adam the 
Lexicographist's query in the affirmative, by shewing that the head 
belongs sometimes to one Self and the heart to the other. Yet these 
two Selves, notwithstanding this continual discord, are so united in 
matrimony, and so inseparably made one flesh, that it becomes another 
query whether death itself can part them.

The aforesaid Dean concludes one of his Discourses with the advice of 
an honest heathen. _Learn to be one Man_; that is, learn to live and 
act alike. For says he, “while we act from contrary principles; 
sometimes give, and sometimes defraud; sometimes love and sometimes 
betray; sometimes are devout, and sometimes careless of God; this is 
to be _two_ Men, which is a foolish aim, and always ends in loss of 
pains. ‘No,’ says wise Epictetus, ‘_Learn to be one Man_,’ thou mayest 
be a good man; or thou mayest be a bad man, and that to the purpose; 
but it is impossible that thou shouldst be both. And here the 
Philosopher had the happiness to fall in exactly with the notion of my 
text. _We cannot serve two Masters._”

But in another sermon Adam Littleton says that “every man is made of 
three Egos, and has three Selfs in him;” and that this “appears in the 
reflection of Conscience upon actions of a dubious nature; whilst one 
Self accuses, another Self defends, and the third Self passes 
judgement upon what hath been so done by the man!” This he adduced as 
among various “mean and unworthy comparisons, whereby to show that 
though the mysterious doctrine of the Trinity” far exceeds our reason, 
there want not natural instances to illustrate it. But he adds most 
properly that we should neither “say or think ought of God in this 
kind,” without a preface of reverence and asking pardon; “for it is 
sufficient for us and most suitable to the mystery, so to conceive, so 
to discourse of God, as He himself has been pleased to make Himself 
known to us in his Word.”

If all theologians had been as wise, as humble and as devout as Adam 
Littleton, from how many heresies and evils might Christendom have 
been spared.

In the Doctor's own days the proposition was advanced, and not as a 
paradox, that a man might be in several places at the same time. 
_Presence corporelle de l'homme en plusieurs lieux prouvée possible 
par les principes de la bonne Philosophie_, is the title of a treatise 
by the Abbé de Lignac, who having been first a Jesuit, and then an 
Oratorian, secularized himself without departing from the principles 
in which he had been trained up. The object of his treatise was to 
show that there is nothing absurd in the doctrine of 
Transubstantiation. He made a distinction between man and his body, 
the body being always in a state of change, the man remaining the 
while identically the same. But how his argument that because a worm 
may be divided and live, the life which animated it while it was 
whole, continues a single life when it animates all the parts into 
which the body may have separated, proves his proposition, or how his 
proposition if proved could prove the hyper-mysterious figment of the 
Romish Church to be no figment, but a divine truth capable of 
philosophical demonstration, Œdipus himself were he raised from the 
dead would be unable to explain.




CHAPTER CCV.

EQUALITY OF THE SEXES,—A POINT ON WHICH IT WAS NOT EASY TO COLLECT THE 
DOCTOR'S OPINION.—THE SALIC LAW.—DANIEL ROGERS'S TREATISE OF 
MATRIMONIAL HONOUR.—MISS HATFIELD'S LETTERS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE 
FEMALE SEX, AND LODOVICO DOMENICHI'S DIALOGUE UPON THE NOBLENESS OF 
WOMEN.

                Mirths and toys
  To cozen time withal: for o' my troth, Sir
  I can love,—I think well too,—well enough;
  And think as well of women as they are,—
  Pretty fantastic things, some more regardful,
  And some few worth a service. I'm so honest
  I wish 'em all in Heaven and you know how hard, Sir,
  'Twill be to get in there with their great farthingals.

BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.

  And not much easier now with their great sleeves.

AUTHOR, A.D. 1830.


The question concerning the equality of the sexes which was discussed 
so warmly some thirty years ago in Magazines and Debating Societies, 
was one upon which it was not easy to collect the Doctor's real 
opinion. His manner indeed was frequently sportive when his meaning 
was most serious, and as frequently the thoughts and speculations with 
which he merely played, and which were sports or exercitations of 
intellect and humour, were advanced with apparent gravity. The 
propensity however was always restrained within due bounds, for he had 
treasured up his father's lessons in his heart, and would have 
regarded it as a crime ever to have trifled with his principles or 
feelings. But this question concerning the sexes was a subject which 
he was fond of introducing before his female acquaintance; it was like 
hitting the right note for a dog when you play the flute, he said. The 
sort of half anger, and the indignation, and the astonishment and the 
merriment withal which he excited when he enlarged upon this fertile 
theme, amused him greatly, and moreover he had a secret pleasure in 
observing the invincible good humour of his wife, even when she 
thought it necessary for the honour of her sex to put on a semblance 
of wrath at the notions which he repeated, and the comments with which 
he accompanied them.

He used to rest his opinion of male superiority upon divinity, law, 
grammar, natural history, and the universal consent of nations. Noting 
also by the way, that in the noble science of heraldry, it is laid 
down as a rule “that amongst things sensitive the males are of more 
worthy bearing than the females.”[1]

[Footnote 1: GWILLIM.]

The Salic law he looked upon as in this respect the Law of Nature. And 
therefore he thought it was wisely appointed in France, that the royal 
Midwife should receive a fee of five hundred crowns upon the birth of 
a boy and only three hundred if it were a female child. This the 
famous Louise Bourgeois has stated to be the custom, who for the 
edification of posterity, the advancement of her own science, and the 
use of French historians published a _Recit veritable de la naissance 
de Messieurs et Dames les enfans de France_, containing minute details 
of every royal parturition at which she had officiated.

But he dwelt with more force on the theological grounds of his 
position. “The wife is the weaker vessel. Wives submit yourselves to 
your husbands: be in subjection to them. The Husband is the head. 
Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord.” And here he had recourse to 
the authority of Daniel Rogers (whom he liked the better for his 
name's sake) who in his Treatise of Matrimonial Honour teaches that 
the duty of subjection, is woman's chief commandment; and that she is 
properly made subject by the Law of Creation and by the Law of 
Penalty. As thus. All other creatures were created male and female at 
the same time; man and woman were not so, for the Man was first 
created—as a perfect creature, and afterwards the woman was thought 
of. Moreover she was not made of the same matter, equally, with 
man,—but of him, of a rib taken from him, and thirdly, she was made 
for his use and benefit as a meet help-mate, “three weighty reasons 
and grounds of the woman's subjection to the man, and that from the 
purpose of the Creator; who might have done otherwise, that is, have 
yielded to the Woman co-equal beginning, sameness of generation, or 
relation of usefulness; for he might have made her without any such 
precedency of matter, without any dependency upon him, and equally for 
her good as for his. All shew at ennobling the Man as the Head and 
more excellent, not that the Man might upbraid her, but that she might 
in all these read her lesson of subjection. And doubtless, as Malachi 
speaks, herein is wisdom, for God hath left nothing to be bettered by 
our invention.

“The woman, being so created by God in the integrity of Nature had a 
most divine honour and partnership of his image, put upon her in her 
creation; yea, such as (without prejudice of those three respects) 
might have held full and sweet correspondence with her husband. But 
her sin still augmented her inequality, and brought her lower and 
lower in her prerogative. For since she would take upon her, as a 
woman, without respect to the order, dependence and use of her 
creation, to enterprize so sad a business, as to jangle and demur with 
the Devil about so weighty a point as her husband's freehold, and of 
her own brain to lay him and it under foot, without the least parley 
and consent of his, obeying Satan before him,—so that till she had put 
all beyond question and past amendment, and eaten, she brought not the 
fruit to him, therefore the Lord stript her of this robe of her 
honour, and smote into the heart of Eve an instinct of inferiority, a 
confessed yielding up of her insufficient self to depend wholly upon 
her husband.”

This being a favourite commentary with the Doctor upon the first 
transgression, what would he have said if he had lived to read an 
Apology for Eve by one of her daughters, yes, an Apology for her and a 
Defence, showing that she acted meritoriously in eating the Apple. It 
is a choice passage and the reader shall have it from Miss Hatfield's 
Letters on the Importance of the Female Sex.

“By the creation of woman, the great design was accomplished,—the 
universal system was harmonized. Happiness and innocence reigned 
together. But unacquainted with the nature or existence of 
evil,—conscious only of good and imagining that all were of that 
essence around her; without the advantages of the tradition of 
forefathers to relate, or of ancient records to hand down, Eve was 
fatally and necessarily ignorant of the rebellious disobedience of the 
fallen Angels, and of their invisible vigilance and combination to 
accomplish the destruction of the new favourites of Heaven.

“In so momentous an event as that which has ever been exclusively 
imputed to her, neither her virtue nor her prudence ought to be 
suspected; and there is little reason to doubt, that if the same 
temptations had been offered to her husband under the same 
appearances, but he also would have acquiesced in the commission of 
this act of disobedience.

“Eve's attention was attracted by the manner in which the Serpent 
first made his attack: he had the gift of speech, which she must have 
observed to be a faculty peculiar to themselves. This appeared an 
evidence of something supernatural. The wily tempter chose also the 
form of the serpent to assist his design, as not only in wisdom and 
sagacity that creature surpassed all others, but his figure was also 
erect and beautiful, for it was not until the offended justice of God 
denounced the curse, that the Serpent's crest was humbled to the dust.

“During this extraordinary interview, it is evident that Eve felt a 
full impression of the divine command, which she repeated to the 
tempter at the time of his solicitations. She told him they were not 
to eat of _that_ Tree.—But the Serpent opposed her arguments with 
sophistry and promises. He said unto the Woman, ye shall not surely 
die—but shall be as Gods. What an idea to a mortal!—Such an image 
astonished her!—It was not the gross impulses of greedy appetite that 
urged her, but a nobler motive that induced her to examine the 
consequences of the act.—She was to be better and happier;—to exchange 
a mortal for an angelic nature. Her motive was 
great,—virtuous,—irresistible. Might she not have felt herself awed 
and inspired with a belief of a divine order?—Upon examination she 
found it was to produce a greater good than as mortals they could 
enjoy; this impression excited a desire to possess that good; and that 
desire determined her will and the future destiny of a World!”

It must be allowed that this Lady Authoress has succeeded in what 
might have been supposed the most difficult of all attempts, that of 
starting a new heresy,—her followers in which may aptly be denominated 
Eveites.

The novelty consists not in excusing the mother of mankind, but in 
representing her transgression as a great and meritorious act. An 
excuse has been advanced for her in Lodovico Domenichi's Dialogue upon 
the nobleness of Women. It is there pleaded that the fruit of the 
fatal tree had not been forbidden to Eve, because she was not created 
when the prohibition was laid on. Adam it was who sinned in eating it, 
not Eve, and it is in Adam that we have all sinned, and all die. Her 
offence was in tempting him to eat, _et questo anchora senza intention 
cattiva, essendo stata tentata dal Diavolo. L'huomo adunque peccò per 
certa scientia, et la Donna ignorantemente, et ingannata._

I know not whether this special pleading be Domenichi's own; but he 
must have been conscious that there is a flaw in it, and could not 
have been in earnest, as Miss Hatfield is. The Veronese lady Isotta 
Nogarola thought differently; _essendo studiosa molto di Theologia et 
di Philosophia_, she composed a Dialogue wherein the question whether 
Adam or Eve in the primal transgression had committed the greater sin. 
How she determined it I cannot say, never having seen her works.

Domenichi makes another assertion in honour of womankind which Miss 
Hatfield would undoubtedly consider it an honour for herself to have 
disproved in her own person,—that no heresy, or error in the faith 
ever originated with a woman.

Had this Lady, most ambitious of Eve's daughters, been contemporary 
with Doctor Dove, how pleasant it would have been to have witnessed a 
debate between them upon the subject! He would have wound her up to 
the highest pitch of indignation, and she would have opened the 
flood-gates of female oratory upon his head.




