CHAPTER XV

ENVY AND WORRY


Envy is a prolific source of worry. Once allow this demon of unrest
to fasten itself in one's vitals, and worry claims every waking
hour. Envy is that peculiar demon of discontent that cannot see
the abilities, attainments, achievements, or possessions of another
without malicious determination to belittle, deride, make light of, or
absolutely deny their existence, while all the time covetously craving
them for itself. Andrew Tooke pictures Envy as a vile female:

  A deadly paleness in her cheek was seen;
  Her meager skeleton scarce cased with skin;
  Her looks awry; an everlasting scowl
  Sits on her brow; her teeth deform'd and foul;
  Her breast had gall more than her breast could hold;
  Beneath her tongue coats of poison roll'd;
  No smile e'er smooth'd her furrow'd brow but those
  Which rose from laughing at another's woes;
  Her eyes were strangers to the sweets of sleep,
  Devouring spite for ever waking keep;
  She sees bless'd men with vast success crown'd,
  Their joys distract her, and their glories wound;
  She kills abroad, herself's consum'd at home,
  And her own crimes are her perpetual martyrdom.

Ever watching, with bloodshot eyes, the good things of others, she
hates them for their possessions, longs to possess them herself,
lets her covetousness gnaw hourly at her very vitals, and yet, in
conversation with others, slays with slander, vile innuendo, and
falsehood, the reputation of those whose virtues she covets.

As Robert Pollock wrote of one full of envy:

  It was his earnest work and daily toil
  With lying tongue, to make the noble seem
  Mean as himself.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Whene'er he heard,
  As oft he did, of joy and happiness,
  And great prosperity, and rising worth,
  'Twas like a wave of wormwood o'er his soul
  Rolling its bitterness.

Aye! and he drank in great draughts of this bitter flood, holding it
in his mouth, tasting its foul and biting qualities until his whole
being seemed saturated with it, hating it, dreading it, suffering
every moment while doing it, yet enduring it, because of his envy at
the good of others.

Few there are, who, at some time or other in their lives, do not have
a taste, at least, of the stinging bite of envy. Girls are envious of
each other's good looks, clothes, possessions, houses, friends; boys
of the strength, skill, ability, popularity of others; women of other
women, men of other men, just as when they were boys and girls.

One of the strongest words the great Socrates ever wrote was against
envy. He said:

    Envy is the daughter of pride, the author of murder and
    revenge, the beginner of secret sedition, the perpetual
    tormentor of virtue. Envy is the filthy slime of the soul; a
    venom, a poison, a quicksilver, which consumeth the flesh, and
    drieth up the marrow of the bones.

And history clearly shows that the wise philosopher stated facts.
Caligula slew his brother because he possessed a beauty that led him
to be more esteemed and favored than he. Dionysius, the tyrant, was
vindictive and cruel to Philoxenius, the musician, because he could
sing; and with Plato, the philosopher, because he could dispute,
better than himself. Even the great Cambyses slew his brother,
Smerdis, because he was a stronger and better bowman than himself or
any of his party. It was envy that led the courtiers of Spain to crave
and seek the destruction of Columbus, and envy that set a score of
enemies at the heels of Cortes, the conqueror of Peru.

It is a fearful and vindictive devil, is this devil of envy, and he
who yields to it, who once allows it admittance to the citadel of his
heart, will soon learn that every subsequent waking and even sleeping
moment is one of worry and distress.




CHAPTER XVI

DISCONTENT AND WORRY


Closely allied to envy is discontent. These are blood relations, and
both are prolific sources of worry. And lest there are those who
think because I have revealed, in the preceding chapter, the demon of
worry--envy--as one that attacks the minds of the great and mighty, it
does not enter the hearts of everyday people, let me quote, entire, an
article and a poem recently written by Ella Wheeler Wilcox in _The Los
Angeles Examiner_. The discontent referred to clearly comes from envy.
Some one has blond tresses, while she has black. This arouses her
envy. She is envious because another's eyes are blue, while hers
are brown; another is tall, while she is small; etc., etc. There is
nothing, indeed, that she cannot weep and worry over:

  There is a certain girl I know, a pretty little elf,
  Who spends almost her entire thoughts in pity for herself.

  Her glossy tresses, raven black, cause her to weep a pond--
  She is so sorry for herself because they are not blond.

  Her eyes, when dry, are very bright and very brown, 'tis true,
  But they are almost always wet, because they are not blue.

  She is of medium height, and when she sees one quite tall
  She weeps all day in keenest pain because she is so small.

  But if she meets some tiny girl whom she considers fair,
  Then that she is so big herself she sobs in great despair.

  When out upon a promenade her tears she cannot hide,
  To think she is obliged to walk while other folks can ride.

  But if she drives, why then she weeps--it is so hard to be
  Perched stiffly in a carriage seat while other girls run free.

  She used to cry herself quite sick to think she had to go
  Month after month to dreary schools; that was her constant woe.

  But on her graduating day, my, how her tears did run!
  It seemed so sorrowful to know that her school life was done.

  One day she wept because she saw a funeral train go by--
  It was so sad that she must live while other folks could die.

  And really all her friends will soon join with her in those tears
  Unless she takes a brighter view of life ere many years.

The conceited girl or woman is tiresome and unpleasant as a companion,
but the morbidly discontented woman is far worse. Perhaps you have met
her, with her eternal complaint of the injustice of Fate toward her.

She feels that she is born for better things than have befallen her;
her family does not understand her; her friends misjudge her; the
public slights her.

If she is married she finds herself superior to her husband and to her
associates. She is eternally longing for what she has not, and when
she gets it is dissatisfied.

The sorrowful side of life alone appeals to her.

This she believes is due to her "artistic nature." The injustice of
fortune and the unkindness of society are topics dear to her heart.
She finds her only rapture in misery.

If she is religiously inclined she looks toward Heaven with more grim
satisfaction in the thought that it will strip fame, favor and fortune
from the unworthy than because it will give her the benefits she feels
she deserves.

She does not dream that she is losing years of Heaven here upon earth
by her own mental attitude.

WE BUILD OUR HEAVENS THOUGHT BY THOUGHT.

If you are dwelling upon the dark phases of your destiny and upon the
ungracious acts of Fate, you are shaping more of the same experience
for yourself here and in realms beyond.

You are making happiness impossible for yourself upon any plane. In
your own self lies Destiny.

I have known a woman to keep her entire family despondent for years by
her continual assertions that she was out of her sphere, misunderstood
and unappreciated.

The minds of sensitive children accepted these statements and grieved
over "Poor Mother's" sad life until their own youth was embittered.
The morbid mother seized upon the sympathies of her children like a
leech and sapped their young lives of joy.

The husband grew discouraged and indifferent under the continual
strain, and what might have been a happy home was a desolate one, and
its memory is a nightmare to the children to-day.

    Understand yourself and your Divine possibilities and you will
    cease to think you are misunderstood.

    It is not possible to misunderstand a beautiful, sunny day.
    All nature rejoices in its loveliness.

    Give love, cheerfulness, kindness and good-will to all
    humanity, and you need not worry about being misunderstood.

    Give the best you have to each object, purpose and individual,
    and you will eventually receive the best from humanity.




