CHAPTER XII

THE WORRY OF THE SQUIRREL CAGE


Reference has already been made to _The Squirrel Cage_, by Dorothy
Canfield. Better than any book I have read for a long time, it reveals
the causes of much of the worry that curses our modern so-called
civilized life. These causes are complex and various. They include
_vanity, undue attention to what our neighbors think of us, a false
appreciation of the values of things_, and they may all be summed
up into what I propose to call--with due acknowledgement to Mrs.
Canfield--_the Worry of the Squirrel Cage_.

I will let the author express her own meaning of this latter term. If
the story leading up seems to be long please seek to read it in the
light of this expression:[A]

[Footnote A: Reprinted from "The Squirrel-Cage" by Dorothy Canfield
($1.35 net); published by Henry Holt and Company, New York City.]

    When Mr. and Mrs. Emery, directly after their wedding in a
    small Central New York village, had gone West to Ohio,
    they had spent their tiny capital in building a small
    story-and-a-half cottage, ornamented with the jig-saw work and
    fancy turning popular in 1872, and this had been the nucleus
    of their present rambling, picturesque, many-roomed home.
    Every step in the long series of changes which had led from
    its first state to its last had a profound and gratifying
    significance for the Emerys and its final condition,
    prosperous, modern, sophisticated, with the right kind of
    wood work in every room that showed, with the latest, most
    unobtrusively artistic effects in decoration, represented
    their culminating well-earned position in the inner circle of
    the best society of Endbury.

    Moreover, they felt that just as the house had been attained
    with effort, self-denial, and careful calculations, yet still
    without incurring debt, so their social position had been
    secured by unremitting diligence and care, but with no loss of
    self-respect or even of dignity. They were honestly proud of
    both their house and of their list of acquaintances and saw
    no reason to regard them as less worthy achievements of an
    industrious life than their four creditable grown-up children
    or Judge Emery's honorable reputation at the bar.

    The two older children, George and Marietta, could remember
    those early struggling days with as fresh an emotion as
    that of their parents. Indeed, Marietta, now a competent,
    sharp-eyed matron of thirty-two, could not see the most
    innocuous colored lithograph without an uncontrollable wave
    of bitterness, so present to her mind was the period when they
    painfully groped their way out of chromos.

    The particular Mrs. Hollister who, at the time the Emerys
    began to pierce the upper crust, was the leader of Endbury
    society, had discarded chromos as much as five years before.
    Mrs. Emery and Marietta, newly admitted to the honor of her
    acquaintance, wondered to themselves at the cold monotony of
    her black and white engravings. The artlessness of this wonder
    struck shame to their hearts when they chanced to learn that
    the lady had repaid it with a worldly-wise amusement at their
    own highly-colored waterfalls and snow-capped mountain-peaks.
    Marietta could recall as piercingly as if it were yesterday,
    in how crestfallen a chagrin she and her mother had gazed at
    their parlor after this incident, their disillusioned eyes
    open for the first time to the futility of its claim to
    sophistication. As for the incident that had led to the
    permanent retiring from their table of the monumental
    salt-and-pepper 'caster' which had been one of their
    most prized wedding presents, the Emerys refused to allow
    themselves to remember it, so intolerably did it spell
    humiliation.

In these quotations the reader has the key to the situation--worry to
become as good as one's neighbors, if not better. _This is the worry
of the squirrel cage_.

Lydia is Mrs. Emery's baby girl, her pet, her passionate delight.
She has been away to a fine school. She knows nothing of the ancient
struggles to attain position and a high place in society. Those
struggles were practically over before she appeared on the scene.

On the occasion of her final home-coming her mother makes great
preparations to please her, yet the worry and the anxiety, are
revealed in her conversation with her older daughter:

    'Oh, Marietta, how _do_ you suppose the house will seem
    to Lydia after she has seen so much? I hope she won't be
    disappointed. I've done so much to it this last year, perhaps
    she won't like it. And oh, I _was_ so tired because we weren't
    able to get the new sideboard put up in the dining-room
    yesterday!'

    'Really, Mother, you must draw the line about Lydia. She's
    only human. I guess if the house is good enough for you and
    father it is good enough for her.'

    'That's just it, Marietta--that's just what came over me!
    _Is_ what's good enough for us good enough for Lydia? Won't
    anything, even the best, in Endbury be a come-down for her?'

The attainments of Mrs. Emery both as to wealth and social position,
however, were not reached by her daughter Marietta and her husband,
but in the determination to make it appear as if they were, Marietta
thus exposes her own life of worry in a talk with her father:

    'Keeping up a two-maid and a man establishment on a one-maid
    income, and mostly not being able to hire the one maid. There
    aren't _any_ girls to be had lately. It means that I have to
    be the other maid and the man all of the time, and all three,
    part of the time.' She was starting down the step, but paused
    as though she could not resist the relief that came from
    expression. 'And the cost of living--the necessities are bad
    enough, but the other things--the things you have to have not
    to be out of everything! I lie awake nights. I think of it
    in church. I can't think of anything else but the way
    the expenses mount up. Everybody getting so reckless and
    extravagant and I _won't_ go in debt! I'll come to it, though.
    Everybody else does. We're the only people that haven't
    oriental rugs now. Why, the Gilberts--and everybody knows how
    much they still owe Dr. Melton for Ellen's appendicitis,
    and their grocer told Ralph they owe him several hundred
    dollars--well, they have just got an oriental rug that they
    paid a hundred and sixty dollars for. Mrs. Gilbert said they
    'just _had_ to have it, and you can always have what you have
    to have.' It makes me sick! Our parlor looks so common! And
    the last dinner party we gave cost--'

Another phase of the _squirrel cage worry_ is expressed in this terse
paragraph:

    'Father keeps talking about getting one of those
    player-pianos, but Mother says they are so new you can't tell
    what they are going to be. She says they may get to be too
    common.'

Bye and bye it comes Lydia's turn to decide what place she and her new
husband are to take in Endbury society, and here is what one frank,
sensible man says about it:

    'It may be all right for Marietta Mortimer to kill herself
    body and soul by inches to keep what bores her to death to
    have--a social position in Endbury's two-for-a-cent society,
    but, for the Lord's sake, why do they make such a howling
    and yelling just at the tree when Lydia's got the tragically
    important question to decide as to whether that's what _she_
    wants? It's like expecting her to do a problem in calculus in
    the midst of an earthquake.'

And the following chapter is a graphic presentation as to how Lydia
made her choice "in perfect freedom"--oh, the frightful sarcasm of the
phrase--during the excitement of the wedding preparations and under
the pressure of expensive gifts and the ideas of over enthusiastic
"society" friends.

Lydia now began her own "squirrel-cage" existence, even her husband
urges her into extravagance in spite of her protest by saying,
"Nothing's too good for you. And besides, it's an asset. The mortgage
won't be so very large. And if we're in it, we'll just have to live up
to it. It'll be a stimulus."

One of the sane characters of the book is dear, lovable, gruff Mr.
Melton, who is Lydia's godfather, and her final awakening is largely
due to him. One day he finds Lydia's mother upstairs sick-a-bed, and
thus breaks forth to his godchild:

    'About your mother--I know without going upstairs that she is
    floored with one or another manifestation of the great disease
    of _social-ambitionitis_. But calm yourself. It's not so bad
    as it seems when you've got the right doctor, I've practiced
    for thirty years among Endbury ladies. They can't spring
    anything new on me. I've taken your mother through doily fever
    induced by the change from tablecloths to bare tops, through
    portiere inflammation, through afternoon tea distemper,
    through _art-nouveau_ prostration and mission furniture palsy,
    not to speak of a horrible attack of acute insanity over the
    necessity of having her maids wear caps. I think you can trust
    me, whatever dodge the old malady is working on her.'

And later in speaking of Lydia's sister he affirms:

    'Your sister Marietta is not a very happy woman. She has too
    many of your father's brains for the life she's been shunted
    into. She might be damming up a big river with a finely
    constructed concrete dam, and what she is giving all her
    strength to is trying to hold back a muddy little trickle with
    her bare hands. The achievement of her life is to give on
    a two-thousand-a-year income the appearance of having five
    thousand like your father. She does it; she's a remarkably
    forceful woman, but it frets her. She ought to be in better
    business, and she knows it, though she won't admit it.'

Oh, the pity of it, the woe of it, the horror of it, for it is one of
the curses of our present day society and is one of the causes of
many a man's and woman's physical and mental ruin. In the words of our
author elsewhere:

    They are killing themselves to get what they really don't want
    and don't need, and are starving for things they could easily
    have by just putting out their hands.

Where life's struggle is reduced to this kind of thing, there is
little compensation, hence we are not surprised to read that:

    Judge Emery was in the state in which of late the end of the
    day's work found him--overwhelmingly fatigued. He had not an
    ounce of superfluous energy to answer his wife's tocsin, while
    she was almost crying with nervous exhaustion. That Lydia's
    course ran smooth through a thousand complications was not
    accomplished without an incalculable expenditure of nervous
    force on her mother's part. Dr. Melton had several times of
    late predicted that he would have his old patient back under
    his care again. Judge Emery, remembering this prophecy, was
    now moved by his wife's pale agitation to a heart-sickening
    mixture or apprehension for her and of recollection of his own
    extreme discomfort whenever she was sick.

Yet in spite of this intense tension, she was unable to stop--felt
she must go on, until finally, a breakdown intervened and she was
compelled to lay by.

On another page a friend tells of his great-aunt's experience:

    'She told me that all through her childhood her family was
    saving and pulling together to build a fine big house. They
    worked along for years until, when she was a young lady, they
    finally accomplished it; built a big three-story house that
    was the admiration of the countryside. Then they moved in. And
    it took the womenfolks every minute of their time, and more
    to keep it clean and in order; it cost as much to keep it up,
    heated, furnished, repaired, painted and everything the way a
    fine house should be, as their entire living used to cost. The
    fine big grounds they had laid out to go with the mansion took
    so much time to--'

Finally Lydia herself becomes awakened, startled as she sees what
everybody is trying to make her life become and she bursts out to her
sister:

    'I'm just frightened of--everything--what everybody expects me
    to do, and to go on doing all my life, and never have any
    time but to just hurry faster and faster, so there'll be
    more things to hurry about, and never talk about anything but
    _things!_' She began to tremble and look white, and stopped
    with a desperate effort to control herself, though she
    burst out at the sight of Mrs. Mortimer's face of despairing
    bewilderment. 'Oh, don't tell me you don't see at all what
    I mean. I can't say it! But you _must_ understand. Can't we
    somehow all stop--_now!_ And start over again! You get muslin
    curtains and not mend your lace ones, and Mother stop fussing
    about whom to invite to that party--that's going to cost more
    than he can afford, Father says--it makes me _sick_ to be
    costing him so much. And not fuss about having clothes just
    so--and Paul have our house built little and plain, so it
    won't be so much work to take care of it and keep it clean.
    I would so much rather look after it myself than to have
    him kill himself making money so I can hire maids that you
    _can't_--you say yourself you can't--and never having any time
    to see him. Perhaps if we did, other people might, and we'd
    all have more time to like things that make us nicer to like.

And when her sister tried to comfort her she continued:

    'You do see what I mean! You see how dreadful it is to look
    forward to just that--being so desperately troubled over
    things that don't really matter--and--and perhaps having
    children, and bringing them to the same thing--when there must
    be so many things that do matter!'

Then, to show how perfectly her sister understood, the author makes
that wise and perceptive woman exclaim:

    'Mercy! Dr. Melton's right! She's perfectly wild with nerves!
    We must get her married as soon as ever we can!'

Lydia gives a reception. Here is part of the description:

    Standing as they were, tightly pressed in between a number of
    different groups, their ears were assaulted by a disjointed
    mass of stentorian conversation that gave a singular illusion
    as if it all came from one inconceivably voluble source,
    the individuality of the voices being lost in the screaming
    enunciation which, as Mrs. Sandworth had pointed out, was a
    prerequisite of self-expression under the circumstances.

    They heard: '_For over a month and the sleeves were too see
    you again at Mrs. Elliott's I'm pouring there from four I've
    got to dismiss one with plum-colored bows all along five
    dollars a week and the washing out and still impossible! I
    was there myself all the time and they neither of thirty-five
    cents a pound for the most ordinary ferns and red carnations
    was all they had, and we thought it rather skimpy under the
    brought up in one big braid and caught down with at Peterson's
    they were pink and white with--' ... 'Oh, no, Madeleine! that
    was at the Burlingame's_.' Mrs. Sandworth took a running jump
    into the din and sank from her brother's sight, vociferating:
    '_The Petersons had them of old gold, don't you remember, with
    little_--'

    The doctor, worming his way desperately through the masses of
    femininity, and resisting all attempts to engage him in the
    local fray, emerged at length into the darkened hall where
    the air was, as he told himself in a frenzied flight of
    imagination, less like a combination of a menagerie and a
    perfume shop. Here, in a quiet corner, sat Lydia's father
    alone. He held in one hand a large platter piled high with
    wafer-like sandwiches, which he was consuming at a Gargantuan
    rate, and as he ate, he smiled to himself.

    'Well, Mr. Ogre,' said the doctor, sitting down beside him
    with a gasp of relief; 'let a wave-worn mariner into your den,
    will you?'

    Provided with an auditor, Judge Emery's smile broke into an
    open laugh. He waved the platter toward the uproar in the next
    rooms: 'A boiler factory ain't in it with woman, lovely woman,
    is it?' he put it to his friend.

    'Gracious powers! There's nothing to laugh at in that
    exhibition!' the doctor reproved him, with an acrimonious
    savagery. 'I don't know which makes me sicker; to stay in
    there and listen to them, or come out here and find you
    thinking they're _funny_!'

    They are funny!' insisted the Judge tranquilly. 'I stood by
    the door and listened to the scraps of talk I could catch,
    till I thought I should have a fit. I never heard anything
    funnier on the stage.'

    'Looky here, Nat,' the doctor stared up at him angrily,
    'they're not monkeys in a zoo, to be looked at only on
    holidays and then laughed at! They're the other half of a
    whole that we're half of, and don't you forget it! Why in the
    world should you think it funny for them to do this tomfool
    trick all winter and have nervous prostration all summer to
    pay for it? You'd lock up a _man_ as a dangerous lunatic if
    he spent his life so. What they're like, and what they do with
    their time and strength concerns us enough sight more than
    what the tariff is, let me tell you.'

    'I admit that what your wife is like concerns you a whole
    lot!' The Judge laughed good-naturedly in the face of the
    little old bachelor. 'Don't commence jumping on the American
    woman so! I won't stand it! She's the noblest of her sex!'

    'Do you know why I am bald?' said Dr. Melton, running his hand
    over his shining dome.

    'If I did, I wouldn't admit it,' the Judge put up a cautious
    guard, 'because I foresee that whatever I say will be used as
    evidence against me.'

    'I've torn out all my hair in desperation at hearing such men
    as you claim to admire and respect and wish to advance the
    American woman. You don't give enough thought to her--real
    thought--from one year's end to another to know whether you
    think she has an immortal soul or not!'

Later Lydia's husband insists that they give a dinner.

    It was to be a large dinner--large, that is, for Endbury--of
    twenty covers, and Lydia had never prepared a table for
    so many guests. The number of objects necessary for the
    conventional setting of a dinner table appalled her. She was
    so tired, and her attention was so fixed on the complicated
    processes going on uncertainly in the kitchen, that her brain
    reeled over the vast quantity of knives and forks and plates
    and glasses needed to convey food to twenty mouths on a festal
    occasion. They persistently eluded her attempts to marshal
    them into order. She discovered that she had put forks for the
    soup--that in some inexplicable way at the plate destined for
    an important guest there was a large kitchen spoon of iron, a
    wild sort of whimsical humor rose in her from the ferment of
    utter fatigue and anxiety. When Paul came in, looking very
    grave, she told him with a wavering laugh, 'If I tried as hard
    for ten minutes to go to Heaven as I've tried all day to have
    this dinner right, I'd certainly have a front seat in the
    angel choir. If anybody here to-night is not satisfied, it'll
    be because he's harder to please than St. Peter himself.'

During the evening:

    Lydia seemed to herself to be in an endless bad dream. The
    exhausting efforts of the day had reduced her to a sort
    of coma of fatigue through which she felt but dully the
    successive stabs of the ill-served unsuccessful dinner. At
    times, the table, the guests, the room itself, wavered before
    her, and she clutched at her chair to keep her balance. She
    did not know that she was laughing and talking gaily and
    eating nothing. She was only conscious of an intense longing
    for the end of things, and darkness and quiet.

When it was all over and her husband was compelled to recognize that
it had been a failure, his mental attitude is thus expressed:

    He had determined to preserve at all costs the appearance
    of the indulgent, non-critical, over-patient husband that he
    intensely felt himself to be. No force, he thought grimly,
    shutting his jaws hard, should drag from him a word of
    his real sentiments. Fanned by the wind of this virtuous
    resolution, his sentiments grew hotter and hotter as he walked
    about, locking doors and windows, and reviewing bitterly the
    events of the evening. If he was to restrain himself from
    saying, he would at least allow himself the privilege of
    feeling all that was possible to a man deeply injured.

And that night Lydia felt for the "first time the quickening to life
of her child. And during all that day, until then, she had forgotten
that she was to know motherhood." Can words more forcefully depict the
_worry of the squirrel-cage_ than this--that an unnecessary dinner,
given in unnecessary style, at unnecessary expense, to visitors to
whom it was unnecessary should have driven from her thought, and
doubtless seriously injured, the new life that she was so soon to give
to the world?

Oh, men and women of divine descent and divine heritage, quit your
squirrel-cage stage of existence. Is life to be one mere whirling
around of the cage of useless toil or pleasure, of mere imagining that
you are doing something? Work with an object. Know your object, that
it is worthy the highest endeavor of a human being, and then pursue it
with a divine enthusiasm that no obstacle can daunt, an ardor that no
weariness can quench. Then it is you will begin to live. There is no
life in _worry_. Worry is a waste of life. If you are a worrier, that
is a proof you (in so far as you worry) do not appreciate the value of
your own life, for a worthy object, a divine enthusiasm, a noble ardor
are in themselves the best possible preventives against worry. They
dignify life above worry. Worry is undignified, petty, paltry. Where
you know you have something to do worth doing, you are conscious of
the Divine Benediction, and who can worry when the smile of God rests
upon him? This is a truism almost to triteness, and yet how few fully
realize it. It is the unworthy potterers with life, the dabblers in
life-stuff, those who blind themselves to their high estate, those who
are unsure of their footing who worry. The true aristocrat is never
worried about his position; the orator convinced of the truth of his
message worries not as to how it will be received; the machinist sure
of his plans hesitates not in the construction of his machinery;
the architect assured of his accuracy pushes on his builders without
hesitancy or question, fear, or alarm; the engineer knowing his engine
and his destination has no heart quiver as he handles the lever. It is
the doubter, the unsure, the aimless, the dabbler, the frivolous,
the dilettante, the uncertain that worry. How nobly Browning set this
forth in his Epilogue:

      What had I on earth to do
  With the slothful, with the mawkish, the unmanly?
  Like the aimless, helpless, hopeless, did I drivel
    --Being--Who?
  One who never turned his back but marched breast forward,
    Never doubted clouds would break,
  Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would triumph,
  Held we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
    Sleep to wake.
  No, at noonday in the bustle of man's worktime
    Greet the unseen with a cheer!
  Bid him forward, breast and back as either should be,
  'Strive and thrive!' cry 'Speed,--fight on, fare ever
    There as here!'

And this is not "mere poetry." Or rather it is because it is "mere
poetry" that it is _real life_. Browning had nearly seventy years of
it. He knew. Where there are those to whom "God has whispered in the
ear," there is no uncertainty, no worry. The musician who knows his
instrument, knows his music, knows his key, and knows his time to play
never hesitates, never falters, never worries. With tone clear, pure,
strong, and certain, he sends forth his melodies or harmonies into
the air. Cannot you, in your daily life, be a true and sure musician?
Cannot you be _certain_--absolutely, definitely certain--of your right
to play the tune of life in the way you have it marked out before you,
and then go ahead and play! Play, in God's name, as God's and man's
music-maker.




