IV

PLATO AS A MYSTIC


The importance of the Mysteries to the spiritual life of the Greeks
may be realised from Plato's conception of the universe. There is only
one way of understanding him thoroughly. It is to place him in the
light which streams forth from the Mysteries.

Plato's later disciples, the Neo-Platonists, credit him with a secret
doctrine which he imparted only to those who were worthy, and which he
conveyed under the "seal of secrecy." His teaching was looked upon as
mysterious in the same sense as the wisdom of the Mysteries. Even if
the seventh Platonic letter is not from his hand, as is alleged, it
does not signify for our present purpose, for it does not matter
whether it was he or another who gave utterance to the view expressed
in this letter. This view is of the essence of Plato's philosophy. In
the letter we read as follows: "This much I may say about all those
who have written or may hereafter write as if they knew the aim of my
work,--that no credence is to be attached to their words, whether they
obtained their information from me, or from others, or invented it
themselves. I have written nothing on this subject, nor would anything
be allowed to appear. This kind of thing cannot be expressed in words
like other teaching, but needs a long study of the subject and a
making oneself one with it. Then it is as though a spark leaped up and
kindled a light in the soul which thereafter is able to keep itself
alight." This utterance might only indicate the writer's powerlessness
to express his meaning in words,--a mere personal weakness,--if the
idea of the Mysteries were not to be found in them. The subject on
which Plato had not written and would never write, must be something
about which all writing would be futile. It must be a feeling, a
sentiment, an experience, which is not gained by instantaneous
communication, but by making oneself one with it, in heart and soul.
The reference is to the inner education which Plato was able to give
those he selected. For them, fire flashed forth from his words, for
others, only thoughts.

The manner of our approach to Plato's _Dialogues_ is not a matter of
indifference. They will mean more or less to us, according to our
spiritual condition. Much more passed from Plato to his disciples than
the literal meaning of his words. The place where he taught his
listeners thrilled in the atmosphere of the Mysteries. His words awoke
overtones in higher regions, which vibrated with them, but these
overtones needed the atmosphere of the Mysteries, or they died away
without having been heard.

In the centre of the world of the Platonic Dialogues stands the
personality of Socrates. We need not here touch upon the historical
aspect of that personality. It is a question of the character of
Socrates as it appears in Plato. Socrates is a person consecrated by
his dying for truth. He died as only an initiate can die, as one to
whom death is merely a moment of life like other moments. He
approaches death as he would any other event in existence. His
attitude towards it was such that even in his friends the feelings
usual on such an occasion were not aroused. Phædo says this in the
_Dialogue on the Immortality of the Soul_: "Truly I found myself in
the strangest state of mind. I had no compassion for him, as is usual
at the death of a dear friend. So happy did the man appear to me in
his demeanour and speech, so steadfast and noble was his end, that I
was confident that he was not going to Hades without a divine mission,
and that even there it would be as well with him as it is with any one
anywhere. No tender-hearted emotion overcame me, as might have been
expected at such a mournful event, nor on the other hand was I in a
cheerful mood, as is usual during philosophical pursuits, and although
our conversation was of this nature; but I found myself in a wondrous
state of mind and in an unwonted blending of joy and grief when I
reflected that this man was about to die." The dying Socrates
instructs his disciples about immortality. His personality, which had
learned by experience the worthlessness of life, furnishes a kind of
proof quite different from logic and arguments founded on reason. It
seems as if it were not a man speaking, for this man was passing away,
but as if it were the voice of eternal truth itself, which had taken
up its abode in a perishable personality. Where a mortal being is
dissolving into nothing, there seems to be a breath of the air in
which it is possible for eternal harmonies to resound.

We hear no logical proofs of immortality. The whole discourse is
designed to lead the friends where they may behold the eternal. Then
they will need no proofs. Would it be necessary to prove that a rose
is red, to one who has one before him? Why should it be necessary to
prove that spirit is eternal, to one whose eyes we have opened to
behold spirit? Experiences, inner events, Socrates points to them, and
first of all to the experience of wisdom itself.

What does he desire who aspires after wisdom? He wishes to free
himself from what the senses offer him in every-day perception. He
seeks for the spirit in the sense-world. Is not this a fact which may
be compared with dying? "For," according to Socrates, "those who
occupy themselves with philosophy in the right way are really striving
after nothing else than to die and to be dead, without this being
perceived by others. If this is true, it would be strange if, after
having aimed at this all through life, when death itself comes they
should be indignant at that which they have so long striven after and
taken pains about." To corroborate this, Socrates asks one of his
friends: "Does it seem to you befitting a philosopher to take trouble
about so-called fleshly pleasures, such as eating and drinking? or
about sexual pleasures? And do you think that such a man pays much
heed to other bodily needs? To have fine clothes, shoes, and other
bodily adornments,--do you think he considers or scorns this more than
utmost necessity demands? Does it not seem to you that it should be
such a man's whole preoccupation not to turn his thoughts to the body,
but as much as possible away from it and towards the soul? Therefore
this is the first mark of the philosopher, that he, more than all
other men, relieves his soul of association with the body."

On this subject Socrates has something more to say, _i.e._, that
aspiration after wisdom has this much in common with dying, that it
turns man away from the physical. But whither does he turn? Towards
the spiritual. But can he desire the same from spirit as from the
senses? Socrates thus expresses himself on this point: "But how is it
with reasonable knowledge itself? Is the body a hindrance or not, if
we take it as a companion in our search for knowledge? I mean, do
sight and hearing procure man any truth? Or is what the poets sing
meaningless, that we see and hear nothing clearly?... When does the
soul catch sight of truth? For when it tries to examine something with
the help of the body, it is manifestly deceived by the latter."

Everything of which we are cognisant by means of our bodily senses
appears and disappears. And it is this appearing and disappearing
which is the cause of our being deceived. But when with our reasonable
intelligence we look deeper into things, the eternal element in them
is revealed to us. Thus the senses do not offer us the eternal in its
true form. The moment we trust them implicitly they deceive us. They
cease to deceive us if we confront them with our thinking insight and
submit what they tell us to its examination.

But how could our thinking insight sit in judgment on the declarations
of the senses, unless there were something living within it which
transcends sense-perception? Therefore the truth or falsity in things
is decided by something within us which opposes the physical body and
is consequently not subject to its laws. First of all, it cannot be
subject to the laws of growth and decay. For this something contains
truth within it. Now truth cannot have a yesterday and a to-day, it
cannot be one thing one day and another the next, like objects of
sense. Therefore truth must be something eternal. And when the
philosopher turns away from the perishable things of sense and towards
truth, he is turning towards an eternal element that lives within him.
If we immerse ourselves wholly in spirit, we shall live wholly in
truth. The things of sense around us are no longer present merely in
their physical form. "And he accomplishes this most perfectly," says
Socrates, "who approaches everything as much as possible with the
spirit only, without either looking round when he is thinking, or
letting any other sense interrupt his reflecting; but who, making use
of pure thought only, strives to grasp everything as it is in itself,
separating it as much as possible from eyes and ears, in short from
the whole body, which only disturbs the soul and does not allow it to
attain truth and insight when associated with the soul.... Now is not
death the release and separation of the soul from the body? And it is
only true philosophers who are always striving to release the soul as
far as they can. This, therefore, is the philosopher's vocation, to
deliver and separate the soul from the body.... Therefore it would be
foolish if a man, who all his life has taken measures to be as near
death as possible, should, when it comes, rebel against it.... In
truth the real seekers after wisdom aspire to die, and of all men they
are those who least fear death." Moreover Socrates bases all higher
morality on liberation from the body. He who only follows what his
body ordains is not moral. Who is valiant? asks Socrates. He is
valiant who does not obey his body but the demands of his spirit when
these demands imperil the body. And who is temperate? Is not this he
who "does not let himself be carried away by desires, but who
maintains an indifferent and moral demeanour with regard to them.
Therefore are not those alone temperate who set least value on the
body and live in the love of wisdom?" And so it is, in the opinion of
Socrates, with all virtues.

Thence Socrates goes on to characterise intellectual cognition. What
is it after all, to cognise? Undoubtedly we arrive at it by forming
judgments. I form a judgment about some object; for instance, I say to
myself, what is in front of me is a tree. How do I arrive at saying
that? I can only do it if I already know what a tree is. I must
remember my conception of a tree. A tree is a physical object. If I
remember a tree, I therefore remember a physical object. I say of
something that it is a tree, if it resembles other things which I have
previously observed and which I know to be trees. Memory is the medium
for this knowledge. It makes it possible for me to compare the various
objects of sense. But this does not exhaust my knowledge. If I see two
similar things, I form a judgment and say, these things are alike.
Now, in reality, two things are never exactly alike. I can only find a
likeness in certain respects. The idea of a perfect similarity
therefore arises within me without having its correspondence in
reality. And this idea helps me to form a judgment, as memory helps me
to a judgment and to knowledge. Just as one tree reminds me of others,
so am I reminded of the idea of similarity by looking at two things
from a certain point of view. Thoughts and memories therefore arise
within me which are not due to physical reality.

All kinds of knowledge not borrowed from sense-reality are grounded on
such thoughts. The whole of mathematics consists of them. He would be
a bad geometrician who could only bring into mathematical relations
what he can see with his eyes and touch with his hands. Thus we have
thoughts which do not originate in perishable nature, but arise out of
the spirit. And it is these that bear in them the mark of eternal
truth. What mathematics teach will be eternally true, even if
to-morrow the whole cosmic system should fall into ruins and an
entirely new one arise. Conditions might prevail in another cosmic
system, to which our present mathematical truths would not be
applicable, but these would be none the less true in themselves.

It is only when the soul is alone with itself that it can bring forth
these eternal truths. It is at these times related to the true and
eternal, and not to the ephemeral and apparent. Hence Socrates says:
"When the soul returning into itself reflects, it goes straight to
what is pure and everlasting and immortal and like unto itself; and
being related to this, cleaves unto it when the soul is alone, and is
not hindered. And then the soul rests from its mistakes, and is like
unto itself, even as the eternal is, with whom the soul is now in
touch. This state of soul is called wisdom.... Look now whether it
does not follow from all that has been said, that the soul is most
like the divine, immortal, reasonable, unique, indissoluble, what is
always the same and like unto itself; and that on the other hand the
body most resembles what is human and mortal, unreasonable, multiform,
soluble, never the same nor remaining equal to itself.... If,
therefore, this be so, the soul goes to what is like itself, to the
immaterial, to the divine, immortal, reasonable. There it attains to
bliss, freed from error and ignorance, from fear and undisciplined
love and all other human evils. There it lives, as the initiates say,
for the remaining time truly with God."

It is not within the scope of this book to indicate all the ways in
which Socrates leads his friends to the eternal. They all breathe the
same spirit. They all tend to show that man finds one thing when he
goes the way of transitory sense-perception, and another when his
spirit is alone with itself. It is to this original nature of spirit
that Socrates points his hearers. If they find it, they see with
their own spiritual eyes that it is eternal. The dying Socrates does
not prove the immortality of the soul, he simply lays bare the nature
of the soul. And then it comes to light that growth and decay, birth
and death, have nothing to do with the soul. The essence of the soul
lies in the true, and this can neither come into being nor perish. The
soul has no more to do with the becoming than the straight has with
the crooked. But death belongs to the becoming. Therefore the soul has
nothing to do with death. Must we not say of what is immortal, that it
admits of mortality as little as does the straight of the crooked?
Starting from this point, "must we not ask," adds Socrates, "that if
the immortal is imperishable, is it not impossible for the soul to
come to an end when death arrives? For from what has been already
shown, it does not admit of death, nor can it die any more than three
can be an even number."

Let us review the whole development of this dialogue, in which
Socrates brings his hearers to behold the eternal in human
personality. The hearers accept his thoughts, and they look into
themselves to see if they can find in their inner experiences
something which assents to his ideas. They make the objections which
strike them. What has happened to the hearers when the dialogue is
finished? They have found something within them which they did not
possess before. They have not merely accepted an abstract truth, but
they have gone through a development. Something has come to life in
them which was not living in them before. Is not this to be compared
with an initiation? And does not this throw light on the reason for
Plato's setting forth his philosophy in the form of conversation?
These dialogues are nothing else than the literary form of the events
which took place in the sanctuaries of the Mysteries. We are convinced
of this from what Plato himself says in many passages. Plato wished to
be, as a philosophical teacher, what the initiator into the Mysteries
was, as far as this was compatible with the philosophical manner of
communication. It is evident how Plato feels himself in harmony with
the Mysteries! He only thinks he is on the right path when it is
taking him where the Mystic is to be led. He thus expresses himself on
the subject in the Timæus. "All those who are of right mind invoke the
gods for their small or great enterprises; but we who are engaged in
teaching about the universe,--how far it is created and
uncreated,--have the special duty, if we have not quite lost our way,
to call upon and implore the gods and goddesses that we may teach
everything first in conformity with their spirit, and next in harmony
with ourselves." And Plato promises those who follow this path, that
divinity, as a deliverer, will grant them illuminating teaching as the
conclusion of their devious and wandering researches.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is especially the _Timæus_ that reveals to us how the Platonic
cosmogony is connected with the Mysteries. At the very beginning of
this dialogue there is mention of an initiation. Solon is initiated by
an Egyptian priest into the formation of the worlds, and the way in
which eternal truths are symbolically expressed in traditional myths.
"There have already been many and various destructions of part of the
human race," says the Egyptian priest to Solon, "and there will be
more in the future; the most extensive by fire and water, other lesser
ones through countless other causes. It is also related in your
country that Phaëthon, the son of Helios, once mounted his father's
chariot, and as he did not know how to drive it, everything on the
earth was burnt up, and he himself slain by lightning. This sounds
like a fable, but it contains the truth of the change in the movements
of the celestial bodies revolving round the earth and of the
annihilation of everything on the earth by much fire. This
annihilation happens periodically, after the lapse of certain long
periods of time." This passage in the _Timæus_ contains a plain
indication of the attitude of the initiate towards folk-myths. He
recognises the truths hidden in their images.

The drama of the formation of the world is brought before us in the
_Timæus_. Any one who will follow up the traces which lead to this
formation of the cosmos arrives at a dim apprehension of the
primordial force from which all things proceeded. "Now it is difficult
to find the Creator and Father of the universe, and when we have found
Him, it is impossible to speak about Him so that all may understand."
The Mystic knew what this "impossibility" means. It points to the
divine drama. God is not present in what belongs merely to the senses
and understanding. In those He is only present as nature. He is under
a spell in nature. Only one who awakens the divine within himself is
able to approach Him. Thus He cannot at once be made comprehensible to
all. But even to one who approaches Him, He does not appear Himself.
The _Timæus_ says that also. The Father made the universe out of the
body and soul of the world. He mixed together, in harmony and perfect
proportions, the elements which came into being when He, pouring
Himself out, gave up His separate existence. Thereby the body of the
world came into being, and stretched upon it, in the form of a cross,
is the soul of the world. It is what is divine in the world. It found
the death of the cross so that the world might come into existence.
Plato may therefore call nature the tomb of the divine, a grave,
however, in which nothing dead lies but the eternal, to which death
only gives the opportunity of bringing into expression the omnipotence
of life. And man sees nature in the right light when he approaches it
in order to release the crucified soul of the world. It must rise
again from its death, from its spell. Where can it come to life again?
Only in the soul of initiated man. Then wisdom finds its right
relation to the cosmos. The resurrection, the liberation of God, that
is wisdom. In the _Timæus_ the development of the world is traced from
the imperfect to the perfect. An ascending process is represented
imaginatively. Beings are developed. God reveals Himself in their
development. Evolution is the resurrection of God from the tomb.
Within evolution, man appears. Plato shows that in man there is
something special. It is true the whole world is divine, and man is
not more divine than other beings. But in other beings God is present
in a hidden way, in man he is manifest. At the end of the _Timæus_ we
read: "And now we might assert that our study of the universe has
attained its end, for after the world was provided and filled with
mortal and immortal living beings, it, this one and only begotten
world, has itself become a visible being embracing everything visible,
and an image of the Creator. It has become the God perceptible to the
senses, and the greatest and best world, the fairest and most perfect
which there could be." But this one and only begotten world would not
be perfect if the image of its Creator were not to be found amongst
the images it contains. This image can only be engendered in the human
soul. Not the Father Himself, but the Son, God's offspring, living in
the soul, and being like unto the Father, him man can bring forth.

Philo, of whom it was said that he was the resurrected Plato,
characterised as the "Son of God" the wisdom born out of man, which
lives in the soul and contains the reason existing in the world. This
cosmic reason, or Logos, appears as the book in which "everything in
the world is recorded and delineated." It also appears as the Son of
God, "following in the paths of the Father, and creating forms,
looking at their archetypes." The platonising Philo addresses this
Logos as Christ, "As God is the first and only king of the universe,
the way to Him is rightly called the 'Royal Road.' Consider this road
to be philosophy ... the road which the company of the ancient
ascetics took, who turned away from the entangling fascination of
pleasure and devoted themselves to the noble and earnest cultivation
of the beautiful. The law names this Royal Road, which we call true
philosophy, God's word and spirit."

It is like an initiation to Philo when he enters upon this path, in
order to meet the Logos who, to him, is the Son of God. "I do not
shrink from relating what has happened to me innumerable times. Often
when I wished to put my philosophical thoughts in writing, in my
accustomed way, and saw quite clearly what was to be set down, I
nevertheless found my mind barren and rigid, so that I was obliged to
desist without having accomplished anything, and seemed to be hampered
with idle fancies. At the same time I could not but marvel at the
power of the reality of thought, with which it rests to open and to
close the womb of the human soul. Another time, however, I would begin
empty and arrive, without any trouble, at fulness. Thoughts came
flying like snowflakes or grains of corn invisibly from above, and it
was as though divine power took hold of me and inspired me, so that I
did not know where I was, who was with me, who I was, or what I was
saying or writing; for just then the flow of ideas was given me, a
delightful clearness, keen insight, and lucid mastery of material, as
if the inner eye were able to see everything with the greatest
distinctness."

This is a description of a path to knowledge so expressed that we see
that any one taking this path is conscious of flowing in one current
with the divine, when the Logos becomes alive within him. This is also
expressed clearly in the words: "When the spirit, moved by love, takes
its flight into the most holy, soaring joyously on divine wings, it
forgets everything else and itself. It only clings to and is filled
with that of which it is the satellite and servant, and to this it
offers the incense of the most sacred and chaste virtue."

There are only two ways for Philo. Either man follows the world of
sense, that is, what observation and intellect offer, in which case he
limits himself to his personality and withdraws from the cosmos; or he
becomes conscious of the universal cosmic force, and experiences the
eternal within his personality. "He who wishes to escape from God
falls into his own hands. For there are two things to be considered,
the universal Spirit which is God, and one's own spirit. The latter
flees to and takes refuge in the universal Spirit, for one who goes
beyond his own spirit says that it is nothing and connects everything
with God; but one who avoids God, abolishes the First Cause, and makes
himself the cause of everything which happens."

The Platonic view of the universe sets out to be knowledge which by
its very nature is also religion. It brings knowledge into relation
with the highest to which man can attain through his feelings. Plato
will only allow knowledge to hold good when feeling may be completely
satisfied in it. It is then more than science, it is the substance of
life. It is a higher man within man, that man of which the personality
is only an image. Within man is born a being who surpasses him, a
primordial, archetypal man, and this is another secret of the
Mysteries brought to expression in the Platonic philosophy.
Hippolytus, one of the Early Fathers, alludes to this secret. "This is
the great secret of the Samothracians (who were guardians of a certain
Mystery-cult), which cannot be expressed and which only the initiates
know. But these latter speak in detail of Adam, as the primordial,
archetypal man."

The Platonic _Dialogue on Love_, or the _Symposium_, also represents
an initiation. Here love appears as the herald of wisdom. If wisdom,
the eternal word, the Logos, is the Son of the Eternal Creator of the
cosmos, love is related to the Logos as a mother. Before even a spark
of the light of wisdom can flash up in the human soul, a dim impulse
or desire for the divine must be present in it. Unconsciously the
divine must draw man to what afterwards, when raised into his
consciousness, constitutes his supreme happiness. What Heraclitus
calls the "daimon" in man (see p. 49) is connected with the idea of
love. In the _Symposium_, people of the most various ranks and views
of life speak about love,--the ordinary man, the politician, the
scientific man, the satiric poet Aristophanes, and the tragic poet
Agathon. They each have their own view of love, in keeping with their
different experiences of life. The way in which they express
themselves shows the stage at which their "daimon" has arrived (_cf._
p. 49). By love one being is attracted to another. The multiplicity,
the diversity of the things into which divine unity was poured,
aspires towards unity and harmony through love. Thus love has
something divine in it, and owing to this, each individual can only
understand it as far as he participates in the divine.

After these men and others at different degrees of maturity have given
utterance to their ideas about love, Socrates takes up the word. He
considers love from the point of view of a man in search of knowledge.
For him, it is not a divinity, but it is something which leads man to
God. Eros, or love, is for him not divine, for a god is perfect, and
therefore possesses the beautiful and good; but Eros is only the
desire for the beautiful and good. He thus stands between man and God.
He is a "daimon," a mediator between the earthly and the divine.

It is significant that Socrates does not claim to be giving his own
thoughts when speaking of love. He says he is only relating what a
woman once imparted to him as a revelation. It was through mantic art
that he came to his conception of love. Diotima, the priestess,
awakened in Socrates the daimonic force which was to lead him to the
divine. She initiated him.

This passage in the _Symposium_ is highly suggestive. Who is the "wise
woman" who awakened the daimon in Socrates? She is more than a merely
poetic mode of expression. For no wise woman on the physical plane
could awaken the daimon in the soul, unless the daimonic force were
latent in the soul itself. It is surely in Socrates' own soul that we
must also look for this "wise woman." But there must be a reason why
that which brings the daimon to life within the soul should appear as
an outward being on the physical plane. The force cannot work in the
same way as the forces which may be observed in the soul, as belonging
to and native to it. We see that it is the soul-force which precedes
the coming of wisdom which Socrates represents as a "wise woman." It
is the mother-principle which gives birth to the Son of God, Wisdom,
the Logos. The unconscious soul-force which brings the divine into the
consciousness is here represented as the feminine element. The soul
which as yet is without wisdom is the mother of what leads to the
divine. This brings us to an important conception of mysticism. The
soul is recognised as the mother of the divine. Unconsciously it leads
man to the divine, with the inevitableness of a natural force.

This conception throws light on the view of Greek mythology taken in
the Mysteries. The world of the gods is born in the soul. Man looks
upon what he creates in images as his gods (_cf._ p. 33). But he must
force his way through to another conception. He must transmute into
divine images the divine force which is active within him before the
creation of those images. Behind the divine appears the mother of the
divine, which is nothing else than the original force of the human
soul. Thus side by side with the gods, man represents goddesses.

Let us look at the myth of Dionysos in this light. Dionysos is the son
of Zeus and a mortal mother, Semele. Zeus wrests the still immature
child from its mother when she is slain by lightning, and shelters it
in his own side till it is ready to be born. Hera, the mother of the
gods, incites the Titans against Dionysos, and they tear him in
pieces. But Pallas Athene rescues his heart, which is still beating,
and brings it to Zeus. Out of it he engenders his son for the second
time.

In this myth we can accurately trace a process which is enacted in the
depths of the human soul. Interpreting it in the manner of the
Egyptian priest who instructed Solon about the nature of myths (_cf._
p. 78 _et seq._), we might say, it is related that Dionysos was the
son of a god and of a mortal mother, that he was torn in pieces and
afterwards born again. This sounds like a fable, but it contains the
truth of the birth of the divine and its destiny in the human soul.
The divine unites itself with the earthly, temporal human soul. As
soon as the divine, Dionysiac element stirs within the soul, it feels
a violent desire for its own true spiritual form. Ordinary
consciousness, which once again appears in the form of a female
goddess, Hera, becomes jealous at the birth of the divine out of the
higher consciousness. It arouses the lower nature of man (the Titans).
The still immature divine child is torn in pieces. Thus the divine
child is present in man as intellectual science broken up. But if
there be enough of the higher wisdom (Zeus) in man to be active, it
nurses and cherishes the immature child, which is then born again as a
second son of God (Dionysos). Thus from science, which is the
fragmentary divine force in man, is born undivided wisdom, which is
the Logos, the son of God and of a mortal mother, of the perishable
human soul, which unconsciously aspires after the divine. As long as
we see in all this merely a process in the soul and look upon it as a
picture of this process, we are a long way from the spiritual reality
which is enacted in it. In this spiritual reality the soul is not
merely experiencing something in itself, but it has been released from
itself and is taking part in a cosmic event, which is not enacted
within the soul, in reality, but outside it.

Platonic wisdom and Greek myths are closely linked together, so too
are the myths and the wisdom of the Mysteries. The created gods were
the object of popular religion, the history of their origin was the
secret of the Mysteries. No wonder that it was held to be dangerous to
"betray" the Mysteries, for thereby the origin of the gods of the
people was "betrayed." And a right understanding of that origin is
salutary, a misunderstanding is injurious.




