The Project Gutenberg eBook of Christianity as Mystical Fact, and the Mysteries of Antiquity
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Christianity as Mystical Fact, and the Mysteries of Antiquity

Author: Rudolf Steiner

Editor: Harry Collison


        
Release date: February 4, 2008 [eBook #24507]
                Most recently updated: January 3, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/24507

Credits: Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Jeannie Howse and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from scanned images of public domain
        material from the Google Print project.)






Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




CHRISTIANITY AS
MYSTICAL FACT
AND
THE MYSTERIES OF ANTIQUITY


BY

DR. RUDOLF STEINER
AUTHOR OF "MYSTICS OF THE RENAISSANCE," "THE GATES
OF KNOWLEDGE," ETC.


_THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED_


EDITED BY H. COLLISON


THE AUTHORIZED ENGLISH TRANSLATION


G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
The Knickerbocker Press
1914




COPYRIGHT, 1914
BY
H. COLLISON


The copyrights, the publishing rights, and the editorial
responsibility for the translations of the works of Rudolf Steiner,
Ph.D., with the exception of those already published under the
editorial supervision of Mr. Max Gysi, are now vested in Mr. Harry
Collison, M.A., Oxon.

The Knickerbocker Press, New York




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


_Christianity as Mystical Fact_ was the title given by the author to
this work, when, eight years ago, he gathered into it the substance of
lectures delivered by him in 1902. The title indicated the special
character of the book. In it the attempt was made, not merely to
represent historically the mystical content of Christianity, but to
describe the origin of Christianity from the standpoint of mystical
contemplation. Underlying this intention was the thought that at the
genesis of Christianity mystical facts were at work which can only be
perceived by such contemplation.

It is only the book itself which can make clear that by "mystical" its
author does not imply a conception which relies more on vague feelings
than on "strictly scientific statements." It is true that "mysticism"
is at present widely understood in the former sense, and hence it is
declared by many to be a sphere of the human soul-life with which
"true science" can have nothing to do. In this book the word
"mysticism" is used in the sense of the representation of a spiritual
fact, which can only be recognised in its true nature when the
knowledge of it is derived from the sources of spiritual life itself.
If the kind of knowledge drawn from such sources is rejected, the
reader will not be in a position to judge of the contents of this
book. Only one who allows that the same clearness may exist in
mysticism as in a true representation of the facts of natural science,
will be ready to admit that the content of Christianity as mysticism
may also be mystically described. For it is not only a question of the
contents of the book, but first and foremost of the methods of
knowledge by means of which the statements in it are made.

Many there are in the present day who have a most violent dislike to
such methods, which are regarded as conflicting with the ways of true
science. And this is not only the case with those willing to admit
other interpretations of the world than their own, on the ground of
"genuine knowledge of natural science," but also with those who as
believers wish to study the nature of Christianity.

The author of this book stands on the ground of a conception which
sees that the achievements of natural science in our age must lead up
into true mysticism. In fact, any other attitude as regards knowledge
actually contradicts everything presented by the achievements of
natural science. The facts of natural science itself indeed cannot be
comprehended by means of those methods of knowledge which so many
people would like to employ to the exclusion of others, under the
illusion that they stand on the firm ground of natural science. It is
only when we are prepared to admit that a full appreciation of our
present admirable knowledge of nature is compatible with genuine
mysticism, that we can take the contents of this book into
consideration.

The author's intention is to show, by means of what is here called
"mystical knowledge," how the source of Christianity prepared its own
ground in the mysteries of pre-Christian times. In this pre-Christian
mysticism we find the soil in which Christianity throve, as a germ of
quite independent nature. This point of view makes it possible to
understand Christianity in its independent being, even though its
evolution is traced from pre-Christian mysticism. If this point of
view be overlooked, it is very possible to misunderstand that
independent character, and to think that Christianity was merely a
further development of what already existed in pre-Christian
mysticism. Many people of the present day have fallen into this error,
comparing the content of Christianity with pre-Christian conceptions,
and then thinking that Christian ideas were only a continuation of the
former. The following pages are intended to show that Christianity
presupposes the earlier mysticism just as a seed must have its soil.
It is intended to emphasise the peculiar character of the essence of
Christianity, through the knowledge of its evolution, but not to
extinguish it.

It is with deep satisfaction that the author is able to mention that
this account of the nature of Christianity has found acceptance with
a writer who has enriched the culture of our time in the highest sense
of the word, by his important works on the spiritual life of humanity.
Edouard Schuré, author of _Les Grands Initiés_,[1] is so far in accord
with the attitude of this book that he undertook to translate it into
French, under the title, _Le mystère chrétien et les mystères
antiques_. It may be mentioned by the way, and as a symptom of the
existence at the present time of a longing to understand the nature of
Christianity as presented in this work, that the first edition was
translated into other European languages besides French.

The author has not found occasion to alter anything essential in the
preparation of this second edition. On the other hand, what was
written eight years ago has been enlarged, and the endeavour has been
made to express many things more exactly and circumstantially than was
then possible. Unfortunately the author was obliged, through stress
of work, to let a long period elapse between the time when the first
edition was exhausted, and the appearance of the second.

                                        RUDOLF STEINER.

  May, 1910.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] This book is to be had in an English translation, by F. Rothwell,
under the title of _The Great Initiates_, A Sketch of the Secret
History of Religions, by Edouard Schuré (Pub., Rider & Son, London).




CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION                                 iii

CHAPTER

   I.--POINTS OF VIEW                                           1

  II.--THE MYSTERIES AND THEIR WISDOM                          10

 III.--THE GREEK SAGES BEFORE PLATO IN THE LIGHT OF THE
       WISDOM OF THE MYSTERIES                                 39

  IV.--PLATO AS A MYSTIC                                       63

   V.--THE WISDOM OF THE MYSTERIES AND THE MYTH                93

  VI.--THE MYSTERY WISDOM OF EGYPT                            127

 VII.--THE GOSPELS                                            147

VIII.--THE LAZARUS MIRACLE                                    159

  IX.--THE APOCALYPSE OF ST. JOHN                             177

   X.--JESUS AND HIS HISTORICAL BACKGROUND                    198

  XI.--THE NATURE OF CHRISTIANITY                             203

 XII.--CHRISTIANITY AND HEATHEN WISDOM                        215

XIII.--ST. AUGUSTINE AND THE CHURCH                           227

       NOTES                                                  239




       *       *       *       *       *




CHRISTIANITY AS MYSTICAL FACT




       *       *       *       *       *




Christianity as Mystical Fact

I

POINTS OF VIEW


Natural Science has deeply influenced modern thought. It is becoming
more and more impossible to speak of spiritual needs and the life of
the soul, without taking into consideration the achievements and
methods of this science. It must be admitted, however, that many
people satisfy these needs, without letting themselves be troubled by
its influence. But those who feel the beating of the pulse of the age
must take this influence into consideration. With increasing swiftness
do ideas derived from natural science take possession of our brains,
and, unwillingly though it may be, our hearts follow, often in
dejection and dismay. It is not a question only of the number thus won
over, but of the fact that there is a force within the method of
natural science, which convinces the attentive observer that that
method contains something which cannot be neglected, and is one by
which any modern conception of the universe must be profoundly
affected. Many of the outgrowths of this method compel a justifiable
rejection. But such rejection is not sufficient in an age in which
very many resort to this way of thinking, and are attracted to it as
if by magic. The case is in no way altered because some people see
that true science long ago passed, by its own initiative, beyond the
shallow doctrines of force and matter taught by materialists. It would
be better, apparently, to listen to those who boldly declare that the
ideas of natural science will form the basis of a new religion. If
these ideas also appear shallow and superficial to one who knows the
deeper spiritual needs of humanity, he must nevertheless take note of
them, for it is to them that attention is now turned, and there is
reason to think they will claim more and more notice in the near
future.

Another class of people have also to be taken into account, those
whose hearts have lagged behind their heads. With their reason they
cannot but accept the ideas of natural science. The burden of proof is
too much for them. But those ideas cannot satisfy the religious needs
of their souls,--the perspective offered is too dreary. Is the human
soul to rise on the wings of enthusiasm to the heights of beauty,
truth, and goodness, only for each individual to be swept away in the
end like a bubble blown by the material brain? This is a feeling which
oppresses many minds like a nightmare. But scientific concepts oppress
them also, coming as they do come with the mighty force of authority.
As long as they can, these people remain blind to the discord in their
souls. Indeed they console themselves by saying that full clearness in
these matters is denied to the human soul. They think in accordance
with natural science so long as the experience of their senses and the
logic of their intellect demand it, but they keep to the religious
sentiments in which they have been educated, and prefer to remain in
darkness as to these matters,--a darkness which clouds their
understanding. They have not the courage to battle through to the
light.

There can be no doubt whatever that the habit of thought derived from
natural science is the greatest force in modern intellectual life, and
it must not be passed by heedlessly by any one concerned with the
spiritual interests of humanity. But it is none the less true that the
way in which it sets about satisfying spiritual needs is superficial
and shallow. If this were the right way, the outlook would indeed be
dreary. Would it not be depressing to be obliged to agree with those
who say: "Thought is a form of force. We walk by means of the same
force by which we think. Man is an organism which transforms various
forms of force into thought-force, an organism the activity of which
we maintain by what we call 'food,' and with which we produce what we
call 'thought.' What a marvellous chemical process it is which could
change a certain quantity of food into the divine tragedy of Hamlet."
This is quoted from a pamphlet of Robert G. Ingersoll, bearing the
title, _Modern Twilight of the Gods_. It matters little if such
thoughts find but scanty acceptance in the outside world. The point is
that innumerable people find themselves compelled by the system of
natural science to take up with regard to world-processes an attitude
in conformity with the above, even when they think they are not doing
so.

It would certainly be a dreary outlook if natural science itself
compelled us to accept the creed proclaimed by many of its modern
prophets. Most dreary of all for one who has gained, from the content
of natural science, the conviction that in its own sphere its mode of
thought holds good and its methods are unassailable. For he is driven
to make the admission that, however much people may dispute about
individual questions, though volume after volume may be written, and
thousands of observations accumulated about the struggle for existence
and its insignificance, about the omnipotence or powerlessness of
natural selection, natural science itself is moving in a direction
which, within certain limits, must find acceptance in an
ever-increasing degree.

But are the demands made by natural science really such as they are
described by some of its representatives? That they are not so is
proved by the method employed by these representatives themselves. The
method they use in their own sphere is not such as is often described,
and claimed for other spheres of thought. Would Darwin and Ernst
Haeckel ever have made their great discoveries about the evolution of
life if, instead of observing life and the structure of living beings,
they had shut themselves up in a laboratory and there made chemical
experiments with tissue cut out of an organism? Would Lyell have been
able to describe the development of the crust of the earth if, instead
of examining strata and their contents, he had scrutinised the
chemical qualities of innumerable rocks? Let us really follow in the
footsteps of these investigators who tower like giants in the domain
of modern science. We shall then apply to the higher regions of
spiritual life the methods they have used in the study of nature. We
shall not then believe we have understood the nature of the "divine"
tragedy of Hamlet by saying that a wonderful chemical process
transformed a certain quantity of food into that tragedy. We shall
believe it as little as an investigator of nature could seriously
believe that he has understood the mission of heat in the evolution of
the earth, when he has studied the action of heat on sulphur in a
retort. Neither does he attempt to understand the construction of the
human brain by examining the effect of liquid potash on a fragment of
it, but rather by inquiring how the brain has, in the course of
evolution, been developed out of the organs of lower organisms.

It is therefore quite true that one who is investigating the nature of
spirit can do nothing better than learn from natural science. He need
only do as science does, but he must not allow himself to be misled by
what individual representatives of natural science would dictate to
him. He must investigate in the spiritual as they do in the physical
domain, but he need not adopt the opinions they entertain about the
spiritual world, confused as they are by their exclusive
contemplation of physical phenomena.

We shall only be acting in the spirit of natural science if we study
the spiritual development of man as impartially as the naturalist
observes the sense-world. We shall then certainly be led, in the
domain of spiritual life, to a kind of contemplation which differs
from that of the naturalist as geology differs from pure physics and
biology from chemistry. We shall be led up to higher methods, which
cannot, it is true, be those of natural science, though quite
conformable with the spirit of it. Such methods alone are able to
bring us to the heart of spiritual developments, such as that of
Christianity, or other worlds of religious conceptions. Any one
applying these methods may arouse the opposition of many who believe
they are thinking scientifically, but he will know himself, for all
that, to be in full accord with a genuinely scientific method of
thought.

An investigator of this kind must also go beyond a merely historical
examination of the documents relating to spiritual life. This is
necessary just on account of the attitude he has acquired from his
study of natural history. When a chemical law is explained, it is of
small use to describe the retorts, dishes, and pincers which have led
to the discovery of the law. And it is just as useless, when
explaining the origin of Christianity, to ascertain the historical
sources drawn upon by the Evangelist St. Luke, or those from which the
"hidden revelation" of St. John is compiled. History can in this case
be only the outer court to research proper. It is not by tracing the
historical origin of documents that we shall discover anything about
the dominant ideas in the writings of Moses or in the traditions of
the Greek mystics. These documents are only the outer expression for
the ideas. Nor does the naturalist who is investigating the nature of
man trouble about the origin of the word "man," or the way in which it
has developed in a language. He keeps to the thing, not to the word in
which it finds expression. And in studying spiritual life we must
likewise abide by the spirit and not by outer documents.




