V

THE WISDOM OF THE MYSTERIES AND THE MYTH


The Mystic sought forces and beings within himself which are unknown
to man as long as he remains in the ordinary attitude towards life.
The Mystic puts the great question about his own spiritual forces and
the laws which transcend the lower nature. A man of ordinary views of
life, bounded by the senses and logic, creates gods for himself, or
when he gets to the point of seeing that he has made them, he
disclaims them. The Mystic knows that he creates gods, he knows why he
creates them, he sees, so to say, behind the natural law which makes
man create them. It is as though a plant suddenly became conscious,
and learned the laws of its growth and development. As it is, it
develops in lovely unconsciousness. If it knew about the laws of its
own being, its relation to itself would be completely changed. What
the lyric poet feels when he sings about a plant, what the botanist
thinks when he investigates its laws, this would hover before a
conscious plant as an ideal of itself.

It is thus with the Mystic with regard to the laws, the forces working
within him. As one who knew, he was forced to create something divine
beyond himself. And the initiates took up the same attitude to that
which the people had created beyond nature; that is to the world of
popular gods and myths. They wanted to penetrate the laws of this
world of gods and myths. Where the people saw the form of a god, or a
myth, they looked for a higher truth.

Let us take an example. The Athenians had been forced by the Cretan
king Minos to deliver up to him every eight years seven boys and seven
girls. These were thrown as food to a terrible monster, the Minotaur.
When the mournful tribute was to be paid for the third time, the
king's son Theseus accompanied it to Crete. On his arrival there,
Ariadne, the daughter of Minos interested herself in him. The Minotaur
dwelt in the labyrinth, a maze from which no one could extricate
himself who had once got in. Theseus desired to deliver his native
city from the shameful tribute. For this purpose he had to enter the
labyrinth into which the monster's booty was usually thrown, and to
kill the Minotaur. He undertook the task, overcame the formidable foe,
and succeeded in regaining the open air with the aid of a ball of
thread which Ariadne had given him.

The Mystic had to discover how the creative human mind comes to weave
such a story. As the botanist watches the growth of plants in order to
discover its laws, so did the Mystic watch the creative spirit. He
sought for a truth, a nucleus of wisdom where the people had invented
a myth.

Sallust discloses to us the attitude of a mystical sage towards a myth
of this kind. "We might call the whole world a myth," says he, "which
contains bodies and things visibly, and souls and spirits in a hidden
manner. If the truth about the gods were taught to all, the
unintelligent would disdain it from not understanding it, and the
more capable would make light of it. But if the truth is given in a
mystical veil, it is assured against contempt and serves as a stimulus
to philosophic thinking."

When the truth contained in a myth was sought by an initiate, he was
conscious of adding something which did not exist in the consciousness
of the people. He was aware of being above that consciousness, as a
botanist is above a growing plant. Something was expressed which was
different from what was present in the mythical consciousness, but it
was looked upon as a deeper truth, symbolically expressed in the myth.
Man is confronted with his own sense-nature in the form of a hostile
monster. He sacrifices to it the fruits of his personality, and the
monster devours them, and continues to do so till the conqueror
(Theseus) awakes in man. His intuition spins the thread by means of
which he finds his way again when he repairs to the maze of the senses
in order to slay his enemy. The mystery of human knowledge itself is
expressed in this conquering of the senses. The initiate knows that
mystery. It points to a force in human personality unknown to ordinary
consciousness, but nevertheless active within it. It is the force
which creates the myth, which has the same structure as mystical
truth. This truth finds its symbol in the myth.

What then is to be found in the myths? In them is a creation of the
spirit, of the unconsciously creative soul. The soul has well-defined
laws. In order to create beyond itself, it must work in a certain
direction. At the mythological stage it does this in images, but these
are built up according to the laws of the soul. We might also say that
when the soul advances beyond the stage of mythological consciousness
to deeper truths, these bear the same stamp as did the myths, for one
and the same force was at work in their formation.

Plotinus, the philosopher of the Neo-Platonic school (A.D. 204-269),
speaks of this relation of mythical representation to higher knowledge
in reference to the priest-sages of Egypt. "Whether as the result of
rigorous investigations, or whether instinctively when imparting
their wisdom, the Egyptian sages do not use, for expressing their
teaching and precepts, written signs which are imitations of voice and
speech; but they draw pictures, and in the outlines of these they
record, in their temples, the thought contained in each thing, so that
every picture contains knowledge and wisdom, and is a definite truth
and a complete whole, although there is no explanation nor discussion.
Afterwards the contents of the picture are drawn out of it and
expressed in words, and the cause is found why it is as it is, and not
otherwise."

If we wish to find out the connection of mysticism with mythical
narratives, we must see what relationship to them there is in the
views of the great thinkers, those who knew their wisdom to be in
harmony with the methods of the Mysteries. We find such harmony in
Plato in the fullest degree. His explanations of myths and his
application of them in his teaching may be taken as a model (_cf._ p.
78 _et seq._). In the _Phædrus_, a dialogue on the soul, the myth of
Boreas is introduced. This divine being, who was seen in the rushing
wind, one day saw the fair Orithyia, daughter of the Attic king
Erectheus, gathering flowers with her companions. Seized with love for
her, he carried her off to his grotto. Plato, by the mouth of
Socrates, rejects a rationalist interpretation of this myth. According
to this explanation, an outward, natural fact is poetically symbolised
by the narrative. A hurricane seized the king's daughter and hurled
her over the rocks. "Interpretations of this sort," says Socrates,
"are learned sophistries, however popular and usual they may be....
For one who has pulled to pieces one of these mythological forms must,
to be consistent, elucidate sceptically and explain naturally all the
rest in the same way.... But even if such a labour could be
accomplished, it would in any case be no proof of superior talents in
the one carrying it out, but only of superficial wit, boorish wisdom,
and ridiculous haste.... Therefore I leave on one side all such
enquiries, and believe what is generally thought about the myths. I do
not examine them, as I have just said, but I examine myself to see
whether I too may perhaps be a monster, more complicated and
therefore more disordered than the chimæra, more savage than Typhon,
or whether I represent a more docile and simple being, to whom some
particle of a virtuous and divine nature has been given."

We see from this that Plato does not approve of a rationalistic and
merely intellectual interpretation of myths. This attitude must be
compared with the way in which he himself uses myths in order to
express himself through them. When he speaks of the life of the soul,
when he leaves the paths of the transitory and seeks the eternal in
the soul, when, therefore, images borrowed from sense-perception and
reasoning thought can no longer be used, then Plato has recourse to
the myth. _Phædrus_ treats of the eternal in the soul, which is
portrayed as a car drawn by two horses winged all over, and driven by
a charioteer. One horse is patient and docile, the other wild and
headstrong. If an obstacle comes in the way of the car the troublesome
horse takes the opportunity of impeding the docile one and defying the
driver. When the car arrives where it has to follow the gods up the
celestial steep, the intractable horse throws the team into confusion.
If it is less strong than the good horse, it is overcome, and the car
is able to go on into the supersensible realm. It thus happens that
the soul can never ascend without difficulties into the kingdom of the
divine. Some souls rise more to the vision of eternity, some less. The
soul which has seen the world beyond remains safe until the next
journey. One who, on account of the intractable horse, has not seen
beyond, must try again on the next journey. These journeys signify the
various incarnations of the soul. One journey signifies the life of
the soul in one personality. The wild horse represents the lower
nature, the docile one the higher nature; the driver, the soul longing
for union with the divine.

Plato resorts to the myth in order to describe the course of the
eternal spirit through its various transformations. In the same way he
has recourse, in other writings, to symbolical narrative, in order to
portray the inner nature of man, which is not perceptible to the
senses.

Plato is here in complete harmony with the mythical and allegorical
manner of expression used by others. For instance there is in ancient
Hindu literature a parable attributed to Buddha.

A man very much attached to life, who seeks sensuous pleasures and
will die at no price is pursued by four serpents. He hears a voice
commanding him to feed and bathe the serpents from time to time. The
man runs away, fearing the serpents. Again he hears a voice, warning
him that he is pursued by five murderers. Once more he escapes. A
voice calls his attention to a sixth murderer, who is about to behead
him with a sword. Again he flees. He comes to a deserted village.
There he hears a voice telling him that robbers are shortly going to
plunder the village. Having again escaped, he comes to a great flood.
He feels unsafe where he is, and out of straw, wood, and leaves he
makes a basket in which he arrives at the other shore. Now he is safe,
he is a Brahmin.

The meaning of this allegory is that man has to pass through the most
various states before attaining to the divine. The four serpents
represent the four elements, fire, water, earth, and air. The five
murderers are the five senses. The deserted village is the soul which
has escaped from sense-impressions, but is not yet safe if it is alone
with itself, for if its lower nature lays hold of it, it must perish.
Man must construct for himself the boat which is to carry him over the
flood of the transitory from the one shore, the sense-nature, to the
other, the eternal, divine world.

Let us look at the Egyptian mystery of Osiris in this light. Osiris
had gradually become one of the most important Egyptian divinities; he
supplanted other gods in certain parts of the country; and an
important cycle of myths was formed round him and his consort Isis.

Osiris was the son of the Sun-god, his brother was Typhon-Set, and his
sister was Isis. Osiris married his sister, and together they reigned
over Egypt. The wicked brother, Typhon, meditated killing Osiris. He
had a chest made which was exactly the length of Osiris' body. At a
banquet this chest was offered to the person whom it exactly fitted.
This was Osiris and none other! He entered the chest. Typhon and his
confederates rushed upon him, closed the chest, and threw it into the
river. When Isis heard the terrible news she wandered far and wide in
despair, seeking her husband's body. When she had found it, Typhon
again took possession of it, and tore it in fourteen pieces which were
dispersed in many different places. Various tombs of Osiris were shown
in Egypt. In many places, up and down the country, portions of the god
were said to be buried. Osiris himself, however, came forth from the
nether-world and vanquished Typhon. A beam shone from him upon Isis,
who in consequence bore a son, Harpocrates or Horus.

And now let us compare this myth with the view which the Greek
philosopher, Empedocles (B.C. 490-430) takes of the universe. He
assumes that the one original primeval being was once broken up into
the four elements, fire, water, earth, and air, or into the
multiplicity of being. He represents two opposing forces, which within
this world of existence bring about growth and decay, love and
strife. Empedocles says of the elements:

    They remain ever the same, but yet by
      combining their forces
    Become transformed into men and the
      numberless beings besides.
    These are now joined into one, love binding the
      many together,
    Now once again they are scattered, dispersing
      through hatred and strife.

What then are the things in the world from Empedocles' point of view?
They are the elements in different combinations. They could only come
into being because the Primeval Unity was broken up into the four
essences. Therefore this primordial unity was poured into the
elements. Anything confronting us is part of the divinity which was
poured out. But the divinity is hidden in the thing; it first had to
die that things might come into being. And what are these things?
Mixtures of divine constituents effectuated by love and hatred.
Empedocles says this distinctly:

    See, for a clear demonstration, how the limbs of
      a man are constructed,
    All that the body possesses, in beauty and pride
      of existence,
    All put together by love, are the elements there
      forming one.
    Afterwards hatred and strife come, and fatally
      tear them asunder,
    Once more they wander alone, on the desolate
      confines of life.
    So it is with the bushes and trees, and the
      water-inhabiting fishes,
    Wild animals roaming the mountains, and ships
      swiftly borne by their sails.

Empedocles therefore must come to the conclusion that the sage finds
again the Divine Primordial Unity, hidden in the world by a spell, and
entangled in the meshes of love and hatred. But if man finds the
divine, he must himself be divine, for Empedocles takes the point of
view that a being is only cognised by its equal. This conviction of
his is expressed in Goethe's lines: "If the eye were not of the nature
of the sun, how could we behold light? If divine force were not at
work in us, how could divine things delight us?"

These thoughts about the world and man, which transcend
sense-experience, were found by the Mystic in the myth of Osiris.
Divine creative force has been poured out into the universe; it
appears as the four elements; God (Osiris) is killed. Man is to raise
him from the dead with his cognition, which is of divine nature. He is
to find him again as Horus (the Son of God, the Logos, Wisdom), in the
opposition between Strife (Typhon) and Love (Isis). Empedocles
expresses his fundamental conviction in Greek form by means of images
which border on myth. Love is Aphrodite, and strife is Neikos. They
bind and unbind the elements.

The portrayal of the content of a myth in the manner followed here
must not be confused with a merely symbolical or even allegorical
interpretation of myths. This is not intended. The images forming the
contents of a myth are not invented symbols of abstract truths, but
actual soul-experiences of the initiate. He experiences the images
with his spiritual organs of perception, just as the normal man
experiences the images of physical things with his eyes and ears. But
as an image is nothing in itself if it is not aroused in the
perception by an outer object, so the mythical image is nothing unless
it is excited by real facts of the spiritual world. Only in regard to
the physical world, man is at first outside the exciting causes,
whereas he can only experience the images of myths when he is within
the corresponding spiritual occurrences. In order, however, to be
within them, he must have gone through initiation. Then the spiritual
occurrences within which he is perceiving are, as it were, illustrated
by the myth-images. Any one who cannot take the mythical element as
such illustration of real spiritual occurrences, has not yet attained
to the understanding of it. For the spiritual events themselves are
supersensible, and images which are reminiscent of the physical world
are not themselves of a spiritual nature, but only an illustration of
spiritual things. One who lives merely in the images lives in a dream.
Only one who has got to the point of feeling the spiritual element in
the image as he feels in the sense-world a rose through the image of
a rose, really lives in spiritual perceptions. This is the reason why
the images of myths cannot have only one meaning. On account of their
illustrative character, the same myths may express several spiritual
facts. It is not therefore a contradiction when interpreters of myths
sometimes connect a myth with one spiritual fact and sometimes with
another.

From this standpoint, we are able to find a thread to conduct us
through the labyrinth of Greek myths. Let us consider the legend of
Heracles. The twelve labours imposed upon Heracles appear in a higher
light when we remember that before the last and most difficult one, he
is initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries. He is commissioned by King
Eurystheus of Mycenæ to bring the hell-hound Cerberus from the
infernal regions and take it back there again. In order to undertake
the descent into hell, Heracles had to be initiated. The Mysteries
conducted man through the death of perishable things, therefore into
the nether-world, and by initiation they rescued his eternal part from
perishing. As a Mystic, he could vanquish death. Heracles having
become a Mystic overcomes the dangers of the nether-world. This
justifies us in interpreting his other ordeals as stages in the inner
development of the soul. He overcomes the Nemæan lion and brings him
to Mycenæ. This means that he becomes master of purely physical force
in man; he tames it. Afterwards he slays the nine-headed Hydra. He
overcomes it with firebrands and dips his arrows in its gall, so that
they become deadly. This means that he overcomes lower knowledge, that
which comes through the senses. He does this through the fire of the
spirit, and from what he has gained through the lower knowledge, he
draws the power to look at lower things in the light which belongs to
spiritual sight. Heracles captures the hind of Artemis, goddess of
hunting: everything which free nature offers to the human soul,
Heracles conquers and subdues. The other labours may be interpreted in
the same way. We cannot here trace out every detail, and only wish to
describe how the general sense of the myth points to inner
development.

A similar interpretation is possible of the expedition of the
Argonauts. Phrixus and his sister Helle, children of a Boeotian king,
suffered many things from their step-mother. The gods sent them a ram
with a golden fleece, which flew away with them. When they came to the
straits between Europe and Asia, Helle was drowned. Hence the strait
is called the Hellespont. Phrixus came to the King of Colchis, on the
east shore of the Black Sea. He sacrificed the ram to the gods, and
gave its fleece to King Æetes. The king had it hung up in a grove and
guarded by a terrible dragon. The Greek hero Jason undertook to fetch
the fleece from Colchis, in company with other heroes, Heracles,
Theseus, and Orpheus. Heavy tasks were laid upon Jason by Æetes for
the obtaining of the treasure, but Medea, the king's daughter, who was
versed in magic, aided him. He subdued two fire-breathing bulls. He
ploughed a field and sowed in it dragon's teeth from which armed men
grew up out of the earth. By Medea's advice he threw a stone into
their midst, whereupon they killed each other. Jason lulls the dragon
to sleep with a charm of Medea's and is then able to win the fleece.
He returns with it to Greece, Medea accompanying him as his wife. The
king pursues the fugitives. In order to detain him, Medea slays her
little brother Absyrtus, and scatters his limbs in the sea. Æetes
stays to collect them, and the pair are able to reach Jason's home
with the fleece.

Each of these facts requires a deep elucidation. The fleece is
something belonging to man, and infinitely precious to him. It is
something from which he was separated in times of yore, and for the
recovery of which he has to overcome terrible forces. It is thus with
the eternal in the human soul. It belongs to man, but man is separated
from it by his lower nature. Only by overcoming the latter, and
lulling it to sleep, can he recover the eternal. This becomes possible
when his own consciousness (Medea) comes to his aid with its magic
power. Medea is to Jason what Diotima was to Socrates, a teacher of
love (_cf._ p. 88). Man's own wisdom has the magic power necessary for
attaining the divine after having overcome the transitory. From the
lower nature there can only arise a lower human principle, the armed
men who are overcome by spiritual force, the counsel of Medea. Even
when man has found the eternal, the fleece, he is not yet safe. He has
to sacrifice part of his consciousness (Absyrtus). This is exacted by
the physical world, which we can only apprehend as a multiple
(dismembered) world. We might go still deeper into the description of
the spiritual events lying behind the images, but it is only intended
here to indicate the principle of the formation of myths.

Of special interest, when interpreted in this way, is the legend of
Prometheus. He and his brother Epimetheus are sons of the Titan
Iapetus. The Titans are the offspring of the oldest generation of
gods, Uranus (Heaven) and Gæa (Earth). Kronos, the youngest of the
Titans, dethroned his father and seized upon the government of the
world. In return, he was overpowered, with the other Titans, by his
son Zeus, who became the chief of the gods. In the struggle with the
Titans, Prometheus was on the side of Zeus. By his advice, Zeus
banished the Titans to the nether-world. But in Prometheus there
still lived the Titan spirit, he was only half a friend to Zeus. When
the latter wished to exterminate men on account of their arrogance,
Prometheus espoused their cause, taught them numbers, writing, and
everything else which leads to culture, especially the use of fire.
This aroused the wrath of Zeus against Prometheus. Hephaistos, the son
of Zeus, was commissioned to make a female form of great beauty, whom
the gods adorned with every possible gift. She was called Pandora, the
all-gifted one. Hermes, messenger of the gods, brought her to
Epimetheus, the brother of Prometheus. She brought him a casket, as a
present from the gods. Epimetheus accepted the present, although
Prometheus had warned him against receiving any gift from the gods.
When the casket was opened, every possible human evil flew out of it.
Hope alone remained, and this because Pandora quickly closed the box.
Hope has therefore been left to man, as a doubtful gift of the gods.
By order of Zeus, Prometheus was chained to a rock on the Caucasus, on
account of his relation to man. An eagle perpetually gnaws his liver,
which is as often renewed. He has to pass his life in agonising
loneliness till one of the gods voluntarily sacrifices himself,
_i.e._, devotes himself to death. The tormented Prometheus bears his
sufferings steadfastly. It had been told him that Zeus would be
dethroned by the son of a mortal unless Zeus consented to wed this
mortal woman. It was important for Zeus to know this secret. He sent
the messenger Hermes to Prometheus, in order to learn something about
it. Prometheus refused to say anything. The legend of Heracles is
connected with that of Prometheus. In the course of his wanderings
Heracles comes to the Caucasus. He slays the eagle which was devouring
the liver of Prometheus. The centaur Chiron, who cannot die, although
suffering from an incurable wound, sacrifices himself for Prometheus,
who is thereupon reconciled with the gods.

The Titans are the force of will, proceeding as nature (Kronos) from
the original universal spirit (Uranus). Here we have to think not
merely of will-forces in an abstract form, but of actual will-beings.
Prometheus is one of them, and this describes his nature. But he is
not altogether a Titan. In a certain sense he is on the side of Zeus,
the Spirit, who enters upon the rulership of the world after the
unbridled force of nature (Kronos) has been subdued. Prometheus is
thus the representative of those worlds which have given man the
progressive element, half nature-force, half spiritual force, man's
will. The will points on the one side towards good, on the other,
towards evil. Its fate is decided according as it leans to the
spiritual or the perishable. This fate is that of man himself. He is
chained to the perishable, the eagle gnaws him, he has to suffer. He
can only reach the highest by seeking his destiny in solitude. He has
a secret which is that the divine (Zeus) must marry a mortal (human
consciousness bound up with the physical body), in order to beget a
son, human wisdom (the Logos) which will deliver the deity. By this
means consciousness becomes immortal. He must not betray this secret
till a Mystic (Heracles) comes to him, and annihilates the power which
was perpetually threatening him with death. A being half animal, half
human, a centaur, is obliged to sacrifice itself to redeem man. The
centaur is man himself, half animal, half spiritual. He must die in
order that the purely spiritual man may be delivered. That which is
disdained by Prometheus, human will, is accepted by Epimetheus, reason
or prudence. But the gifts offered to Epimetheus are only troubles and
sorrows, for reason clings to the transitory and perishable. And only
one thing is left--the hope that even out of the perishable the
eternal may some day be born.

The thread running through the legends of the Argonauts, Heracles and
Prometheus, is continued in Homer's _Odyssey_. Here we find ourselves
compelled to use our own method of interpretation. But on closer
consideration of everything which has to be taken into account, even
the sturdiest doubter must lose all scruples about such an
interpretation. In the first place, it is a startling fact that it is
also related of Odysseus that he descended into the nether-world.
Whatever we may think about the author of the _Odyssey_ in other
respects, it is impossible to imagine his representing a mortal
descending to the infernal regions, without his bringing him into
connection with what the journey into the nether-world meant to the
Greeks. It meant the conquest of the perishable and the awakening of
the eternal in the soul. It must therefore be conceded that Odysseus
accomplished this, and thereby his experiences and those of Heracles
acquire a deeper significance. They become a delineation of the
non-sensuous, of the soul's progress of development. Hence the
narrative in the _Odyssey_ is different from what is demanded by a
history of outer events. The hero makes voyages in enchanted ships.
Actual geographical distances are dealt with in most arbitrary
fashion. It is not in the least a question of what is physically real.
This becomes comprehensible, if the physically real events are only
related for the sake of illustrating the development of a soul.
Moreover the poet himself at the opening of the book says that it
deals with a search for the soul:

"O Muse, sing to me of the man full of resource, who wandered very
much after he had destroyed the sacred city of Troy, and saw the
cities of many men, and learned their manners. Many griefs also in his
mind did he suffer on the sea, although seeking to preserve his own
soul, and the return of his companions."

We have before us a man seeking for the soul, for the divine, and his
wanderings during this search are narrated. He comes to the land of
the Cyclopes. These are uncouth giants, with only one eye and that in
the centre of the forehead. The most terrible, Polyphemus, devours
several of Odysseus' companions. Odysseus himself escapes by blinding
the Cyclopes. Here we have to do with the first stage of life's
pilgrimage. Physical force or the lower nature has to be overcome. It
devours any one who does not take away its power, who does not blind
it. Odysseus next comes to the island of the enchantress Circe. She
changes some of his companions into grunting pigs. She also is subdued
by Odysseus. Circe is the lower mind-force, which cleaves to the
transitory. If misused, it may thrust men down even deeper into
bestiality. Odysseus has to overcome it. Then he is able to descend
into the nether-world. He becomes a Mystic. Now he is exposed to the
dangers which beset the Mystic on his progress from the lower to the
higher degrees of initiation. He comes to the Sirens, who lure the
passer-by to death by sweet magic sounds. These are the forms of the
lower imagination, which are at first pursued by one who has freed
himself from the power of the senses. He has got so far that his
spirit acts freely, but is not initiated. He pursues illusions, from
the power of which he must break loose. Odysseus has to accomplish the
awful passage between Scylla and Charybdis. The Mystic, at the
beginning of the path wavers between spirit and sensuousness. He
cannot yet grasp the full value of spirit, yet sensuousness has
already lost its former attraction. All Odysseus' companions perish in
a shipwreck; he alone escapes and comes to the nymph Calypso, who
receives him kindly and takes care of him for seven years. At length,
by order of Zeus, she dismisses him to his home. The Mystic has
arrived at a stage at which all his fellow-aspirants fail; he alone,
Odysseus, is worthy. He enjoys for a time, which is defined by the
mystically symbolic number seven, the rest of gradual initiation.
Before Odysseus arrives at his home, he comes to the isle of the
Phæaces, where he meets with a hospitable reception. The king's
daughter gives him sympathy, and the king, Alcinous, entertains and
honours him. Once more does Odysseus approach the world and its joys,
and the spirit which is attached to the world, Nausicaa, awakes within
him. But he finds the way home, to the divine. At first nothing good
awaits him at home. His wife, Penelope, is surrounded by numerous
suitors. Each one she promises to marry, when she has finished weaving
a certain piece of work. She avoids keeping her promise by undoing
every night what she has woven by day. Odysseus is obliged to vanquish
the suitors before he can be reunited to his wife in peace. The
goddess Athene changes him into a beggar so that he may not be
recognised at his entrance; and thus he overcomes the suitors.
Odysseus is seeking his own deeper consciousness, the divine powers of
the soul. He wishes to be united with them. Before the Mystic can find
them, he must overcome everything which sues for the favour of that
consciousness. The band of suitors spring from the world of lower
reality, from perishable nature. The logic directed against them is a
spinning which is always undone again after it has been spun. Wisdom
(the goddess Athene) is the sure guide to the deepest powers of the
soul. It changes man into a beggar, _i.e._, it divests him of
everything of a transitory nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Eleusinian festivals, which were celebrated in Greece in honour of
Demeter and Dionysos, were steeped in the wisdom of the Mysteries. A
sacred road led from Athens to Eleusis. It was bordered with
mysterious signs, intended to bring the soul into an exalted mood. In
Eleusis were mysterious temples, served by families of priests. The
dignity and the wisdom which was bound up with it were inherited in
these families from generation to generation. (Instructive information
about the organisation of these sanctuaries will be found in Karl
Bötticher's _Ergänzungen zu den letzten Untersuchungen auf der
Akropolis in Athen_, Philologus, Supplement, vol. iii, part 3.) The
wisdom, which qualified for the priesthood, was the wisdom of the
Greek Mysteries. The festivals, which were celebrated twice a year,
represented the great world-drama of the destiny of the divine in the
world, and of that of the human soul. The lesser Mysteries took place
in February, the greater in September. Initiations were connected with
the festivals. The symbolical presentation of the cosmic and human
drama formed the final act of the initiations of the Mystics, which
took place here.

The Eleusinian temples had been erected in honour of the goddess
Demeter. She was a daughter of Kronos. She had given to Zeus a
daughter, Persephone, before his marriage with Hera. Persephone, while
playing, was carried away by Hades (Pluto), the god of the infernal
regions. Demeter wandered far and wide over the earth, seeking her
with lamentations. Sitting on a stone in Eleusis, she was found by the
daughters of Keleus, ruler of the place; in the form of an old woman
she entered the service of his family, as nurse to the queen's son.
She wished to endow this boy with immortality, and for this purpose
hid him in fire every night. When his mother discovered this, she wept
and lamented. After that the bestowal of immortality was impossible.
Demeter left the house. Keleus then built a temple. The grief of
Demeter for Persephone was limitless. She spread sterility over the
earth. The gods had to appease her, to prevent a great catastrophe.
Then Zeus induced Hades (Pluto) to release Persephone into the upper
world, but before letting her go, he gave her a pomegranate to eat.
This obliged her to return periodically to the nether-world for
evermore. Henceforward she spent a third of the year there, and
two-thirds in the world above. Demeter was appeased and returned to
Olympus; but at Eleusis, the place of her suffering, she founded the
cult which should keep her fate in remembrance.

It is not difficult to discover the meaning of the myth of Demeter and
Persephone. It is the soul which lives alternately above and below.
The immortality of the soul and its perpetually recurring
transformation by birth and death are thus symbolised. The soul
originates from the immortal--Demeter. But it is led astray by the
transitory, and even prevailed upon to share its destiny. It has
partaken of the fruits in the nether-world, the human soul is
satisfied with the transitory, therefore it cannot permanently live in
the heights of the divine. It has always to return to the realm of the
perishable. Demeter is the representative of the essence from which
human consciousness arose; but we must think of it as the
consciousness which was able to come into being through the spiritual
forces of the earth. Thus Demeter is the primordial essence of the
earth, and the endowment of the earth with the seed-forces of the
produce of the fields through her, points to a still deeper side of
her being. This being wishes to give man immortality. She hides her
nursling in fire by night. But man cannot bear the pure force of fire
(the spirit). Demeter is obliged to abandon the idea. She is only able
to found a temple service, through which man is able to participate in
the divine as far as this is possible.

The Eleusinian festivals were an eloquent confession of the belief in
the immortality of the human soul. This confession found symbolic
expression in the Persephone myth. Together with Demeter and
Persephone Dionysos was commemorated in Eleusis. As Demeter was
honoured as the divine creatress of the eternal in man, so in Dionysos
was honoured the ever-changing divine in the world. The divine poured
into the world and torn to pieces in order to be spiritually reborn
(_cf._ p. 90) had to be honoured together with Demeter. (A brilliant
description of the spirit of the Eleusinian Mysteries is found in
Edouard Schuré's book, _Sanctuaires d'Orient_. Paris, 1898.)




