XII

CHRISTIANITY AND HEATHEN WISDOM


At the time of the first beginnings of Christianity, there appear in
heathen civilisation conceptions of the universe which seem to be a
continuation of the Platonic philosophy, and which may also be taken
as a deepening and spiritualisation of the wisdom of the Mysteries.
The beginning of such conceptions is to be dated from Philo of
Alexandria (B.C. 25-A.D. 50). From his point of view the processes
which lead to the divine take place in the innermost part of the human
soul. We might say that the temple in which Philo seeks initiation is
wholly within him, and his higher experiences are the Mysteries. In
his case processes of a purely spiritual nature replace the initiatory
ceremonies of the sanctuary.

According to Philo, sense-observation and knowledge gained through the
logical intellect do not lead to the divine. They have merely to do
with what is perishable. But there is a way by which the soul may rise
above these methods. It must come out of what it calls its ordinary
self: from this it must withdraw. Then it enters a state of spiritual
exaltation and illumination, in which it no longer knows, thinks, and
judges in the ordinary sense of the words; for it has become merged,
identified with the divine, which is experienced in its essence, and
cannot be imparted in thought-concepts or abstract ideas. It is
experienced, and one who goes through this experience knows that no
one can impart it, for the only way of reaching it is to live it. The
visible world is an image of this mystic reality which is experienced
in the inmost recesses of the soul. The world has come forth from the
invisible, inconceivable God. The harmony of the cosmos, which is
steeped in wisdom, and to which sense-phenomena are subject, is a
direct reflection of the Godhead, its spiritual image. It is divine
spirit poured out into the world,--cosmic reason, the Logos, the
offspring or Son of God. The Logos is the mediator between the world
of sense and the unimaginable God. When man steeps himself in
knowledge, he becomes united with the Logos, which is embodied in him.
The person who has developed spirituality is the vehicle of the Logos.
Above the Logos is God; beneath is the perishable world. It is man's
vocation to form the link between the two. What he experiences in his
inmost being, as spirit, is the universal Spirit. Such ideas are
directly reminiscent of the Pythagorean manner of thinking (_cf._ p.
57 _et seq._).

The centre of existence is sought in the inner life, but this life is
conscious of its cosmic value. St. Augustine was thinking in virtually
the same way as Philo, when he said: "We see all created things
because they are; but they are, because God sees them." And he adds,
concerning what and how we see: "And because they are, we see them
outwardly; because they are perfect, we see them inwardly."

Plato has the same fundamental idea (_cf._ p. 63 _et seq._). Like
Plato, Philo sees in the destiny of the human soul the closing act of
the great cosmic drama, the awakening of the divinity that is under a
spell. He thus describes the inner actions of the soul: the wisdom in
man's inner being walks along, "tracing the paths of the Father, and
shapes the forms while beholding the archetypes." It is no personal
matter for man to create forms in his inner being; they are the
eternal wisdom, they are the cosmic life.

This is in harmony with the interpretation of the myths of the people
in the light of the Mysteries. The Mystic searches for the deeper
truth in the myths (_cf._ p. 94 _et seq._). And as the Mystic treats
the myths of paganism, Philo handles Moses' story of the creation. The
Old Testament accounts are for him images of inner soul-processes. The
Bible relates the creation of the world. One who merely takes it as a
description of outer events only half knows it. It is certainly
written, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And
the earth was without form and void, and darkness was on the face of
the deep. And the spirit of God moved on the face of the waters." But
the real inner meaning of the words must be lived in the depths of the
soul. God must be found within, then He appears as the "Primal
Splendour, who sends out innumerable rays, not perceptible by the
senses, but collectively thinkable." This is Philo's expression. In
the _Timæus_ of Plato, the words are almost identical with the Bible
ones, "Now when the Father, who had created the universe, saw how it
had become living and animated, and an image of the eternal gods, he
felt pleasure therein." In the Bible we read, "And God saw that it was
good."

The recognition of the divine is for Philo, as well as for Plato and
in the wisdom of the Mysteries, to live through the process of
creation in one's own soul. The history of creation and the history of
the soul which is becoming divine, in this way flow into one. Philo is
convinced that Moses' account of the creation may be used for writing
the history of the soul which is seeking God. Everything in the Bible
thereby acquires a profoundly symbolical meaning, of which Philo
becomes the interpreter. He reads the Bible as a history of the soul.

We may say that Philo's manner of reading the Bible corresponds to a
feature of his age which originated in the wisdom of the Mysteries. He
indeed relates that the Therapeutæ interpreted ancient writings in the
same way. "They also possess works by ancient authors who once
directed their school and left behind many explanations about the
customary method pursued in allegorical writings.... The
interpretation of such writings is directed to the deeper meaning of
the allegorical narratives" (_cf._ p. 200). Thus Philo's aim was to
discover the deeper meaning of the "allegorical" narratives in the Old
Testament.

Let us try to realise whither such an interpretation could lead. We
read the account of creation and find in it not only a narrative of
outward events, but an indication of the way which the soul has to
take in order to attain to the divine. Thus the soul must reproduce in
itself, as a microcosm, the ways of God, and in this alone can its
efforts after wisdom consist. The drama of the universe must be
enacted in each individual soul. The inner life of the mystical sage
is the realisation of the image given in the account of creation.
Moses wrote not only to relate historical facts, but to represent
pictorially the paths which the soul must travel if it would find God.

All this, in Philo's conception of the universe, is enacted within the
human soul. Man experiences within himself what God has experienced in
the universe. The word of God, the Logos, becomes an event in the
soul. God brought the Jews from Egypt into Palestine; he let them go
through distress and privation before giving them that Land of
Promise. That is the outward event. Man must experience it inwardly.
He goes from the land of Egypt, the perishable world, through the
privations which lead to the suppression of the sense-nature, into the
Promised Land of the soul, he attains the eternal. With Philo it is
all an inward process. The God who poured Himself forth into the world
consummates His resurrection in the soul when that soul understands
His creative word and echoes it. Then man has spiritually given birth
within himself to divinity, to the divine spirit which became man, to
the Logos, Christ. In this sense knowledge was, for Philo and those
who thought like him, the birth of Christ within the world of spirit.
The Neo-Platonic philosophy, which developed contemporaneously with
Christianity, was an elaboration of Philo's thought. Let us see how
Plotinus (A.D. 204-269) describes his spiritual experiences:

"Often when I come to myself on awaking from bodily sleep and, turning
from the outer world, enter into myself, I behold wondrous beauty.
Then I am sure that I have been conscious of the better part of
myself. I live my true life, I am one with the divine and, rooted in
the divine, gain the power to transport myself beyond even the
super-world. After thus resting in God, when I descend from spiritual
vision and again form thoughts, I ask myself how it has happened that
I now descend and that my soul ever entered the body at all, since, in
its essence, it is what it has just revealed itself to me. What can
the reason be for souls forgetting God the Father since they come
from the beyond and belong to Him, and, when they forget Him, know
nothing of Him or of themselves? The first false step they take is
indulging in presumption, the desire to become, and in forgetfulness
of their true self and in the pleasure of only belonging to
themselves. They coveted self-glorification, they rushed about in
pursuit of their desires and thus went astray and fell completely
away. Thereupon they lost all knowledge of their origin in the beyond,
just as children, early separated from their parents and brought up
elsewhere, do not know who they themselves and their parents are."
Plotinus delineates the kind of life which the soul should strive to
develop. "The life of the body and its longings should be stilled, the
soul should see calm in all that surrounds it: in earth, sea, air, and
heaven itself no movement. It should learn to see how the soul pours
itself from without into the serene cosmos, streaming into it from all
sides; as the sun's rays illuminate a dark cloud and make it golden,
so does the soul, on entering the body of the world encircled by the
sky, give it life and immortality."

It is evident that this vision of the world is very similar to that of
Christianity. Believers of the community of Jesus said: "That which
was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of
the Word of life ... declare we unto you." In the same way it might be
said in the spirit of Neo-Platonism, "That which was from the
beginning, which cannot be heard and seen, must be spiritually
experienced as the Word of life."

And so the old conception of the universe is developed and splits into
two leading ideas. It leads in Neo-Platonism and similar systems to an
idea of Christ which is purely spiritual; on the other hand, it leads
to a fusion of the idea of Christ with a historical manifestation, the
personality of Jesus. The writer of the Gospel of St. John may be said
to unite these two conceptions. "In the beginning was the Word." He
shares this conviction with the Neo-Platonists. The Word becomes
spirit within the soul, thus do the Neo-Platonists conclude. The Word
was made flesh in Jesus, thus does St. John conclude, and with him
the whole Christian community. The inner meaning of the manner in
which the Word was made flesh was given in all the ancient
cosmogonies. Plato says of the macrocosm: "God has extended the body
of the world on the soul of the world in the form of a cross." The
soul of the world is the Logos. If the Logos is to be made flesh, he
must recapitulate the cosmic process in fleshly existence. He must be
nailed to the cross, and rise again. In spiritual form this most
momentous thought of Christianity had long before been prefigured in
the old cosmogonies. The Mystic went through it as a personal
experience in initiation. The Logos become man had to go through it in
a way that made this fact one that is true for or valid to the whole
of humanity. Something which was present under the old dispensation as
an incident in the Mysteries becomes a historical fact through
Christianity. Hence Christianity was the fulfilment not only of what
the Jewish prophets had predicted, but also of the truth which had
been prefigured in the Mysteries.

The Cross of Golgotha gathers together in one fact the whole cult of
the Mysteries of antiquity. We find the cross first in the ancient
cosmogonies. At the starting-point of Christianity it confronts us in
an unique event which has supreme value for the whole of mankind. It
is from this point of view that it is possible for the reason to
apprehend the mystical element in Christianity. Christianity as a
mystical fact is a milestone in the process of human evolution; and
the incidents in the Mysteries, with their attendant results, are the
preparation for that mystical fact.




