The Project Gutenberg eBook of Evolution, Old & New
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Evolution, Old & New

Author: Samuel Butler


        
Release date: November 9, 2007 [eBook #23427]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/23427

Credits: Produced by Stacy Brown, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Stacy Brown, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Evolution, Old & New


    "The want of a practical acquaintance with Natural History leads the
    author to take an erroneous view of the bearing of his own theories
    on those of Mr. Darwin.--_Review of 'Life and Habit,' by Mr. A. R.
    Wallace, in 'Nature,' March 27, 1879._

    "Neither lastly would our observer be driven out of his conclusion,
    or from his confidence in its truth, by being told that he knows
    nothing at all about the matter. He knows enough for his argument;
    he knows the utility of the end; he knows the subserviency and
    adaptation of the means to the end. These points being known, his
    ignorance concerning other points, his doubts concerning other
    points, affect not the certainty of his reasoning. The consciousness
    of knowing little need not beget a distrust of that which he does
    know."

    Paley's '_Natural Theology_,' chap. i.




Evolution, Old & New

Or the Theories of Buffon, Dr. Erasmus Darwin and Lamarck,
as compared with that of Charles Darwin

_by_

Samuel Butler


  New York
  E. P. Dutton & Company
  681 Fifth Avenue




_Made and printed in Great Britain_




NOTE


    The demand for a new edition of "Evolution, Old and New," gives me
    an opportunity of publishing Butler's latest revision of his work.
    The second edition of "Evolution, Old and New," which was published
    in 1882 and re-issued with a new title-page in 1890, was merely a
    re-issue of the first edition with a new preface, an appendix, and
    an index. At a later date, though I cannot say precisely when,
    Butler revised the text of the book in view of a future edition. The
    corrections that he made are mainly verbal and do not, I think,
    affect the argument to any considerable extent. Butler, however,
    attached sufficient importance to them to incur the expense of
    having the stereos of more than fifty pages cancelled and new
    stereos substituted. I have also added a few entries to the index,
    which are taken from a copy of the book, now in my possession, in
    which Butler made a few manuscript notes.

    R. A. STREATFEILD.

    _October, 1911._




AUTHOR'S PREFACE

TO

THE SECOND EDITION


Since the proof-sheets of the Appendix to this book left my hands,
finally corrected, and too late for me to be able to recast the first of
the two chapters that compose it, I hear, with the most profound regret,
of the death of Mr. Charles Darwin.

It being still possible for me to refer to this event in a preface, I
hasten to say how much it grates upon me to appear to renew my attack
upon Mr. Darwin under the present circumstances.

I have insisted in each of my three books on Evolution upon the
immensity of the service which Mr. Darwin rendered to that
transcendently important theory. In "Life and Habit," I said: "To the
end of time, if the question be asked, 'Who taught people to believe in
Evolution?' the answer must be that it was Mr. Darwin." This is true;
and it is hard to see what palm of higher praise can be awarded to any
philosopher.

I have always admitted myself to be under the deepest obligations to Mr.
Darwin's works; and it was with the greatest reluctance, not to say
repugnance, that I became one of his opponents. I have partaken of his
hospitality, and have had too much experience of the charming simplicity
of his manner not to be among the readiest to at once admire and envy
it. It is unfortunately true that I believe Mr. Darwin to have behaved
badly to me; this is too notorious to be denied; but at the same time I
cannot be blind to the fact that no man can be judge in his own case,
and that after all Mr. Darwin may have been right, and I wrong.

At the present moment, let me impress this latter alternative upon my
mind as far as possible, and dwell only upon that side of Mr. Darwin's
work and character, about which there is no difference of opinion among
either his admirers or his opponents.

_April 21, 1882._




PREFACE.


Contrary to the advice of my friends, who caution me to avoid all
appearance of singularity, I venture upon introducing a practice, the
expediency of which I will submit to the judgment of the reader. It is
one which has been adopted by musicians for more than a century--to the
great convenience of all who are fond of music--and I observe that
within the last few years two such distinguished painters as Mr.
Alma-Tadema and Mr. Hubert Herkomer have taken to it. It is a matter for
regret that the practice should not have been general at an earlier
date, not only among painters and musicians, but also among the people
who write books. It consists in signifying the number of a piece of
music, picture, or book by the abbreviation "Op." and the number
whatever it may happen to be.

No work can be judged intelligently unless not only the author's
relations to his surroundings, but also the relation in which the work
stands to the life and other works of the author, is understood and
borne in mind; nor do I know any way of conveying this information at a
glance, comparable to that which I now borrow from musicians. When we
see the number against a work of Beethoven, we need ask no further to be
informed concerning the general character of the music. The same holds
good more or less with all composers. Handel's works were not
numbered--not at least his operas and oratorios. Had they been so, the
significance of the numbers on Susanna and Theodora would have been at
once apparent, connected as they would have been with the number on
Jephthah, Handel's next and last work, in which he emphatically
repudiates the influence which, perhaps in a time of self-distrust, he
had allowed contemporary German music to exert over him. Many painters
have dated their works, but still more have neglected doing so, and some
of these have been not a little misconceived in consequence. As for
authors, it is unnecessary to go farther back than Lord Beaconsfield,
Thackeray, Dickens, and Scott, to feel how much obliged we should have
been to any custom that should have compelled them to number their works
in the order in which they were written. When we think of Shakespeare,
any doubt which might remain as to the advantage of the proposed
innovation is felt to disappear.

My friends, to whom I urged all the above, and more, met me by saying
that the practice was doubtless a very good one in the abstract, but
that no one was particularly likely to want to know in what order my
books had been written. To which I answered that even a bad book which
introduced so good a custom would not be without value, though the value
might lie in the custom, and not in the book itself; whereon, seeing
that I was obstinate, they left me, and interpreting their doing so into
at any rate a modified approbation of my design, I have carried it into
practice.

The edition of the 'Philosophie Zoologique' referred to in the following
volume, is that edited by M. Chas. Martins, Paris, Librairie F. Savy,
24, Rue de Hautefeuille, 1873.

The edition of the 'Origin of Species' is that of 1876, unless another
edition be especially named.

The italics throughout the book are generally mine, except in the
quotations from Miss Seward, where they are all her own.

I am anxious also to take the present opportunity of acknowledging the
obligations I am under to my friend Mr. H. F. Jones, and to other
friends (who will not allow me to mention their names, lest more errors
should be discovered than they or I yet know of), for the invaluable
assistance they have given me while this work was going through the
press. If I am able to let it go before the public with any comfort or
peace of mind, I owe it entirely to the carefulness of their
supervision.

I am also greatly indebted to Mr. Garnett, of the British Museum, for
having called my attention to many works and passages of which otherwise
I should have known nothing.

_March 31, 1879._




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

  Statement of the Question--Current Opinion adverse to
  Teleology                                                          1

