CHAPTER XXII.

THE CASE OF THE MADEIRA BEETLES AS ILLUSTRATING THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE EVOLUTION OF LAMARCK AND OF MR. CHARLES DARWIN--CONCLUSION.


An island of no very great extent is surrounded by a sea which cuts it
off for many miles from the nearest land. It lies a good deal exposed to
winds, so that the beetles which live upon it are in continual danger of
being blown out to sea if they fly during the hours and seasons when the
wind is blowing. It is found that an unusually large proportion of the
beetles inhabiting this island are either without wings or have their
wings in a useless and merely rudimentary state; and that a large number
of kinds which are very common on the nearest mainland, but which are
compelled to use their wings in seeking their food, are here entirely
wanting. It is also observed that the beetles on this island generally
lie much concealed until the wind lulls and the sun shines. These are
the facts; let us now see how Lamarck would treat them.

Lamarck would say that the beetles once being on this island it became
one of the conditions of their existence that they should not get blown
out to sea. For once blown out to sea, they would be quite certain to be
drowned. Beetles, when they fly, generally fly for some purpose, and do
not like having that purpose interfered with by something which can
carry them all-whithers, whether they like it or no. If they are flying
and find the wind taking them in a wrong direction, or seaward--which
they know will be fatal to them--they stop flying as soon as may be, and
alight on _terra firma_. But if the wind is very prevalent the beetles
can find but little opportunity for flying at all: they will therefore
lie quiet all day and do as best they can to get their living on foot
instead of on the wing. There will thus be a long-continued disuse of
wings, and this will gradually diminish the development of the wings
themselves, till after a sufficient number of generations these will
either disappear altogether, or be seen in a rudimentary condition only.
For each beetle which has made but little use of its wings will be
liable to leave offspring with a slightly diminished wing, some other
organ which has been used instead of the wing becoming proportionately
developed. It is thus seen that the conditions of existence are the
indirect cause of the wings becoming rudimentary, inasmuch as they
preclude the beetles from using them; the disuse however on the part of
the beetles themselves is the direct cause.

Now let us see how Mr. Darwin deals with the same case. He writes:--

"In some cases we might easily set down to disuse, modifications of
structure which are _wholly_ or _mainly_ due to natural selection." Then
follow the facts about the beetles of Madeira, as I have given them
above. While we are reading them we naturally make up our minds that
the winglessness of the beetles will prove due either wholly, or at any
rate mainly, to natural selection, and that though it would be easy to
set it down to disuse, yet we must on no account do so. The facts having
been stated, Mr. Darwin continues:--"These several considerations make
me believe that the wingless condition of so many Madeira beetles is
mainly due to the action of natural selection," and when we go on to the
words that immediately follow, "combined probably with disuse," we are
almost surprised at finding that disuse has had anything to do with the
matter. We feel a languid wish to know exactly how much and in what way
it has entered into the combination; but we find it difficult to think
the matter out, and are glad to take it for granted that the part played
by disuse must be so unimportant that we need not consider it. Mr.
Darwin continues:--

"For during many successive generations each individual beetle which
flew least, either from its wings having been ever so little less
perfectly developed, or from indolent habit, will have had the best
chance of surviving from not having been blown out to sea; and on the
other hand those beetles which most readily took to flight would
oftenest be blown out to sea and perish."[371]

So apt are we to believe what we are told, when it is told us gravely
and with authority, and when there is no statement at hand to contradict
it, that we fail to see that Mr. Darwin is all the time really
attributing the winglessness of the Madeira beetles either to the _qua_
him _unknown causes_ which have led to the "ever so little less perfect
development of wing" on the part of the beetles that leave
offspring--that is to say, is admitting that he can give no account of
the matter--or else to the "indolent habit" of the parent beetles which
has led them to disuse their wings, and hence gradually to lose
them--which is neither more nor less than the "erroneous grounds of
opinion," and "well-known doctrine" of Lamarck.

For Mr. Darwin cannot mean that the fact of some beetles being blown out
to sea is the most important means whereby certain other beetles come to
have smaller wings--that the Madeira beetles in fact come to have
smaller wings mainly because their large winged uncles and aunts--go
away.

But if he does not mean this, what becomes of natural selection?

For in this case we are left exactly where Lamarck left us, and must
hold that such beetles as have smaller wings have them because the
conditions of life or "circumstances" in which their parents were
placed, rendered it inconvenient to them to fly, and thus led them to
leave off using their wings.

Granted, that if there had been nothing to take unmodified beetles away,
there would have been less room and scope for the modified beetles; also
that unmodified beetles would have intermixed with the modified, and
impeded the prevalence of the modification. But anything else than such
removal of unmodified individuals would be contrary to our hypothesis.
The very essence of conditions of existence is that there _shall be_
something to take away those which do not comply with the conditions;
if there is nothing to render such and such a course a _sine qua non_
for life, there is no condition of existence in respect of this course,
and no modification according to Lamarck could follow, as there would be
no changed distribution of use.

I think that if I were to leave this matter here I should have said
enough to make the reader feel that Lamarck's system is direct,
intelligible and sufficient--while Mr. Darwin's is confused and
confusing. I may however quote Mr. Darwin himself as throwing his theory
about the Madeira beetles on one side in a later passage, for he
writes:--

"It is probable that _disuse has been the main agent in rendering organs
rudimentary_," or in other words that Lamarck was quite right--nor does
one see why if disuse is after all the main agent in rendering an organ
rudimentary, use should not have been the main agent in developing
it--but let that pass. "It (disuse) would at first lead," continues Mr.
Darwin, "by slow steps to the more and more complete reduction of a
part, until at last it became rudimentary--as in the case of the eyes of
animals inhabiting dark caverns, and of the wings of birds inhabiting
oceanic islands, which have seldom been forced by beasts of prey to take
flight, and have ultimately lost the power of flying. Again, an organ
useful under certain conditions, might become injurious under others,
_as with the wings of beetles living on small and exposed
islands_;"[372] so that the rudimentary condition of the Madeira
beetles' wings is here set down as mainly due to disuse--while above we
find it mainly due to natural selection--I should say that immediately
after the word "islands" just quoted, Mr. Darwin adds "and in this case
natural selection will have aided in reducing the organ, until it was
rendered harmless and rudimentary," but this is Mr. Darwin's manner, and
must go for what it is worth.

How refreshing to turn to the simple straightforward language of
Lamarck.

"Long continued disuse," he writes, "in consequence of the habits which
an animal has contracted, gradually reduces an organ, and leads to its
final disappearance....

"Eyes placed in the head form an essential part of that plan on which we
observe all vertebrate organisms to be constructed. Nevertheless the
mole which uses its vision very little, has eyes which are only very
small and hardly apparent.

"The _aspalax_ of Olivier, which lives underground like the mole, and
exposes itself even less than the mole to the light of day, has wholly
lost the use of its sight, nor does it retain more than mere traces of
visual organs, these traces again being hidden under the skin and under
certain other parts which cover them up and leave not even the smallest
access to the light. The Proteus, an aquatic reptile akin to the
Salamander and living in deep and obscure cavities under water, has,
like the aspalax, no longer anything but traces of eyes
remaining--traces which are again entirely hidden and covered up.[373]

"The following consideration should be decisive.

"Light cannot penetrate everywhere, and as a consequence, animals which
live habitually in places which it cannot reach, do not have an
opportunity of using eyes, even though they have got them; but animals
which form part of a system of organization which comprises eyes as an
invariable rule among its organs, must have had eyes originally. Since
then we find among these animals some which have lost their eyes, and
which have only concealed traces of these organs, it is evident that the
impoverishment, and even disappearance of the organs in question, must
be the effect of long-continued disuse.

"A proof of this is to be found in the fact that the organ of hearing is
never in like case with that of sight; we always find it in animals of
whose system of organization hearing is a component part; and for the
following reason, namely, that sound, which is the effect of vibration
upon the ear, can penetrate everywhere, and pass even through massive
intermediate bodies. Any animal, therefore, with an organic system of
which the ear is an essential part, can always find a use for its ears,
no matter where it inhabits. We never, therefore, come upon rudimentary
ears among the vertebrata, and when, going down the scale of life lower
than the vertebrata, we come to a point at which the ear is no longer to
be found; we never come upon ears again in any lower class.

"Not so with the organ of sight: we see this organ disappear, reappear,
and disappear again with the possibility or impossibility of using eyes
on the part of the creature itself.[374]

"The great development of mantle in the acephalous molluscs has rendered
eyes, and even a head, entirely useless to them. These organs, though
belonging to the type of the organism, and by rights included in it,
have had to disappear and become annihilated owing to continued default
of use.

     . . . . . .

"Many insects which, by the analogy of their order and even genus,
should have wings, have nevertheless lost them more or less completely
through disuse. A number of coleoptera, orthoptera, hymenoptera, and
hemiptera give us examples, the habits of these animals never leading
them to use their wings."[375]

     *     *     *     *     *

I will here bring this present volume to a conclusion, hoping, however,
to return to the same subject shortly, but to that part of it which
bears upon longevity and the phenomena of old age. In 'Life and Habit' I
pointed out that if differentiations of structure and instinct are
considered as due to the different desires under different circumstances
of an organism, which must be regarded as a single creature, though its
development has extended over millions of years, and which is guided
mainly by habit and memory until some disturbing cause compels
invention--then the longevity of each generation or stage of this
organism should depend upon the lateness of the average age of
reproduction in each generation; so that an organism (using the word in
its usual signification) which did not upon the average begin to
reproduce itself till it was twenty, should be longer lived than one
that on the average begins to reproduce itself at a year old. I also
maintained that the phenomena of old age should be referred to failure
of memory on the part of the organism, which in the embryonic stages,
infancy, youth, and early manhood, leans upon the memory of what it did
when it was in the persons of its ancestors; in middle life, carries its
action onward by means of the impetus, already received, and by the
force of habit; and in old age becomes puzzled, having no experience of
any past existence at seventy-five, we will say, to guide it, and
therefore forgetting itself more and more completely till it dies. I
hope to extend this, and to bring forward arguments in support of it in
a future work.

Of the importance of the theory put forward in 'Life and Habit'--I am
daily more and more convinced. Unless we admit oneness of personality
between parents and offspring, memory of the often repeated facts of
past existences, the latency of that memory until it is rekindled by the
presence of the associated ideas, or of a sufficient number of them, and
the far-reaching consequences of the unconsciousness which results from
habitual action, evolution does not greatly add to our knowledge as to
how we shall live here to the best advantage. Add these considerations,
and its value as a guide becomes immediately apparent; a new light is
poured upon a hundred problems of the greatest delicacy and difficulty.
Not the least interesting of these is the gradual extension of human
longevity--an extension, however, which cannot be effected till many
many generations as yet unborn have come and gone. There is nothing,
however, to prevent man's becoming as long lived as the oak if he will
persevere for many generations in the steps which can alone lead to this
result. Another interesting achievement which should be more quickly
attainable, though still not in our own time, is the earlier maturity of
those animals whose rapid maturity is an advantage to us, but whose
longevity is not to our purpose.

     *     *     *     *     *

The question--Evolution or Direct Creation of all species?--has been
settled in favour of Evolution. A hardly less interesting and important
battle has now to be fought over the question whether we are to accept
the evolution of the founders of the theory--with the adjuncts hinted at
by Dr. Darwin and Mr. Matthew, and insisted on, so far as I can gather,
by Professor Hering and myself--or the evolution of Mr. Darwin, which
denies the purposiveness or teleology inherent in evolution as first
propounded. I am assured that such of my readers as I can persuade to
prefer the old evolution to the new will have but little reason to
regret their preference.

     *     *     *     *     *

P.S.--As these sheets leave my hands, my attention is called to a review
of Professor Haeckel's 'Evolution of Man,' by Mr. A. E. Wallace, in the
'Academy' for April 12, 1879. "Professor Haeckel maintains," says Mr.
Wallace, "_that the struggle for existence in nature evolves new forms
without design, just as the will of man produces new varieties in
cultivation with design_." I maintain in preference with the older
evolutionists, that in consequence of change in the conditions of their
existence, _organisms design new forms for themselves, and carry those
designs out in additions to, and modifications of, their own bodies_.

"The science of rudimentary organs," continues Mr. Wallace, "which
Haeckel terms 'dysteleology, or the doctrine of purposelessness,' is
here discussed, and a number of interesting examples are given, the
conclusion being that they prove the mechanical or monistic conception
of the origin of organisms to be correct, and the idea of any 'all-wise
creative plan an ancient fable.'" I see no reason to suppose, or again
not to suppose, an all-wise creative plan. I decline to go into this
question, believing it to be not yet ripe, nor nearly ripe, for
consideration. I see purpose, however, in rudimentary organs as much as
in useful ones, but a spent or extinct purpose--a purpose which has been
fulfilled, and is now forgotten--the rudimentary organ being repeated
from force of habit, indolence, and dislike of change, so long as it
does not, to use the words of Buffon, "stand in the way of the fair
development" of other parts which are found useful and necessary. I
demur, therefore, to the inference of "purposelessness" which I gather
that Professor Haeckel draws from these organs.

In the 'Academy' for April 19, 1879, Mr. Wallace quotes Professor
Haeckel as saying that our "highly purposive and admirably-constituted
sense-organs have developed without premeditated aim; that they have
originated by the same mechanical process of Natural Selection, by the
same constant interaction of Adaptation and Heredity [what _is_ Heredity
but another word for unknown causes, unless it is explained in some such
manner as in 'Life and Habit'?] by which all the other purposive
contrivances of the animal organization have been slowly and gradually
evolved during the struggle for existence."

I see no evidence for "premeditated aim" at any modification very far in
advance of an existing organ, any more than I do for "premeditated aim"
on man's part at any as yet inconceivable mechanical invention; but as
in the case of man's inventions, so also in that of the organs of
animals and plants, modification is due to the accumulation of small,
well-considered improvements, as found necessary in practice, and the
conduct of their affairs. Each step having been purposive, the whole
road has been travelled purposively; nor is the purposiveness of such an
organ, we will say, as the eye, barred by the fact that invention has
doubtless been aided by some of those happy accidents which from time to
time happen to all who keep their wits about them, and know how to turn
the gifts of Fortune to account.

FOOTNOTES:

[371] 'Origin of Species,' p. 109.

[372] 'Origin of Species, p. 401.

[373] 'Phil. Zool.,' tom. i. p. 242.

[374] 'Phil. Zool.,' tom. i. p. 244.

[375] 'Phil. Zool.,' tom. i. p. 245.




APPENDIX.




