IX

CONSCIENCE AND CHARACTER


Von Humboldt said that every man, however good, has a yet better man
within him. When the outer man is unfaithful to his deeper
convictions, the hidden man whispers a protest. The name of this
whisper in the soul is conscience. And never had monarch aspect so
magisterial as when conscience terrified King Herod into confession.
The cruel, crafty despot had slain John the Baptist to gratify the
revenge of the beautiful Jezebel, his wife, reproved of John for her
outrageous sins. But soon passed from memory that hateful night when
the blood of a good man mingled with the red wine of the feast. Luxury
by day and revelry by night caused the hateful incident to be
forgotten. Soon a full year had passed over the palace with its silken
seclusion. One day, when the dead prophet had long been forgotten, a
courtier at the king's table told the story of a strange carpenter,
whose name and fame were ringing through the land.

Who is He? asked the feasters, pausing over their spiced wine. Who is
He? asked the women, gossiping over the new sensation. Suddenly,
conscience touched an old memory in Herod's heart. In terror the
despot rose from the banquet. As in the legend, when the murderer's
finger touched the gaping wound the blood began again to flow--a
silent witness against the unsuspected but guilty friend, so Herod's
conscience opened up again his guilty secret. Memory, thrusting a
hooked pole into "the ocean of oblivion, brought up the pale and
drowned deed." The long-forgotten sin was revealed in all its ghastly
atrocity. It availed nothing that Herod was a Sadducee--the agnostic
of antiquity. For, when conscience spake, all his doubts fell away.
Immortality and responsibility were clear as noonday. Holding a
thousand swords in her hand, conscience attacked the guilty king. Then
were fulfilled Plato's words: "If we could examine the heart of a
king, we would find it full of scars and black wounds." For no slave
was ever marked by his master's scourge as Herod's heart was lashed by
his conscience.

Socrates told his disciples that the facts of conscience must be
reckoned with as certainly as the facts of fire or wood or water. None
may deny the condemnation that weighed upon the soul of Herod or
Judas, or the approval of conscience that transfigured the face of the
martyred Stephen or Savonarola. For all happiness comes only through
peace with one's self, one's record, and one's God. All the great,
from Æschylus and Sophocles to Channing and Webster, have emphasized
man's conscience as the oracle divine. Let the witnesses speak. Here
is the Judge, famous in English history: It became his duty to
sentence a servant for murdering his master. Suddenly, before the
astounded onlookers, the Judge arose and took his place in the dock
beside the prisoner. He stated that, thirty years before, in a distant
province, he had taken the life and property of his master, and
thereby gained his present position and influence. Though he had never
been suspected of crime, he now begged his fellow Judges to condemn
him to the death unto which his conscience had long urged him. Here is
the student of man and things, Dr. Samuel Johnson: In his old and
honored age he goes back to Litchfield to stand with uncovered head
from morning till night in the market-place on the spot where fifteen
years before he had refused to keep his father's book-stall. Despite
the grotesque figure he made, midst the sneers and the rain,
conscience bade him expiate his breach of filial piety. And here is
Channing, the scholar and seer: A child of six years, he lifted his
stick to strike the tortoise, as he had seen older boys do. But in
that moment an inner voice whispered loud and clear: "It is wrong." In
his fright the boy hastened home to fling himself into his mother's
arms. "What was the voice?" he asked. To which his mother answered:
"Men call the voice conscience; but I prefer to call it the voice of
God. And always your happiness will depend upon obedience to that
little voice."

Here also is the great Persian Sadi. One day he found a good man in
the jungle, who had been attacked by a tiger and horribly mutilated.
Despite his dreadful agony, the dying man's features were calm and
serene. "Great God," said he, "I thank thee that I am only suffering
from the fangs of the tiger and not of remorse." And here is Professor
Webster, endungeoned for the murder of Dr. Parkman. One morning he
sent for his jailer and asked to be placed in another cell. "At
midnight," he said, "the prisoners in the next cell tap on the wall
and whisper, 'Thou art a murderer.'" Now there were no prisoners in
the next cell. The whispers were the echoes of a guilty conscience.

Daniel Webster also testifies: Once he was asked what was the greatest
thought that had ever occupied his mind. "Who are here?" "Only your
friends." Then this colossal man answered: "There is no evil we can
not face or flee from but the consequences of duty disregarded. A
sense of obligation pursues us ever. It is omnipresent like the Deity.
If we take to ourselves wings of the morning and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, duty performed or duty violated is still
with us, for our happiness or our misery. If we say that darkness
shall cover us, in the darkness as in the light, our obligations are
yet with us. We can not escape their power nor fly from their
presence. They are with us in this life, will be with us at its close,
and in that scene of inconceivable solemnity which lies yet farther on
we shall find ourselves followed by the consciousness of duty--to pain
us forever if it has been violated, and to console us so far as God
has given us grace to perform it." Weighed against conscience the
world itself is but a bubble. For God himself is in conscience lending
it authority.

We also owe the great dramatists and novelists a debt, in that they
have portrayed and analyzed the essential facts of man's moral life.
That which Shakespeare does for us in "Macbeth," Victor Hugo does in
his "Les Misérables." The latter work, always ranked as one of the
seven great novels, exhibits happiness and character as fruits of
obedience to the soul's inner circle. Jean Valjean was an escaped
convict. Going into a distant province he assumed a new name and began
life again. He invented a machine, amassed wealth, became mayor of the
town, was honored and beloved by all. One evening the good mayor heard
of an old man in another town who had been arrested for stealing
fruit. The officer apprehending him perceived in the old man a
striking resemblance to Jean Valjean. Despite his protests he was
tried as Jean Valjean, and was about to be remanded to prison--this
time for life. Unless some one cleared him he must go to the galleys.
Only Jean Valjean himself can clear the stranger. How clear him? By
confessing his identity and going himself.

In that hour the mayor's brain reeled. He retired to his inner room.
Then the tempest raged in his brain as a cyclone rages through the
trees, twisting off the branches and pulling up the roots. Must he go
back again to the galleys with their profanity and obscenity? Must he
resign his mayoralty and his wealth? Must he give up his life, so
useful and helpful, and all to save a possible year or two of life for
this old man? Were not these two young wards whom he was supporting
more than this one old wreck? Fate had decided. Let the old man go to
the galleys.

Then with muscles tense as steel, with jugular vein all swollen and
purple, Jean Valjean took the two candlesticks given him by the
Bishop, his thorn cane, the coin taken from the boy, and cast all upon
the blazing coals. Soon the flames had licked all up. Then Victor Hugo
says: "Jean Valjean heard a burst of internal laughter." What was it
in him jeering and mocking? At midnight from sheer exhaustion the
mayor slept. Dreaming, he seemed to be in a hall of justice where an
old man was being tried. There were roses in the vase, only sin had
bleached the crimson petals gray. The sunlight came through the
window, only sin had washed the color from the sunbeam and left the
golden rays ashen pale. All the people were silent. At length an
officer touched the mayor and said: "Do you know you have been dead a
long while? Your body lives, but you died when you slew your
conscience." Suddenly a voice said: "Jean Valjean, you may melt the
candlestick, burn your clothes, change your face, but God sees you."
Afterward came a second burst of internal laughter. Then the mayor
arose swiftly, took his horse, drove hard all night and reached the
distant village to enter the courtroom just as the old man was about
to be sent to the galleys. Ascending the prisoner's dock, he confessed
his identity. Victor Hugo tells us that in that hour the judge and the
lawyer saw a strange light upon the mayor's face, and felt a light
within dazzling their hearts. It was the same light that fell on the
German monk's face when before the Emperor at Worms he said: "I cannot
and will not recant!" and then boldly fronted death. Conscience
shining through made Luther's face luminous, as it had made the face
of Moses before him!

As obedience to the behests of conscience has always yielded happiness
and formed character, so disobedience has always destroyed manhood.
The great novelists have exhibited the deterioration of character in
their hero as beginning with a sin against the sense of duty. In
Romola, George Eliot exhibits Tito as a gifted and ideal youth. The
orphan child was adopted by the Greek scholar, who lavished upon him
all the gifts of affection, all the culture and embellishments of the
schools, all the comforts of a beautiful home; and when the longing
for foreign travel came upon the youth the foster-father could not
deny him, but took passage for Tito and himself and sailed for
Alexandria. But the motto of Tito's life was, get all the pleasure
you can, avoid all the pain. Soon the old scholar became a clog and a
burden. One night, conscience battled for its life with Tito. At
midnight the youth arose, unbuckled from his father's waist the
leather belt stuffed with jewels, and fled into the night, leaving the
gray-haired man among strangers whose language he could not speak.

Then this youth sailed away to Florence. There his handsome person,
his Southern beauty, his grace of address, his aptitude for affairs,
won him the admiration of the wisest statesmen and the heart of one of
the noblest of women. But all the time we feel toward this beautiful
youth that same loathing and contempt that we feel toward a beautiful
young tiger. Tito had no conscience toward Romola, no conscience
toward her father's priceless library, no conscience toward the
patriots struggling for the city's liberty; he played the traitor
toward all. His soul was, indeed, sheathed in a glowing and beautiful
body; but it was the corpse sheathed over with flowers and vines; and
so conscience becomes an avenger upon Tito. When the keystone goes
from the arch, all must crash down in ruins. Unconsciously but surely
the youth moved toward his destruction. The day of doom was delayed,
but there came an hour when conscience first drove Tito into the
Arno's swift current, and then became a millstone, that sunk him into
the deep abyss. For ours is a world in which nature and God cannot
afford to permit sin to prosper. Conscience is God's avenger.

Open all the master books, and they portray the same truth. Three of
the seven greatest novels deal with conscience. Seven of the world's
greatest dramas are studies of conscience and of duty. The
masterpieces of Sophocles and Æschylus, of Dante and Milton, of Göethe
and Byron, are all studies of the soul's oracle, that, disobeyed,
hurls man into the abyss, or, followed, becomes wings, lifting him
into the open sky.

Demosthenes said that knowledge begins with definition. What, then, is
conscience? Many misconceptions have prevailed. Multitudes suppose it
to be a distinct faculty. The eye tests colors for beauty, the ear
tests sounds for harmony, the reason tests arguments for truth, and
there is a popular notion that conscience is a distinct faculty,
testing deeds for morality. Many suppose that, when God made man, He
implanted conscience as an automatic moral mechanism, a kind of inner
mind, to act in his absence; but conscience is not a single faculty.
It includes many faculties, and is complex in nature. It has an
intellectual element, and this is distinctly fallible and capable of
education. Witness the Indians, believing it to be right to kill aged
persons. Witness savages of old, sacrificing their children to appease
the gods. Just as there has been an evolution in tools, in laws and in
institutions, so has there been an evolution of the intellectual
element in conscience. Thucydides tells us that the time was in Sparta
when stealing was right. In that far-off time a boy was praised for
exhibiting skill and dexterity in pilfering. Stealing was disgraceful
and wrong only when it was found out, and, if the theft was large and
skillfully done, it won honor--a condition of things that still
prevails in some sections.

Never since man stepped foot upon this planet has there been a time
when conscience, the judge, has praised a David when sinning against
what he believed to be the law of right; never once has it condemned a
Daniel in doing what he believed to be right. In this sense conscience
is, indeed, infallible and is the very voice and regent of God.

Since, therefore, conscience partakes of this divine nature and speaks
as an oracle, what are its uses and functions? Primarily, the moral
sense furnishes a standard and tests actions for righteousness or
iniquity. To its judgment-seat comes reason, with its purposes and
ambitions. When his color sense is jaded the artist uses the sapphire
or ruby to bring his tints up to perfection. And when contact with
selfishness or sordidness has soiled the soul's garments, dulled its
instruments, and lowered its standards, then conscience comes in to
freshen the ideals and to smite vice and vulgarity. In these luminous
hours when conscience causes the deeper convictions to prevail, how
beautiful seem truth and purity and justice! How does the soul revolt
from iniquity, even as the eye revolts from the slough or the nostril
from filth!

Conscience has also relations to judgment. It pronounces upon the
inner motive that colors the deeds, for it is the motive within that
makes the actions without right or wrong. When Coleridge, the
schoolboy, was going along the street thinking of the story of Hero
and Leander and imagining himself to be swimming the Hellespont, he
threw wide his arms as though breasting the waves. Unfortunately, his
hand struck the pocket of a passer-by and knocked out a purse. The
outer deed was that of a pickpocket and could have sent the youth to
jail. The inner motive was that of an imaginative youth deeply
impressed by the story he was translating from the Greek, and that
inner motive made the owner of the purse his friend and sent young
Coleridge to college. Thus, the philosopher tells us, the motive made
what was outwardly wrong to be inwardly right.

Memory, too, is influenced by the moral Faculty. Memory gathers up all
our yesterdays. Often her writing is invisible, like that of a penman
writing with lemon juice, taking note of each transgression and
recording words that will appear when held up to the heat of fire.
Very strangely does conscience bring out the processes of memory. Sir
William Hamilton tells of a little child brought to England at four
years of age. When a few brief summers and winters had passed over his
head, the language of far-off Russia had passed completely out of the
child's mind. Seventy years afterward, stricken with his last illness,
in his delirium the man spoke with perfect ease in the language of
childhood. In moments of extreme excitement, when ships go down or
death is imminent, conscience doth so quicken the mind that all the
deeds and thoughts of an entire career are reviewed within a few
minutes. Scholars have been deeply impressed with this unique fact.
Seeking to interpret it, Walter Scott takes us into the castle where a
foul murder was committed. So deeply did the red current stain the
floor that, though the servants scrubbed and scrubbed and planed and
planed, still the dull red stains oozed up through the oaken planks.
This is the great Scotchman's way of saying that our deeds stain
through the very fiber and substance of the soul.

Looking backward, we see only here and there a peak of remembrance
standing out midst the sea of forgetfulness, even as the islands in
the West Indies stand out midst the ocean. But each of these island
peaks represents a submerged continent. Drain off the sea, and the
mountains ease off toward the foothills and the hills toward the great
plains that make up the hidden land. Thus the isolated memories of the
past are all united, and will at length stand forth in perfect
revelation. Verily, conscience is a witness, secretly taking notes,
even as good Latimer in his cell overheard the scratching of the pen
in the chimney behind the curtain. Conscience is a judge, and, though
juries nod and witnesses may be bribed, conscience never slumbers and
never sleeps. Conscience is a monarch, and, though to-day the soul's
king be deposed from its throne, to-morrow it will ascend to the
judgment-seat and lift the scepter. For conscience represents God and
acts in His stead.

Consider the workings of conscience in daily life. The ideal man is he
who is equally conscientious toward intellect and affection, toward
plan and purpose. But in practical life men are Christian only in
spots and departments. The soul may be likened unto a house, and
conscience is the furnace thereof. Sometimes the householder turns the
heat into the sitting-room and parlor, but in the other rooms he turns
off the warm currents of air. Sometimes heat is turned into the upper
rooms, while the lower rooms are cold. Thus conscience, that should
govern all faculties alike, is largely departmental in its workings.
Some men are conscientious toward Sunday, but not toward the week
days. On Sunday they sing like saints, on Monday they act like demons.
On the morning of St. Bartholomew's massacre, Charles IX was
conscientious toward the cathedral and attended mass during three
hours; in the evening he filled the streets of Paris with rivers of
blood. John Calvin was conscientious toward his logical system. He was
very faithful to his theology, but he had no conscience toward his
fellows, and burned Servetus without a sympathetic throb.

In the Middle Ages conscience worked toward outer forms. In those days
the baron and priest made a contract. The general led his peasants
forth to burn and pillage and kill, and the priest absolved the
murderers for five per cent of the profits. Men were very
conscientious toward absolution, but not at all toward the neighbor's
flocks and barns. In others conscience is largely superstition.
Recently an officer of our army found himself sitting beside his host
at a table containing thirteen guests. The soldier, who perhaps would
have braved death on the battle-field, was pricked by his conscience
for sitting at table where the guests numbered thirteen. But he was
afraid to die at the dinner-table. He believed that the great God who
makes suns and stars and blazing planets to fly from His hand as
sparks beneath the hammer of a smith, the god of Sirius and Orion,
always stopped his work at six o'clock to count the guests around each
table, and if he found perchance there were thirteen, then would lift
his arrow to the bow to let fly the deadly shaft upon these awful
sinners against the law of twelve chairs or fourteen.

Singularly enough, now and then an individual is conscientious toward
some charm, as in the case of a merchant who presently discovered that
he had left his buckeye at home. He had carried this for twenty years.
Had he forgotten to pray he would not have gone home to fall upon his
knees. Nature and God were in the merchant's counting-room, but not
the buckeye. So he hurriedly left his office to bring back the agent
that secured all his success and prosperity.

Then, there is a commercial conscience. Some men feel that the law of
right is chiefly binding upon a man in his business relations. They
exile themselves from home, break the laws of love and companionship
with the wife whom they have engaged to cherish and love, until they
become strangers to her. But conscience does not prick them. Home,
friends, music, culture, all these may be neglected--but the business,
never. Others there are whose consciences work largely toward the
home. When they cross their own thresholds they are genial, kind and
delightful. As hosts they are famed for their companionship. Dying,
their fame is gathered up by the expressions, "good husband, good
father, good provider." But they have no conscience toward the street.
They count other men their prey, being grasping, greedy and
avaricious. They feel about their fellows just as men do about the
timber in the forest. When a man wants timber for his house, he says,
"That is the tree I want," and the woodsman fells it and squares it
for the sill. Does he want stone for his foundations or marble for his
finishings? There are the rocks; quarry them. Men go into inanimate
nature and get the materials they need. Nor is it very different in
the great world of business and ambition. The giant takes one man for
the foundation and cuts him down and builds him into the walls; he
selects another man and uses him up, building his substance into the
structure; he looks upon his fellows as the shepherd upon his
flocks--so much wool to be sheared.

Nor is the work of conscience very different in the moral and
spiritual realm. Here is one man who is conscientious toward
yesterday. Ten years ago, he says, "while kneeling in the field light
broke through the clouds" and he obtained "a hope." And every Sunday
since that day he has not failed to recall that scene. He is not
conscientious about having a new, fresh, crisp, vital experience for
to-day, but he is conscientiously faithful in recalling that old
experience. It is all as foolish as if he should say that ten years
ago he had a bath, or ten years ago he drank at the bubbling spring,
or ten years ago he met a friend. What about to-day's purity, to-day's
loaf and to-day's friendships? The heart should count no manna good
that is not gathered fresh each morning. Others there are whose
conscience works largely toward doctrine and intellectual statements.
With them Christianity is a function of thought in the brain. These
are they who want every sermon to consist of linked arguments. The
good deacon sits in his pew and listens to the unfolding of proofs of
election or foreordination. When the arguments have been piled up to
sixteen or eighteen, the good man begins to chuckle with delight,
saying, "Verily, this is a high day in Israel; my soul feasts on fat
things." Other men want some flesh on their skeletons, but he is fed
on the dry bones of logic.

Sometimes conscience affects only the feelings. Fifty years ago there
was a type numbering hundreds of thousands of persons whose religion
was largely emotional. In great camp-meetings filled with a warm
atmosphere men showed at their best. The sunny spot of all the year
was the month of revival meetings. Then they experienced the luxury of
spiritual enjoyment. They lived on the top of some Mount of
Transfiguration, while the world below was thundering with wickedness
and tormented with passion. Men became drunk with emotions. Religion
was an exquisite form of spiritual selfishness. Afterward came an era
when men learned to transmute feelings into thoughts and fidelities
toward friendships and business and duty. At other times conscience
has had unique manifestations in fidelity toward creeds. Now one
denomination and now another, forgetting to be conscientious in
meeting together for days and weeks to plan in the interests of the
pauper, the orphans, the tenement house or the foreign district in the
great city, will through months of excitement exhibit conscience
toward some doctrinal symbol. Witness the recent upheaval about
inspiration. As water bubbling up through the spring was once rain
that fell from the sky, so the truth coming through the lips of poet
or prophet was first breathed into the heart by God. Recently a good
professor thought more emphasis should be laid upon the human spring.
But his opponents thought the emphasis should be placed upon the sky,
from which the rain fell. In the broil about the nature of the water,
the spring itself was soiled, much mud stirred up, until multitudes
wholly forgot the spring, and many knew not whether there was any
water of life.

But conscience in some, means fidelity to what man and God did--not
what God is doing or will do. When the flowing sap under the stimulus
of the sun causes the tree to grow and splits the bark, men rejoice
that the bark is rent and that new and larger growths must be
inserted. Sometimes a child, long feeble and sickly, enters upon a
period of very rapid growth. Soon the boy's old clothes are too small,
and so is his hat. But what if the parents should remember only that
the clothes and hat came from some famous pattern? What if in their
zeal to preserve the hat they should put an iron band about the boy's
forehead and never permit it to increase so that the hat would not
fit? What if they should put a strait-jacket about the chest to
restrain the stature? This would show great zeal toward the hat and
the coat, but meanwhile what is to become of the boy? Strange that men
should be so conscientious toward an intellectual symbol, but forget
to give liberty to other men's consciences who day and night seek to
please God and be true to their beliefs. Thus in a thousand ways
conscience is partial and fragmentary in its workings. Only one
full-orbed man has ever trod our earth!

God's crowning gift to man is the gift of conscience. Reason is a
noble and kingly faculty, turning reveries into orations and
conversations into books. Imagination is a stately and divine gift,
turning thoughts into poems and blocks of stone into statues. Great is
the power of an eloquent tongue instructing men, restraining,
inspiring, stimulating vast multitudes. Great are the joys of memory,
that gallery stored with pictures of the past. But there is no genius
of mind or heart comparable to a vigorous conscience, magisterial,
clear-eyed, wide-looking. He who gave all-comprehending reason,
all-judging reason, reserved his best gift to the last--then gave the
gift of conscience.

Man is a pilgrim and conscience is the guide, leading him safely
through forests and thickets, restraining from the paths of wrong,
pointing out the ways of right. Man is a voyager and conscience is his
compass. The sails may be swept away, and the engines stopped, but the
voyager yet may be saved if only the compass is kept. In time of
danger man may be careless about his garments, but not about his hand
or foot or eye. It is possible to sustain the loss of wealth, friends
and outer honors, but no man can sustain the loss of conscience. It is
the soul's eye. Afar off it sees the face of God. Instructed, guided,
loved, and redeemed by Jesus Christ, he who while living is at peace
with his Master and with his conscience will, when dying, find himself
at peace with his God.




VISIONS THAT DISTURB CONTENTMENT

      "Like other gently nurtured Boston boys, Wendell Phillips
      began the study of law. Doubtless the sirens sang to him,
      as to the noble youth of every country and time. Musing
      over Coke and Blackstone, perhaps he saw himself
      succeeding Ames and Otis and Webster, the idol of
      society, the applauded orator, the brilliant champion of
      the elegant ease, and the cultivated conservatism of
      Massachusetts. * * * But one October day he saw an
      American citizen assailed by a furious mob in the city of
      James Otis for saying with James Otis that a man's right
      to liberty is inherent and inalienable. As the jail doors
      closed upon Garrison to save his life, Garrison and his
      cause had won their most powerful and renowned ally. With
      the setting of that October sun, vanished forever the
      career of prosperous ease, the gratification of ordinary
      ambition, which the genius and the accomplishments of
      Wendell Phillips had seemed to foretell. Yes, the
      long-awaited client had come at last. Scarred, scorned
      and forsaken, that cowering and friendless client was
      wronged and degraded humanity. The great soul saw and
      understood."--_Oration on Wendell Phillips by George Wm.
      Curtis._




