VII

THE IMAGINATION AS THE ARCHITECT OF MANHOOD


Measured by whatsoever standard, Moses was the one colossal man of
antiquity. It may be doubted whether nature has ever produced a
greater mind. When we consider that law, government and education took
their rise in his single brain; when we remember that the
commonwealths of to-day rest upon foundations reared by this jurist of
the desert; when we recall his poetic and literary skill, Moses stands
forth clothed with the proportions and grandeur of an all-comprehending
genius. His intellect seems the more titanic by reason of the obstacles
and romantic contrasts in his career. He was born in the hut of a
slave, but so strikingly did his genius flame forth that he won the
approbation of the great, and passed swiftly from the slave market to
the splendor of Pharaoh's palace.

Fortunately, his youth was not without the refinements and
accomplishments of the schools. For then Egypt was the one radiant
spot upon earth. At a time when Greece was a den of robbers and Rome
was unheard of, Memphis was gloriously attractive. Schools of art and
science stood along the banks of the Nile. From Thebes Pythagoras
carried mathematics into Greece. From Memphis Solon derived his wise
political precepts. In Luxor, architecture and sculpture took their
rise. From Cleopatra's kingdom men stole the obelisks now in New York
and London. Moses' opportunities were fully equaled by his energy and
ambition to excel. Even in his youth he must have been renowned for
his administrative genius.

But his moral grandeur exceeded his mentality. When events compelled a
choice between the luxury of the court and the love of his own people,
he did not hesitate, for he was every inch a hero. In that crisis he
forsook the palace, allied himself with his enslaved brethren, and
went forth an exile of the desert. Nor could any event be more
dramatic than the manner of his return to Pharaoh's palace.
Single-handed, he undertook the emancipation of a nation. Our leaders,
through vast armies, achieved the freedom of our slaves; this soldier,
single-handed, freed three millions of bondsmen. Other generals, with
cannon, have captured castles; this man beat castles down with his
naked fists. And when he had achieved freedom for his people he led
them into the desert, and taught the crude and servile slaves the
principles of law, liberty and government. Under his guidance the mob
became an army; the slaves became patriots and citizens; the savages
were clothed with customs and institutions. His mind became a
university for millions. And from that day until now the columns of
society have followed the name of Moses, as of old the pilgrims
followed the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of fire by night.
Greater name history does not hold, save only the Name that is above
every name.

Wise men will ask, where were the hidings of this man's power? Whence
came his herculean strength? Moses was the father of a race of giants.
He was the representative of brave men in every age, who have laid
foundations upon which others have builded; he was the prototype of
noble leaders who have scattered everywhere the seeds of civilization,
and left others to reap the harvests; he was the forerunner of
innumerable reformers and inventors, to whom it was never given to
enter into the fruit of their labors; of soldiers and heroes who
perished on the scaffold that others might be emancipated; of men like
Huss and Cranmer, whose overthrow and defeat paved the way for others'
victories. Dying, no other man has left behind influences that have
wrought so powerfully or so continuously through the centuries. But
when we search out the springs of his power we are amazed at his
secret. We are told that he endured his tremendous burdens and
achieved the impossible through the sight of the invisible. The sense
of future victory sustained him in present defeat. Through the right
use of the vision faculty he conquered.

Imagination was the telescope by which he saw victory afar off.
Imagination was the tool with which he digged and quarried his
foundations. Imagination was the castle and tower under which he found
refuge from the storms, attacks and afflictions of life. No wing ever
had such power for lifting, no spring ever had such tides for
assuaging thirst. He bore with savages, because afar off he saw the
slaves clothed with the qualities of patriots. He endured the desert,
because imagination revealed a fruitful land flowing with milk and
honey. He survived lawlessness, because he foresaw the day of law and
liberty. He bore up under weight of cares, discouragements and
responsibilities heavy enough to have crushed a score of men, because
he foresaw the day of final triumph. Of old, when that legendary hero
was in the thick of his fight against his enemies, an invisible
friend hovered above the warrior, handing forth spear and sword as
they were needed. So for the great jurist imagination reached up even
into the heavenly armory and plucked such weapons as the hero needed.

Our intellectual tread will be firmer if we define the imagination and
consider its uses. The soul is a city; and the external senses are
gateways through which sweep all the caravans of truth and beauty.
Through the eye gate pass all faces, cities and landscapes. Through
the ear gate pass all sweet sounds. But when the facts of land and sea
and sky have reported themselves to the soul, reason sweeps these
intellectual harvests into the granary of memory for future sowing.
But these harvests must be arranged. In the Orient the merchant who
keeps a general store puts the swords and spears upon one shelf; the
tapestries and rugs upon another; the books and manuscripts upon a
third; and each thing has its own shelf and drawer. So judgment comes
in to sort knowledges, and puts things useful into one intellectual
shelf, things beautiful upon another shelf, and puts things true apart
by themselves.

Afterward when the under-servant, called reason, has accumulated the
materials, when memory has taken care of them, and judgment has
classified all, then the constructive imagination comes in to create
new objects. Working in iron and steel, the imagination of Watt
organizes an engine; working midst the colors beautiful, the
imagination paints pictures; working upon marble it carves statues;
working in wood and stone it rears cathedrals; working in sound it
creates symphonies; working with ideas it fashions intellectual
systems; working in morals it constructs ethical principles; working
toward immortality, it bids all cooling streams, fruitful trees, sweet
sounds, all noble friendships, report themselves beyond the grave. For
faith itself is but the imagination allied with confidence that God is
able to realize man's highest ideals. Imagination therefore is a
prophet. It is a seer for the soul. It toils as artist and architect
and creator. It plants hard problems as seeds, rears these germs into
trees, and from them garners the ripe fruit. It wins victory before
battles are fought. Without it, civilization would be impossible. What
we call progress is but society following after and realizing the
visions, plans and patterns of the imagination.

Now our busy, bustling age is inclined to under-estimate the
imagination. Men cavil at castle-building. The pragmatist jeers at
reveries. Men believe in stores, and goods in them; in factories, and
wealth by them; men believe in houses and horses, but not in ideals.
Nevertheless, thoughts and dreams are the stuff out of which towns and
cities are builded. We may despise the silent dreamer, but in the last
analysis he appears the real architect of states! Immeasurable the
practical power of the vision faculty! The heroes of yesterday have
all been sustained--not by swords and guns, but by the sight of the
invisible!

Here is the old hero in his dungeon in Florence. While he dozed, the
night before he was to be burned, the jailer saw a rare, sweet smile
upon his face. "What is it?" the guard asked. "I hear the sounds of
falling chains, and their clangor is like sweet music in my ears."
Then, with smiling face he went to his martyrdom. And here is Michael
Angelo. Grown old and blind, he gropes his way into the gallery of the
Vatican, where with uplifted face his fingers feel their way over the
torso of Phidias. Lingering by him one day the Cardinal Farnese heard
the old sculptor say: "Great is this marble; greater still the hand
that carved it; greatest of all, the God who fashioned the sculptor. I
still learn! I still learn!" And he too went forward sustained by his
vision of perfect beauty.

And here is John Huss, looking between the iron bars of his prison
upon an army of pikes and spears, massed before his jail; but the
martyr endured his danger by the foresight of the day when the swords
then wielded for repression of liberty of thought would flash for its
emancipation. And here is Walter Scott ruined by the failure of his
publishers, just at the hour when nature whispered that he had
fulfilled his task and earned his respite. But he girded himself anew
for the battle, and sustained his grievous loss through the foresight
of the hour when the last debt would be paid and his again would be a
spotless name. And here is that youth, Emerson, looking out upon a
world full of noise and strife, full of the cries of slaves and the
warfare of zealots. He was sustained by the foresight of a day when
God would breathe peace o'er all the scene. With hope shining in his
face, he began to "take down men's idols with such reverence that it
seemed an act of worship." And what shall we more say? By the sight of
the invisible, Dante endured his scaffold; the heroes, hunted like
partridges upon the mountains, endured their caves and the winter's
cold; martyrs endured the scourge and fagot. In every age, the great,
by the sight of the invisible, have been lifted into the realms of
tranquillity. Outwardly, there may have been the roar and boom of
guns, but inwardly men were lutes with singing harps. As the
householder sitting by his blazing hearth thinks not of the sleet and
hail falling on the roof of slate, so the soul abides in peace over
which has been reared the castle and covert of God's presence.

How signal a place does the imagination hold in the realm of science
and invention! Reason itself is only an under-servant. It has no
creative skill. Memory makes no discoveries. But the imagination is a
wonder-worker. One day, chancing upon a large bone of the mammoth in
the Black Forest, Oken, the German naturalist, exclaimed: "This is a
part of a spinal column." The eyes of the scientist saw only one of
the vertebræ, but to that one bone his imagination added frame, limb
and head, then clothed the skeleton with skin, and saw the giant of
animals moving through the forest. In that hour the imagination
wrought a revolution in the science of anatomy. Similarly, this
creative faculty in Göethe gave botany a new scientific basis. Sitting
in his favorite seat near the castle of Heidelberg one day, the great
poet was picking in pieces an oak leaf. Suddenly his imagination
transformed the leaf. Under its touch the central stalk lifted itself
up and became the trunk of the tree; the veins of the leaf were
extended and became boughs and branches; each filament became a leaf
and spray; the imagination revealed each petal and stamen and pistil,
as after the leaf type, and gave a new philosophy to the science of
herbs and shrubs. When a pistachio tree in Paris with only female
blossoms suddenly bore nuts, the mind of a scientist suggested that
some other rich man had imported a tree with male flowers, and careful
search revealed that tree many miles away.

And in every department of science this faculty bridges over chasms
between discovered truths. Even Newton's discovery was the gift of
imagination. When the eyes of the scientist saw the falling apple it
was his vision faculty that leaped through space and saw the falling
moon. When the western trade winds, blowing for weeks, had cast the
drift wood upon the shores of Spain, Columbus' eyes fell not only upon
the strange wood but also upon a pebble caught in the crevice. But his
imagination leaped from the pebble to the Western continent of which
the stone was a part, and from the tree to the forest in which it
grew.

This faculty has performed a similar work in the realm of mechanics.
Watt tells us that his engine worked in his mind years before it
worked in his shop. In his biography, Milton recognizes the beauty of
the trees and flowers he culled from earth's landscapes and gardens,
but in his "Paradise Lost," his imagination beheld an Eden fairer than
any scene ever found on earth. Napoleon believed that every battle was
won by the imagination. While his soldiers slept, the great Corsican
marshaled his troops, hurled them against the enemy, and won the
victory in his mind the night before the battle was fought. Even the
orator like Webster must be described as one who sees his argument in
the air before he writes it upon the page, just as Handel thought he
heard the music falling from the sky more rapidly than his hand could
fasten the notes upon the musical bars. Thus every new tool and
picture, every new temple or law or reform, has been the imagination's
gift to man.

Nor has the case been different with men in the humbler walks of life.
Multitudes are doomed to delve and dig. Three-fourths of the race live
on the verge of poverty. The energies of most men are consumed in
supporting the wants of the body. It is given to multitudes to descend
into the coal mine ere the day is risen, to emerge only when night has
fallen. Other multitudes toil in the smithy or tend the loom. The
division of labor has closed many avenues for happiness and culture.
The time was when the village cobbler was primarily a citizen, and
only incidentally a shoemaker. In the old New England days the cobbler
owned his garden and knew the orchard; owned his horse and knew the
care of animals; had his special duties in relation to school and
church, and, therefore, was a student of all public questions. But
tending a machine that clinches tacks, cabins and confines the soul.
The man who begins as a citizen ends an appendage to a wheel. The life
of many becomes a treadmill existence. Year in and year out they tend
some spindle. Now this drudgery of modern life threatens happiness and
manhood. Therefore it was ordained that while the hand digs the mind
may soar.

While Henry Clay's hands were hoeing corn in that field in Kentucky,
through his imagination the young orator was standing in the halls of
Congress. What orations he wrote! What arguments he fashioned! Each
time his hoe cut down a weed, his mind with an argument hewed down an
opponent. Never was there a tool for hoeing corn like unto the
imagination! Christine Nilsson tells that once she toiled as a flower
girl at the country fairs in Sweden. But all the time she delved she
was dreaming, and by her very dreams making herself strong against
the day when she would charm vast audiences with celestial music. What
battles the plowboys have fought in dreams! What orations they have
pronounced! What reforms they have achieved! What tools invented! What
books written! What business reared! Thus the imagination shortens the
hours of labor and sweetens toil. While the body tires, the soul soars
and sings.

This young foreigner newly arrived in our city digs downward with his
spade, but his imagination works upward into the realm of the
invisible. He endures the ditch and the spade through foresight of the
day when his playmate will come over the sea; when together they will
own a little house, and have a garden with vines and flowers, with a
little path leading down to "the spring where the water bubbles out
day and night like a little poem from the heart of the earth;" when
they will have a little competence, so that the sweet babe shall not
want for knowledge. By that dream the youth sustains his loneliness
and poverty; by that dream he conquers his vices and passions; at last
through that dream he is lifted up to the rank of a patriot and worthy
citizen. Nor shall you find one hard-worked man caught to-morrow in
life's swirl who does not endure the strife, the rivalry and the
selfishness of the street with this gift divine. It is the noblest
instrument of the soul. Thereby are the heavens opened. Imagination is
the poor man's friend and saviour. Imagination is God whispering to
the soul what shall be when time and the divine resources have
accomplished their work upon man.

And when imagination has achieved for man, his progress, happiness,
and culture, it goes on to help him to gain personal worth and
character. Above every noble soul hangs a vision of things higher,
better and sweeter. It causes the best men even in their best moods to
feel that better things still are possible. By sweet visions it tempts
men upward, just as of old the bees were lured onward by the honey
dropped through the hunter's hands. The vision of a higher manhood
discontents men with to-day's achievement and takes the flavor out of
yesterday's victory. In such hours it is not enough that men have
bread and raiment, or are better than their fellows. The soul is
filled with nameless yearnings and longings. The deeper convictions,
long hidden, begin to stir and strain, even as in June the seed aches
with its hidden harvest.

Though the youth still pursues, he never overtakes his ideal. In the
process of transmutation into life the ideal is injured and dwarfed.
Just as the poet's vision is transcendently more beautiful than the
song he writes upon the page; as the artist's dream is a
glorious-creation, but his picture is only a photograph thereof; as
the musician's song or symphony is but an echo of the ethereal music
he heard in his soul, so every purpose and ideal is marred in the
effort to give it expression and embodiment.

These children of aspiration hold the secret of all progress for
society. Just as of old artists drew the outline of glowing and
glorious pictures, and then with bits of colored glass and precious
stones filled up the mosaic, causing angels and seraphs to stand forth
in lustrous beauty, so imagination lifts up before the youth its
glowing plans and purposes, and asks him to give himself to the
details of life in filling it up and perfecting a glorious character.
The patterns of life are only given upon that holy mount where, midst
clouds and darkness, dwell God and the higher imagination.

But if the imagination has its use, it has its abuse also. If visions
of truth and beauty can exalt, visions of vice can debase and degrade.
In that picture where Faust and Satan battle together for the
scholar's soul, the angels share in the conflict. Plucking the roses
of Paradise, they fling them over the battlements down upon the heads
of the combatants. When the roses fall on Faust they heal his wounds;
when they fall on Satan they turn into coals of fire. Thus the
imagination casts inspirations down upon the pure, but smites the evil
into the abyss. The miseries of men of genius like Burns are perpetual
warnings to youth against the riotings of imagination. There are
poems, also novels and lurid scenes in the city, hanging pictures
before the imagination and scorching the soul like flames of fire. For
as of old so now, what a man imagineth in his heart that he is. For
not what a man does outwardly, but what he dreams inwardly, determines
his character.

Most men are better than we think, but some men are worse. As steam in
the boiler makes itself known by hisses, so the evil imaginings heave
and strain, seeking escape. Many forbear vice and crime through fear;
their conscience is cowardice; if they dared they would riot through
life like the beasts of the field; if all their inner imaginings were
to take an outward expression in deeds, they would be scourges,
plagues and pests. In the silence of the soul they commit every vice.
But they who sow the wind shall reap the whirlwind; the revealing day
will come when the films of life shall be withdrawn, and the
character shall appear faithful as a portrait, and then all the
meanness and sliminess shall be seen to have given something to the
soul's picture. Oh, be warned against these dreams, all ye young
hearts! The indulgence of the imagination is like the sultriness of a
summer's day; what began so fair ends with sharp lightnings and
thunder. How terrible is this word to evil-doers! "As a man thinketh
in his heart, so is he."

It is also given to this vision faculty to redeem men out of
oppression and misfortune, and through its intimations of royalty to
lend victory and peace. Oft the days are full of storms and
turbulence; oft events grow bad as heart can wish; full oft the next
step promises the precipice. There are periods in every career when
troubles are so strangely increased that the world seems like an orb
let loose to wander widely through space. In these dark hours some
endure their pain and trouble through dogged, stoical toughness. Then
men imitate the turtle as it draws in its head and neck, saying to
misfortune: "Behold the shell, and beat on that." But, God be thanked!
victory over trouble has been ordained. In the blackest hour of the
storm it is given to the vision faculty to lift man into the realm of
tranquillity. As travelers in the jungle climb the trees at night and
draw the ladder up after them, and dwell above the reach of wild
beasts and serpents, so the soul in its higher moods ascends into the
realms of peace and rest. In that dark hour just before Jesus Christ
entered into the cloud and darkness, and fronted His grievous
suffering, He called His disciples about Him and uttered that
discourse beginning: "Let not your hearts be troubled." Strange wonder
words; words of matchless genius and beauty.

Moreover, the vision faculty furnishes man his idea and picture of
God. Many suppose that all that is necessary to understand the divine
nature is that it should be stated distinctly in language. Greater
error there could not be. There can be no language for causing a
little child to understand the larger truths of heroism, art or
government. The unripe cannot understand the mature. Each mind must
paint its own picture of God. Nature itself is but a palette upon
which God draws her portrait. Reason furnishes the materials and
truths about God, and the imagination unites them in some noble
conception of His all-helpful nature. Everything in nature that has
power or beauty or benefit has received it from God. Moving along the
Alpine valleys the traveler sees huge bowlders lying in the stream,
and, looking to the mountain side, his eye rests upon the very cliff
from which the bowlder fell. Thus discerning the noble qualities in
mother or patriot, in hero or friend, we trace their beautiful
qualities back to God, from whom all noble souls borrow their
excellence. In the largest sense all the elements of power in sea and
sky and sun, all the beauty of the fields and forests, of summers and
winters, are letters in nature's alphabet for spelling out the name of
God. As a diamond has many facets, and every one reflects the sun, so
the universe itself is a gem whose every facet reflects the mind and
genius of God.

When reason has culled out of life and nature everything that excites
awe or admiration, everything that represents bounty and beauty, then
imagination lifts up all these ideals and sweeps them together and
melts them into one glowing and glorious conception of the God of
power, wisdom and love. But even then the heart whispers: "He is that,
and infinitely more than that, even as the sun is more than the little
taper man has made." But if the reason and memory, through misuse,
furnish but few of the truths about God, and if the imagination has
been weakened in its power, then how poor the picture the soul paints!

What scant, feeble portraits of God some men have! What can an Eskimo,
whose highest conception of summer is a stunted bush, know of tropical
orchards, of luscious peach, pear and plum? If the student has seen
only the broken fragments of Phidias, what can he know of the
Parthenon as it once stood in the zenith of its perfection, in the
splendor of its beauty? But if man's reason can cull out all the
lustrous facts of nature and history, and if his imagination has
strength and skill to bring them all together, then how beautiful will
be the face and name of God! That name will fill his soul with music.
That thought will set his heart vibrating with tumultuous joy. If all
the air were filled with invisible bells, and angels were the ringers,
and music fell in waves as sweet as melted amethyst and pearl, we
should have that which would answer to the sweetness that by day and
night rains down upon the hearts of those who approach God--not
through the eye nor ear, not through argument nor judgment, but
through the heart, through the imagination, as they endure, beholding
Him who is invisible.




THE ENTHUSIASM OF FRIENDSHIP


      "He that walketh with wise men shall be wise."--_Solomon._

      "The only way to have a friend is to be one."--_Emerson._

      "A talent is perfected in solitude; a character in the
      stream of the world."--_Göethe._

      "It is certain that either wise bearing or ignorant
      carriage is caught as men take diseases, one of another;
      therefore let men take heed of their
      company."--_Shakespeare._

      "Beyond all wealth, honor or even health, is the
      attachment we form to noble souls, because to become one
      with the good, generous and true, is to become, in a
      measure, good, generous and true ourselves."--_Thomas
      Arnold._

      "Cicero said: 'Friendship can make riches splendid.'
      Friendship can plan many things for its wealth to
      execute. It can plan a good winter evening for a group,
      and it can plan an afternoon for a hundred children. It
      can roll in a Christmas log for a large hearth. It can
      spread happiness to the right and left. It can spend
      money most beautifully and make gold to shine.
      Civilization itself is of the heart."--_Swing._




