VIII

THE ENTHUSIASM OF FRIENDSHIP


Destiny is determined by friendship. Fortune is made or marred when
the youth selects his companions. Friendship has ever been the
master-passion ruling the forum, the court, the camp. The power of
love is God-breathed, and life has nothing like love for majesty and
beauty. Civilization itself is more of the heart than of the mind. As
an eagle cannot rise with one wing, so the soul ascends borne up
equally by reason and affection. Plato found the measure of greatness
in a man's capacity for exalted friendship. All the great ones of
history stand forth as unique in some master passion as in their
intellectual supremacy. Witness David and Jonathan, with love
surpassing the love of women. Witness Socrates and his group of
immortal friends. Witness Dante and his deathless love for Beatrice.
Witness Tennyson and his refrain for Arthur Hallam. Witness the
disciples and Christ, with "love as strong as death."

Sweetness is not more truly the essence of music than is love the very
soul of a deep, strong, harmonious manhood. Friendship cheers like a
sunbeam; charms like a good story; inspires like a brave leader; binds
like a golden chain; guides like a heavenly vision. To love alone is
it given to wrestle victoriously with death.

Lord Bacon said: "He who loves solitude is either a wild beast or a
god." The normal man is gregarious. He wants companionship. The very
cattle go in herds. The fishes go in shoals. The bees go in swarms.
And men come together in families and cities. As men go up toward
greatness their need of friendship increases. No mind of the first
order was ever a hermit. Modern literature enshrines the friendships
of the great and makes them memorable. While letters last, society
will never forget Charles Lamb and his companions; Dr. Johnson and his
immortal group; Petrarch and his helpless dependence upon Laura; while
the letters of Abélard and Héloise enshrine them in everlasting
remembrance.

In all literature there is no more touching death-bed scene than that
of the patriarch Jacob. Dying, the Prince forgot his gold and silver,
his herds and lands. Lifted up upon his pillows, in tremulous
excitement he took upon his lips two names--God and Rachel. More than
a score of years had passed since her death, but in that memorable
hour the great man built a monument to her who had fed his joy and
deepened his life.

Friendship carries a certain fertilizing force. All biographers tell
us that each epoch in a hero's life was ushered in by a new friend.
When Schiller met Göethe every latent talent awakened. The poet's
friendship caused the youth to grow by leaps and bounds. Once,
returning home after a brief visit to Göethe's house, one exclaimed:
"I am amazed by the progress Schiller can make within a single
fortnight!" Perhaps this explains why the great seem to come in
groups. Thrust an Emerson into any Concord, and his pungent presence
will penetrate the entire region. Soon all who come within the radius
of his life respond to his presence, as flowers and trees respond with
boughs brilliant and fragrant to the sunshine when spring replaces the
icy winter. After a little time, each Emerson stands girt about with
Hawthornes, Whittiers, Holmeses, and Lowells. The greatness of each
Milton lingers in his friends, Cromwell and Hampden, as the sun
lingers in the clouds after the day is done. Therefore the great epics
and dramas, from the Iliad to the Idylls of the King, are stories of
friendships. Take love out of our greatest literature, and it is like
taking a sweet babe out of the clothes that cover it. Man listens
eagerly to tales of eloquence and heroism, but loves most of all the
stories of the heart. God is not more truly the life of dead matter
than is love the very life of man.

Now, the secret of eminence in the realm of industry or art or
invention is this: that the worker has wrought in his luminous mental
moods. In its passive, inert states, the mind is receptive. Then
reason is like a sheathed sword. Thought must be struck forth as fire
is struck from flint. But under inspirational moods the mind begins to
glow and kindle. Then the reason of the orator, the poet or reformer
ceases to be like a taper, needing a match to light it, and becomes a
sun, blazing with its own radiance. Spencer wrote: "By no political
alchemy can we get golden conduct out of leaden instincts." Thus there
is no necromancy by which the mind can get superior work out of its
inferior moods.

When, then, reason approaches its task under the inspiration of
enthusiasm and love, nature yields up all her secrets. Here is the
author sitting down to write. Memory refuses facts, and reason
declines to create fictions. The mind is dull and dead. Suddenly the
step of some friend long absent is heard at the door. Then how do the
faculties awake! Through all the long winter evening, the mind brings
forth its treasures of wit, of anecdote, of instructive fact and
charming allusion. Here is some Edison, with an enthusiasm for
invention, who found his electric lamps that burned well for a month
had suddenly gone out, and read in the morning paper the judgment of
the scientist that his electric bulb was a good toy but a poor tool.

In his enthusiasm for his work, the man exclaimed, "I will make a
statue of that professor, and illumine him with electric lamps, and
make his ignorance memorable." Then Edison went away to begin a series
of experiments that drove sleep from his eyes and slumber from his
eyelids through five successive days and nights, until love and
enthusiasm helped reason to wrest victory from defeat.

Here is the boy Mozart, with his love of music, toiling through the
long days at tasks he hated, and in the darkening twilight stealing
into the old church, where he poured out his very soul over the organ
keys, sobbing out his mournful melodies. Here is Lincoln, with his
enthusiasm for books, coming in at night all aching with cold and wet,
and rising when parents slept, to roll another log upon the blazing
hearth, while midst the grateful heat his eager eyes searched out the
treasures that lay along the line of the printed page, until his mind
grew rich and strong. And here are the Scottish clansmen and patriots,
for love's sake, following the noble chieftain, their hearts all
aflame, who, if they had a hundred lives, would gladly have given them
all for their heroic leader. And here is the orator rising to plead
the cause of the savage, and of the slave, before men who feel no
sympathy, and are as castles locked and barred. But the love for the
poor shines in Wendell Phillips' eyes, trembles in his voice, pleads
in his thinking, until the multitude become all plastic to his
thought, and his smile becomes their smile, his tear their tear, the
throb of his heart the throb of the whole assembly. Here is the
Scottish girl, in love with truth, standing midst the sea, within the
clutches of the incoming tide. She is bound down midst the rising
waters. Doomed is she and soon must die. But her eyes are turned
upward toward the sky, and a great sweet light is on her face that
tells us enthusiasm and love in her have been victorious over death.
Truly, that Greek did well to call enthusiasm "a god within," for love
is stronger than death.

The historian tells us that all the liberties, reforms and political
achievements of society have been gained by nations thrilling and
throbbing to one great enthusiasm. The Renaissance does not mean a
single Dante, nor Boccaccio, but a national enthusiasm and a "god
within all minds." The Reformation is not a single Savonarola, nor
Luther, but a universal enthusiasm and "a god within," all heart and
conscience. If we study these movements of society as typified by
their leaders, these heroes stand forth before us with hearts all
aflame and with minds that grow like suns. In times of great danger
men develop unsuspected physical strength, and the force of the whole
body seems to rush upward and compact itself with the thumb or fist.
And in the mental world lawyers and orators tell us that at heated
crises, when great issues hang upon their words, the memory achieves
feats otherwise impossible. In these hours the mind becomes luminous.
All the experience of the past passes before the orator with the
majesty of a mighty wave or a rushing storm. Similarly, the hero
inflamed with love or liberty becomes invincible. When some Garibaldi
or Lincoln appears, and the people behold his greatness and beauty and
magnanimity, every heart catches the sacred passion. Then the
narrow-minded youth tumbles down his little idols, sets up diviner
ideals, and finds new measurements for the thrones of heaven and
earth. Then, in a great abandonment of love, the nation pours out its
heart for the cause it loves.

Froude tells us that self-government has cost mankind hundreds of wars
and thousands of battle-fields. Tennyson writes of the boy who was
following his father's plow when the share turned up a human skull.
There, where the plow stayed, the patriot had fallen in battle.
Sitting upon the furrow with the child upon his knee, the father
caused his boy to see a million men in arms fighting for some great
principle; to see the battle-fields all red with blood; the hillsides
all billowy with graves; caused him to hear the shrieking shot and
shell; pointed out the army of cripples hobbling homeward. When the
child shivered in fear the father whispered, "Your ancestors would
have gladly died daily for the liberty they loved." And if to-day good
men brood over the wrongs of Armenia, and breathe a silent prayer for
those who struggle against desperate odds and "the unspeakable Turk,"
and if to-morrow and on the morrow's morrow editors and orators unite
in words of sympathy and encouragement for the patriots fighting in
some Cuba, it is because we believe the love of liberty implies the
right to liberty; that despotism corrupts manhood; that
self-government is the best for industry, the best for integrity, the
best for intelligence. If the red plowshare of war must pass through
the soil of the nations, may it bury forever the seeds of oppression
and injustice, and sow for future generations the seeds of liberty,
intelligence and religion!

Moreover, an overmastering passion is the secret of all eminence in
scholarship. Each autumn the golden gates of learning swing wide to
welcome the thousands who enter our colleges and universities. If it
were possible for each young student to sit down and speak with the
library and laboratory as with a familiar friend, we would hear
wisdom's voice uttering one report: "I love them that love me." None
of those forms of mental wealth called art or science or literature,
enters the mind unasked or stays unurged. All the shelves are heavy
with mental treasure, but only the eager mind may harvest it. Beauty
sleeps in all the quarries, but only the eager chisel wakens it.
Wealth is in every crack and crevice of the soil, but nature forbids
the sluggard to mine it. Those forms of paradise called fame,
position, influence, stand with gates open by day and night, but the
cherubim with flaming swords wave back all idle youth. When the
Grecian king set forth upon his expedition he stayed his golden
chariot at the market-place. Lifting up his voice he forbade any man's
body to enter his chariot whose heart remained behind. Thus the mind
is a chariot that sweeps no unwilling student upward toward those
heights where wisdom and happiness dwell.

To-day our young men and women stand in the midst of arts, vast,
beautiful and useful; they are surrounded by all the facts of man's
marvelous history; they breathe an atmosphere charged with refinement.
But the youth who hates his books might as well be the poor savage
lying on the banks of the Niger, whose soul sits in silence and
starves to death in a silent dungeon. Should a kind heaven give us the
power to select some charmed gift to be dropped down upon our youth,
parents and teachers could ask nothing better than that each young
heart should storm the gates of learning with such enthusiasm as
belonged to Milton or Epictetus. The Roman slave had one leg broken
and twisted by a cruel master, but in his enthusiasm for knowledge he
used the dim light of his cell for copying the thoughts of great
authors, and lay awake at night reflecting upon the problems of life
and death with man's mysterious nature, and so made himself immortal
by his devotion to the truth. For the student, enthusiasm is indeed "a
god within." Ignorance is want of mental animation. The scientist
tells us the Patagonians sleep eighteen hours each day, with a
tendency to doze through the other six. Their minds are unable to make
any kind of movement, and the chief once told Sir John Lubbock that he
would love to talk were it not that large ideas made him very sleepy.

But it is all in vain that man has reason or learning or imagination
if these talents lie sleeping. Not long ago the ruins of an old temple
were discovered in Rome. When the spade had turned up the soil, lo,
seeds long hidden awakened to cover the soil with rich verdure. For
2,000 years these germs had slept, waiting for the day of warmth and
quickening. Thus each faculty of man is latent, until some powerful
enthusiasm passes over it. Indeed, mental power is not in the
multitude of knowledge acquired, but in the powerful enthusiasms that
drive the informed soul along some noble path. Power is not in the
engine, but in the steam that pounds the piston; and the soul is a
mechanism driven forward by those motives called enthusiasm for
learning or influence or wealth. Success might be defined as a full
casting of the heart into some worthy cause.

It is high time that our young men should recognize that prosperity
and wealth are won only when the mind moves enthusiastically along the
pathway of industry. Our young men have been deeply injured by the
fact that now and then some one stumbles upon sudden wealth, or by
accident gains great treasure. But for every one such fortunate
person, there are ten thousand who have failed of success for want of
a purposeful enthusiasm.

The Persians have a strange story of the Golconda diamond mines. Once
Ali Hafed sat with his wife looking out upon the river that flowed
through their farm. Soon their children came through the trees
bringing with them a traveler. In confidence the stranger showed Ali
Hafed a diamond that shone like a drop of condensed sunshine. He told
his host that one large diamond was worth whole mines of copper and
silver; that a handful would make him a prince; that a mine of
diamonds would buy a kingdom. That night wealthy Ali Hafed went to bed
a poor man, for poverty is discontent. When the morning came he sold
his farm for gold, and went forth in search of diamonds. Years passed.
Old and gray he returned in rags and poverty. He found his dear ones
had all died in penury. He also found that the peasant who bought his
farm was now a prince. One day, digging in the white sand in the
stream at the foot of the garden, the peasant saw a shining something
that sent his heart to his mouth. Running his hands through the sand,
he found it sown with gems. Thus were discovered the Golconda mines.
Had Ali Hafed dug in his own garden, instead of starvation, poverty
and a broken heart, he would have owned gems that made nations rich.

This legend reminds us how youth constantly throws away its
opportunities. Each day some man exchanges a farm in Pennsylvania for
the prairies of Dakota, only to find that the hills he despised have
developed oil that makes his successor rich. Each year purposeful men
grow rich out of trifles that the careless cast away. The sewers of
Paris have made one man wealthy with treasure beyond that of gold
mines. The wastes of a cotton mill founded the fortune of one of the
greatest families in England. Peter Cooper used to say that he built
the Cooper Institute by picking up the refuse that the butcher shops
threw aside. A boy tugging over a shoe-last in Haverhill, Mass., was
told by his mother to give himself to making better and stronger
lasts. Twenty years of enthusiastic study ended, and he was president
of one of the greatest of our railways. In 1870, a youth sat upon the
slag heap of a mine in California. But he gave his full mind to each
clod, and going away for a few weeks he returned with a machine that
extracted greater treasure from the slag than men had ever gained from
the mines. All wise men unite in telling us that ours is a world where
prosperity is won by fidelity to details, and that wealth comes
through little improvements. But, best of all, a purposeful enthusiasm
gives mental wealth, and achieves a treasure beyond gold and rubies--a
worthy character.

Nor is there any dross that love will not refine away, nor any vice
that love can not expel from the heart. Wordsworth was so impressed
with the evil of avarice that he could compare it only to a poisoned
vine that wrapped itself so tightly about his favorite tree that vine
and tree became one life, and the removal of the one meant the death
of the other. But in her most famous story George Eliot tells us that
avarice passes utterly away before the touch of love. Silas Marner was
the victim of blackest ingratitude. His friend was a thief, who thrust
upon him the blame of a black crime. Suddenly, this innocent man found
all homes closed to his hand, all shops locked to his tools, while
even the market refused his wares. Through two years and more, right
bravely he held his head aloft and looked all men in the face. At
length hunger and want drove him forth a wanderer. Then he shook off
the dust of his feet against his false friends, and cursed their
firesides. Kindness in him soured into cynicism, his sweetness became
bitterness, his faith in God and man fluttered feebly for awhile, then
lay without a single pulse-beat. In anger he cursed God, but could not
die.

Journeying afar, the traveler at length stayed his steps in a distant
village. Then in toil he sought to forget. Rising a great while before
day, he wrought with the activity of a spinning insect; and while men
slept, his loom hummed far into the night. When fifteen years had
passed, he had much gold and was a miser. Under the brick floor he
secreted his treasure. Each night he locked the door, shuttered his
windows, and poured upon the table his gold and silver. He bathed his
hands in the yellow river. He piled his guineas up in heaps. Sometimes
he slept with arms around his precious money-bags. One evening he
lifted the bricks of the floor, to find that the hole was empty.
Benumbed with terror, he went everywhither seeking his treasure. He
kneaded his bed, swept his oven, peered into each crack and crevice.
When the full truth fell upon the miser, he sent forth a wild, ringing
scream--the soul's cry of desolation. Then in his grief he rushed into
the rain and the wild night, and wandered on and on, stupefied with
pain. Not until morning came did he stagger in out of the storm.
Entering, he saw the glint of yellow by his hearth. With a wild cry he
sprang forward and clutched it. But it was not gold; it was something
better--it was the yellow locks of a sleeping child. Broken-hearted,
with nothing else to live for, Silas Marner took the deserted babe
into his bosom. As the weeks went on, the little creature nestled into
his heart. For the child's sake he turned again to his loom; love
taught him thrift and industry. For the child's sake he bought books
and hived knowledge; love made a scholar of him. For the child's sake
he planted vines, roses and all sweet flowers; love made him an
artist. For the child's sake he bought carpets for the bare floors and
pictures for the wall; love had made him generous. For the child's
sake he knelt one night and recited her prayer; love would fain make
him a Christian. But he hated men, and could not forget their
ingratitude. One day a rich man's carriage stopped before his cottage.
The lord of the mansion told a strange story--how this beautiful girl
of eighteen was his daughter. In that hour the girl, tall and
beautiful, turned away from palace, lands, position, and, for the love
she bore him, put her arms around Silas Marner and refused to leave
him. Then something in him gave way, and Silas Marner wept. Then
confidence in man and God was his again. Love had destroyed avarice
and purged away his sin. For love is a civilizer; it makes saints out
of savages. As an armor of ice melts before the sun, so all vice and
iniquity disappear in the presence of an overmastering affection.

It remains for us to consider that the absence of an enthusiastic
devotion to integrity and the law of God explains the moral disasters
and shipwrecks that have increased the tears and sorrows of mankind.
Recently the people of this land opened their morning papers only to
be deeply shocked by a rehearsal of grievous disasters, not all of
which were physical. It seems that an awful cyclone had swept through
a Western community, twisting the orchards, destroying houses and
barns, and leaving behind a swath wide and black with destruction. In
addition, the foreign news told of a volcano whose crater had suddenly
poured forth a river of lurid lava, which, sweeping down the mountain
side, consumed the homes of the flying multitude. But the saddest
disaster was reserved to the last. It told of the shame and sorrow,
from which there is no recovery, that had befallen the parents and
friends of three young men, hitherto held in high honor. It seems that
for many years these men had been honored by their friends, and
trusted by the banks in which they were employed. But in a dark hour
they determined to cease to be gentlemen, preferring, rather, to join
the ranks of thieves. Despising every principle of honor, the gold
which employers committed to their care was taken, not to the safety
vault, but distributed among gamblers and evil persons. And our heavy
sorrow is increased when we read in our commercial reports that last
year 625 men went astray as embezzlers, robbing the people in
forty-five states of $25,234,112. The time seems to have come for this
nation to sit down in sackcloth and ashes.

To all good men comes the reflection that either this immorality must
cease its ravages, or this nation will be irretrievably disgraced.
Were it possible to search out these unhappy men, some of them wearing
the convict's garb, and some wandering as fugitives in foreign lands,
henceforth to be men "without a country," and question each for the
cause of his deep disgrace, from all would come this shameful
confession: "I loved evil and hated the law of God." Not one could
confess to passionate, enthusiastic devotion to the divine laws. But
every tree not rooted goes down before the storm, and every ship
unanchored midst the rocks will go to pieces when the wind rises.
Would that we could to-day cause the laws of God to stand forth as
sharply defined as mountain peaks before the eyes of all young men;
would that we could also kindle in each a passionate love and loyal
affection for these holy laws. If the youth of to-day are to be the
leaders of to-morrow, and are ever to have power to stir their
fellows, to correct abuses, revolutionize society, or organize
history, they must, with the enthusiasm of love, ally themselves with
God and His law, clothing that law with flesh until it becomes
visible, clothing it with voice until it becomes eloquent, thrilling
it with power until it becomes triumphant. Only love fulfills law!

Most of all does man need the enthusiasm of love toward his God and
Saviour. In the olden time Plato expressed a wish to have the moral
law become a living personage, that beholding, mankind might stand
amazed and entranced at her beauty. The philosopher felt that
abstractions were too cold to kindle the soul's enthusiasm. As
planets are removed from the sun, their light and heat lessen; their
flowers fade; their fruits lack luster; their summers shorten. Thus
Neptune stands in the midst of perpetual ice and winter, without tree
or bird or human voice. But as our earth approaches the direct rays of
the sun, its beauty increases, its harvests grow heavy.

As if to fulfill Plato's desire, Jesus Christ drew near to our world,
not to chill man's heart, but to strengthen his affection, refine his
reason, enlarge his horizon. How admirable Christ's words, how
illustrious His work, how divine His character! The philosopher
describes man, but Jesus Christ loves man, weeps for man, dies for
man. Dante inspires, but Jesus Christ gives life. Shakespeare shines,
but Jesus Christ uplifts. History causes the heroes of yesterday to
pass before the mind, surrounded by applauding multitudes. When
Napoleon entered Paris the people ran together with one accord, and
the tides of enthusiasm rose like a mountain freshet. When Garibaldi
entered Florence, when Kossuth passed up Broadway in New York, when
Grant, returning homeward, entered our own city, the streets were
filled solidly with multitudes who forgot hunger and exhaustion,
exalted by hero-worship.

But the divine man never stood forth in full proportion until Jesus
Christ stepped upon this planet. What strength! What gentleness!
Behold His exquisite sympathy! Behold the instinct of confidence, that
drew little children to His arms! How did men, defiled within and
without, throng round Him, while His presence wrought the miracle of
miracles in cleansing them! Then for the first time in history did
disheveled ones so feel the beauty of goodness that an irresistible
enthusiasm drew them about Him to kiss the very hem of His garment.
All the excellencies of life, and more, unite in Him; the orator's
persuasive speech; the artist's love of beauty; the scholar's passion
for truth; the patriot's love of country. His also is more than the
love of mother, lover, friend, for his is the love of Saviour. To-day
He rises over each soul in such majesty of excellence as to include
the excellencies of everything in heaven and everything on earth. As
the clouds sometimes, after hanging for days and nights in the
atmosphere, at length come together and pour down their refreshing
showers, so let all that is deepest and richest and sweetest in man's
thought and affection pour itself out before Him who is worthy of the
world's anthem. For His mind will guide, His mercy forgive, His love
redeem, His hand lead--not into the abyss of death, but unto the
heavenly heights. He who with Dante looks upward to-day may behold the
Saviour's divine chariot "sweeping along the confines of heaven, a
sweet light above it, its wheels almost blocked with flowers."




CONSCIENCE AND CHARACTER

      "There is a higher law than the constitution."--_Seward._

    "Whatever creed be taught, or land be trod,
    Man's conscience is the oracle of God."
                       --_Byron._

      "Labor to keep alive in your breast that little spark of
      celestial fire called conscience."--_Washington._

      "Trust that man in nothing who has not a conscience in
      everything."--_Sterne._

      "If you can find a place between the throne of God and
      the dust to which man's body crumbles, where the fatal
      responsibilities of law do not weigh upon him, I will
      find a vacuum in nature. They press upon him from God out
      of eternity and from the earth out of nature, and from
      every department of life, as constant and all-surrounding
      as the pressure of the air."--_Beecher._




