
                          Transcriber’s Notes

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation and accents have been standardised but all other
spelling and punctuation remains unchanged.

Footnotes are located at the end of the chapters.

Italics are represented thus _italic_.




                              AN ETHICAL
                          PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE

                    PRESENTED IN ITS MAIN OUTLINES

                                  BY
                              FELIX ADLER




                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                        NEW YORK         LONDON
                                 1920




                          COPYRIGHT, 1918, BY
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY


                Printed in the United States of America




PREFACE


This book records a philosophy of life growing out of the experience
of a lifetime. The convictions put in it are not dogmatic, for dogma
is the conviction of one man imposed authoritatively upon others. The
convictions herein expounded are submitted to those who search, as the
writer has searched, for light on the problems of life, in order that
they may compare their experience with his, and their interpretations
of their experience with his interpretation.[1]

It is a great hope that some of the readers of this book may find the
general world-view expounded congenial, and for them also real and
true. It is believed that others may find the practical suggestions as
to the conduct of life in which the theory issues helpful in part, if
not in whole, as many of us accept from the teachings of the Stoics, or
of other thinkers, practical precepts, without on that account adopting
the philosophy from which these precepts are derived.

The book is divided into four parts: the first an autobiographical
introduction describing the various stations on the road by which
the author arrived at his present position, and offering incidental
appreciations and appraisements of the Hebrew religion, of Emerson,
of the ethics of the Gospels, of Socialism and of other social reform
movements.

The second part expounds the philosophical theory.

The third part contains the applications of the theory to the more
strictly personal life, under the captions of the Three Shadows of
Sickness, Sorrow and Sin, and also to the principal so-called Rights to
Life, Property, Reputation.

The fourth part applies the theory to the social institutions, to the
Family, the Vocation, the State, the International Society, and the
Church, these institutions being considered as an expanding series
through which the individual is to pass on his pilgrimage in the
direction of the supreme spiritual end.

The principal problems considered are:

1. How to establish the fundamental ethical dictum that every human
being ought to count, and is intrinsically worth while. This dictum has
been denied by many of the greatest thinkers, who assert the intrinsic
inferiority of some men, the intrinsic superiority of others. The
practice of the world also runs most distinctly contrary to it. How
then is it to be validated?

2. The problem of how to attach a precise meaning to the term
“spiritual,” thereby divesting it of the flavor of sentimentality and
vagueness that attaches to it.

3. How to link up the world’s activities in science, art, politics,
business, to the supreme ethical end.

4. How to lay foundations whereon to erect the conviction that there
verily is a supersensible reality.

For the repetitions that occur throughout the volume indulgence is
requested. In presenting an unfamiliar system of thought they may
sometimes assist the reader in retaining the thread.

The work is conceived as a whole, and should be read through before any
part of it is more minutely examined. The theory of Part II especially
should be read in the light of the applications submitted in Parts III
and IV.




CONTENTS


  BOOK I

  AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION

  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

     I. PRELUDE                                                        3

    II. THE HEBREW RELIGION                                           14

   III. EMERSON                                                       27

    IV. THE TEACHINGS OF JESUS                                        30

     V. SOCIAL REFORM                                                 43

    VI. THE INFLUENCE OF MY VOCATION ON INNER DEVELOPMENT             58


  BOOK II

  PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY

     I. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS: CRITIQUE OF KANT                        73

    II. CRITIQUE OF KANT (_Continued_)                                82

   III. PRELIMINARY REMARKS ON WORTH, AND ON THE REASONS
            WHY THE METHOD EMPLOYED BY ETHICS
            MUST BE THE OPPOSITE OF THAT EMPLOYED BY
            THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES                                     91

    IV. THE IDEAL OF THE WHOLE                                       100

     V. THE IDEAL OF THE WHOLE AND THE ETHICAL MANIFOLD              114

    VI. THE IDEAL OF THE SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE AND THE GOD-IDEAL        125


  BOOK III

  APPLICATIONS: THE THREE SHADOWS, SICKNESS,
  SORROW AND SIN, AND THE RIGHT TO LIFE,
  PROPERTY AND REPUTATION

     I. INTRODUCTION                                                 147

    II. THE THREE SHADOWS: SICKNESS, SORROW, SIN                     154

   III. BEREAVEMENT                                                  162

    IV. THE SHADOW OF SIN                                            171

     V. THE SPIRITUAL ATTITUDE TO BE OBSERVED TOWARDS
            FELLOW-MEN IN GENERAL, IRRESPECTIVE OF THE
            SPECIAL RELATIONS WHICH CONNECT US MORE
            CLOSELY WITH SOME THAN OTHERS                            179

    VI. THE MEANING OF FORGIVENESS                                   202

   VII. THE SUPREME ETHICAL RULE: ACT SO AS TO ELICIT
            THE BEST IN OTHERS AND THEREBY IN THYSELF                208

  VIII. THE SUPREME ETHICAL RULE (_Continued_)                       220

    IX. HOW TO LEARN TO SEE THE SPIRITUAL _Numen_ IN
            OTHERS                                                   223


  BOOK IV

  APPLICATIONS: THE ETHICS OF THE FAMILY, THE
  STATE, THE INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, ETC.

     I. THE COLLECTIVE TASK OF MANKIND AND THE THREE-FOLD
            REVERENCE                                                241

    II. THE FAMILY                                                   249

   III. THE VOCATIONS                                                260

    IV. THE PRACTICAL VOCATIONS                                      270

     V. THE VOCATION OF THE ARTIST: OUTLINE OF A THEORY
            OF THE RELATION OF ART TO ETHICS                         277

    VI. EDUCATIONAL VOCATIONS, OR VOCATIONS CONNECTED
            WITH THE STATE                                           289

   VII. THE STATE                                                    305

  VIII. THE NATIONAL CHARACTER SPIRITUALLY TRANSFORMED:
            THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY, OR THE
            ORGANIZATION OF MANKIND                                  324

    IX. RELIGIOUS FELLOWSHIP AS THE CULMINATING SOCIAL
            INSTITUTION                                              341

     X. THE LAST OUTLOOK ON LIFE                                     354


  APPENDIX

  APPENDIX I: SPIRITUAL SELF-DISCIPLINE                              365

  APPENDIX II: THE EXERCISE OF FORCE IN THE INTEREST OF
            FREEDOM                                                  369

  INDEX                                                              375




                                BOOK I

                     AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL INTRODUCTION




CHAPTER I

PRELUDE


What this book offers is a system of thought and of points of view as
to conduct, as these have jointly grown out of personal experience. It
will be useful to introduce them with an autobiographical statement.
The ideas which follow are such as have been found by me, the author,
to be fruitful. Certainly I claim for them objectivity; but I do so
because of what I have found them to mean in my own life. He who has
been scorched by lightning knows that the effects of the lightning will
be felt by all who are exposed to the same experience. I narrate my
experience; let others compare with it theirs.

There is, however, a serious, and most embarrassing difficulty in
the way of discussing the phases and vicissitudes of one’s ethical
development. Self-appraisement is necessarily involved in the
narration. The outstanding subject of ethics is the self and its
relations. The physicist, the chemist, the biologist, however the
methods they use may differ in other respects, agree in the endeavor
to eliminate the personal equation. The psychologist likewise does his
best to see the procession that moves across the inner stage like an
interested but detached spectator. In the case of ethics, however, the
personal factor cannot be eliminated, because the personal factor is
just the Alpha and the Omega of the whole matter; and if this be left
out of account, the very object to be studied disappears.

Ethical standards are exacting, separated often from performance by the
widest interval. To set up a standard, therefore, is to reflect upon
oneself, to expose oneself to the backstroke of one’s own deliverances,
to be plunged perhaps into deep pits of self-humiliation. How shall
anyone have the courage to face so searching a test, or the hardihood
to discuss with a lofty air, and to recommend to others ideals of
conduct against which he knows that he daily offends? How can anyone
teach ethics or write about it? The words of the Sermon on the Mount,
“Judge not that ye be not judged,” seem to apply very closely. Do not
judge others, do not lay down the law for others, because in so doing
you will be judged in the inner forum, becoming a repulsive object in
your own eyes, or standing forth a whited sepulcher. In brief, to touch
the subject of ethics is to handle a knife that cuts both ways, to cast
a weapon which returns upon him who sends it.

The difficulty then which confronts the ethical writer is that the
attitude of detachment possible in other branches of investigation is
found to be impossible when one attempts to sound the profundities
of that kind of inner experience which is called ethical. The self
obtrudes itself at every point, and it instinctively refuses to be
humbled. What may be denominated the struggle for self-esteem has
indeed played a leading rôle both in the outer and inner history of
mankind. This struggle, whose immense importance is often overlooked,
accounts for even more interesting facts than the biological struggle
for existence. The desire to exercise power over others, often ruthless
in the means adopted, is frequently nothing more than a miserable
attempt to save self-esteem by covering up the inner sense of the
weakness of the self. But the same struggle penetrates also into the
realm of theoretical ethics with which we are concerned. Here it
tampers with the standards which mortify self-esteem, by inventing
such ethical theories as seem to make the problems of personality easy
of solution, and by blinking the tragic facts of guilt, remorse, etc.
Various ethical systems that are in vogue at the present time are, at
least in part, exemplars of this process—the theory for instance that
ethics is nothing more than a calculus of self-interest, or a matter
of sympathetic feeling, or a balancing of the more refined against the
grosser pleasures. The instinct of self-preservation, in the shape of
the preservation of self-esteem, is quite incorrigible, and against its
insidious suggestion we have reason to be particularly on our guard in
the discussion which we are entering.

Are we then to refrain, out of sheer regard for decency, from touching
on this subject at all? Is everyone who writes on ethics, or attempts
to teach it, either a pedant or a hypocrite? But we cannot avoid
discussing it, nor resist the impulse to teach and write about it, for
it is the subject on which more than any other we and others sorely
need help and enlightenment. And we shall get help in the endeavor
to afford it to others. This, then, is my position: I do not presume
to lay down the law for anyone. I find that I can set forth the
better standards which in the course of trial and error I have come to
recognize. I would not shamelessly expose mere private failures and
failings after the manner of Rousseau in the “Confessions”; for there
is a tract of the inner life which ought to be kept from publicity and
prying intrusion. I shall then deal with deflections only in so far as
they can be traced to false standards or principles, and as they tend
to illustrate the flaw in those standards and principles.

What I state as certain is certain for me. It has approved itself as
such in my experience. Let others consult their experience, and see
how far it tallies with that which is here set forth. A distinction,
however, I wish to call attention to between the theory as expounded
in the second part of this volume, and the practical applications to
be found in the third and fourth parts. Persons who are not trained
in metaphysical thinking or interested in it, may do well to omit the
reading of the second part. To those who are competent in philosophical
thinking, and who disagree with the positions there taken, I may
perhaps be permitted to suggest that one can dissent from a philosophy
and yet find help in the applications to which it leads. And, after
all, it is the practice that counts.

With these preliminaries, I now proceed to delineate briefly the stages
of inner development which have led me slowly and with much labor to
the system of thought described in the following pages.

One of the leading principles to which I early gave assent, and to
which I have ever since adhered as a correct fundamental insight, is
expressed in the statement that every human being is an end _per se_,
worth while on his own account.[2]

Every human personality is to be safe against infringement and is,
in this sense, sacred. There is a certain precinct which may not be
invaded. The experience which served me especially as the matrix of
this idea was the adolescent experience of sex-life,—the necessity
felt of inhibiting, out of reverence for the personality of women, the
powerful instincts then awakened.[3]

The fact that I had lived abroad for three years in frequent contact
with young men, especially students, who derided my scruples, and in
the impure atmosphere of three capital cities of Europe, Berlin,
Paris and Vienna, where the “primrose path” is easy, tended to make
the retention of my point of view more difficult, and at the same time
to give it greater fixity, also to drive me into a kind of inward
solitude. I felt myself in opposition to my surroundings, and acquired
a confidence, perhaps exaggerated, to persevere along my own lines
against prevailing tendencies.

I ought next to mention the decay of theism which took place in my mind
in consequence of philosophic reading. Already at an early age I had
stumbled over the doctrine of Creation. I remember asking my Sunday
School teacher—How is creation possible? How can something originate
out of nothing? The answer I received was evasive, and left me uneasy
and unsatisfied. On another occasion I ventured to suggest to the same
authority—a revered and beloved authority—that the conception of God
seemed to me too much like that of a man, too much fashioned on the
human model; and he amazed me beyond words by replying that he himself
sympathized more or less with the ideas of Spinoza. This chance remark
set me thinking, and seemed to open wide spaces in which my mind felt
free to travel—though I never tended in the direction of Spinoza.[4]

My thoughts were driven still further by reaction against the narrow
theology of the lectures on Christian Evidences as taught at that time
in Columbia College, where I was a student. And all these influences
came to a head in the atmosphere of the German university at Berlin.
There I heard Zeller, Duhring, Steinthal, Bonitz. Above all I came into
contact with Herman Cohen, subsequently and for many years professor
of philosophy at the University of Marburg, and undertook to grapple
in grim earnest with the philosophy of Immanuel Kant. The net outcome
was not atheism in the moral sense,—I have never been what is called
an atheist,—but the definite and permanent disappearance of the
individualistic conception of Deity. I was attracted by the rigor,
the sublimity, of Kant’s system, and especially by his transcendental
derivation of the moral law. The individualistic basis of his ethics,
which is quite uncongenial to me, I ignored, and for a time simply
accounted myself a follower of Kant. Very often since then I have
discovered that men, unbeknown to themselves, are apt to sail under
false flags, ranking themselves Kantians, Socialists, or what not,
because the system to which they give their adherence attracts them
at some one outstanding point, the point namely, where it sharply
conflicts with views which they themselves strongly reprobate; and they
are thus led to overlook other features no less important in which the
system is really uncongenial to them. Thus a person who recognizes the
evils of the present wage system may label himself a Socialist, simply
because Socialism is most in evidence as an adversary of the wage
system, while he may by no means agree with the positive principles
that underlie Socialism, when he comes to examine them dispassionately.

I thought at that time of the Moral Law as that which answers to
or should replace the individualistic God-idea. I believed in an
unknown principle or power in things of which the Moral Law is
the manifestation, and I found the evidence of the moral law in
man’s consciousness. Matthew Arnold’s “the power that makes for
righteousness” is a phrase which at that time would have suited
me,—though perhaps not entirely even at that time. I have since come
to see that “making for righteousness” is a conception inapplicable to
the ultimate reality, and is properly applied only to human effort;
since purpose implies that the end sought has not as yet been realized,
and non-realization and ultimate reality are contradictory ideas. The
power that only makes for righteousness cannot be the ultimate truth in
things. The utmost we can say is that the ultimate reality expresses
itself in the human world as the power that inspires in men moral
purpose.

To return to my personal experiences, there fell into my hands, while
still a student abroad, a book by Friedrich Albert Lange entitled
_Die Arbeiterfrage_ (The Labor Question), which proved epoch-making
in my life. Bacon says in his essay _Of Studies_: “Some books are
to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and
digested.” He might have added that there are books that make a man
over, changing the current of his existence, or at least opening
channels which previously had been blocked.[5]

_Die Arbeiterfrage_ is not a great book. In the literature of the
subject it has long since been superseded. Yet it opened for me a
wide and tragic prospect, an outlook of which I had been until then
in great measure oblivious, an outlook on all the moral as well as
economic issues involved in what is called the Labor Question. My
teacher in philosophy, Cohen, once said to me sharply, that if there
is to be anything like religion in the world hereafter, Socialism
must be the expression of it. I did not agree with his statement that
Socialism spells religion, and have not seen my way to this day toward
identifying the two. But I realized that there was a measure of truth
in what he said,—and that I must square myself with the issues that
Socialism raises. Lange helped me to do this.

He aided me in other respects as well. His _History of Materialism_
dispelled some of the fictitious glamor that still hung about the
materialistic hypothesis at that time,—though the last chapter on the
ultimate philosophy of life, in which he identifies religion with
poetry, is distinctly weak. I read his book on the Labor Question with
burning cheeks; no work of fiction ever excited me as did this little
treatise. It was ethical in spirit, if not in its ruling ideas. It
favored productive co-operation, and seemed to point a way to immediate
action, as Socialism did not.

The upshot of it was that I now possessed a second object, namely, the
laborer, to whom I could apply my non-violation ethics. I had always
felt an instinctive, idealizing reverence for women, and this had its
influence in the first practical outcome of the philosophy of life with
which I started on my career. I would go out as the minister of a new
religious evangel. Instead of preaching the individual God, I was to
stir men up to enact the Moral Law; and to enact the Moral Law meant at
that time primarily to influence the young men with whom I came into
contact to reverence womanhood, and to keep inviolate the sacred thing,
woman’s honor. And now I had a second arrow in my quiver. I was to go
out to help to arouse the conscience of the wealthy, the advantaged,
the educated classes, to a sense of their guilt in violating the human
personality of the laborer. My mother had often sent me as a child
on errands of charity, and had always impressed upon me the duty of
respecting the dignity of the poor while ministering sympathetically
to their needs. I was prepared by this youthful training to resent the
indignity offered to the personality of the laborer, as well as the
suffering endured by him in consequence of existing conditions.

Accordingly, on returning from abroad, my first action consisted in
founding among men of my own or nearly my own age a little society
which we ambitiously called a Union for the Higher Life, based on
three tacit assumptions: sex purity, the principle of devoting the
surplus of one’s income beyond that required for one’s own genuine
needs to the elevation of the working class, and thirdly, continued
intellectual development. A second practical enterprise attempted was
the establishment of a co-operative printing shop. This having failed
because of the selfishness actuating the members, the Workingman’s
School was founded, with the avowed object of creating a truly
co-operative spirit among workingmen.

I must, however, pause at this point to explain how the development
described led me to separation from the Hebrew religion, the religion
in which I was born, and to the service of which as a Jewish minister
it was expected that I should devote my life.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In view of the writer’s connection with the Ethical Culture
Societies it is fitting to state expressly that the philosophical
positions herein set forth are not to be taken as an official
pronouncement on behalf of the Ethical Culture Movement. The Ethical
Societies as such have no official philosophy. _See_ Book IV, Chapter 9.

[2] Though I must at once mention the first great error which
accompanied the true insight, the shadow which went alongside of the
light, namely, my understanding of the above principle mainly in a
negative sense. My ethics was largely what may be called non-violation
ethics.

[3] The relation of chastity to the birth of the idea of personality
among the Hebrews I have touched upon elsewhere. The Hebrew people
abhorred promiscuity, or the dishonoring of oneself by indiscriminate
mingling. It is instructive that this did not stand in the way of
polygamy. Those persons whom the Hebrew received, so to speak, into
the sphere of his personality, did not imperil his sense of personal
intactness. And personal intactness seems to have been the determining
motive in the severe attitude taken toward prostitution. The fact
that the worship of other gods, the worst of crimes in the eyes of
the Hebrew legislator, was described as “whoring after other gods” is
particularly significant. The sacred, sensitive self, the holy thing
whatever it might be, which the Hebrew discovered within his own sex
experience, was thereafter attributed also to others, and especially to
those who had the same aversion to promiscuity as he. Hence perhaps the
limited ascription of holiness to members of the Hebrew people.

[4] Pantheism has always seemed to me the least satisfactory of
theological or ethical solutions. The system of thought which will
be found later on in this volume may have a certain superficial
resemblance to Pantheism, but in reality is as far from it in origin
and purpose as pole from pole.

[5] There are also passages in books that have the same revolutionizing
effect (Cf. the passage quoted from St. Paul in St. Augustine’s
“Confessions”). However, it is curious to observe that the effect
brought about may be quite out of proportion to the cause. The book or
the passage may prove to be of inferior value, so far as its subject
is concerned, and may yet serve suddenly to call attention to the
subject itself, and give rise to trains of thought that eventually
go far beyond the impetus that set them in motion. “Ripeness,” says
Shakespeare, “is everything,”—ripeness to receive the impetus.
Relatedness to the state of mind of the recipient is the decisive
factor, and this accounts for the astounding changes that result.




