CHAPTER VI

THE INFLUENCE OF MY VOCATION ON INNER DEVELOPMENT


The present chapter deals with my inner development as I believe it
to have been furthered by my connection with the Society for Ethical
Culture. The functions intrusted to me in this connection were, first,
various forms of so-called philanthropic activity. The effects of the
experience gathered in them has been described in a preceding chapter;
they may be summed up in the formula: littleness in the external
results achieved, consciousness of moral danger to self.

Secondly, the ministerial function of offering “edification” in public
addresses to Sunday assemblies, the solemnizing of marriages, and
the conducting of funeral services,—while in addition a large part
of my vocational life consisted in the building up of an educational
institution.[16]

_The Public Addresses._ Edification, or building up, as I understood
it, involved the profoundly difficult task of supplying a working
philosophy of life without traveling into the field of metaphysics,
teaching the practicable counterpart of a connected system of thought
concerning the problems of life,—the system being so firmly knit as to
make the appropriate feelings and impulses more or less natural to its
exponent. In my case, not having fallen heir to such a system, the task
of edification became doubly difficult. It meant from the beginning
unceasing self-edification, with a view to edifying others.[17] Setting
out with a general scheme along Kantian lines, I proceeded to fill in
the outline in the course of my public teachings, with the result that
the content filled in eventually disrupted the scheme, and compelled
a thoroughgoing reconstruction. The Holiness conception had been my
starting point. I never gave it up. I was attracted to Kant because
he affirmed it. I broke with him because he does not make good his
affirmation.

I began with Kantianism, which is predominantly individualistic, and I
found that in dealing with the problems of the family, with the labor
question, and in the attempt to reach an ideal of democracy beyond
the materialistic conception of it which is at present current—I
was introducing into my initial sketch elements incompatible with
individualism, and necessitating formulation in social terms. And since
I retained and stressed the notion of personality, I had to seek a way
of interpreting the term Social spiritually, as Kant had undertaken to
interpret the term individual spiritually. I certainly could not fall
in with Darwinism or other evolutionary interpretations of sociality,
inasmuch as they all leave out the concept of inviolable personality,
the indefeasible factor in my ethical thinking.

These things are here alluded to in order to emphasize the influence
of the public Sunday addresses delivered by me regularly for more than
forty years in stimulating, I had almost said forcing, my ethical
growth. To care for anyone else enough to make his problem one’s own
is ever the beginning of one’s real ethical development. To care for
a group of people in the sense of being challenged to suggest to
them ideas and ways of behavior that shall really be of use to them
in the storm and stress of life, is the most searching incentive to
self-development imaginable. It is more powerful than the desire to
get truth for one’s own sake. The closet philosopher may be serious
enough in his search for truth, and he may succeed in constructing a
symmetrical system which at the time seems complete. Will it stand wear
and tear? Will it in the bitter moments of his life hold together? If
not, he has failed; but then he only is the loser, it is only his ship
that has gone down. But the situation is different when a company of
people venture with you on the same voyage, and trust to you as in a
way their pilot.

The challenge that comes from the expectant eyes of those who are in
trouble, of those whose relations to their friends or the members of
their family have become tangled, the challenge that comes from the
larger public towards which every public speaker has a certain ethical
duty—all these challenges press home the question: are the things that
you believe true, so true that you may confidently expect them to be
confirmed by the experience of those who in some measure depend upon
you? Are they genuinely of use?

There is also another kind of challenge that in a way is even more
taxing and searching: the silent appeal that comes from those who are
spiritually dead, from those who are sunk in sloth or sensuality, or
who waste their precious days in the pursuit of trivial, frivolous
ends, and from the insensitive consciences of the self-righteous and
the self-complacent. In the Bible we read that the prophet Elisha
once threw himself on the body of a dead child, in order with his own
life to kindle there the life that seemed extinct. In some such way
in public addresses, in which it is not the word but the personality
behind the word that counts, the speaker is bound to throw himself
body and soul, as it were, upon those who are spiritually numbed, and
to _enhance the life within himself_ in order to stir up life in them.
All of which means that the task of edifying others involves continuous
efforts at self-edification.

_The Solemnizing of Marriages._ In solemnizing marriages I had
the experience that some of those at which I had officiated ended
disastrously,—there had been no real marriage at all. Though such
instances were not numerous in my own experience, yet the statistics
of divorce prove that the number of unfortunate marriages in this
and other countries is very large, and is increasing. What are
the foundations of a permanent relation such as would tend to the
development of personality in and through marriage? was the question
urged upon me. Here is a social tie in which two individuals, and later
the offspring, are combined in the closest propinquity. How can an
ethical theory of marriage be reached, that is, a theory dependent
on the idea of the joint realization of the highest end of life by
the members of the family group? This ethical theory of marriage will
be set forth in a subsequent part of this volume. Here I wish again
to mark the retroactive effect of the function I was called upon to
exercise in the Ethical Society on the development of theory. The most
incisive effect of my practical experience, however, was the being
compelled to encounter the effect of _frustration_. How reluctant is
the natural man to face this fact! How he shrinks, and puts up screens
between his face and the head of Medusa! In my earliest marriage
addresses I remember how I used to describe the relation as one in
which each of the partners receives the cup of happiness at the hands
of the other. The second time I performed the ceremony, the bride
was the only child of excellent friends, whose life was completely
wrapped up in their one daughter. She was a charming young girl, and
the bridegroom was a fine-grained person entirely devoted to her. That
marriage feast I shall never forget. A little less than a year after,
the young wife having died in child-birth, I was called in to speak
at her bier. Where, then, was the exchange of happiness? How suddenly
had the house of bliss fallen into ruins! A similar experience that
touched me even more deeply was that of a friend, the first one among
my associates who believed with me in the possibility of a religious
society without a dogmatic creed. The course of love in his case had
not run smooth. The marriage between himself and the lovely young
woman he wedded was the happy culmination of many trials, a haven
of peace after storms. Hardly more than two years elapsed when he
suddenly developed a fatal form of mental disease, and lingered for
ten years in a long, slow, degrading decline. I thus became acquainted
with frustration in one of its most woeful shapes. I remember how the
poor young wife, during those ten years, widow in all but name, sought
alleviation in various directions for her intolerable grief. Work to
occupy her mind was one; caring for the needs of the poor another. I
remember also how futile these devices seemed. She had lived “on the
heights”; she must now descend to lower levels; she had had first best,
she must now put up with second or third best. Gladly indeed would she
have exchanged places with some of the poor women whom she assisted,
could she have kept her husband at her side as they had theirs. It was
well enough for her to try to alleviate the troubles of these people,
but what were their sorrows compared to hers? And to keep the mind
occupied by work, what was it at best but a temporary anodyne? When
the work was over, in the still, lonely hours of the night, the storm
of grief would break with all the greater violence. I had not taught
these my friends a really valid spiritual conception of the purpose
of marriage: I had failed in that: and when they were in need of it
they did not have it to support them. They had looked on marriage as a
scene of felicity; they had not been taught to make allowance for the
frustration.

I had not made preparation for the palpable frustrations just
mentioned, nor yet for others, for the discovery that the beloved
person is faulty, that the nimbus of divine personality does not
coincide with the character. And especially did the lack of any
explicit idea of personality prove fatal in those cases where the
frustration is most serious, where real or apparent incompatibilities
appear, or where actual degeneration occurs, and the hope of
regeneration becomes remote.

_Bereavement_ was the second shape in which the fact of frustration
most often came home to me. Hundreds of times I have spoken to people
in the moment of the last leave-taking. The usual consolations, aside
from those that depend on mythological beliefs, are: Submit to the
inevitable; clinch your teeth and face the storms of fate. Remember
the debt you owe to the living. There is work that remains for you
to do. See to it that you do not by excessive grieving destroy your
capacity for work. Instead of indulging in sorrow for your own loss,
take upon yourself the sorrows of others. In particular it is uplifting
for one who has been more severely afflicted to take upon himself the
sorrow of those whose burden is lighter. Be grateful for what you have
possessed. Think not so much of what you have lost, as of what you were
privileged for a season to call your own. Make the virtues of those
who are no longer living a force for good in your own life. Paint the
portrait of your friend incessantly. Retouch it. Eliminate what was of
merely transient value in him. Remember him in the light of his best
qualities, and live so as to be able to endure his purified glance.
Or, in the case of those whose lives were stained, seek to expiate
their faults in your life. Purify and perpetuate them in this way
in yourself. Memory is not a mere passive receptacle, it is rather
a creative faculty. Let it play upon the lives that are no longer
sensibly present, and thus maintain the connection with them. A friend
living across the sea, whom you will never see again, may yet be a
living presence for you if you continue by the aid of memory to be in
communication with him. In the case of the departed, likewise, their
effectual influence may remain none the less real.

These various modes of consolation have each a certain value. To
the one last mentioned I attach the greatest value. Bereavement is
a challenge for a fresh start in spiritual development. It should
not mean putting up with the second best, but reaching out toward
first best. The object to be achieved by the ethical teacher on such
occasions is to help the bereaved to tie anew the threads that have
been sundered, or rather to substitute a more ethereal but firmer tie
for the contacts mediated by the senses. But this task of the reweaving
of ties, spiritually, not sensibly, depends entirely for its success
upon a spiritual conception of personality. And if this be lacking, the
attempt is hopeless. Frustration itself must be recognized as partial
if it is to lead beyond itself. There must be found in man that which
cannot be defeated if the defeat is not to be accepted as final.

A third kind of frustration was brought home to me by the problem of
specialization, as it presented itself in the course of my efforts to
work out an ethical theory true to the facts of life. To discharge
competently my own special function, I saw that I ought to be
acquainted with the best ethical thought of the past. This meant an
exhaustive study of the philosophical systems of which the ethical
thought of the philosophers is the fruit. I ought further to be
familiar with the great religions, in which so much of the ethical
insight of mankind is incorporated. I ought to acquaint myself with
the moral history of mankind in so far as it is accessible, including
that of the primitive races. I ought to gain a survey of the variations
of moral opinion that have so staggered belief in the possibility of
ethical truth. I ought to master at least the general principles of the
physical and biological sciences, since it is impossible that the first
principles of ethics should not be related to the governing principles
that obtain in other departments of knowledge. I ought in addition to
master in their ethical aspect the economic and political problems of
the present day, as well as the psychology of individual and social
life, in order to be able to apply with some degree of competence the
directives of ethics to actual conduct. There are in addition other
subjects, such as jurisprudence, poetry and the fine arts, that have
ultimate relation to ethics, and that may not safely be neglected.
Behold, then, the problem of specialism in one of its most appalling
forms. For how can any one individual hope to adequately fill out such
a programme? And what I have said is but my own personal illustration
of a general problem that more and more besets every reflective person
in our time. And it is a problem that has direct bearings upon the
question of human personality. The personality is not a detached and
isolated thing. It is a center that radiates out in every possible
direction, and depends for the release of its energy on the influences
received in turn from all directions. On the one hand, to have a
footing at all in reality one must be a specialist, and the fields of
specialism are becoming more and more restricted. To know one thing
well is the indispensable condition of the sense of mastery, yes, of
self-respect. And yet it seems to be becoming increasingly clear that
one cannot really master a single specialty without knowing of other
specialties whatsoever is related to one’s own. Narrowness, and loss
of power, and consequent decay of the special function itself, seems
the one alternative. Dilettantism, the other. But again I ask, who can
actually fill out such a programme? The frustration of effort thus
appears, in its intellectual guise, as one more manifestation of that
general fact of frustration which we meet with wherever we turn.[18]

On the side of character the same reflections occur. Unity in the
direction of distinctiveness or uniqueness is the end and aim.
But instead of unity of character, conflict of inner tendencies,
ever-recurrent rupture of provisional harmonies, a duality of self
or multiplicity of selves, are the facts attested by one’s inner
experience. And frustration here, at the core of a man’s being, is
perhaps more painful and more seemingly contradictory of the very ideal
and purpose of ethical development than in any of the forms previously
recorded.

The last instance of frustration that I will mention appears in
connection with the cosmic relation of our race. The thought of the
death of the individual may be overcome by the idea of perpetuity in
the lives of successors. The death of the human race, its eventual
extinction, is capable of no such assured compensation. We are ethical
beings, committed to the pursuit of an ideal end, yet the cosmic
conditions are such as to make the end unattainable within the limits
of a finite world. This unattainableness of the end it is true is the
very ground and foundation of the supersensible interpretation of
ethical experience. Yet this thought itself can only be made good by a
positive interpretation of personality (of the spiritual nature), which
we are yet to seek. As viewed empirically, the human generations are
but accidents of nature, waves on the sea of life, passing shadows. And
viewing ourselves in this manner our self-respect goes to pieces. The
idea of obligation vanishes. Man’s claim to infinite worth is bitterly
mocked. Unless we can reach the spiritual view of life, the frustration
of purpose in the large, that is, of humanity as a whole, is final.

These then, summarily stated, are the problems with which an ethical
philosophy of life has to deal.

1. How to remedy the belittlement of man, the infinitesimal
insignificance of him as a creature of time and space, when compared
with the immensities of the world around him—its spatial and temporal
immensities. What is man in the presence of these myriads of worlds, of
this unending procession of time that he should attribute to himself
significance, nay, worth? Is he perhaps an infinitesimal member of an
Infinite?—preserving in this way the sense of his littleness, and of
the vastness that bears down upon him, and yet maintaining himself
irrefragably at his station, as indispensable to the perfection of the
whole.

2. How to discover a way of retaining the connection between man and
the lower forms of life that preceded him, not doing violence to the
facts which the evolutionists have brought out, and yet at the same
time assuring man’s spiritual distinction? Does he perhaps possess in
his ethical nature a window, so to speak, through which he can catch at
least a glimpse of the ultimate reality, of the infinite life which is
the real life, behind the picture screen of sea and mountain, plants
and animals?

3. How to overcome the various types of frustration mentioned above:
frustration on its intellectual side, or the reconciliation of
specialist efficiency with breadth and relatedness; frustration on the
character side.

Frustration in the social relations, as in marriage, or as in the case
of defective children.

Frustration through bereavement, or the privation suffered by the going
out of our life of lives with which we are inseparably connected by
ethical as well as affectional ties.

Frustration in the attempt to carry out projects of social betterment;
on what moral ground to assert the possible moral value of life in the
slums today, and at the same time to put forth and to stimulate the
most assiduous efforts to abolish the slum; on what grounds to affirm
that the best life is possible under the worst conditions, and yet not
to cease or for an instant relax the effort to change the conditions.

The problem of how to support and console the wretched multitudes
of mankind in the interval that must elapse before the reform of
conditions can take real effect; the problem of support and consolation
in fatal sickness, on the deathbed, and in the harrowing recollection
of irremediable and irrevocable wrong done to others; the problem
raised by the prospective extinction, or the possible old age and
degeneration before extinction of mankind—all these problems should be
taken together, not one, for instance the so-called social problem,
accentuated, leaving the rest out of sight. From one peg they all
hang, on one cardinal idea they all depend—the idea of personality
as positively defined, of the holy thing as not merely inviolable
without regard to its content, but inviolable because of a certain
positive content. The ascription of worth to man, in this sense, is the
fundamental problem of all, and to the full discussion of this we shall
turn in the constructive part of the volume which is now to follow.

FOOTNOTES:

[16] See the published accounts of the Ethical Culture School.

[17] The word “edification” as commonly used has a sentimental flavor.
It does not as a rule convey the idea of constructiveness at all. It
frequently suggests a kind of warm, moist, semi-tropical atmosphere for
the emotions of the hearer to simmer in. But in its genuine meaning of
“building up” it is too valuable a word to lose.

[18] A new conception of culture is needed, based neither on exclusive
specialism, nor on the ambition to know everything after the manner of
Goethe in his early days, and such a conception of culture must supply
the foundation of an educational philosophy.




                                BOOK II

                         PHILOSOPHICAL THEORY




