CHAPTER II

CRITIQUE OF KANT (_Continued_)


I now proceed to the second point of criticism, which strikes at the
heart of Kant’s ethics. Man according to Kant is worth while on his
own account (an end _per se_), never to be used as a mere tool or
thing. He is a person, an object towards whom we are bound to evince
absolute respect. Yet Kant immediately goes on to say that there is
no object in all the world, neither man nor any other, that is worth
while on its own account, that deserves such respect. Kant’s views
of actual human nature are tinged with somber pessimism. (Compare
the chapter on Radical Evil in his _Religion Within the Limits of
Pure Reason_.) A strange paradox is thus presented to us. Man is
to be accepted as a worth while object, and yet there is no worth
while object. How does Kant seek to escape from this predicament? He
says, not the man primarily, but something that happens in the man,
is supremely significant: certain acts are worth while on their own
account,—the agent only in so far as he performs such acts (or, let
us add with a sigh, as he tries to perform them)—namely, acts which
have as their sole motive respect for universal law. Then he informs
us that similar processes occur in other agents, in fellow human
beings, or, more precisely, that these others are capable of trying to
act as I myself feel bound to try to act. Consider how far fetched
is the argument, on what wavering foundations has been placed the
ethical pronouncement of human worth and human equality in which our
interest is so profoundly engaged. We do wish to be assured of this
cardinal truth. No other truth is practically and theoretically of
greater importance. As against the iniquitous practices of the world,
as against the exploitation of labor, as against the degradation of
woman, as against political tyranny whether exercised by kings or by
mobs, we raise up for our shield the indefeasible worth of men—not of
some men but of all men. And now, behold! the thinker to whom we owe
the forcible expression of this truth seems to have left it in the air.
I scrutinize my neighbors, and find in their behavior no sure sign of
real worth. I fall back on myself and I discover what? The idea of an
act which, if I could perform it, would stand on its own merits (would
be self-justified). I then find that I am bound to try to perform such
acts. I cannot affirm that in a single instance I have ever performed
such an act. I next infer—on what tenuous ground has been shown in
the last chapter—that my fellow-beings have the same inner experience
as mine. And it is for this reason that by a circuitous inference I
declare them to be worth while objects.

That Kant has formulated a truth of the utmost importance for
mankind (that no man is to be treated as a mere tool), seems to me
incontestable. That he has not made good his own proposition is my
contention, and that the whole problem must therefore be taken up
_de novo_. It will assist us in doing so to expose the flaw in his
categorical imperative, or the formal principle of universality and
necessity applied to human actions, which in his view imprints upon
them the character of absolute rightness.

Note that Kant approaches the problems of ethics from the side of
physical science, and with the bias of the physical scientist. The
ethical principle he sets up, the bare idea of universal necessity or
of law in general, is derived by way of abstraction from the particular
laws of nature. It is a physical principle in disguise. To understand
Kant’s system, it is simply indispensable to keep this point in mind.
He was pre-occupied during the major portion of his life with profound
speculations on scientific subjects. The title of the _Critique of
Pure Reason_ might not be inappropriately changed into “A treatise on
the fundamental assumptions of science, as handled by Newton and his
successors.” He was undeniably interested in ethics. His ultimate aim
was to clear the way for the confident holding of ethical principles.
(See the Preface to the _Critique of Pure Reason_.) But he could not
divest himself of the prejudice of his temperament and of his lifelong
pursuit. He is not singular in this respect. To borrow the first
principle of ethics from some other field is a common and apparently
ineradicable error. Mechanics, æsthetics, and recently biology, have
been laid under contribution for this purpose. A consistent attempt to
study ethical phenomena on their own ground, to mark off what is really
distinctive in the data of ethical experience, and then to search for
some principle which shall serve to give a coherent account of them,
has to my knowledge never yet been undertaken. Always ethics has been
treated as an annex to some other discipline. Always we behold the
attempt to assimilate before the distinctive traits and characteristics
have been carefully investigated. Never yet has the independence of
this wonderful aspect of human nature been truly acknowledged. Kant
indeed freed ethics from its long tutelage to theology; but he left
it still in subjection, subject to his own favorite study, physical
science.

But though the notion of necessity, together with that of universality,
which he derived from physics was employed by him as a fundamental
principle of rightness in conduct, the principle itself insensibly, and
as it would seem unbeknown to himself, underwent a remarkable change
in the course of his undertaking to give it a new application. The
following brief comments will serve to elucidate this point.

In physics, whenever an antecedent phenomenon has been exactly
described, and a sequent phenomenon is defined in the same fashion,
the connection is pronounced to be necessary—as for instance the
transformation of mechanical energy into heat, and conversely. A
single carefully guarded experiment may suffice to establish the
necessary nexus between two phenomena. And after having established
the necessity, we are confident of the universality. If exceptions
should occur and contravene the supposed law, the calculations or the
observations are to be corrected. But never in physical science do
we start from universality and predict necessity therefrom. Kant in
his ethics invariably couples together the two terms Universal and
Necessary. But he reverses the procedure of science, he _begins with
the universality and thereupon affirms the necessity_.

Universality is for him the test of moral necessity. If an act can be
universalized, the performance of it, according to him, is morally
necessary. For instance, the question is asked, Is it right to kill?
Look at the act of killing, says Kant, and see whether it can be
universalized, that is to say, whether if everybody felt at liberty to
kill, the act of the murderer would or would not be self-defeating? He
kills in order to affirm his life at the expense of another’s. If his
action were to be generally imitated, his own life would be forfeit,
or at least in danger, and he would be annulling what he intends to
affirm. Hence murder is morally wrong: to sacredly respect the life of
others is right.

But not only is the order reversed, so that necessity follows on the
heels of universality, but the very meaning of the term necessity is
altered. _A logical necessity is substituted for a physical necessity._
The idea of necessity as handled by physical science denotes the
connection between one thing and something else. It is not the thing
itself but its relation to some other thing that is necessary. It is
not the phenomenon A nor the phenomenon B, in the case of a cause
and its effect, that is declared to be necessary, but the sequence
of B on A, the circumstance that B is tied up to A, must follow in
its wake. But the term Necessity as used by Kant in his _Ethics_,
denotes a relation of a thing to itself. It is in fact equivalent to
self-consistency, which is a logical notion derived from the principle
of self-identity. A is A, and it is not thinkable that it should
be non-A. Similarly Kant says: If a man desires to affirm his life,
that is, to be self-preserving, it is not thinkable, it would not be
rational or logical on his part, to perform an act which would be
self-defeating. Kant does not say that a man might not irrationally
take another man’s life, regardless of the consequences to himself; he
says that as a rational intelligence acting on purely logical motives
he could not do so.[21] To repeat, then, physical necessity is a
relation of one thing to another thing: the logical necessity involved
in self-consistency is a relation of a thing to itself.

My next contention, and this touches the root of the matter, is
that the notion of end is incompatible with self-consistency as the
paramount principle in ethics. For a self-consistent rational being
is a being in harmony with himself, one who if this harmony should in
some unaccountable way ever be broken would by his own endeavor seek
to return to himself. (Kant declares that the morality of any one man
cannot be affected by his fellows, by any influence from the outside;
it must be his own act.) But an end presupposes some outside object
as a means: means and ends are inseparable correlatives. On the other
hand, an entity which merely affirms itself, or if somehow alienated
from self endeavors without assistance from beyond its sphere to
return to itself, is no true end at all, and cannot be designated as
such. It is no end because it employs no means.

What warrant then has Kant for introducing the foreign notion of end
into a world of pure self-consistency? When we use the term Necessity
in relation to physical phenomena, as of cause and effect, we assert
unalterable sequence, unity of temporal and spatial differentiæ.
When we use the same term as Kant uses it, we assert the unity of a
thing with itself. But this in the nature of the case does not admit
the intrusion of the alien concept of the outside. The spiritual
society or pattern to which human society ought to be conformed, is
according to Kant a society of ends, of ends _per se_. This is his
great pronouncement. But the very idea on which he lays so much stress,
the idea of end, on closer scrutiny of his premises disappears. The
entities composing that society are self-sufficing, and moreover
intrinsically unrelated to each other. Rational self-preservation is
the only character that can be predicated of any of them.

I have laid stress on the fact that Kant derived his ethical principle
from his physics. The passage in which he speaks of the ethical order
as a universal and necessary order like that of nature is to my mind
conclusive. I now urge in addition that this sort of second nature
superimposed upon existing nature would not have to our contemplating
minds a dignity superior to that of physical nature. The moral order
as thus exhibited would not possess the worth we attribute to it as
exalted above what is called the natural order. The falling stone is
a perfect illustration of physical necessity. Necessity passed through
human consciousness, or bathed in human consciousness, is not on that
account a more eligible principle. Nay, since human consciousness
interferes and causes contingent actions, due to passion, appetite,
etc., the moral order constructed by men should be even less worth
while than the physical order of nature, if indeed necessity be the
touchstone of worth.[22]

To summarize: according to Kant man as an object is unfit to warrant
the claim of unconditional obligation on the part of others toward
himself. An abstract principle must be sought. This principle is
universality, and necessity based on universality. Respect for this
purely abstract notion is that which alone imparts a moral quality to
so-called moral acts. We start, according to Kant, with the declaration
that man is an end _per se_. But we reject him as an object, and take
refuge in a formal principle. We then assume that every human being is
conscious of the working within himself of this formal principle and
acknowledges his subjection to it, whether he is able to analyze it out
or not. And thus indirectly we derive out of emptiness a ray of glory
which we allow to fall upon each and every man.

The question now is, since this approach to the ethical problem
manifestly fails, must we not begin at the opposite end, and take the
attribution of worth to men, however unworthy they may actually be, as
our starting-point?

FOOTNOTES:

[21] He also assumes a society not only of rational intelligences
determined by the same rational motives, but equal in ability to carry
out their motives. (See my article in _Mind_ [new series, Vol. XI, No.
42, p. 162], reprinted in the volume dedicated to William James, by the
Philosophical Faculty of Columbia University.)

[22] Surefootedness, or certainty in thinking and in acting seems
to have been the chief desideratum at which Kant aimed. As against
scepticism or mere empirical groping this element of the inner life is
obviously of exceeding value. But it is far from being the only element
to be taken into account.




