CHAPTER VI

THE IDEAL OF THE SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE AND THE GOD-IDEAL


We have seen whence the ideal of a spiritual universe arises. It is
unnecessary to prove that the universe is moral. What it is necessary
to verify is that a universe exists; for “universe” is an ethical
ideal, it is the ethical manifold, or, if we distinguish ethical as
concerning relations between man and man, then we may use the term
“spiritual” to designate that infinite system of interdependence
in which men as ethical units have their place. We begin with the
affirmation—Man is an end _per se_. This wonderful affirmation,
which the democracies are darkly and confusedly trying to express in
political and social arrangements, constitutes the problem of all
problems. It is the great datum of ethics, of which ethical theory
must give an account. All other data or problems that have been thrust
into the foreground—freedom of the will, responsibility, altruistic
self-sacrifice—are secondary, in the sense that they depend for their
solution on a right conception of man as end _per se_. As possessing
worth on his own account he is an ethical unit. Only as a member
of the infinite spiritual universe does he possess the two-fold
attributes implied in worth—inviolability with respect to outsiders
and indefeasible, intrinsic preciousness. Therefore I say that around
the individual, the ethical unit, we build up as a necessary postulate
the spiritual universe. Man ethically considered carries with him this
infinite environment.

Does this universe exist or is it a mere figment? It is the product of
the reality-producing functions in their ideal completion. It is the
necessary postulate required if the idea of right is to have validity,
and the idea of right is required by man in so far as he is an agent
and not merely a spectator of life. The ethical manifold, the spiritual
universe, exists in so far as there is a right.

Have we then reinstated the idea of God as existent? Not the idea of
God as an individual. We have on the contrary set aside that idea by
affirming that manifoldness cannot be derived from unity, that the
positing of plurality is just as much a primary function of the mind as
the positing of unity. We have discarded the God-idea as the _locus_ of
unity, since the unity subsists in the relation of the units. Strictly
speaking, we have replaced the God-idea by that of a universe of
spiritual beings interacting in infinite harmony.

But at this point I must go back for a moment to Kant, using his ideas
once more as a foil to make my own more explicit. Wilhelm von Humboldt
said of Kant that some of the things he had destroyed would never
be rebuilt, and that some of the things he had built would never be
destroyed.

For more than a hundred years the impression has prevailed that among
the things forever destroyed by Kant are the proofs of the existence
of God. He is represented as an intellectual giant whose blows have
forever shattered the proofs on which the existence of a supersensible
reality rested. Kant’s mind was preëminently scientific. He was the
philosopher who made explicit the principles underlying Newtonian
science as Aristotle had made explicit the logic underlying the Greek
science. His philosophy is essentially agnostic. The use that he
continues to make of the God-idea can be dissociated from his system
with advantage to the latter.[34]

But did Kant indeed destroy the idea of a supersensible reality
as existent, or are we warranted in undertaking to build anew the
supersensible world.[35] “_Du hast sie zerstörrt, die schöne Welt,
In deinem Busen baue sie wieder_”—not indeed in the realm of mere
feelings, but in the sphere of will. The spell of Kant’s shattering
attack still rests upon the intellectual world today. The notion of a
supersensible reality, if held at all, is held timidly, apologetically
and is apt to be based on subjective emotional need. The wish is more
or less admitted to be father to the faith—the will to believe is
defiantly asserted in despair of sound foundations. A scientist like
Dubois-Reymond enumerates seven world riddles, or mysteries that cannot
be explained, and after saying that they cannot be explained, he seems
to see that no alternative remains but to take refuge in resignation:
“Ignoramus, ignorabimus!”

That “explanation” is not the only avenue to truth, that the referring
of effects to their causes is not the highest operation of the
reality-producing functions, I have pointed out in a previous chapter.
But Kant, as has been said, is supposed to have utterly annihilated
the arguments intended to demonstrate the existence of God, and it
will clear up the matter at issue if we consider wherein he actually
succeeded and wherein he quite failed. As he himself declares, his
method is regressive; he does not attempt the progressive method path.
He seeks to ascertain whether by going backward along the chain of
effects and causes, or of conditions, he can somewhere find God as
first cause or as unconditioned. He does not look forward looking to
the ideals of the will. He does not enter into the realm of ends, where
the necessity of determining action in obedience to some universal plan
or scheme of relations might have forced itself on his attention. His
approach, like his habit of mind, is scientific. He is not primarily
an ethicist. Proceeding in this manner he shows that the notion of a
first cause is untenable, and he attacks in particular the ontological
argument by which every other argument supplements itself at the point
where it breaks down.

Did Kant, however, annihilate the Ontological Argument? Yes, in the
scholastic form in which it was held. No, in a form, based on the idea
of the ethical manifold, in which it can be restated. In the scholastic
form it runs: “There is such a thing as the idea of a perfect being.
Existence is an element of perfection. If the perfect being did not
exist it would be less than perfect. But the _ens realissimum_, the
perfect being, is present as an idea in the mind. Therefore it exists.”
The disproof of this amounts to the curt statement that what exists in
the mind does not necessarily exist outside of it, or, as Kant put it:
“The idea of 100 thalers in the head of a man is one thing, lacking no
element of conceptual integrity; while the existence of the 100 thalers
in the man’s purse is an entirely different matter.” The evidence of
existence, in other words, depends on the synthesis of the data of
sense as arranged in the space and time manifold in accordance with the
categories of the understanding. Existence is temporal and spatial. To
prove that God exists we should have to prove that he exists in the
world of the senses. Of any other kind of existence we are agnostic.
Kant’s disproof of the Ontological Argument thus depends on his
agnosticism.

But suppose that on ethical grounds we find ourselves compelled to
affirm that there is an object which has worth, and that to account for
the inviolableness, indispensableness and preciousness of this object
we are compelled to give free rein to the reality-producing functions,
and to place this object having worth as a member in a manifold
not spatial and temporal but infinite: and suppose we say that the
existence of this worth-endowed object, of this ethical unit with its
compeers, is as certain as the notion of rightness is certain, have we
not then without blame widened the conception of existence, and placed
the Ontological Argument where Kant’s disproof does not even touch
it?[36]

One more important remark is here in place, suggested by Kant’s
designation of God as the ideal of reason, and by his designation of
our highest nature as the rational nature.

Is “rational” equivalent to intellectual? If it be so, then feeling
must be classed as irrational, and impulse likewise, since neither
feeling nor impulse is subject to logical rules. And then the war will
be on between the intellectualists or rationalists and the champions of
irrational conceptions of life, since feeling and impulse actually make
up the major part of life, and can neither be left out of account nor
compressed into intellectualist formulas.[37]

Plainly, there is a deep misunderstanding between the two parties. An
error is involved somewhere. It appears to consist in assuming that
objectivity can be supplied only by the intellect, in overlooking the
fact that the feelings and still more the volition possess intrinsic
controls and norms of their own, that Science, the work of the
intellect, and art and ethics, spring from a common root, namely,
the reality-producing functions. The manifolds with which each of
the three respectively deals are different, the methods of synthesis
are different, but the root principle, synthesis of the manifold, is
identical in all.

To describe our highest nature, therefore, as the rational nature is
perilous, since the word rational suggests intellectual. Either we must
strain the signification of reason to include feeling and will, which
is contrary to common usage, or we should select some other term, such
as _spiritual_, to designate that nature within us which operates in
science and art and achieves its highest manifestation in producing the
ethical ideal.

Finally, if what has been said regarding the ethical manifold holds
good, then a genuine philosophy of life can only be reached by the
ethical approach to the problems of life. This has never yet been
consistently attempted. The approach has been made from the scientific
or the logical side, or as in the case of Plato from the æsthetic,
or as in modern times from the biological. Yet the ethical approach
is full of promise. A philosophy of physical nature may be feasible
without it, a philosophy of art may be possible without it, but not so
a philosophy of life. It has not been tried because ethics has lain
in the lap of theology, which was itself corrupted by the attempt to
apply to ethical problems the inadequate principle of causality in the
form of creation theories, while again in recent times, by way of
reaction against theology, the solution of ethical questions is sought
for in the empirical disciplines where a measure at least of objective
certainty has rewarded the investigators. Even Kant, who asserted
the independence of ethics, actually made it dependent on Newtonian
science. The great task now is, strictly to carry out the idea of the
independence of ethics, not indeed as if its principles were unrelated
to those of science and art, but in the sense of independently
investigating the problems _peculiar_ to ethical consciousness. I am
well aware that the attempt made in this volume to take the ethical
line of approach to a general philosophy of life, is tentative and
defective in a hundred ways, nevertheless it is an attempt in a new
direction.

In the next book I shall take up the practical consequences that
follow from the theory here advanced. Having delineated the ethical
ideal, and discovered the invaluable fact that there is a structural
plan contained in it, we shall see that our actual human duties
may be derived by applying this ideal scheme to the quasi-organic
groups already existing in human society. There are provocative
correspondences to the ethical ideal in the social life of men;
otherwise it would be impossible to apply it. There are human groups
in which a quasi-correlative membership in a common life already
exists. In the case of each of these groups we find some sort of
empirical multiplicity which must be studied scientifically, and also
an empirical motive which may be utilized in the interest of developing
the ethical relation. The family is the first of these groups which
offers a footing in the world of experience for the ideal. In the
family natural affection is the motive; in the vocational group, the
desire to express a talent or special gift; in the state, patriotism;
in the church, the need felt to integrate all human ideals.

Thus the things of earth are to be used as instrumentalities by
which we are to become aware of the spiritual reality. Only that the
disparateness of the physical world and the ethical universe should
ever be kept in the foreground. Every effort to solve the riddle by
somehow identifying the two has failed. To account for the existence of
a finite world of indefinite extensibility side by side with a universe
_ex hypothesi_ infinite is impossible. Instead of seeking to explain
let effort go toward utilizing. Let the _world_ be used instrumentally
for the purpose of verifying the existence of _universe_.

For the average man, and indeed for all men, the test of the truth of
a theory is in the practice to which it leads. Abstract metaphysical
arguments appeal only to a few, and even for them the formula in its
abstract guise is unconvincing. Look at the mathematical figure, and
see whether the axioms hold good. Look at the sequent phenomena and see
whether the so-called law of nature is exemplified. And so with respect
to conduct: look at the ways of human behavior traced out in accordance
with the plan of the ethical manifold, and see whether such behavior
wins the approval of the spiritual nature implicit within you.[38]


 NOTE I

 There are various points at which the system sketched in the text
 deviates from current opinion, but in regard to the underlying
 proposition the reader’s particular attention is called to the remarks
 on the “prejudice of causality” and to the statement that verification
 is exemplification.

 How can ethical truth be verified? How can we be sure that ethical
 ideals are more than fine wishes, expressing subjective aspiration,
 but having no counterpart in the ultimate constitution of things? This
 is the dark doubt that haunts the minds of ethical writers, as well
 as of the average man. We ask to have the things we believe in, the
 objects of our supreme aspiration, verified. How can they be verified?

 I think that we shall see light in this matter once we have grasped
 the thought that verification, both in science and in ethics, is
 nothing more than exemplification. In the case of causality, in
 science, verification does not consist in mere recurrence. For if
 we find, even by a single carefully guarded experiment, that a
 given phenomenon A is the true antecedent of B, then we take leave
 to predict that B will always follow A, without regard to the
 repetition of the sequence in our experience.[39] Indeed, no amount
 of repetition would justify prediction. The problem in the case of
 causality is to determine the true antecedent and the true consequent.
 For at any moment there are innumerable phenomena that might possibly
 be antecedents of B. How obtain certainty that A is the causal
 antecedent? By the synthetic process. We assume a unity, say energy.
 We assume that there are differentiæ, say a certain mathematically
 determined quantum of mechanical energy in A, and a determined
 quantum of thermal energy in B. No sooner have these differentiæ
 been mathematically determined, than in virtue of the assumed unity
 of energy underlying the differences, we pronounce the nexus to be
 necessary. We predict that B will always follow A.

 Causality, therefore, is an example of a synthesis which over-arches
 sequences. The fact that the phenomena are sequent does not affect the
 principle involved. Whenever we contemplate an example of synthesis,
 that is, defined differentiæ of some sort, and a defined underlying
 unity of some sort, the mind affirms that reality exists. There
 are degrees of reality. The degree of completeness with which the
 synthetic function is carried out in any instance determines the
 degree.

 Ethical verification is likewise exemplification, though in another
 sense. When the ideal plan of ethical relations is presented, the
 ideal plan being a synthesis not of sequences but of all co-existent
 entities whatsoever, the mind assents to this ideal plan as
 representing the complete synthesis or the complete reality. The
 more explicitly and definitely the relation between the ethical
 units is conceived, the greater the conviction of reality resulting.
 Now frustration after partial achievement has the effect of making
 more explicit the idea of the plan of relations as it ought to be
 carried out in human life. And in this sense I would have the reader
 understand the main practical argument of the book—that frustration
 is the condition of our intensified conviction as to the reality of
 the supersensible universe.

 In virtue of the constitution of our minds we cannot help
 acknowledging as real that which is synthesized. Synthesized and
 real are synonymous terms. Hence the idea of the completed synthesis
 necessarily is the idea of the ultimate reality.


 NOTE II

 The three principal respects wherein Kant has failed to justify his
 affirmation that every human being is to be regarded as an end _per
 se_, and not to be used as a tool, are:

 1. Out of the bare experience of oughtness, absolute constraint, he
 seeks to derive personality. Out of the empty categorical imperative
 he seeks to draw a substantive entity—a being possessed of worth.

 2. The society of ends _per se_ described by him is not a true
 society, but a collection of atomic individuals juxtaposed. The
 capital flaw in his ethics is here. He begins by detaching the
 individual. He studies the individual, and discovers, or believes
 himself to have discovered, that something happens in him (the
 consciousness of absolute constraint) which entitles him to be
 considered worth while on his own account.

 Next, since the formula of university proposes imitability by others
 as the test of a moral act, all others are called in as concomitants
 of the detached atom first considered. Each of the concomitants in
 turn is an atomic entity. It is in this mechanical way that the
 conception of a kingdom of ends, or a holy community, is supposed
 to be validated. Kant’s mistake is to assume that an individual
 regarded as an isolated being can be worth while, can be an end _per
 se_. The notion of end involves relation to others, not mechanical
 juxtaposition, but intrinsic connection. No one is worth while by
 himself. He has worth only as an organic member of a spiritual whole.
 The unique quality which lends him incomparable distinction is the
 creative life which emanates from him and quickens cognate but
 diversely modified life in his associates.

 3. Kant’s version of the ethical rule is strong on the side of
 interdiction, but quite inadequate on the positive side. He tells us
 that we are to look on others not merely as means to our own ends, but
 also ends _per se_. The vagueness is in the formula “not merely ...
 but also.” Where the dividing line is to be drawn he does not tell. I
 am at liberty to use the services of others in the prosecution of my
 own interests, as they may use mine, since we are social beings and
 dependent on one another. But how far may I go in this direction? On
 this point we are left wholly in the dark. Kant admits into his system
 the so-called natural ends,[40] such as wealth, culture and the like,
 gives them leave to abound, only with the proviso that they may not
 overpass a certain limit,—the limit beyond which they would interfere
 with the rights of fellowmen. An instrumental view of wealth, science,
 culture, as positively promoting the ethical end of man, he does not
 and cannot establish.[41] But the instrumental view is precisely that
 in which modern society has most at stake, on the working out of
 which the solution of our most pressing problems,—such as the labor
 problem, the problem of the family, the problem of patriotism and
 international relations—is entirely dependent. If Kant has failed at
 this point, as I believe he has, his usefulness as a guide in the
 reconstruction of modern life is seriously diminished. What he had
 set out to demonstrate, the inalienable worth of man, remains; but
 foundations other than his must be found. For the formula “not merely
 as a means but also as an end” I would substitute: Treat every man
 as a spiritual means to thine own spiritual end and conversely ...
 treat the extent and the manner in which we are to use one another as
 means being determined by the criterion that our exchange of services
 shall conduce to the attainment of each other’s ends as ethical beings
 conjointly.


 NOTE III

 I would also ask the reader to consider well the effect upon the
 philosophy of life of the position taken throughout this volume that
 there is no intellectual bridge between the finite order and the
 infinite order. This involves dropping creation at the beginning and
 immortality in its usual sense at the end. Creation is an attempt to
 show how the world, including man, proceeded out of the infinite.
 Immortality is an attempt to express how man returns to the infinite.
 In this volume man’s dealings with the finite order are represented
 as having for their purpose the achievement of the conviction that
 there verily is an infinite life, a supersensible universe. Creation
 systems, pantheistic systems, certain evolutionary systems, also
 the Hegelian system, are futile attempts to explain the How. But
 explanation is impossible; for to explain means to understand, and to
 understand means to trace an effect to its cause. And causality is not
 the kind of synthesis applicable to a co-existent totality.

 Among practical consequences note the difference between the theistic
 attitude in fatal sickness and the spiritual attitude.[42] The theist
 presupposes that there is a God to whose will he must patiently
 submit. But theism is a principle of explanation, the God-idea being
 employed to account for the finite order. God is thus made responsible
 for the suffering of the sick as well as for all other evils in the
 world. Hence the very idea which is presupposed in order to produce
 patience raises up doubts and perplexities, which imperil patience.
 If God made the world why does he permit pain and evil? The spiritual
 attitude, on the contrary, ethically interpreted, does not presuppose
 the idea of a divine order as a dogma, but offers it as the product
 of the experience of suffering itself. The conviction that there is
 in man an essential spiritual self, a holy thing, and a spiritual
 universe, a holy community, are not gifts to which we fall heir at
 birth, or by some sort of revelation borrow from the experience of
 ancient teachers; they are a supreme good to be arduously worked out
 by ourselves. And the interpretation given to the facts of suffering
 and frustration is that they can be used as the means of bringing to
 birth in us that supreme conviction.

 In general it may be said that the purpose of existence, both of the
 individual and of the race, is so to work in the finite world as to
 become possessed with ever greater distinctness of the conviction
 of the reality of the wholly real world, the infinite supersensible
 universe.

 The attitude of the Christian is other-worldly. He shuns intimacy
 with the finite world and turns his face toward his “true home.” The
 attitude herein described is that of hearty attack upon the business
 of life, and close embrace of all the partial reality which finite
 experience contains, with a view of thus acquiring in some measure an
 appreciation of the utter reality of which these partial realities are
 hints and glimmerings.


 NOTE IV

 In the case of any new theory, it is true that one must live with it
 for a considerable time before acquiring the habit of thinking in
 accordance with it. The older habits constantly crop up and interfere
 with the correct understanding of any new point of view. This is
 especially so of a new attitude towards reality. The world seems
 topsy-turvy to one who learns for the first time that grass and the
 leaves of trees are not really green apart from the eye that sees
 them, that beings with different organs might interpret differently
 that which stimulates the human eye to its specific color reactions.
 The heliocentric theory, when first announced by Copernicus, outraged
 naïve commonsense. It exacted a new habit of thinking in regard to
 the relation of the sun to the earth,—the real relation, apprehended
 by intercalated mental processes being the direct opposite of the
 apparent relation. The sun evidently revolves around the earth,
 nevertheless the truth is that the earth revolves around the sun.

 Modern science reveals behind the palpable world around us
 unimaginable fluids, speeds, and physical units which are so
 sublimated in thought as to be barely distinguishable from
 metaphysical entities. The habit of penetrating with radium-like
 glance the concrete screen of things, and of seeing behind the screen
 the company of atoms, ions, etc., may be gradually acquired; but the
 older habit of regarding the palpable and visible as the truly real
 continues to assert itself in conflict with the new habit.

 The ethical unit in an ethical manifold postulated in the text as the
 closest, though still symbolic, reading of the ultimate reality, makes
 a similar demand upon the reader, and requires of him in like manner
 the formation of a new habit of thinking, against which the older
 habits will doubtless continue to protest.

 The most obstinate of the older habits that stand in the way has
 been dealt with in the note on causality, namely,—the unscientific
 habit of ignoring the boundaries of science, and of taking the method
 employed in the physical sciences as the sole method that leads to
 certainty. The prejudice of causality is probably ineradicable, just
 as the illusion that the sun revolves about the earth persists. But
 we can at least reach the point of realizing that it is a prejudice,
 and to this extent overcome it. If it be synthesis, or the employment
 in inseparable conjunction of the two functions mentioned, that for
 the human mind spells reality, then one kind of synthesis called
 causality, that of sequent phenomena, does not exclude the ampler,
 though ideal synthesis, which is carried out in the mental production
 of the ethical manifold. So much I wish to add to the statements
 contained in the text in regard to the theory.

 But there is also a new habit to be acquired in regard to the
 practical ethical consequences of the theory. The chief of these is
 the prizing of distinctive difference above uniformity or sameness.
 The ethical quality is that quality in which a man is intrinsically
 unique. The ethical act is the most completely individualized act (I
 ought perhaps to say personalized, but the completely individualized
 act _is_ that of a unique personality). In brief, the emphasis is
 here put on that in which a man differs from all others, and not on
 the common nature which he shares with the rest; or rather, since the
 common nature is not denied, the stress is put on the intrinsically
 different mode in which the common nature is expressed in him.[43]

 The accentuation in current ethical discussion of the common nature of
 man, and the fallacious assumption that the common interests are the
 pre-eminently moral interests, that uniformity is the test of ethical
 quality, is easy to understand. It is the reaction of the modern world
 against feudalism, a social system not yet entirely outgrown, in
 which the empirical differences of rank and birth were made the basis
 of intolerably oppressive discriminations, and in which it was an
 accepted axiom that some men are baked of better clay than others. It
 is also a reaction against the capitalistic system that has taken the
 place of the feudal, in which wealth is to a considerable extent made
 the standard of social appraisement.

 It is against these false discriminations that the voice of humanity
 is now indignantly raised, affirming the moral equality of all men.
 But equality is mistakenly taken to mean likeness in the sense of
 sameness, not in the sense of that fundamental likeness on the
 background of which the desirable unlikenesses stand forth. And this
 notion of equality as identical with sameness leads to great practical
 aberrations. Thus, for instance, women are not only to be recognized
 as the equals of men, but are to be the same as men,—their education
 patterned on that of men, their specific functions, as far as
 possible, ignored. For unlikeness is supposed to connote inferiority,
 and inferiority is justly repelled as morally intolerable. But aside
 from this one example, the stressing of the common nature, or of the
 basis of likeness at the expense of the outstanding unlikenesses,
 leads to other leveling tendencies of which modern democracies
 furnish many unpleasing illustrations. Thus uniform popular opinion,
 encompassing the individual on every side, penetrates into his inmost
 thinking, so that he hardly ventures to hold to his own judgment
 against the judgments of the majority. And the impulses of the mass
 tend also to threaten his independence in action. There is indeed a
 certain intoxication in the very sense of being submerged in a large
 whole, a certain glad loss of self in great impersonal movements, a
 certain strain of democratic pantheism, as it were, that takes the
 place with some of mystic absorption in Deity. But whatever the value
 that may attach to these upswellings of feeling, it is counterbalanced
 by the circumstance that in proportion as indiscriminate devotion to
 society as a whole becomes the paramount motive, the sub-organisms of
 society, the family, the vocation and the state, in which the ethical
 personality is ripened, are threatened with effacement. Instead of
 moral equality it were better to use the term “moral equivalence.” The
 differences are to be stressed; they are the coruscating points in the
 spiritual life of mankind. That every man is the equal of his fellows
 means that he has the same right as each of the others to become
 unlike the others, to acquire a distinct personality, to contribute
 his one peculiar ray to the white light of the spiritual life.

 FOOTNOTES:

 [34] I do not however agree with those who regard the shreds of
 theology remaining in his system as a concession, not wholly
 ingenuous, to orthodoxy. He was brought up in the pietistic faith,
 and had probably not entirely outgrown the emotional impressions
 of those early teachings. The noumena, however, play a part in the
 system itself distinct from the theology, and are not to be taken as
 supersensible realities. They are limiting concepts intended to serve
 as incentives or lures, winning the mind to continue without cessation
 its advance along certain paths within the field of experience;
 but they are not supposed to give any clue as to what is beyond
 experience. That which is beyond the field of experience is simply
 unknowable. Thus the noumenon called “thing _per se_” is notice given
 to the mind not to be deterred in its proper business of unifying the
 space and time manifold by the difficulties which arise when the time
 and space manifold is taken as an ultimate account of reality. The
 thing _per se_ is a welcome to science and not a bar set up in its
 path.

 The noumenon of freedom is an incentive to man urging him to act
 as if he were capable of practicing the law of universality and
 necessity. In fact the phrase “as if” plays a leading rôle in the
 Kantian philosophy. The noumenon of God, as will presently be shown,
 is afflicted with this conditional “as if” character to even a higher
 degree. We are to assume God in order to look upon the vast field of
 possible experience as if it were unified, as if a being who himself
 stands for unity had been its creator. This assumption is supposed to
 be necessary in order to encourage the scientist in his search for
 the thread of unity, lest he flag by the way. As a matter of fact
 scientists have contented themselves with the simple assumption of
 the uniformity of nature as necessary to the prosecution of their
 investigations, and have as a rule troubled themselves little to
 hypostasize the notion of unity. Nor has recent progress in science
 been associated with and influenced by the belief in an individual
 Deity. The noumenon of God is unnecessary for science while in Kant’s
 ethical application of it it is positively harmful. He introduces the
 God notion as an artificial device for linking together happiness and
 virtue, a device quite inconsistent with the noble austerity of his
 ethical system, whatever its other defects may be.

 The noumena, then, are apparitions that appear at the end of certain
 paths in the field of experience, far off where the sky and the ground
 seem to meet. These paths run off in different directions. At the
 end of each is one of these limiting apparitions, and the society of
 noumena is disconnected internally: there is no relation of unity
 between the unifiers.

 [35] The difference between “supersensible” and “supernatural”
 is capital. I do not encourage relapse into supernaturalism. The
 supernatural is the opposite of the supersensible. It is an attempt to
 represent in natural or _sensible_ guise what is supposed to be beyond
 the senses; and the naturalistic representation of the supersensible
 is then taken not metaphorically but literally.

 [36] He allows indeed the _Ens Realissimum_ to remain, and calls it
 the ideal of the reason, the ideal of unity hypostasized, centralized
 in an individual, and somehow harboring within itself all real
 properties whatsoever. But it is quite impossible to conceive how all
 real properties can belong to a single individual. For the properties
 as we know them are incompatible with each other. Surely an individual
 cannot be both great and small, beautiful and ugly, of all colors and
 sounds, etc., etc. Or again if all properties were somehow assembled
 in one individual, since that individual is conceived of as an
 hypostasized unity, it would be impossible to speak of a relation
 between them, and yet upon the relation of the differentiæ depends the
 ethical utility of the idea of a supreme reality.

 [37] Compare, for instance, the anti-intellectualistic philosophy
 of Bergson, with its emphasis on planless spurts of energy, the
 irrationalist philosophy of Schopenhauer, etc.

 [38] The above exposition is not a transcendental derivation of
 ethics. The ideal of the infinite society is a fulguration _out
 of_ ethical experience, to be ever renewed _in it_. We build not
 only our world, but our universe. The ethical principle is not a
 working hypothesis, like those provisionally used in science. It is
 the outgrowth of the functional finalities. It is a postulate. The
 specific moral laws, or expressions of the ethical principle indeed,
 are changeable, being the product of the principle with the varying
 empirical conditions of human society. The fundamental principle is
 unchangeable.

 The consciousness of universal interrelation is not to be described as
 mystical consciousness. The identity of the self remains intact; it is
 never lost in the One or the All. The ethical consciousness includes
 indeed the consciousness of other selves related to our own, in a kind
 of superindividual consciousness. But this is reached along the sunlit
 path of action (So _act_, etc.), and not along the dreamy flux of
 emotionalism or in the silent depths of quietism.

 [39] The frequent recurrence gives us a sense of safety in expecting
 the consequent on the appearance of the antecedent. But the sense of
 safety should not be confounded with the sense of the certainty. We
 expect that day will follow night, because it has followed innumerable
 times. But no amount of repetition can warrant the assertion that it
 will and must do so. The Pragmatist view explains the sense of safety
 in expectation, but does not appear to account for the certainty in
 prediction, as for instance in the astronomer’s prediction of an
 eclipse.

 [40] A hybrid conception, since in nature there are only happenings,
 but no ends.

 [41] His efforts in some measure to remedy this defect in the Doctrine
 of Virtue are artificial and unconvincing.

 [42] See Book III for a fuller development of this point.

 [43] Difference in the ethical meaning is not to be confounded with
 mere idiosyncrasy, or originality, not to say eccentricity. It is
 the kind of difference which elicits correlated difference in all
 spiritual associates.




                               BOOK III

  APPLICATIONS: THE THREE SHADOWS, SICKNESS, SORROW AND SIN, AND THE
                RIGHT TO LIFE, PROPERTY AND REPUTATION




