CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


Three main thoughts should be kept clear: the end to be realized, the
incongruity of the finite and the infinite order, and hence, thirdly,
the indispensable ministry of frustration in the realization of the
purpose of life.

In regard to the so-called moral end of life, there has been much
variety and contrarity of teaching. I shall touch only upon that
aspect of the doctrine expounded in the previous book wherein it seems
to resemble other doctrines, and where a distinct statement of the
difference is therefore imperative. “So act as to develop the faculties
of thy fellowman” is not the rule proposed. “So act as to develop
the so-called good qualities in the man” is not the rule proposed.
The rule reads, “Act so as to bring out the spiritual personality,
the unique nature of the other.” Now, in putting the matter in this
way, we incurred the danger of seeming to concentrate attention on
the individual as a detached being, we seemed to have him only in
mind, though it is true, in respect to what is intrinsic in him, the
irreducible ethical unit which he essentially is. We must, therefore,
constantly remind ourselves that the ethical unit, while unique, is
at the same time an inseparable member of a society of differentiated
units; that its very distinctiveness consists in injecting, as it
were, streams of dynamic energy into its fellow-beings. Or, as I have
elsewhere figuratively put it, the distinctiveness of any ethical
being consists, so to speak, in emitting a ray the color of which is
nowhere else to be found, the miraculous quality of which consists in
acquiring this color at the very instant in which it causes counter or
complementary colors to appear in its fellow-being. (I am using the
words “instant,” “miraculous,” “ray of light,” etc., of course, in a
wholly figurative sense.)

We have at last, this is my belief, achieved a positive definition of
the spiritual nature. The spiritual nature is that which forever is
social in a supra-social sense, as embracing not only human society,
but a universal society of spirits. The spiritual nature is that
of which the very life consists in starting up unlike but equally
worthwhile life elsewhere, everywhere. The spiritual experience to get
hold of, therefore, is the consciousness of this interrelation.

The moral end to be realized, in accordance with the deductions
of Book II, is “So to act upon another as to evoke in him, and
conjointly in oneself, in the same movement and counter-movement the
consciousness of the interlacedness of life with life, the reciprocal,
universal, infinite interrelatedness.”

Now, as a fact, we never realize this end. If we did we should possess
what alone is properly called freedom,—freedom in the positive sense
being the exercise of power peculiar to ourselves, welling up out of
our veriest self, and executing the totality of its effects. Freedom is
marked by these two signs: energy coming unborrowed out of self, and
producing the totality of its effects. I am free when the thing I do
is verily my own, when the power released is the power of my essential
self; and when that power is nowhere checked, inhibited or interrupted,
so that it produces its due, that is, its universal effects.

An ethical being in an ethical universe would be free. The dynamic
energy proceeding from it would be aboriginal. And since it would
radiate upon every other member of the infinite society, it would also
produce the unstinted plenitude of its effects. Each ethical unit, at
its station, would be at once the _producer and the recipient of the
totality of life_.[44]

It is apparent from what has been said that the superlative, sublime
thing, freedom, is not realizable except in an infinite world. And
hence that the supreme end to be realized by man as a finite being
cannot be the full release of unique power in himself. But neither can
the end be approximation. In so serious a business as a philosophy of
life we ought not to play with words, nor delude ourselves with the
implication of proximity seemingly contained in the word approximation.
For it being admitted that we cannot reach the ideal, approximation
seems to suggest that we come into its neighborhood. But the truth
is that the more we advance the less do we arrive in the immediate
neighborhood of the ideal, the distance at which it lies becoming ever
more remote. The moral end, therefore, for a finite nature, like that
of man, is just to realize the unattainableness of the end. There must
be no heaven-on-earth illusions, no resting in the development of our
inadequate human faculties, and no illusions as to approximation. The
unattainableness of the infinite end in the finite world by the finite
nature is the Alpha and Omega of the doctrine, as I propound it. Only
after this truth has been fully faced and recognized, shall we be in
a position to take in the vast significance of the fact that we are
nevertheless under a certain coercion to persist in our efforts to
attain the unattainable, and in inquiring into the source from which
this pressure comes, we shall be led to infer the influence in us of
an infinite nature enshrined in this finite nature of ours. In other
words, to admit the unattainableness of the end in a finite world by
a finite being is the very condition of our acquiring the conviction
that there is an infinite world, and that we, as possessing an infinite
nature, are included in it.[45]

I have now covered the points mentioned: the end to be realized,
the incongruity of the two orders, and the cardinal importance of
frustration as a spiritual experience, as a means of spiritual
education.

From this point of view the whole question of how to deal with the
frustrations of life assumes a new aspect. Lessing published his
well-known essay on the Education of the Race towards the close of the
eighteenth century.[46] Interest in the subject has since been obscured
by the scientific movement, and especially by the evolutionary
philosophy. The latter excludes the idea of education in the proper
sense, and substitutes for it a natural process, a genetic unfolding.
The education of the human race, and of the human individual from the
spiritual point of view consists in a series of efforts never to be
intermitted, but not necessarily following each other in an orderly
series, aiming to embody the infinite in the finite.

Both partial success and failure in these efforts are instrumental
to the achievement of the task of mankind. Both serve to make more
explicit the character and extent of the ideal, while the ultimate
inevitable failure painfully instructs man in the fact of the
incongruity of the two orders. The only outcome of human history that
we can view with satisfaction on a large scale, is the same as that
which we should regard as the best outcome of an individual life,
namely, the growing conviction and the clearer vision of the eternal
spiritual universe as real. We might say that that man had lived best
who on his deathbed could declare with perfect truth: “I have achieved
the certainty, and in through the vicissitudes of my life, that there
is a universe.” I here emphasize again the distinction between universe
and world. To say that the universe is “good” is equivocal. The term
“good,” as commonly used, describes the moral striving of a finite
nature, and not the quality that belongs to the spiritual universe
and its members, thinking of them as ideally we must, as freed from
finite limitation. Of the spiritual universe, we might use the term
“supra-good,” only we should then be careful to add that the “beyond
good” is to be conceived as lying in the direction of the good, while
transcending it. Thereby we avoid the pitfall of Nietzsche and of
others who speak in a totally different sense of the “beyond good and
evil.” We read of a man blessing his children on his deathbed. The
highest type of man is the one who _in articulo mortis_ can bless the
universe.

The discrepancy of the finite and the infinite order appears on the
physical and moral sides. On the physical side it thrusts itself upon
our attention in the circumstance that juxtaposition and sequence are
incapable of being unified, or totalized. Space and time and that
which fills them, matter, are by nature incongruous with spirit. On
the moral side the incongruity appears in the deflecting forces of
appetite and passion which hinder us in the attainment of the spiritual
end and in the fact that our so-called higher faculties are in
irreconcilable conflict with one another. The harmonious union of all
of them in any individual is a fiction. It is impossible to be fully
developed on all sides. And in addition the social substrata in which
the spiritual relation has to be worked out, are themselves too deeply
beset with internal contrarieties to serve their purpose adequately.
The sex relation, for instance, is to a certain extent favorable to the
achievement of spirituality, that is, of living in the life of another;
yet on the other hand there are elements in it that defeat this very
object.

I write, therefore, at the head of such words of counsel as I can hope
to give in respect to the conduct of life, the word _Frustration_.
It is understood that this word is not used in the pathetic sense.
First because there is partial achievement, moments in life at which
the rainbow actually seems to touch the earth. Love and marriage, the
completing of a beautiful work of art, the discovery of a new law of
nature, the emancipation of an oppressed class, are examples. But these
partial successes are presently seen to be partial; they are followed,
or even in the moment of triumph, permeated, with the sense of
incompleteness and the foreboding of new obscurities and perplexities
advancing upon the mind. Yet essentially the doctrine is not a
melancholy doctrine, because frustration, though a painful instrument,
is yet a necessary instrument of spiritual development. We are not open
to the reproach of dampening the zest and relish for life of those who
are setting out to try the hazard of their fortunes. They shall put
forth their best effort to succeed, but let them be so guided herein
that they may meet in the right attitude of mind the disillusionment
which is the condition of the revelation. The shadows will and must
descend before they can be parted, disclosing the landscape of the
spiritual universe.

FOOTNOTES:

[44] Incidentally it may be remarked that in introducing the category
of interrelation we remove the objection against freedom which remains
unmitigable so long as freedom is supposed to be a kind of causality,
competing with natural causality. Causality is the unity of a temporal
manifold of sequent phenomena. The concept of interrelation is the
concept of the unity of co-existent entities.

[45] See some fine remarks on the unattainableness in Tyrrel’s
_Christianity at the Cross-roads_.

[46] _Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts._




