CHAPTER IV

THE IDEAL OF THE WHOLE


To recapitulate and at the same time to enlarge somewhat the points
thus far covered in Book II: Kant proclaims man an end _per se_. This
promises a philosophic basis for an ethical world-view. The promise is
not kept. Kant takes as his point of departure absolute obligation, and
attempts to deduce out of an empty formula a worthwhile object. Kant’s
formula is: Treat man never merely as a means, but also as an end _per
se_. But how far man may be treated as a means, and what the relation
of the means to the end may be is left undetermined. An upper crust of
morality is formed, as it were, upon the empirical flood of passions,
desires, etc. A straight line is drawn beyond which the under world in
every man may not emerge. But a truly instrumental view of the means as
related to the end is not established. This is one of the great gaps
in Kant’s system. Note the almost puerile reason given for culture: we
should cultivate our talents _weil sie zu allerhand Zwecken nützlich
sein mögen_.

Kant’s ethical order is a duplicate of the physical order. The notion
of law is taken from physics, and expanded into the concept of law
in general. Ethical behavior is represented as behavior motivated by
the notion of lawfulness. Law is characterized by universality and
necessity. Chapter II, however, shows that in physics universality is
predicated on the ground of an ascertained necessary connection. In
physics, necessity has its true meaning as pertaining to a relation
between one thing and another. If the linkage can be established, the
universality follows. In Kant’s ethics, on the contrary, necessity is
taken as the consequence of the universality and the proper meaning of
necessity is lost. Self-consistency takes the place of the relation
to something else. The ideal society, as described, would therefore
be a society of self-preserving rational intelligences, ethically
solipsistic.

Next we began the investigation into the idea of worth. Why do men
hold themselves and others cheap? They regard each other from the
point of view of the _use_ to be made of others and of their own life,
and not from the point of view of the energies deployed. The turning
on of electric power was used as an illustration. Nevertheless, even
exceptional men, men regarded as illustrating in the highest degree the
mental energies implicit in human nature, would not possess the quality
of worth, that is, of being ends _per se_, merely on the score of their
scientific or their artistic activities. We cannot say that the world
would be less perfect if there were no scientists to discover its laws.
There is a supreme, a unique energy and it is to this that the quality
of worth belongs.[26]

The ethical quality called worth is the supreme good, and must be
accessible to all, even to those to whom the lesser goods are denied.
Ethics is a system of thought which stands or falls with the contention
that while the better may be within reach only of the exceptional few,
the best is within reach of all.

In attempting to approach the task of building up a world-view based
on ethical experience, it became unavoidable to consider the method
by which the approach might be made, and for this purpose to contrast
the methods of science and the methods of ethics. Science, as we have
seen, collects its bricks and builds its house by composition. Science
analyzes phenomena into units, which it then combines. The mystery is
how science can achieve certainty in respect to certain phenomena of
nature without previous knowledge of the whole of nature. Kant’s answer
is that there is partial congruity between the mental functions and the
data that come to us from the unknown. Kant’s _Critique of Pure Reason_
faces in two directions. It expels the older metaphysics which assumed
that the empirical world is rational throughout, or rationalizable, and
which thence argued the existence of the unconditioned as necessarily
implied in the existence of the conditioned, and of a first cause as
actually implied in the chain of causes and effects. Kant contends
that there is an irrational element, namely, bare juxtaposition
(part outside part), and bare sequence (part before and after part),
while the logical or rational relation implies that the part is to
be conceived as implicit in the whole. Juxtaposition and sequence,
therefore, can never be completely rationalized. On the other hand,
Kant undertakes to prove that whatever of reality we know is traceable
to the projection of the rational factor upon the irrational. One
might even say that, according to Kant, the mind itself produces the
irrational factor, since the intuitions of space and time are according
to him, functions of the mind itself—the mind setting up a manifold so
constituted as to receive sense impressions. At any rate the capital
point to which we were led up was that science puts her foot on _terra
firma_ in a restricted area, without reference to what lies beyond,
while if we are to proceed in ethics at all, we must begin with some
ideal plan of the whole, since in ethics we are not interpreting a
foreign nature, but act upon natures similar to our own; and since,
in the case of conduct, there is no such partial concurrence of
the rational and irrational as in physics, no one of the so-called
moral modes of behavior being moral when taken separately. Hence the
conclusion that there is no possibility of establishing the conception
of worth unless we have some ideal of the whole in which and in
relation to which the incomparable worthwhileness of a human being can
be made good.

We need hardly again remind ourselves that this conception of worth,
or of man as end _per se_, is not a mere abstraction, and that our
interest in it is not academic. Every outcry against the oppression
of man by man, or against whatsoever is morally hideous, is but the
affirmation of the cardinal principle that a human being as such is
not to be violated, is not to be handled like a tool, but is to be
respected and revered as an end _per se_. But what do we mean by end
_per se_, and how account for this notion? Does it come into our mind
like a bolt from the blue, or is it revealed as prefigured in the human
mind when we follow it into its intimate constitution?

Our knowledge of the world we live in is extremely limited—in its
details it is confined to the planet we live on, extending to
the myriads of celestial bodies beyond us only by means of scant
generalizations. If we have knowledge of only so small a portion, how
can we frame an ideal of the whole? At the same time we must remember
that the world we actually know, this earth and yonder starry myriads,
is in very truth _our_ world, the world as it exists for us, a world
which with the help of data coming to us from the unknown, we ourselves
have built up on certain constructive principles; and that these
principles have been found, within certain limits, availing.[27] I
say availing within certain limits. The defeat they meet with beyond
those limits is due to the intractable elements of juxtaposition and
sequence, of the time and space manifolds, which in themselves are
incapable of being completely rationalized.

Now the ideal of the whole is a plan or scheme in which the
constructive principles of the mind are conceived as having untrammeled
course and unhindered application, and the task of world-building, or
rather universe-building, is in idea carried out to completion.

The attempt to present an ideal forecast, or outline of the whole of
reality, as it would satisfy a mind constituted like ours, an ideal
landscape of this sort, is not at all to be confounded with the
arrogation of _a priori_ knowledge. _A priori_ knowledge is supposed
to be a kind of knowledge, and _knowledge_ of the whole is utterly
and confessedly beyond our reach. The phrase _a priori_, too, is
objectionable and unfortunate for two reasons. First, as just said,
because it has been supposed to be a kind of knowledge. By some
theologians men were supposed to possess _a priori_ knowledge of
God.[28] Secondly, because the word _a priori_ suggests precedence
in time, and our knowledge of the human mind and of its irreducible
capacities comes out only in the course of experience. Much that has
been called _a priori_, that is implicit in experience, did not become
explicit until after prolonged experience. The Greek thinkers before
Aristotle doubtless thought in terms of syllogism, but it was not until
Greek science had attained a certain ripeness that Aristotle was able
to dissect out the logic which had previously been employed more or
less unconsciously.

Instead, therefore, of using the term _a priori_, which gives rise to
the two-fold misapprehension of an _a priori_ knowledge and of temporal
precedence, and instead of throwing out the child with the bath, that
is, of ignoring the independent part played by our mental constitution
in building up experience, and in affording us the conviction of
certainty, and of reality, it is highly desirable that a new term be
found to take the place of _a priori_. The term “functional finality”
suggests itself to me for this purpose.[29]

My field is ethics. I am entirely desirous of sticking to my own last,
that is, dealing with such concepts as the data of my subject force
upon me. I do not wish to trespass, or to seem to trespass, on the
domain of my neighbors. Hence in dealing with functional finalities I
must deal with them primarily as they appear in the field of ethics,
that is, in the domain of the actions and reactions of human beings
upon one another. Irreducible _principia_ of ethics are the functional
finalities, which prescribe rules for such intercourse, or better which
create a scheme of ideal intercourse whereby the conduct of men shall
be measured and determined.

I must, however, glance for a moment at fields outside my own, for the
purpose not of controversy but of elucidation; not to deal with the
subject matter of my neighbors, but to mark off my own more definitely.
What then, I ask, is the most general expression by which to designate
the singularities of the human mind, the principles on which it acts,
its immutable modes of behavior, the invariants that recur amid all
the complex varieties of its processes? The principal invariants are
the positing of a manifold of some kind, and the apprehending of
that manifold as coherent. The manifold is not given, but is posited
by the mind. The positing is a mental function, just as much as the
apprehending of the plurality as coherent is a mental function. The
particular manifolds of space and time experience are said to be given,
but they would not be received by the mind were not the function of
manifold-positing prepared to apprehend them.

In recent physical science the notion of the manifold plays a
conspicuous rôle. Subtle speculations are employed to define the
kinds of manifold which the physicist finds opportune, and the kind
of unity of which these manifolds are respectively capable. The two
terms mentioned are themselves the most abstract conceivable, and
naturally, that which is here taken to underlie all the constructive,
world-building activity of the mind in every possible direction can
only be expressed in the most sublimated language. But the notions
themselves, or rather the acts of the mind, the functions designated,
are rich and replete with concrete utility when applied to subject
matter in the different fields.

Wherever we turn we find that the assurance of reality depends on the
joint use of the two principles mentioned, the joint operation of
the two kinds of mental action; that is to say—on the positing of a
manifold and on the simultaneous apprehension of the subject matter to
which it relates as coherent, as unified.

The simultaneity, the inseparableness of the two mental acts or
functions in regard to the same subject-matter is the essential point
on which hangs the web of the argument here submitted. Thus in geometry
space must be regarded as a continuum, unbroken, uninterrupted at any
point, and at the same time the same space must be treated as capable
of puncture, of linear and superficial delimitations; that is to say,
of division. That which is one must yet be apprehended as divided;
that which is divided, or delimitated, must yet be apprehended as one.
The difficulties that arise spring from the vain endeavor to separate
the two inseparable acts—the act of apprehending the manifold of space
_sub specie pluralitatis_, and the act of apprehending it _sub specie
unitatis_. Hence arises the puzzling question: How can that which is
continuous be divided, how can chasms between the parts of space,
however infinitesimal, be bridged? Witness the problem of Zeno, and
the pragmatist solution of it by a demonstration that satisfies us
indeed as to the fact (which no one doubts), but leaves the mental
puzzle as before; and also Bergson’s Method of accounting for division
by a comparison of the inner and the outer flux, wherein he seems to
overlook the difficulty that for the purpose of comparison two points
must be fixed, one in each flux, that is to say, the division in the
flux must be regarded as already existing.

In the physical sciences we are compelled to assume on the one hand
the atomic or granular constitution of matter, in other words,
manifoldness. On the other hand, if “action at a distance” is to be
escaped, we are bound to assume a continuum of some sort like the
ether. Again, in the organic world there is the manifold of structures
and functions, and the unity of organism. To whatever object of
inquiry we give our attention, we find ourselves not only restricted
fundamentally to the two functions described, but we discover that to
their insunderable co-operation we owe whatever of truth we possess.

Now the business of ethics is to define its own subject-matter, that
is to say the particular kind of manifold with which it deals, and the
kind of unity of which that manifold is susceptible. But as I approach
this first goal of my enterprise, there is one obstacle which I must
try to remove out of the way of the reader, before I can hope to win
him to a hospitable consideration of my conclusions. The jointness
or inseparableness of the two acts out of which certainty or reality
issues has created all the difficulties. The fact that the manifold
must be regarded as remaining a manifold, unaltered in its character
as such, not derivative from the One (there is no such One), and that
the unity does not contrariwise result from the manifold in the sense
of springing from or being derived from it;—in other words that we
must see the same landscape of things and events both _sub specie
pluralitatis_ and _sub specie unitatis_—has been the stumbling-block.
The history of philosophy might be written under the two headings: 1,
monistic systems that undertake, collapsing in their futile effort, to
derive the world and its plurality from the One, as if there were such
an One, out of whose bosom philosophy might evoke the many (creational
systems, pantheistic systems, emanation systems, evolution systems); 2,
pluralistic systems that essay, with equal lack of success, to explain
the unity as somehow the offspring of the plurality.

Why then have these systems flourished? Why are these vain undertakings
still renewed? The reason is that we cannot understand the joint action
of the two functions, and the very point where enlightenment is needed
is for us to recognize that no fundamental truths can be understood
by us, that we can only look at them, contemplate and accept them.
The point, I say, where enlightenment is needed is that the habit of
trying to understand is due to a prejudice, to what may be called the
_superstition of causality_.

I shall have to explain this hardy assertion with some care to prevent
misconception. Causality, it will be objected, is the one thread that
leads us through the labyrinth of nature. The search for causes enables
us to become at home in our world by foreseeing events. In what sense
then can it be permissible to speak of the prejudice of causality,
nay, of the superstition of it? With what warrant prescribe a limit to
the aspirations of the human intellect to push its inquiries to the
farthest limit, even so far as to understand the functional finalities
themselves, if such there be?

The answer, succinctly put, is this: explaining or understanding things
means tracing effects to their causes, and this is only one mode, a
somewhat _disguised_ mode, of the joint functional activity of which
I have spoken. The manifold in this case is that of the temporal
sequence of phenomena, of differences due to change of position in
time; and the unity established between them (as for instance energy,
of which the sequent phenomena represent the transformations) is an
ideal, fictive unity, mentally superimposed (real despite its ideal
or imaginary character, because of the necessity we are under to view
the sequent phenomena _sub specie unitatis_). That there is nothing
in the antecedent to compel the sequent to follow has been since the
days of Hume a commonplace in philosophy. That nevertheless there is
such a thing as the prediction of eclipses was made by Kant the basis
of his doctrine of synthesis _a priori_. Be the terms used what they
may, what counts is the fact that the _joint action of two functions,
which itself is inexplicable_, not to be understood, that is, not to be
referred back to a preceding cause (as if there could be such a thing
as a cause why we think in terms of causality) is the foundation of all
so-called understanding.

Moreover causality is an incomplete example of the fundamental
functional process. We never do thoroughly understand; we gain a
certain relief, a certain increased ease of mind by pushing the problem
back a step. And what I have called the prejudice of causality, is the
unwillingness on our part to acknowledge the fact that we are face to
face, in the case of causality, with the inexplicable; that that which
helps us partially to understand (and serves for practical purposes
well enough) is in its nature not to be understood, one of the modes in
which the joint action of the functional finalities manifests itself.

An ultimate principle has been defined as one which is presupposed in
every attempt to account for it. The functional finalities of which I
speak bear the test of this definition. The upshot of it all is that
the constitutive principles of the human mind cannot be explained or
understood, but can nevertheless be verified. And verification, in the
last analysis, means exemplification. If we look at these ultimate
truths, whether in geometry, in physics, or, as we shall later see, in
ethics and æsthetics, as enunciated abstractly, baldly, we confront
them blankly, we are as it were dumbfounded in their presence. They
seem arbitrarily imposed upon us. And why? Because we are endeavoring
to understand them. We have acquired the habit of trying to get hold of
truth by referring back to some antecedent. And therefore we are uneasy
and disconcerted. But the moment we see them exemplified, as in the
constructions of the geometer, in the laws or uniformities established
by the physicist, etc., we are convinced. The subject-matter of ethics
is different. The kind of exemplification is likewise different. But
verification is exemplification in ethics as elsewhere; and this will
be found to mean that the life, the ethical experience, must lead to
the certainty.

And now we have reached the point where a brief discussion of the
ethical manifold and its mode of unification comes up in proper order.

FOOTNOTES:

[26] To rate anyone as an end _per se_ means that in a world conceived
as perfect his existence would be indispensable. The world we know may
not be perfect, is not perfect, but we do conceive of an ideal world
that is. And to ascribe to anyone the quality of worth, to denominate
him an end _per se_, is to place him into that world, to regard him as
potentially a member of it.

[27] For a creature endowed with different senses, and having a mind
unlike our own, the world would be a totally different world.

[28] To deny such _a priori_ knowledge of the object called God is
not to deny that the production of this object is due to constructive
principles of human thinking; while, in turn, to assert the functional
derivation of the God-idea is not to validate that idea itself as
permanent and inexpugnable. It may have owed its origin to a permanent
disposition of the mind, and yet be fallible because of the historical
conditions under which it arose and the defective data in which it was
expressed. By way of illustration we might apply the same reflection
to the Ptolemaic astronomy. The mathematical processes by which this
astronomy was constructed may be traced to permanent singularities of
human thinking, yet the astronomical theory of Ptolemy is not on that
account _a priori_ true.

[29] It must, however, be understood that the formula in which a
finality is expressed is not itself a final formula. The business of
definition is precarious, liable to error and dogmatic abuse, and
the formulas of finality are to be constantly subjected to revision.
Possible and even probable abuse, however, does not warrant the
negative attitude at present taken; it does not justify the revulsion
of feeling against _A Priorism_ which is just now general. Exasperation
with absolutism does not of itself justify recourse to the opposite
extreme of pragmatism.




