CHAPTER III

PRELIMINARY REMARKS ON WORTH, AND ON THE REASONS WHY THE METHOD
EMPLOYED BY ETHICS MUST BE THE OPPOSITE OF THAT EMPLOYED BY THE
PHYSICAL SCIENCES


The moral equality of men is a corollary of the attribution of worth
to all men. Did we not ascribe worth to them, there is no reason why
we should not make servile use of them. But there are admittedly
formidable difficulties in the way of attributing worth to human nature.

The first and most obvious of these is the existence of repulsive
traits in human beings, such as sly cunning, deceit, falsehood,
grossness, cruelty: _homo homini lupus_! Secondly, there is the
prevalent error of employing ethical terms, like good and bad, to
denote the merely attractive and repellent traits.[23] Attractive
traits, such as gentleness, sweetness, kindness, a sympathetic
disposition, are, in those fortunate enough to possess them, pleasing
accidents of nature. We delight in them, but have no reason to ascribe
the superlative quality of worth to those who possess them. If the evil
that men do revolts us, the so-called good in them does not give us the
right to surround their heads with the nimbus of worth. Thirdly, and
perhaps even more deterrent than the ever-present spectacle of evil
and the inadequacy of so-called goodness, is the commonplaceness, the
cheapness of men.

It must be admitted that, with rare exceptions, our estimates of others
are apt to be low rather than lofty. Can we ascribe worth to those
whom we hold cheap? The reason of our habitual under-estimation of
fellowmen I think is that we regard them from the standpoint of the
use to which we can put them, and do not see them from the inside,
as it were, in the light of the marvelous energies of which human
nature is the scene. The grossest matter, the most ordinary physical
happenings, reveal to the instructed eye of the scientist the play of
forces which it taxes the most powerful intellects in some measure to
apprehend and describe. Yet these miracles escape the dull senses of
those of us who deal with the forces of nature from the point of view
of their immediate use. We turn on the electric light, but have little
more than a crude surmise of the things that the word electricity
meant to Faraday, Clerk Maxwell, or Hertz. And as we turn on the
electric light, so we turn on our fellowmen, as it were, to use them.
The thought of the poet—“What a piece of work is man, how infinite
in faculty!” occurs to us only at scattered moments. And yet things
transpire in the inner life of human beings far more marvelous than the
chemical processes or the flux of electric waves, did we but attend to
them. There is in particular one kind of energy to which the quality
of worth may well attach itself. It is unlike the physical forces; it
is not a transformed mode of mechanical energy. It is _sui generis_,
underivative, unique; it is synonymous with highest freedom; it is
power raised to the Nth degree. It is ethical energy. To release it
in oneself is to achieve unbounded expansion. Morality, as commonly
understood, is a system of rules, chiefly repressive. Ethical energy,
on the contrary, is determined by the very opposite tendency; a
tendency, it is true, never more than tentatively effectuated under
finite conditions. And because the energy is unique, it points toward
a unique, irreducible, hence substantive entity in man, from which it
springs. This entity is itself incognizable, yet the effect it produces
requires that it be postulated. The category of substance, which is
almost disappearing from science, is to be reinstalled in ethics.
Ethics cannot dispense with it. This, as a prelude, may suffice to
indicate the path along which we shall proceed.


_The Reason Why the Method of Ethics Must Be the Opposite of the Method
Employed by the Physical Sciences_

Physical science begins from the bottom and builds upwards. It analyzes
phenomena into their elements, and thereupon seeks to combine these
elements into structures that shall correspond to experience. In this
business it never comes to a finish. Its analysis of the elements is
provisional. Every element is hypothetical. Indeed it is plain in the
nature of the case that no element can be ultimate. An element is a
unit, and every empirical unit necessarily conceals in its bosom a
plexus of which it is the unification. The very idea of unit requires
for its complement a manifold of some kind. In hypothetical units, or
ideal constructs that have for their purpose to lead to the discovery
and arrangement of real phenomena, science abounds. Atoms, electrons,
energy conceived as a substance by Ostwald, Spencer’s physiological
units, are examples.

The results achieved by science are never more than approximations in
the sense that the units, the bricks with which the house is built, are
liable to be rejected, and the constructions achieved are subject to
revision.

The point however which I wish to emphasize is that the scientist is
satisfied of the truth, the reality of its partial results. Newton,
for instance, in formulating the law of gravitation has, so to speak,
marked off a strip of reality. The ground covered cannot be lost; when
some natural law is enunciated, the proper conditions for its discovery
and verification having been observed, a sure footing in reality has
been gained, science standing to this extent on _terra firma_, though
beyond the domain within which the law applies the phenomena may be
heaving and billowing like the sea.

Now the question I am intent upon is, Why is it possible for science
to be content with partial acquisition? Why does it profess to know
positively a part without knowing the whole? And why can ethics not
take a step without an ideal of the whole?

Kant’s chief purpose in the _Critique of Pure Reason_ was to vindicate
the certainty of the physical knowledge of a part as being compatible
with total ignorance of the whole. The older metaphysics was engaged
in the attempt to supply the whole, to sketch it out in order to
give certainty to the part that is within the reach of science. The
older metaphysics said to science: You have in hand the conditioned,
but remember the conditioned depends on the unconditioned. Unless,
therefore, you round out what you possess, with the help of the
unconditioned, the certainty you seem to have within the field of the
conditioned disappears. Again, science traces causes, and the older
metaphysicians insisted that the whole chain of causes hangs in air
unless it be attached to a first cause. Now Kant’s _Critique of Pure
Reason_ really amounts _in nuce_ to this: you do not require the whole
in order to explain the part. Link the partial phenomena together in a
certain way, a way dependent on the joint action of the space and time
intuitions and the categories, and you will gain the desired certainty.
The certainty is in the linkage. We may add link to link of the chain
of reality without troubling to consider by what piers it is supported
or on what shore the piers rest—if indeed there be piers and shores at
all. The bridge hangs over the River of Time and we can safely travel
on it. How we get on to this bridge we do not know, and where we shall
leave it we cannot know either.

It is a mistake to speak of Kant as a rationalist pure and simple. When
he expelled the older metaphysics he antagonized pure rationalism.
The older metaphysics held that the mere existence of the conditioned
proves the existence of the unconditioned, requires the unconditioned.
In Kant’s answer to this lies the gist of his enterprise in philosophy:
You are quite right, he says, that the _idea_ of the conditioned
requires the idea of the unconditioned, logically, rationally. But
observe well, nature is not just logical or rational. There is an
irrational element in it, namely, extended manifold and temporal
sequence. Juxtaposition and sequence are irrational, because, if I
interpret him rightly, in the case of each the relation presented to
the mind is that of parts outside each other—in the one case alongside,
in the other before and after; while in the logical or rational
relation the parts are implicit in the whole as in the case of the
premises of a syllogism and the conclusion, the relation of a genus to
the species, the universal to the particular.

We have in nature, according to Kant, a partnership between the
irrational and the rational factors. And thereupon he proceeds to
argue that we impose laws on nature, understanding thereby that we get
hold of reality or objectivity in so far as we are able to imprint
the rational element upon the irrational. The positing of the thing
_per se_, which has proved a stumbling-block to many, is no more than
a confession that we shall never succeed entirely in this business of
subjecting the irrational to the rational factor. The thing _per se_ is
the X that remains over when the rational function has done its utmost.
A thing, a real object, is that which is imprinted with, penetrated
with, rationality. The manifolds of space and time, of juxtaposition
and sequence are incapable of completely receiving this imprint, that
is, of completely responding to our quest for reality, and this their
incompetency is expressed in the notion of the thing _per se_.

To return to the main question as to the difference between the method
by which science proceeds and the reverse method prescribed to ethics,
I ask, Why is absolute knowledge of nature impossible? The answer
is, Because absolute knowledge would mean the completely rational
construction of nature, and this is prevented by the irrational element
existing in it. But why has the relative knowledge we possess the
character of certainty? Why are we sure of the law of gravitation? Why
are we justified in saying that science within certain limits plants
her foot on _terra solida_? Because at certain points the sense data do
coincide with the rational requirements. There are recurrent phenomena
of such a kind, coupled together in such a way, that each is capable of
mathematical measurement, and that the sequence of the one after the
other can therefore be predicted.

Nature might have been arranged quite otherwise. The time spans might
have been so long, as to prevent our observing the recurrences. A
day-fly cannot observe the periodicity of the earth’s revolution around
its axis. The fact however that there is this partial correspondence
between human rationality and the unknown nature of things is a bare
fact, incapable of explanation.[24] The answer, then, I take it, is:
our knowledge of nature is relative, which means incompletely rational,
because of the foreign element in nature unamenable to the operation
of the rational, the synthetic, function. This relative knowledge is
none the less certain, that is, in some sense absolute, because of
the partial coincidence of the phenomena of nature and the synthetic
processes of the mind.

With this degree of certainty we must perforce content ourselves, in
dealing with outside nature. In trying to understand and interpret
that which is not ourselves, we hit upon barriers which cannot be
transcended, upon a foreign factor which opposes itself to our
endeavors. But it is otherwise in the sphere of conduct. Here, if there
is to be certainty at all, in regard to right as distinguished from
wrong, if there is to be such a thing as right in the strict sense,
we cannot content ourselves with the paradoxical, relative-absolute
just described. For here we not merely interpret but act, and we must
possess an ideal plan of the whole if we are to be certain of our
rightness in any particular part of conduct. _For in conduct there is
no such partial coincidence between the rational and the irrational as
in the case of physical law._ There is not a single partial rule of
conduct, neither “Thou shalt not kill” nor “Thou shalt not lie,” nor
any other that, taken by itself, is of itself ethically right. It may
be right, it may be wrong. It takes its ethical quality from the plan
of conduct as a whole, and without reference to the whole it is devoid
of rightness.[25]

I have thus indicated the ground of the distinction between the method
of science and the method of ethics, a distinction, it is true, to
which Kant himself did not adhere. Partial coincidence of the rational
with the irrational is expressed in physical law; absence of such
concurrence destroys any attempt to build up an ethical theory on the
empirical method. We cannot plant our feet on the part, gaining there
the sense of certainty: we must creatively conceive the ideal of the
whole and educe every partial mode of ethical conduct from that.

But how shall we proceed in the construction of such an ideal, for it
is obvious that knowledge, in the scientific sense of the word, is
entirely out of the question?

FOOTNOTES:

[23] See the more extended remarks on this subject in Book III.

[24] In Kant’s view the rational element is projected on the
irrational. In this way spatial juxtaposition is ideally transformed
into a spatial continuum. In the same manner temporal sequence is
ideally changed into a uniform temporal flux. Without the former,
geometry could not have established its propositions; without the
latter Galileo could not have measured the fall of the stone.

[25] The ethical character of acts depends on the worth of the agent
and the object. Is it right to kill or to enslave a fellowman? We do
not hesitate to kill an animal, or to harness horses to vehicles, or to
use them as beasts of burden. Why not kill men, or use them as beasts
of burden in like manner?—Only because they possess a worth which gives
them a different standing.

Is it on grounds of sympathy that I should observe the so-called moral
rules? But if I am not sympathetic by nature, why should I be subject
to censure in case I refrain from displaying a tenderness which I do
not feel? Why should I sympathize with the pleasures and pains of
fellow human beings any more than with the pleasures and pains of
inferior sentient creatures, unless men have worth? And worth, as will
appear in the subsequent chapters, signifies indispensableness in a
perfect whole. No detached thing has worth. No part of an incomplete
system has worth. Worth belongs to those to whom it is attributed in
so far as they are conceived of as not to be spared, as representing a
distinctive indispensable preciousness, a mode of being without which
perfection would be less than perfect.

So that morality depends on the attribution of worth to men, and
worth depends on the formation in the mind of an ideal plan of the
whole—or instead of a complete plan let me say more precisely a rule of
relations whereby the plan is itself progressively developed.




