CHAPTER III

BEREAVEMENT


When we reflect on what actually happens in cases of bereavement, we
shall find great diversity in different situations. It may be that the
deceased person has led a worthless life, and that the grave is allowed
to close over him without much regret. Nevertheless, the honor due to
worth that _never appeared in him_ ought to be shown. In the worst
cases we may not treat human beings like animals. Besides, there are
generally one or more persons who seem to have an unreasoning natural
affection for the wretched being, and so he does not go wholly without
the tribute of tears. Others, like sufferers from cancer, pass through
days, weeks, months of acute pain before they die. In their case it is
said that death comes as a relief, and often the final relief from the
suffering obscures the loss.

Again, in most men’s lives there is an upper and an under side. Though
the public career of statesmen, poets, artists may be dazzling, yet
their faults or obliquities are probably well enough known to those
who have seen them at close range. Obituaries are seldom truthful.
Sometimes, however, the reverse happens; men whose names are held up
to public obloquy are not always as black as they are painted. Their
worst side becomes known to the public, yet they sometimes possess
wonderfully fine traits.

Very pathetic is the mourning for a baby, and its unfulfilled promise,
or for a defective child, long a burden, yet strangely grieved for when
its feeble little flame of life is extinguished.

The most poignant sorrow is that which cannot be communicated to others
or shared by others, because the tie severed by bereavement, like
that of husband and wife, is between two only. The loss by death of
a beloved life companion is apt to lead to an inconsolable state of
mind, because in this relation, when finely interpreted, the empirical
and the spiritual appear almost to coincide. The ethical rule, Live
in the life of another, live so as to enhance to the highest degree
the possibilities of another, seems almost no longer a counsel of
perfection but an actual experience. Hence the utter grief into which
the sundering of the tie is apt to plunge the survivor. On the other
hand, Jonathan Edwards said on his deathbed to his wife: “Our relation
has been spiritual, and therefore is eternal.” And there is indeed an
element of eternality in marriage, only it is not the sex relation as
such that is or can be conceived of as eternal. It is not man and woman
in their empirical form to which this attribute belongs. Marriage is
the sign; the spiritual relation that which is signified.[48]

It may be objected that marriage being a tie strictly between two, one
can hardly think without repugnance of an equally intimate, nay, far
more intimate, relation with all spiritual beings whatsoever. Yet the
spiritual relation is one in which the ethical being is conceived to be
in touch with each of the infinite beings that comprise the spiritual
universe, pouring its essential life into them, and receiving theirs in
return. Is not then the sign incompatible with and contradictory to the
thing signified? But it is not of the multitude of mortal men and women
surrounding us that we think when we speak of the eternal hosts. From
this surrounding swarm of mortals, we retreat, taking refuge in the
inmost privacy which we share with one other only. Yet this very inmost
intimacy, so far as it is pure, is the emblem of that pure intercourse
of essential being with essential being in which we are related to
all.[49]

Following up the subject of bereavement, we find the following
consolations employed:

The first to be mentioned is, “Bow to the inevitable.” I include
this because frustration is inevitable, on account of the discrepancy
between the finite and the infinite order, and because we are to use
inevitable frustration for the purpose of experiencing the reality
of the ideal. But without this use in mind, the inevitable presents
itself as a mere blind necessity, in which we can see neither right nor
reason, a hostile doom that simply crushes us. The psychological effect
of the thought of an event as inevitable, it is true, is in any case
calming, but the tranquillity thus induced is a heavy and hopeless one.
And those who accept the inevitable in this stupefying manner often
become meaner in their way of living. The light of life is for them
extinguished. They put up perhaps with creature comforts, or with work
that merely keeps the mind occupied, and prevents it from fretting the
wound, thus allowing slow time to cicatrize it.

There is, however, a larger way in which a materialist may regard the
inevitable. The world in his view being a vast machine, he may, as it
were, identify himself with the machine, and thereby rise in thought
superior to the injury it inflicts on him. But though we can imagine
someone thus deadening his feelings when he himself is the victim, we
cannot well conceive of the same remedy applying when a beloved person,
say an only child, is being crushed under the Juggernaut car of the
world-machine. _The great test of one’s philosophy of life is whether
it helps us in the case of those whom we love, rather than in the case
of the sufferings we experience in our own person._

A second consolation is: Remember the universality of sorrow. Look
around you, behold the vast multitude who are suffering like you;
remember the countless generations who have suffered in the past,
think of the generations to come that will suffer in like manner. Such
are some of the consolations of the choruses in the Greek tragedies.
Latent perhaps in this mournful view of the facts of existence is
another aspect of the matter, namely, the uprising from frustration
toward ideal realization. And in so far as this other uplifting view is
indeed latent or suggested, the thought of the universality of sorrow
has an ennobling effect. On the other hand, without the explication of
what may be regarded as implicit in them the consolations of the Greek
choruses are inexpressibly saddening.

A third and active variant of the former consolation is: Seek to
mitigate the sorrow and trouble of thy fellow-sufferers. Appease the
passion of thine own grief by compassion and the works to which it
leads. And by as much as activity of any kind is better than passivity,
or mere feeling, by so much is this third kind of consolation better
than the ones above mentioned. But at bottom the same criticism applies
to it. It leaves still unanswered the question, To what end this
suffering both of others and of oneself? Not Why? is the question,
but To what end? How bereavement may be used so as to bring it into
relation with the final end of life?

A fourth consolation is the popular belief in immortality. This
is a resort to supernaturalism, and the supernatural should ever
be distinguished from the supersensible. Immortality as popularly
held involves the continued existence in some empirical form of the
essential, central entity in man. For the suggestion that new organs
may replace the wornout terrestrial body does not alter the empirical
character of the conception. The new organs are still conceived in some
vague fashion as similar to those with which we are acquainted.

Finally, my own interpretation of consolation may be set forth in
contrast to all these. Again I say that for the bereaved, as for the
sick, there is business in hand, there is a task to be performed, a
work to be done. What is it? Let me endeavor to explain. The spiritual
nature of man is incognizable, only the plan of the relations between
spirit and spirit being given. Yet to think of a relation at all
we must think of entities or objects between which it subsists. Of
the spiritual part of our fellow-beings, therefore, we are bound to
fashion mentally a symbolic image, one that shall stand for the real
object, the spiritual nature, though we are well aware that it does not
adequately express it.

When the beloved person is no longer visibly present, the work we do
upon the symbolic image of him is not to cease. We are to review, to
summarize the whole existence of a departed friend, as we have probably
never done while he was with us. We are to get the total perspective of
his life, to see the fine qualities standing out more distinctly; to
seize the net result of his existence so far as those character traits
are concerned which in him were most analogous to spiritual traits.
This image we can now ideally contemplate with the advantage that none
of the actual infirmities of his nature can mar it, and that no future
events can henceforth alter our impression. The work of clarifying
the image of our friend goes on unimpeded. And our own activity in
the process of purifying his image of all that was merely fallible in
him benefits us in return. The effect of this activity of ours on the
datum of his life is our permanent gain. Thus both what he was and what
he was not is stimulative. While he lived we performed the function
of elimination and concentration with a view of producing progress in
him and in ourselves jointly. Progress, induced by us, so far as he
is concerned, for all we know is at an end. Progress so far as we are
concerned is assured by the activity we continue to expend as long as
we live on his memory. And the memory, or the image, stands for the
beloved person. There is real mental intercourse wherever there is a
movement of one mind towards the outgoings of another, even though the
retroactive relation be suspended. The beloved person benefits me,
though I no longer benefit him, except indirectly so far as in my own
life I possibly expiate his shortcomings and in so far as I bestow on
other living persons the advantage I receive from my mental intercourse
with him.[50]

What, then, is the business in hand? What is the work to be done?
Plainly to tie anew the threads that were broken, to bring it about
that the loss, infinitely painful though it be, shall lead to gain,
to substitute for the mixed relation of touch and sight the purely
spiritual relation.

One more remark must be made in connection with the above. There is
at present a tendency to dishonor the past in comparison with the
future. Interest seems to lie in what lies ahead. Hence a breathless,
forward-urging mood. One consequence of this is that the dead are less
honored than of old. Within a single generation, for instance, I have
seen not a few eminent persons in the city of New York pass away who
up to the time of their death and in their obituaries were greatly and
justly praised. I have hardly ever seen their names publicly mentioned
since. Already they seem practically forgotten. In our national history
likewise only a few of the most eminent are remembered. In like manner
in families, the names even of father and mother are seldom mentioned
by their surviving adult children, and ancestors at second remove
are barely remembered. Now excessive reverence for the past, as in
China, is a mark of stationariness. A retrospective point of view
is inconsistent with progress. Our face must necessarily be turned
toward the future. And yet forgetfulness of those human beings whom
we have known, and who represented to us while they lived much of the
best that life had to give, seems inhuman and incredible. It is true
that I have drawn a sharp distinction between the empirical selves
and those spiritual selves which the former for a time enshrined. The
empirical selves have now disappeared. The gleam of love in the eye,
the luster of beauty, whether of form or of expression, that touched
for a season the sacred features, have vanished. On the other hand, the
spiritual self as a member of the spiritual universe is confessedly
past knowing and past imagining. On what object then shall memory
dwell? It may dwell on the empirical self in so far as it was the sign
of the thing signified, in so far as the being we knew and loved was
to us convincing of the reality of that spiritual world which itself
is incognizable by sense or mind. The greatest boon any human being
can confer on another is to serve him in attaining the end for which
he exists; and the supreme end for us all is the realization of our
interrelation with the infinite community of spirits. The woman whom
we say we loved, we loved precisely because she revealed to us that
spiritual galaxy—because she was a Beatrice, ascending with us, and
opening to our sight the eternal expanses.

FOOTNOTES:

[48] In the New Testament, despite the preference expressed for
celibacy, the relation of the bridegroom to the bride is used
metaphorically to represent that of Christ with the church, and among
the mystics the same figure represents the union of Christ with the
believing soul.

[49] I call attention to the difference between the view here expressed
and that of Emerson in the last paragraphs of his _Essay on Love_,
where he says: “Our affections are tents of a night. Our warm loves
are clouds that pass over the firmament of mind with its overarching
vault, its galaxies of immutable lights. In the personal relations
we are put in training for impersonal submergence and absorption in
God.” In my own view the infinite community of spiritual beings that
takes the place of God consists altogether of personalities. Godhead,
if you choose to apply that name to this infinite society, is not a
person but a community of personalities. Personality is not drowned in
the impersonal. On the contrary, the individual becomes a personality
through his relation to his associates in the eternal life.

[50] I have real intercourse with Aristotle and Kant, as the outgoings
of their minds are still effectual in me—more vital intercourse than
with many of those who surround me.




