CHAPTER VI

THE MEANING OF FORGIVENESS


In the last chapter we treated the imputation of evil to the innocent.
We must now consider the right attitude toward actual evildoers.

In discussing sin, one of the points emphasized was that of the moral
solidarity between the individual and society. The moral interest of
the individual is always identical with the moral interest of society;
and, on the other hand, the failure of the individual is a social
failure. The human race sags morally at the point of some particular
member of it.

Again, we defined the task of humanity as the incessant endeavor
to embody the ideal spiritual order in the finite sphere of human
relations. This effort meets both with partial success and with
failure. The gain derived by the human race from its experiences,
its labors, its sufferings, is that the spiritual universe in its
unattainable elevation and sublimity is more and more revealed to
the inner eye; in other words, that by way of effort and recoil, and
renewed effort and renewed recoil from the finite, the infiniteness of
the infinite world is realized. The essential point is that the boon of
realization must be gained both through partial success and failure.
Now sin is failure; everyone fails, everyone is convicted of sin. There
is no exception. In insisting on this point the Christian account
is exact. Only it should be remembered that sin or failure itself is
one of the instrumentalities by which the end of human existence is
achieved. These preliminaries being understood, certain propositions
may be brought forward as to the treatment of sin, and in particular as
to repentance, punishment and forgiveness.

Repentance is recoil, recoil not from the bad act and its painful
consequences, but from the principle underlying the act. Every kind of
sin is an attempt in some fashion to live at the expense of other life.
The spiritual principle is: live in the life of others, in the energy
expended to promote the essential life in others. Moral badness is
self-isolation, detachment. Spirituality is consciousness of infinite
interrelatedness.

Punishment, rightly regarded, is a name for the steps taken to lead the
unrepentant up to the point of repentance, _i.e._, up to the recoil.
Punishment is itself criminal when undertaken for any other object.
Punishment on the vindictive _lex talionis_ theory, or on the bare
deterrent theory, is excluded. Reformatory punishment as commonly
understood is no less inadequate, because it restricts the idea of
reformation as a rule to the externals of conduct.[58]

The steps taken to lead the evildoer up to the point of repentance
are to be criticised from this point of view. Transient or prolonged
separation from ordinary society may be necessary. Severe discipline
may be indispensable. Capital punishment, however, is wholly out of
the question, since the prevention of the crime now being impossible,
the achievement of the spiritual gain is the point to be aimed at. But
the most effectual aid in promoting repentance is faith in the better
nature of the wrongdoer, in that spiritual principle resident within
him which no crime committed by him can wholly crush, and which in
the most apparently hopeless cases is still to be presumed. But faith
in the good that persists in those whom we call bad must go hand in
hand with the acknowledgment of the bad that remains unexpurgated in
those whom we call good. The prison reformer who poses as impeccable
and righteous himself can never win the confidence of the poor human
derelicts with whom he has to deal nor effect in them the desired
change. He must share with them the conviction of sin if he would
impart to them the power of the resilience which he experiences within
himself.

Faith in the potential power of goodness resident in the evildoer is
often confounded with forgiveness. The distinction between the two,
however, should not be obliterated. Faith is help proffered from the
outside to effectuate the inner change. Forgiveness is a record of the
fact that the change has actually taken place, and belief that it is
likely to be permanent. Forgiveness, in the mind of spiritually-minded
persons, takes place almost automatically when the conditions on which
it depends are fulfilled. So long as he remains unrepentant a man
cannot be forgiven, although we may have the conviction that it is in
his power to repent and the earnest desire to bring about the change
in him. Jesus on the Cross says: “Forgive them, for they know not what
they do.” Perhaps “open their eyes so that they may see the Light” may
be the more just interpretation of the meaning—not “forgive” in the
strict sense, for forgiveness is not feasible while the heart of the
offender remains closed.[59]

Both faith and forgiveness are factors in regeneration: the one to
assist in accomplishing the change, the other to assist in making it
permanent. But both the faith and the forgiveness are exceptionally
difficult in the case of our personal enemies. _Enemies in the
spiritual sense there are and can be none._ Every human being, even
one who has done me the most cruel harm, is yet, from another point of
view, a fellow member of the spiritual society. But to discriminate
between the two relations in which the man stands to me—that in which
he is my foe, and the other in which he is my fellow—to be able to put
aside as less important the harm he has done, the suffering he has
forced me to endure, and to desire with perfect sincerity that the
recoil, the transformation, may take place in him, that is the most
searching test of one’s own ethical character.[60]

The forgiveness of personal foes, when complete, establishes a
strangely tender spiritual fellowship between the pardoner and the
pardoned. Both have transcended their normal empirical selves, both
have become partners in a sublime transaction: the one delivered from
the clinging of his baser desires, the other released from his first
crude reaction against evil. They will never forget what they thus owe
to one another. They will continue to walk hand in hand, the one still
leaning, the other supporting and himself unspeakably strengthened by
the support he gives.

Finally, to forgive is not to forget—quite the contrary. To forgive is
to remember the past action, but to remember it as belonging to the
past, as the act of one who has since undergone the great change. The
miracle of the change of water into wine at the feast of Cana would
not have seemed so wonderful to the guests had they not remembered
that what was turned into wine had before been water. To forgive is to
remember that what was water has become wine. And he, too, who has
been forgiven may not forget. The remembrance of the past he will need
as a warning and a safeguard.[61] Not to see the essentially divine
nature in others, and thus also in one’s self is the essence of the
wrong. To teach the guilty to see it is the object of punishment. To
forgive is to declare that what before was ignored is now seen and
known.

FOOTNOTES:

[58] I mean that it is usually considered sufficient, for purposes
of reformation, to bring the wrongdoer up to the average standard of
law-abiding citizenship, to restore him to the bosom of society as a
safe and industrious member. Whereas a person who has had the searching
experience of deep guilt is a candidate for a higher station in the
moral scale. Humanity having fallen in him, he should be helped to rise
to a higher than the average altitude. This at least should be the
aim. Consider the fact that Jesus selected some of his most spiritual
companions from among publicans and harlots.

[59] Compare the words addressed by Sir Thomas More to his judges
when sentence of death had been pronounced upon him—“For though you
have been my judges to condemnation, may we meet merrily hereafter in
everlasting salvation.”

[60] Everyone admires a disinterested prison reformer, one who is able
to see and to call out the good in a so-called bad man; but it is one
thing to be disinterested and generous towards men who have acted badly
towards others, and quite another thing to take the ethical attitude
towards those who have acted wickedly towards oneself. Hence the
touchstone of the character of the prison-reformer is to be found in
the way in which he behaves and feels towards his personal enemies, for
instance, towards those who malignantly attack him and interfere with
the business of prison reform on which he has set his heart.

[61] Perhaps I may add a word as to the forgiveness of those who,
by an extension of meaning, may be called our intellectual enemies.
By intellectual enemies I understand those whose point of view is
radically opposed to our own, whose principles and premises, if
accepted, would render the entire theory of life on which we act,
and on which we found our convictions, untenable. We are apt to be
exasperated in listening to them, or in reading the works in which
they express their opinions. We are apt to feel that there is no room
in the world in which we live for such ideas as theirs, that we and
they cannot exist side by side. The bitter feuds of rival religious
factions, the notorious _odium theologicum_, and in more recent times
the thinly veiled animus shown in the controversies of philosophical
schools are all alike traceable to this source. Racial antagonisms,
too, are partly to be accounted for on the same ground. There are
certain primary attitudes of mind, modes of feeling and directions of
impulse, the correctness of which we cannot demonstrate just because
they are primary, and which we all the more vehemently assert when we
find them disputed. Love your intellectual enemies, may usefully be
added to the stock of moral commandments; keep an open and hospitable
mind to opinions and ways of acting, thinking and feeling which
naturally repel you. And it will help us to discipline ourselves in
this difficult behavior if we reflect that the views most contrary to
our own are nevertheless sure to contain some element of truth which
we cannot afford to disregard, and which will serve the purpose of
correcting and supplementing such truth as we may ourselves possess.




