CHAPTER VII

THE SUPREME ETHICAL RULE: ACT SO AS TO ELICIT THE BEST IN OTHERS AND
THEREBY IN THYSELF[62]


It is difficult to see the potentially divine nature in men when masked
by the forbidding traits which human beings so often exhibit.

A number of vital considerations will now have to be emphasized as
pertinent to the subject we are dealing with.

The first point is that the character of every person contains contrary
elements.[63] Let the two kinds of qualities be called the fair and
foul, or more simply still the plus and minus traits. The bright
qualities, the plus traits, are undoubtedly more predominant in some,
the dark or minus traits in others. But potential plus qualities exist
in the worst characters, and potential minus traits may be surmised,
and on scrutiny will be found, in those whom the world most admires.

A second point is mentioned as an hypothesis not indeed as yet
verified, but I believe verifiable, namely, that certain defined minus
traits will be found to go with certain plus traits. Wherever bright
qualities stand out we are likely to meet with _corresponding_ dark
qualities or dispositions, and conversely. There are, I am persuaded,
uniformities of correspondence between the plus and minus traits, and
it would be of greatest practical help in judging others and ourselves
if these uniformities could be worked out. A kind of chart might then
be made, a description of the principal types of human character,
with the salient defects and qualities that belong to each. Extensive
statistical treatment of a multitude of biographies would lay the
foundation for such an undertaking; also sketches of the prominent
characteristics of nations, like those furnished by Fouillée, would be
utilized. Also the study of the character traits of primitive races as
partially carried out by Waitz in his _Anthropology_ and the character
types of animals, so far as accessible to observation, might be used
for comparison. Instructed in this manner, we should, on coming into
contact with others, either on their attractive or repellent side,
be prepared to expect and to allow for the opposite traits. And we
should learn to see ourselves in the same manner; we should see our
empirical character as it really is, the dark traits side by side with
the bright. The courage to wish to know the truth about one’s self is
rare, and when the revelation comes or is forced upon us, it often
breeds a kind of sick self-disgust and despair. The saint at such times
in moral agony declares himself to be the worst of sinners. He has
striven to attain a higher than the average moral level, and behold
he has slipped into only deeper depths. The minister of religion, the
revered teacher, the political and social leader, when abruptly shocked
into self-examination by some evidence of grossness or deviousness
in themselves, no longer to be glossed over or explained away, are
fated to go through the same ordeal. A profound despondency is the
consequence. It is not only the badness now exposed, but the previous
state of hypocrisy that seems in the retrospect intolerable. Some
persons live what is called a double life in the face of the world.
But who is quite free from living a double life in his own estimate?
Achilles said of himself ἄχθος ἀροῦρας (“cumberer of the ground”). Many
a man has echoed that cry with a bitterness of soul more poignant than
that which Achilles felt when he uttered the words.

Now the principle of the duality[64] of character traits, or as we may
also designate it, the principle of the polarity of character, applies
to our natural or empirical character, and our empirical character is
not our moral character. The distinction between the two will serve, as
we shall presently see, to rescue us from the state of moral dejection
just described. But first it is indispensable to fix attention on the
natural character, to recognize that we are composite, each and every
one of us, and that the all-important thing to know is which of our
plus qualities go with which of the minus. Here the psychologist
can help us. Here a great field is open for a practical science of
ethology. This would give us a more adequate knowledge of the empirical
character, the substratum in which ethical character is to be worked
out.

Point three opens up a great enlightenment in regard to the whole
subject. It is that the distinction must be drawn, and ever be kept in
mind, between the bright and dark qualities and the virtues and vices.
The bright qualities are not of themselves virtues. The dark qualities
are not of themselves vices. To suppose that they are, to confuse the
bright with virtue and the dark with viciousness, is the most prevalent
of moral fallacies.[65]

A person is found to be kind, sympathetic, gentle, and on this score is
said to be virtuous or good. But gentleness, kindness, a sympathetic
disposition, while they lend themselves to the process of being
transformed into virtues, are not of themselves moral qualities at all,
but gifts of nature, happy endowments for which the possessor can claim
no merit. And sullenness, irascibility, the hot, fierce cravings and
passions with which some men are cursed, are not vices, though it is
obvious how readily they turn into vices as soon as the will consents
to them.

The question becomes urgent: What then is a virtue? The fair qualities
are the basis, the natural substratum of the virtues, the material
susceptible of transformation into virtues. In what does the
transformation consist? When does it take place? The answer is, when
the plus quality has been raised to the Nth degree, and in consequence
the minus qualities are expelled. This result, of course, is never
actually achieved. The concept here presented is a concept of limits.
But in the direction defined lies growth and continuous development
not of but toward ethical personality. In public addresses I have
often said: Look to your virtues, and your vices will take care of
themselves. I can put this thought more exactly by saying: Change your
so-called virtues into real virtues: raise your plus qualities to the
Nth degree. And the degree to which you succeed in so doing you can
judge of by the extent to which the minus qualities are in process of
disappearing.

One or two examples will illustrate the pivotal thought thus reached
in the exposition of our ethical system with respect to its practical
consequences. To raise to the Nth degree is to infinitize a finite
quality, or to enhance it in the direction of infinity. I shall take
two examples, one _self-sacrifice_, the other _justice_, both viewed
in their finite aspect as plus traits requiring to be subjected to the
process of transformation.

The empirical motive of self-sacrifice may be egocentric or altruistic.
In egocentric self-sacrifice, doing for others is a means of exalting
the idea of self to the mind of the doer. He uses others, not as sacred
personalities, worth while on their own account, but subtly exploits
them by benefiting them. He uses them as objects by means of which to
achieve a finer self-aggrandizement. He may indeed go to the utmost
lengths of devotion for his friends. He may perform for them the most
repulsive offices. He may give freely of his means, denying himself
meanwhile comforts and even necessaries in order perhaps to extricate
them from pecuniary difficulties. He may contribute in refined ways
to their pleasure. As a physician he may watch night after night
at the bedside of the sick, foregoing sleep though fatigued to the
point of exhaustion in order to be at hand to mitigate the pains of
the sufferer, jeopardizing his own health in order to assist others
in recovering theirs. Yes, he may even give of his own blood to
renew their ebbing life. In all this he will look for no material
compensation. Gratitude, especially gratitude expressed in words, is
repugnant to him. The lofty image of self which he strives to create
would be marred if any such coarsely selfish motive were allowed to
intrude. All that he requires, but this he does inexorably require,
is that his beneficiaries shall silently confess their dependence on
him, that he shall see the exalted image of himself mirrored in their
attitude, and that they shall move in their orbits as satellites
around his sun. The egocentrism is veiled and easily confounded with
the purest moral disposition. But it is there all the same, and the
proof of it is that the very same person who is thus friendly to his
friends, and an unstinting benefactor to those who pay him the kind
of homage he exacts, is capable of behaving with almost inconceivable
hardness and even cruelty toward others who will not stand in this
subordinate relation to him, or who in any way wound his self-esteem.
Sister Dora, serving enthusiastically in a small-pox hospital, while
neglecting the nearer duties at home, intent on dramatic, histrionic
self-representation, is likewise a palpable instance of egocentric
self-sacrifice.

The self is precious on its own account. The non-self, the other,
equally so. A virtuous act is one in which the ends of self and of
the other are respected and promoted jointly. It is an act which has
for its result the more vivid consciousness of this very jointness.
Egocentric self-sacrifice errs on the one side, the personality of
another being made tributary to the empirical self, despite the actual
benefits conferred. Altruistic self-sacrifice errs in the opposite way.
In it the personality of the self is effaced or made servile to the
interests or supposed interests of another. Not, let me add, to the
real interests, for the spiritual interests are never achievable at the
expense of other spiritual natures. The wife or mother is an instance,
who slaves for husband or children, obliterating herself, never
requiring the services due to her in return and the respect for her
which such services imply, degrading herself and thereby injuring the
moral character of those whom she pampers. An historic instance of the
altruistic error on a larger scale is afforded by the Platonic scheme
of scientific breeding under state supervision, a suggestion revived
in modern times, in which freedom of choice between the sexes, and the
integrity of the personality of those concerned, is sacrificed to the
supposed interests of the community. Nietzsche’s doctrine may possibly
be regarded as a compound of the two errors described, the Superman
representing the egocentrism, while altruistic self-sacrifice, entire
annulment of their personalities is expected of the multitude.

It is easy to distinguish the plus and minus qualities in the
characters of the egocentrist and the altruist: in the one case,
beneficence combined with hardness; in the other, service of others
combined with absence of self-respect.

The second example to be briefly considered is the finite trait
commonly mistaken for justice. A typical illustration of this is
presented by the merchant who ascribes to himself a just character on
the ground that he is punctual in the payment of his debts, that his
word is as good as his bond; or by the manufacturer who entertains
the same opinion of himself because he pays scrupulously the wages
on which he has agreed with his employees.[66] One wonders that so
great and profound a notion as that of justice should be understood
so superficially, restricted to such narrow limits, and that rational
human beings should claim to possess so lofty a virtue on the score of
credentials so inadequate. The reason is that the empirical substratum
of justice is mistaken for the ethical virtue itself. This substratum
may be described as an inborn propensity toward order in things
and in relations, a natural impatience of loose fringes, a certain
mental neatness. Hence insistence on explicitly defined arrangements
and on simple, over-simple formulas. These are favored because they
keep out of sight the complex elements which if considered might
introduce uncertainty and possibly disorder into the situation. Thus
a manufacturer, impatient of looseness, over-rating explicitness,
will be led to grasp at a formula of justice which reduces it to the
bare literal performance of a fixed agreement, no matter with what
unfreedom, owing to the pressure of want, it was entered into by
the wage-earners, and no matter how deteriorating the effect of the
insufficient wage may prove to be on their standard of living.

But it is a far cry from this empirical predisposition to the sublime
ethical idea itself. The idea of “the just” as exemplified in any act
performed by me includes the totality of all those conditions which
make for the development of the ethical personality of others in so far
as it can be affected by my action. To do a just act is to act with the
totality of these conditions in view, in order to promote the end in
view, which is the liberation of personality or at least the idea of
personality in others and in myself.

It is thus evident that a just act—an ideally, perfectly just act,—can
be performed by no man. First because the right conditions of human
development are but very imperfectly known, and are only brought
to light by slow degrees. Secondly because even as to the known
conditions of justice, for instance the abolition of the evils of the
present industrial wage system, a single employer, or even a group of
well-intentioned employers can bring about the desired changes only to
a very limited extent.

Raising the finite quality underlying justice to the Nth degree
therefore means opening an illimitable prospect. The ethical effort
in this, as in all other instances, is destined to be thwarted. It is
an effort in the direction of the finitely unattainable; the effort
itself, with the conviction it fosters as to the reality of that
which is finitely unattainable, being the ethically valuable outcome.
The just man, therefore, in any proper sense of the word, is one who
is convinced of the fact that he is _essentially not a just man_,
and a deep humility as to both his actual and possible achievements
will distinguish him from the “just man” so-called, who arrogates to
himself that sublime attribute on the ground of the scrupulous payment
of debts, or the fulfilment of contracts. Humility in fact will be
found to be the characteristic mark of those who have attained ethical
enlightenment in any direction. It is the outward sign from which we
may infer that the finite quality in them is in process of being raised
to the Nth degree.

I have given these few specific illustrations of my meaning, but what
has been said applies equally to any of the plus qualities. The plus
qualities are the ones which are favorable for transformation into
the infinitized ethical quality. The ethical principle itself is one
and indivisible. Any one of the plus qualities, when ethicized, will
conduce to the same result. From whatever point of the periphery of the
ethical sphere we advance toward the center we shall meet with the same
experience. Thus self-affirmation or egoism when in idea raised to the
Nth degree will reveal that the highest selfhood can be achieved only
when the unique power of a spiritual being is deployed in such a way as
to challenge the unique, distinctive power that is lodged in each of
the infinite multitude of spiritual beings that are partners with us in
the eternal life.

And altruism, or care for others, at its spiritual climax, will
conversely involve the recognition that true service to others can
only be perfectly performed when the power that is resident in
ourselves is exercised in its most vigorous, most spontaneous, and most
self-affirming mode. And as the diverse empirical qualities which we
observe in one another all appear to be modes of or cognate with these
two principal tendencies—the self-affirming and the altruistic—the
method of transfiguring empirical qualities which has been set forth
may be found to apply in every instance.

FOOTNOTES:

[62] Or more exactly act so as to elicit the sense of unique
distinctive selfhood, as interconnected with all other distinctive
spiritual beings in the infinite universe.

[63] The conception underlying Robert L. Stevenson’s sketch of Jekyl
and Hyde is to be taken seriously, and applied without exception
_mutatis mutandis_ to every human being whatsoever (but see footnote p.
76). It is not original with Stevenson. The French, who are perhaps the
keenest psychologists, long ago invented the _apercu_ that everyone has
the defects of his qualities.

[64] The use of the term duality is not intended to exclude the
possibility of multiplicity, but only to call attention to one striking
bifurcation of human character.

[65] Stevenson falls into this error. He confounds Jekyl with the
virtuous and Hyde with the vicious side of character. In reality the
one should stand for the empirical plus traits, the other for the
empirical minus traits.

[66] Contract-keeping is peculiarly the moral rule applicable to
mercantile transactions. To apply it without modification to the
dealings of employers and wage-earners is to intrude the mercantile
standard into the industrial sphere. This is what we are now
witnessing. The industrial standard is only in process of development
and clarification, and the accepted mercantile standard is really in
conflict with it. Among merchants it is of the very essence of their
transactions that a contract shall not be invalidated, despite the
injurious consequences to one or the other party which it may turn
out later on to involve. The security of commercial transactions
would be gone if revision of the contract should be permitted
whenever consequent loss appears. Again, and this is particularly
important, merchants are assumed to be on a footing of equality in
dealing with one another, equally free in accepting or rejecting a
proposed contract, equally competent to take care of their respective
interests. The relation of employers to wage-earners however is not
that of economic equals, but of the economically stronger with the
economically weaker. And this difference is of cardinal importance in
determining the rule of justice as it should obtain in the industrial
sphere. I do not of course intend to imply that an agreement between
employer and wage-earners once made should not as a rule be kept as
scrupulously as that between merchant and merchant. What I affirm is
that in view of the greatness of the injury possibly inflicted upon
the weaker, the economically stronger party is bound at least to share
the responsibility with the weaker for the essential fairness of the
terms of the agreement before it is finally completed. Nay, I would go
a step farther, and say that despite the indispensable condemnation of
contract-breaking, provision should be made for possible revision in
cases where it can be shown that exceptional hardships have appeared,
unforeseen and unforeseeable at the time when the agreement was made.




