CHAPTER VIII

THE SUPREME ETHICAL RULE (_Continued_)


Whatever the steps that have thus far been taken, they are preliminary
to the final step. And the _method_ of “salvation,” the distinctive
feature wherein this ethical system differs from others, may now be
briefly stated. So act as to elicit the unique personality in others,
and _thereby_ in thyself. Salvation is found in the effort to save
others! The difference in method consists in the joint pursuit of the
two ends, that of the other and that of the self. The controlling
idea is that the _numen_ in the self is raised out of potentiality
into actuality by the energy put forth to raise the _numen_ in the
other,—the two divinities greeting each other as simultaneously they
rise into the light.

It is thus that both egoism and altruism are transcended. To be
egoistic is to assert one’s empirical self at the expense of other
empirical selves. To be altruistic is to prefer the empirical selves
of others to one’s own. It is not true that self-realization, keeping
to the empirical signification of self, leads insensibly to altruistic
conduct. The life of the great “self-realizer,” Goethe, may be cited
in evidence of this. Nor is it true that preference for the empirical
self of another necessarily involves maintaining the integrity of one’s
own empirical self. In the empirical field egoism and altruism are
conflicting and mutually contradictory. It is in the spiritual field
that they cease to be so, because both disappear in an object of the
will which includes them both and transcends them both. If this be so,
it may be asked why does the formula we have adopted read: So act as to
elicit the unique personality in others, and thereby in thyself? Why
not conversely:—So act as to realize the unique personality in thyself,
and thereby in others?—since in any case the ends in view are to be
achieved conjointly. The answer is that in the pure spiritual field,
in the world of ideal ethical units, it would make no difference from
which point of view the relation were regarded. But when the spiritual
formula is applied as a regulative rule to the mutual relations
of empirical beings there is a difference. Thus applied, it must
necessarily be couched in such terms as will make the spiritual birth
of the other the prime object, and the spiritual birth of the self its
incidental though inseparable concomitant. This is so because ethics
is a science of energetics, which has to do with the potencies of our
nature in their most affirmative efferent expression. All our higher
faculties are active, and touch for good or ill the lives of those who
surround us. Even the secret thoughts which seem only to affect our own
individuality, inevitably project their influence upon our associates.

Now ethics is a science of _right_ energizing. And since as a matter of
fact we do inevitably energize in such a manner as to affect others,
the fundamental question in ethics is: how are we to regulate the
incidences of our natures that fall upon other lives so that they shall
be right? Since we cannot help acting upon them and influencing them,
how can we act rightly toward them and rightly influence them? And the
rule supplied by the ethical principle is: Act upon their empirical
selves in such a manner as to draw from their empirical natures the
hidden personality, or at least the consciousness of it. And the
repercussion of the rule is: in the attempt to do so you will convert
your own empirical self into a spiritual personality, or at least evoke
in yourself the idea of yourself as a spiritual personality.

Incontestably, in the attempt to change others we are compelled to try
to change ourselves. The transformation undergone by a parent in the
attempt to educate his child is an obvious instance. No parent is a
true parent at the outset. As his perception deepens of the real needs
of the child, which is so entirely dependent on his self-control, on
his wisdom as well as his love, he will realize more and more his
own deficiencies, and seek to remedy them. The same is true of the
professor in relation to his students, of a leader and his followers,
of a religious teacher and those who look to him for advice and help.
In all such relations when rightly understood there is simultaneous
growth on both sides. In the ethical sphere there is a law of
levitation, the contrary of the law of gravitation that obtains in the
realm of matter. We actually tend to rise from a lower to a higher
level in proportion as we bend downward to lift those still lower than
ourselves.




CHAPTER IX

HOW TO LEARN TO SEE THE SPIRITUAL _NUMEN_ IN OTHERS


We now have to consider how to acquire the faculty of seeing the light
that in our fellowmen is often so deeply hidden. We can love only that
which is lovable. If we could see holiness, beauty concealed within our
fellow-beings, we should be drawn towards them by the most powerful
attraction, willingly living in their life, and permitting them to live
in ours. We should then love all men, for we should see in all what is
unspeakably lovable. But the empirical man stands between us and the
spiritual man, and the empirical woman between us and the spiritual
woman; and very often the former are most repulsive, even when their
ugly traits do not affect us personally, even when as spectators merely
we observe how they behave.

Much more is it well-nigh insuperably difficult to worship, in the
sense of holding worthy, those whose characteristic traits directly
offend us, or are perpetual thorns in our side. We must somehow learn
to regard the empirical traits, odious, harmful or merely commonplace
and vulgar as they may be, as the mask, the screen interposed between
our eyes and the real self of others. We must acquire the faculty of
second sight, of seeing the lovable self as the true self. And how
without self deception we can possibly succeed in doing so is the
question.

In the first place, it is my own craving for resurrection out of that
death in life to which I seem doomed that must impel me to penetrate to
the essential life in others. My own spiritual nature is in fetters,
and to burst the fetters, to escape from the prison, there is but one
way. The unique personality, which is the real life in me, I cannot
gain, nor even approximate to, unless I search and go on searching for
the spiritual _numen_ in others.[67] The force which incites me to
penetrate beyond the empirical traits of others, to surmount the walls
which surround the shrine in them, is the consciousness that unless I
do so I am myself spiritually lost, I remain myself spiritually dead.
For it is only face to face with the god enthroned in the innermost
shrine of the other that the god hidden in me will consent to appear.

The expression “death in life” means living, even living passionately
and in a way efficiently, with a sense, nevertheless, underneath of the
hollowness, the futility of the objects of pursuit. The death in life
is the state of discontent that slowly gathers and augments in a man’s
mind as he pursues his customary ends, as he reviews his intellectual
achievement, the books he has written, the pictures he has painted,
the meager outcome of his schemes of social reform, the uncertain
result of his efforts at moral self-development. It is the ensuing
distaste for what he has actually accomplished, the disallowance of
it as in any way ultimately satisfying. And yet this death in life is
itself the well-spring of resurrection, out of which is engendered
an irrepressible yearning of the mind to attach itself to something
greater than all ephemeral interests, to something that has eternal
worth, and is of such a kind as to communicate of its eternal nature to
him who touches it. The god in the other, the eternal personality in
the inner sanctuary of the other, is that object which must be sought
and touched. The cry of my own soul for salvation is the impulse that
leads me on to search for that object. Without the previous discontent,
I shall not seek; without the appraisement of the temporal ends and
interests of man as in the last analysis unsatisfying, I shall not set
out on my quest. Enmeshed in the jungle of the empirical world, I shall
find no exit. I shall remain the victim of the illusion that the peace
I need can be found in the realm of temporal desire. I shall commit
what the theologians called Original Sin, that is, the preferring of
“the works of the Creator to the Creator himself.”

But there is a second force that must act in conjunction with this keen
desire for personal liberation or highest personal self-affirmation.
It is the sense of the _dependence of others_ upon what I can do for
them. Notoriously it is the dependence of the child that evokes in the
parent the noblest qualities of which he is capable, the self-denial,
the incessant willingness to labor for the good of the offspring. It is
the dependence of the student on the teacher, of the disciple on the
master that elicits the latter’s best thought. It is the dependence of
the multitude on the religious teacher that puts him on his mettle. But
if the dependence of others upon oneself is to produce its appropriate
results, that dependence will have to be interpreted in a spiritual
sense. We shall have to think of others as dependent on us not only for
the necessary empirical services we are bound to render them, but those
empirical services themselves will have to be regarded as instruments
by means of which we may render them the highest spiritual service.

This leads to a more _rigorous scrutiny of the notion of service_ than
has hitherto been customary.

The question we must answer, and it is one that has never been
adequately met, is: What is it in the other that we are to serve,
what is the true object of our service? Man is worth while on his own
account. Now no one can pretend that the welfare of the animal part of
man is an object worth while on its own account. To satisfy the hunger
or the thirst of another, or to promote his health is to serve his
body. But the body is the servant of a master. And I am not bound to
serve a servant. If I am to serve the servant at all it must be for the
sake of the master. Who then is the master?

The same argument applies also to the intellect. Human science is after
all but a narrow littoral along the illimitable continent of nescience.
No one who compares the intellectual achievements of mankind with the
problems that remain unsolved will pretend that the accomplishments
of the intellect are worth while on their own account. The mental no
less than the physical part of us has a master. There is an object
higher than the acquisition of knowledge to be attained in the course
of the mind’s endeavors to acquire knowledge, namely the growth of the
scientist towards unique personality, as will be shown in the chapter
on the Vocations in the last Book. Analogous considerations apply to
art and its achievements.

And if someone should say that neither the satisfaction of the body
alone, nor of the intellect, nor of the æsthetic sense, nor of the
affections, but of all of them taken together, is to be the object
of our service, the answer is that this would be merely serving a
whole household of servants, and still not serving the master. This
quite aside from the fact that the ideal of happiness as consisting
in the harmonious gratification of the various elements enumerated is
chimerical. Since some of the most indispensable elements of happiness,
such as freedom from disease and from bereavement, are beyond our
control. While even the higher faculties are far from harmoniously
coöperating, the one-sidedness of human nature being such that a marked
development in one direction is actually incompatible with complete
development in other directions.

Unless, then, there be some master end in everyone’s life, one
paramount to all others, to which all others are subordinate (the
subordination and the renunciation involved being themselves means
of spiritualizing one’s nature) there is no point to the notion of
service. That master end I have defined as the attainment of the
conviction of one’s infinite interrelatedness, the consciousness of
oneself as a member of the spiritual universe, a ἄπαξ λεγόμενον[68]
in the eternal life, a source of energy induplicable in its kind,
which radiates out and touches at the center each one of the infinite
multitude of spiritual associates, and receives from them the effect of
their aboriginally diverse modes of energizing in return.

I have mentioned two motives that impel me to search for the _numen_
in others. The one, the craving for my own liberation from the death
in life, my own desperate outreaching toward salvation; the other, the
sense of the dependence of others upon me. Yes, but this dependence
of theirs I must now interpret as spiritual dependence. I must look
for them also beyond the death in life to life itself. I must have
the courage and the truthfulness to look upon neighbor, friend, wife,
husband, son, daughter _sub specie æternitatis_, that is, as primarily
spiritual beings, and estimate any physical, intellectual or emotional
help I can give them by the consideration whether it does or does not
advance them toward the master end of their being.

Courage of this sort is rare, because precisely the physical, mental
and emotional wants of those who depend on us are the most obvious
and clamorous. I do not of course mean that we should not attend
effectually to their immediate wants. How could we avoid doing so? How
could we neglect the health, the education, etc., of our children? What
I say is that we should acquire the habit of looking upon the immediate
ends as instrumental, and keep in view the supreme end which they in
turn are to serve, and that we should beware of what I have called the
fallacy of provisionalism—that of supposing that we are at liberty to
provide for the lower immediate necessities first, leaving the higher
and the highest needs to be attended to later on.

The manner in which parents commonly plan for the future of their sons
and daughters is perhaps the fittest illustration of the idea I am
here seeking to exclude. During the period of infancy they pilot the
child through the dangers that beset its physical existence. Later on,
what is called education, the preliminary mental training required to
fit the young for the business of life, is felt to be imperative. Then
comes the selection of a vocation with a view of assuring the material
basis of subsistence. Still later, the advancement of the sons or
daughters in their chosen vocations, or their social success occupies
perhaps the parent’s mind. Thoughts of a happy marriage flatter the
parent’s imagination. If the moral side receives attention, the
utmost that as a rule is demanded is that the young person shall not
fall below the average moral standard that happens to prevail in the
community. And it is in such ways as these that we are apt to respond
to the claims of those spiritual beings for whose essential future
welfare we are to so large an extent responsible.

To widen this all too narrow conception of our responsibilities, the
following reflections may be found useful. A father in the last decade
of his life realizes acutely the brevity of his own past existence.
The curve of his life is now rapidly descending. Supposing him to be
nearing seventy, his adult sons and daughters may by this time have
reached the age of thirty or forty. Looking back on the thirty or
more years that separate him from them, and remembering how like a
dream the intervening years have glided by, it may come home to him
with sudden force how soon these, his sons and daughters too, though
now in their prime, will reach the point at which he has arrived. The
error of parents is to think of their grown sons and daughters only
as moving on the upward curve of life. They stop short in imagination
there. They look forward to marriage, vocational success and the like,
as finalities for those who are still young. We ought to remember
that the upward curve in the lives of our children will presently
descend just as ours has descended, that the few decades which separate
them from old age will pass as quickly for them as they have passed
for us,—almost in the twinkling of an eye,—and we ought to ask on
their behalf as we must on ours,—What is to be the result of it all?
What does it all profit? And it is this thought that will turn our
attention for them as for ourselves to the spiritual end which should
be dominant at all times,—in the morning, at noon, and in the evening
twilight of a human existence.

All that has been said has to do with the arousing in us of the desire
to see in others the god, the _numen_, the master end. The wish to
escape from our own death in life, the sense of the dependence of
others on us as interpreted,—these two are the means of stirring us up
to go forth upon the quest, and the seeking is already more than half
the journey. Seek, and ye shall find. But what exactly is it that we
are to seek? What are we to see in the other?—The spiritual nature. But
what is the spiritual nature? I have frequently urged that the lack of
a definite description of the spiritual nature is the chief defect in
ethics up to the present time. This defect I endeavor to supply. The
spiritual nature is the unique nature conceived as interrelated with an
infinity of natures unique like itself. The spiritual nature in another
is the fair quality distinctive of the other raised toward the Nth
degree. We are to paint ideal portraits of our spiritual associates. We
are to see them in the light of what is better in them as it would be
if it were transfigured into the best. We are to go on as long as we
live painting these ideal portraits of them. We are to retouch their
portraits constantly. We are not indeed to obtrude or impose upon
others these sketches, these mental creations of ours, but to propose
them diffidently, reverently, to hold them up as glasses in which our
associates may possibly see themselves mirrored. It is for them to
accept in whole or in part our rendering of their inner selves or to
reject it. But we are not to desist from our labor in creating the
ideal portraits, for in this consists the spiritual artistry of human
intercourse.

Our friends we are to see in the light of these glorified sketches,—our
friends and our enemies too. For only thus can we win them, and be
essentially their benefactors. There is no power so irresistible,
it has been said, as love. I do not quite accept the word Love. It
signifies the feeling that goes with the ideal appreciation of others;
and mere feeling supplies no directive rule of conduct. But it is
true that the power of ideally appreciating others, of seeing them in
the light of their possible best, and the feeling of love consequent
on this vision, is the mightiest lever for transforming evil into
good, and for sweetening the embittered lives of men. No greater boon
can anyone receive from another than to be helped to think well of
himself. Flattery is the base counterfeit of appreciation. Spiritual
appreciation, appreciation of the inner self despite the mask, is
the greatest of gifts, to manifest it is the greatest of arts. In
its supreme form it is the art of going down to the lowest of human
beings—the man in the ditch, the woman on the street—and making them
think well of themselves because of possibilities in their nature
they themselves hardly surmise. It is also the art of making the most
developed and advanced human beings realize in themselves something
still higher and better than they have ever reached. It is this art
by which the supreme human benefactors have worked their spiritual
miracles, and it is an art which to the extent of our ability we must
each acquire and practice, if human society is to be redeemed.

There are specially two points to be remembered: the one, that of
seeing the unattained excellence in those who are already in the way of
excellence; the other, where there is or seems to be a complete absence
of fine qualities or of the promise of development, as in the case of
backward children, that we should still not abate one jot of hope or
effort, seeking to win even the smallest improvement, in the conviction
that the best possible under the circumstances is incalculably worth
while. For, compared with the infinite ideal even the achievements of
the most advanced and most developed fall infinitely short, and what
are they more than the best possible under the circumstances. The best
possible under the circumstances represents for us the absolute best.

Now a word in regard to those who resist the better influence which we
may seek to exercise over them, for instance, the so-called black sheep
in families. Our chief concern should here be to prevent the resistance
from infecting ourselves and provoking unethical reactions. Ethics is
a system of relations. The ethical point of view consists in seeing
the relation between the offending person and ourselves as it ought
to be, in seeing with perfect objectivity the kind of conduct ideally
required by the relation on both sides, seeing it and thereby assisting
the other to see it. But we shall never succeed in doing this until we
purge from our thoughts and speech every trace of private irritation.
If we can point out to the one who has gone wrong how he has hurt
another, and has spiritually hurt himself; if while we do this we see
the fineness that is possible to him and make him realize that we see
it, we shall not utterly fail. I am aware that other methods should
accompany the spiritual appeal. In some cases, a temporary separation
is indicated, in other cases, a prolonged change of environment, or
the gradual formation of new habits of industry and application, the
awakening of interest in some pursuit that leads the mind away from
egocentric pre-occupation. Psychology and experience crystallized,
into commonsense have valuable counsels to give. But, along with the
technical aids, the spiritual influence should never be lost sight of
or relegated to the second place.

And finally two ideas should be mentioned which are pertinent to broken
relations, as for instance to the unhappy marriage relation and to
interrupted friendships: One that the break is never complete. There
remain certain threads unsundered, which should be most sedulously
preserved intact. They may serve as points of attachment to weave the
tie anew. Again, and this is still more important, thought that the
break would never have occurred if the relation had been as finely
conceived as it ought to have been on my side as well as on the others.
Take friendship as an example. A friendship of many years’ standing
is suddenly wrecked. Why? What were the terms on which the friendship
had been based? What had friendship meant to me?—A certain personal
attraction, mutual aid and comfort, taking counsel together, sympathy
in joy and sorrow. These are valuable elements of friendship, but
they do not even touch the essential point. They do not describe the
principal function which a friend has to fulfil. The friend ideally
is one who stands alongside another as the spectator of his spiritual
development, as one who appraises his friend’s advance toward the
master end of life disinterestedly, and yet with deepest personal
concern. He is the mirror in which his friend may see the stages of
his spiritual progress reflected. Now I have lost my friend. Why have
I lost him? Because he was never a true friend to me, and, I must add,
because I was never a real friend to him. I have not really lost him,
because I never really possessed him. And on making this discovery I
shall have a new light shed on what friendship might mean. I may never
be so fortunate as to find the actual friend, but I shall know what he
ought to be, and what it is in me to be to him. And when I say, “what
it is in me to be to him,” I think of resources of my inner being which
have never been called out; I think of the worth that belongs to me
as a spiritual being capable of giving forth and receiving highest
spiritual influence, and I am thereby immeasurably aggrandized in my
own esteem, the self in me is lifted nearer as it were to its infinite
counterpart in the eternal life. I walk henceforth on a higher level, I
dwell amid serener presences. And this aggrandizement of the self, not
on the ground of what I am but what I may be, and of others too, not on
the ground of what they are, but what they may be, is the compensation
derived from the bitter experience of broken relations. And what has
been said of friendship by way of example is true of frustration in
marriage as well, and of frustrations of every kind.


 NOTE TO BOOK III

 I may mention a certain test case for trying out the proposed rule,
 namely, to idealize the fair quality in others, and thereby achieve
 the concomitant transformation of the self. I mean the case of the
 victims of a cruel race prejudice, such as is entertained against the
 colored people of the South by the more brutal whites. I remember a
 long evening which I once spent in the company of a leader among the
 colored people, and one of the best men I have ever known. I looked
 that night deep into a suffering, sensitive human soul, and I tried
 to put myself in his place. I realized the hardships of his lot, the
 anguish that I myself should suffer if I were in his position. But
 would there be the spiritual equivalent? Would the way I had found
 in trials less poignant be the way of release? To make the situation
 clear, I selected two points in which the white man, my supposed
 oppressor, has the advantage, two fair qualities of which he can
 boast. His family life is purer on the average than that of a large
 number of the colored people. And he has also learned in the case
 of white men to distinguish between the criminal and the innocent.
 He will protect the latter, and give up the former to justice. Now
 my own people, putting myself in the place of the colored man, are
 backward in both these respects. In consequence of the long centuries
 of slavery their family relations are often unstable, while they are
 apt to shield the colored criminal from the arm of the law. In both
 respects I want to represent to myself the white man as he ought to
 act. He ought to help me lift up my race, first, by making their
 family life purer and more stable. But instead, many of the whites
 debauch the women of my race, while perhaps respecting those of their
 own race; moreover, by refusing decent accommodation on railroads they
 compel educated and refined colored women to travel in cars in which
 the coarsest men are herded together.

 Again, how can I, as a leader among my people, teach them to
 distinguish between the criminal and the innocent of their race so
 long as mobs of white men indiscriminately lynch the innocent and
 the criminal of my race alike on the barest suspicion? Against their
 actual behavior I set up in my mind a picture of how the superior
 race, superior in point of civilization, but still morally backward,
 ought to act. I can but suggest this picture, keep it in view as a
 constant protest, or still better as an imperative model.

 But I can do more. I can turn upon myself, and upon others of my own
 people who are in advance of the majority of them, and presently
 I shall be compelled to admit that amongst ourselves something
 of the same pride of superiority exists, something of the same
 prejudice against those who are lower in the scale. For there is
 also a stratification and a hierarchy of higher and lower among the
 oppressed. And the relatively higher are apt to behave toward the
 lower in the same fashion as their common oppressors behave toward
 them all. We find the same tendency among other oppressed races, as
 for instance in the attitude of certain of the Spanish and the German
 Jews toward the Polish and the Russian. Purge thyself, therefore, is
 the incisive monition; purify thine own nature of that pride which
 hurts so cruelly when it is directed upon thee from without. Let the
 sin committed against thee be the means of purifying thee from the
 like sin. This is the spiritual compensation, this the thought that
 leads to inward peace!

FOOTNOTES:

[67] In a previous chapter I remarked that the cheap estimate of others
and of oneself is due to the habit of regarding human beings from the
point of view of the use they can be put to, ignoring the wonderful
and mysterious energies and potencies which are exhibited day by day
in every human being. If the force stored in an infinitesimal particle
of radium is calculated to excite admiration, how much more the forces
exhibited in man, looking at him merely as the stage on which the
spectacle of these forces is displayed. Consider the occurrence of such
a thing as thought, the sheer miracle of mentality, the working of the
constructive imagination in the artist, etc. If we sufficiently dwell
on these inward facts about men, instead of merely emphasizing their
external utility to one another, we shall thereby be put in tune, as
it were, for the higher spiritual view of man. The difference I have
said is like that between understanding the theory of electricity and
merely turning on electric power in the workshop or the home. And yet
the scientific contemplation of the miracles of human nature as seen
from within, while it serves as a propædeutic, cannot actually bring
us up to the ethical point of view. For this sort of contemplation
reveals only the working of impersonal forces or powers, thought,
feeling, impulse in their endless actions and reactions, similar, in
so far as they are impersonal, to the forces observed in nature. The
ethical point of view alone discloses a centrality, an underivative,
irreducible core, a substantive being, personality.

[68] An expression occurring once only.




                                BOOK IV

 APPLICATIONS: THE ETHICS OF THE FAMILY, THE STATE, THE INTERNATIONAL
                            RELATIONS, ETC.




