CHAPTER V

THE IDEAL OF THE WHOLE AND THE ETHICAL MANIFOLD


The ethical manifold, conceived of as unified, furnishes, or rather is,
the ideal of the whole. The ethical manifold is the true universe, not
“Universe” in the sense in which the word is too laxly used at present
to designate those fragmentary and in many respects unconnected lines
of experience which might better by way of discrimination be called
World.

The ideal of the whole, as the terms imply, must fulfill two
conditions: it must be a whole, that is, include all manifoldness
whatsoever; and it must be ideal, or perfectly unified. In such an
ideal whole the two reality-producing functions of the human mind would
find their complete fruition.

 Point 1.—The totality of manifoldness must be comprised.

 Point 2.—The connectedness must be without flaw.

From point one it follows that the ethical manifold cannot be
spatial or temporal, since juxtaposition and sequence lapse into
indefiniteness, abounding without ceasing, but never attaining or
promising the attainment of totality. Our first conclusion then is that
the ethical manifold is non-temporal and non-spatial.

Furthermore it is necessary and decisive for the theoretical
construction here attempted to keep sharply in view, that the
manifoldness may not be derived from the unity, or conversely. The
manifold remains forever manifold. This means that in the ethical
manifold each member[30] will differ uniquely from all the rest,
and preserve his irreducible singularity. The member of the ethical
manifold was not created by _the_ One or any One. He is not derived
as effect from any cause. Causality does not apply to the ethical
manifold, being a category of spatial sequence. The member of the
ethical manifold, or the ethical unit, as we may now call him (I say
him metaphorically and provisionally) is unbegotten, induplicable,
unique. In the ethical manifold each infinitesimal member is
indispensable, inasmuch as he is one of the totality of intrinsically
unlike differentiæ. A duplicate would be superfluous. Inclusion implies
indispensableness; no member acquires a place within the ethical
universe save on the score of his title, as one of the possible modes
of being that are required to complete the totality of manifoldness.

But the reality-producing functions of the mind are two, and they
act jointly. The same manifold that is regarded as the scene of
irreducible manifoldness, is also regarded _sub specie unitatis_.
The immense practical importance of holding fast to diversity as
indefeasible, and at the same time stressing the unity, will amply
appear in the course of the third Book. It is this insistence on the
two aspects _jointly_, that distinguishes the theory here worked out
from preceding ethical philosophies, and will be found to open new
ethical applications to conduct. It is this insistence on the joint
action of the two reality-producing functions that will enable us to
see in the ideal of the whole _a pattern traced_, and to derive from
this pattern of relations a supreme rule of conduct. If the differences
that exist among the members of the manifold be slurred over, if the
indefeasible singularity of each member be overlooked, if the many be
derived from the One, since the One is an empty concept, we shall gain
no light upon the conduct to be followed by each of the many. It is
true that our notion of the distinctive difference or the uniqueness of
each ethical unit is also empty as far as knowledge goes. The unique
is incognizable. Yet we are able to apprehend, and do apprehend, a
determinate relation as subsisting between the ethical units, and this
relation supplies us with an ideal plan of the ethical universe and a
first principle and rule of ethics. The relation is that of reciprocal
universal interdependence.

Consider that an infinite number of ethical entities is presented to
our minds—each of them radically different from the rest. In what
then possibly can the unity of this infinite assemblage consist? In
this—_that the unique difference of each shall be such as to render
possible the correlated unique differences of all the rest_. It is in
this formula that we find the key to a new ethical system, in this
conception we get our hand firmly on the notion of right, and by means
of it we discover the object which Kant failed to find, the object to
which worth attaches, the object which is so indispensable to the ideal
of the whole as to authenticate unconditional obligation or rightness
in conduct with respect to it. It is as an ethical unit, as a member of
the infinite ethical manifold, that man has worth.[31]

In accordance with the above, the first principle of ethics may be
expressed in the following formulas:

A. Act as a member of the ethical manifold (the infinite spiritual
universe).

B. Act so as to achieve uniqueness (complete individualization—the most
completely individualized act is the most ethical).

C. Act so as to elicit in another the distinctive, unique quality
characteristic of him as a fellow-member of the infinite whole.

A and B are comprised in C. I am taking three steps toward a fuller
exposition of the meaning of the principle. To act as a member
according to A is to strive to achieve uniqueness as declared in
B. To achieve uniqueness as declared in C is to seek to elicit the
diverse uniqueness in others. The actual unique quality in myself
is incognizable, and only appears, so far as it does appear, in the
effect produced by myself upon my fellows. Hence, to advance towards
uniqueness I must project dynamically my most distinctive mode of
energy upon my fellow-members.

Since the finite nature of man is a clog and screen, clouding and
checking the action of man viewed as an ethical unit, it follows that
no man will ever succeed in carrying out completely the rule which is
derived from the ideal pattern. He will invariably meet with partial
frustration in his efforts to do so, and yet in virtue of his ethical
character he will always renew the effort. While in physical science
the recurrence of phenomena supplies the occasion for exemplification
or verification, in conduct, or the sphere of volition, not recurrence
but the persistence of the effort after defeat is at least a help to
verification, arguing in one’s self a consciousness, however obscured,
of the relation of reciprocal interdependence and of subjection to the
urge or pressure thence derived.[32] It is our own reality-producing
functions, exerted to their utmost, to which we are delivered over.
Hence the final formulation: So act as to raise up in others the ideal
of the relation of give and take, of universal interdependence in
which they stand with an infinity of beings like themselves, members of
the infinite universe, irreducible, like and unlike themselves in their
respective uniqueness.

The simile that may be used is that of a ray of light which has the
effect of kindling other rays, unlike but complementary to itself.
Each ethical unit, each member of the infinite universe, is to be
regarded as a center from which such a ray emanates, touching other
centers, and awakening there the light intrinsic in them. Or we may
think of a fountain from which stream forth jets of indescribable
life-power—playing out of it, playing into other life, and evoking
there kindred and yet unkindred life-waves, waves effluent and
refluent. Whatever the symbolism may be, inadequate in any case, the
idea of the enmeshing of one’s life in universal life without loss of
distinctness—the everlasting selfhood to be achieved on the contrary,
by means of the cross-relation—is the cardinal point.

I have here to answer one question. By what warrant do I ascribe worth
to any human being? Where is the head deserving that this ray that
streams out from me shall light upon it? What man or woman merits that
he be invested with this glory? Does not the same objection opposed
to Kant hold with respect to my own view? It is true that he found no
object at all, and sought indirectly to draw from the empty notion
of obligation the inference that man is an end _per se_. Perhaps
it will be admitted that the supremely worthwhile object has now
been found, the holy thing (holy in two ways, as being inviolable,
reverence-inspiring, holding at a distance those who would encroach:
and intrinsically priceless as a component of the ethical manifold, as
indispensable in a perfect whole). But this object, you will say, is
in the air, or in the heavens, and how shall it be made to descend on
empirical man?

My answer is that certainly I do not discover the quality of worth
in people as an empirical fact. In many people I do not even
discover value. Judging from the point of view of bare fact, many
of us could very well be spared. Many are even in the way of what
is called “progress.” And the suggestion of some extreme disciples
of Darwin that the degenerate and defective should be removed, or
the opinion of others that pestilence and war should be allowed to
take the unpleasant business off our hands, is, from the empirical
point of view, not easily to be refuted. I can also enter into, if
I do not wholly share, the pessimistic mood with regard to actual
human nature expressed by Schopenhauer and others. To the list of
repulsive human creatures mentioned by Marcus Aurelius in one of his
morning meditations,—the back-biter, the scandal-monger, the informer,
etc.—might be added in modern times, the white-slaver, the exploiter of
child-labor, the fawning politician, and many another revolting type.
And even more discouraging in a way, than these examples of deepest
human debasement—the copper natures, as Plato calls them, or the
leaden natures, as we might call them—is the disillusionment we often
experience with regard to the so-called gold natures, the discovery of
the large admixture of baser metal which is often combined with their
gold.

It is imperative to acquaint oneself, nay, to impregnate one’s mind
thoroughly with these contrary facts, if the doctrine of worth, the
sanest and to my mind the most real of all conceptions, is to be saved
from the appearance of an optimistic illusion.

The answer to the objection is that I do not _find_ worth in others
or in myself, I _attribute_ it to them and to myself. And why do I
attribute it? In virtue of the reality-producing functions of my own
mind. I create the ethical manifold. The pressure of the essential
rationality within me, seeking to complete itself in the perfect
fruition of these functions, _i.e._, in the positing of a total
manifold and its total unification, drives me forward. I need an idea
of the whole in order to act rightly, in such a way as to satisfy the
dual functions within me. My own nature as a spiritual being urges me
to seek this satisfaction. This ideal whole, as I have shown, is a
complexus of uniquely differentiated units. In order to advance toward
uniqueness, in order to achieve what in a word may be called my own
truth, to build myself into the truth, to become essentially real,
I must seek to elicit the consciousness of the uniqueness and the
interrelation in others. I must help others in order to save myself;
I must look upon the other as an ethical unit or moral being in order
to become a moral being myself. And wherever I find consciousness of
relation, of connectedness, even incipient, I project myself upon
that consciousness, with a view to awaking in it the consciousness
of universal connectedness. Wherever I can hope to get a response
I test my power. Fields and trees do not speak to me, as Socrates
said, but human beings do. I should attribute worth to stones and to
animals could they respond, were the power of forming ideas, without
which the idea of relation or connectedness is impossible, apparent in
them. Doubtless stones and trees and animals, and the physical world
itself, are but the screen behind which lies the infinite universe.
But the light of that universe does not break through the screen where
it is made up of stones and trees and the lower animals. It breaks
through, however faintly, where there is consciousness of relation: and
wherever I discover that consciousness I find my opportunity. It is
quite possible that the men and women upon whom I try my power will not
actually respond. The complaint is often heard from moral persons, or
persons who think themselves such, that what they call the moral plan
of rousing the moral consciousness in others will not work. Perhaps the
plan they follow is not the moral plan at all, but the plan of sympathy
or of some other empirically derived rule. But be that as it may,
the question is not whether we get the response but whether we shall
achieve reality or truth ourselves; in theological terms, save our own
life, by trying to elicit the response.

And here one profoundly important practical consideration will come to
our aid, namely, the sense of our own imperfection, coupled indeed with
the consciousness of inextinguishable power of moral renewal. Instead
of attributing the lack of response to the hopeless dullness of the
person upon whom we labor, a sense of humility, based on the knowledge
of our own exceeding spiritual variability—best moments followed by
worst moments, imperfect grasp on our own ideals, most imperfect
fidelity in executing them—will lead us to turn upon ourselves, and
far from permitting us to despair of others, will impel us rather to
make ourselves more fitting instruments of spiritual influence than
obviously as yet we are.[33]

FOOTNOTES:

[30] Say not _part_ or _element_, but _member_, to distinguish the
components of the ethical manifold from such concepts as are used in
mathematics and physical science.

[31] The distinction between value and worth must be stressed for
it is capital. Value is subjective. The worth notion is the most
objective conceivable. Value depends on the wants or needs of our
empirical nature. That has value which satisfies our needs or wants.
We possess value for one another, for the reason that each of us has
wants which the others alone are capable of satisfying, as in the case
of sex, of coöperation, in the vocation, etc. But value ceases when
the want or need is gratified. The value which one human being has for
another is transient. There are, in the strict sense, no permanent
values. The value which the majority have for the more advanced and
developed members of a community is small; from the standpoint of value
most persons are duplicable and dispensable. Consider only the ease
with which factory labor is replaced, in consequence of the prolific
fertility of the human race. The custom of speaking of ethics as a
theory of values is regrettable. It evidences the despair into which
many writers on ethics have fallen as to the possibility of discovering
an objective basis for rightness.

[32] But the verification itself is the clearer and more explicit
vision of the ethical relation, as it ought to be.

[33] The term “ethical unit” used above should be found useful. The
chemists have found the concept of the atom useful, though no one
has ever seen an atom. And all the sciences have recourse to similar
inventions,—such as the electron, or the ion, or energy regarded as
a substance, and in mathematics the sublimated, space-transcending
concepts. Looking through the eyes of science, we are taught to see,
underlying the grossest forms of matter, imaginary entities which are
well-nigh metaphysical in nature. Science starts from the realm of
the sensible, and constructs its super-rarefied devices on mechanical
models. Then it leaves the field of the intuitively perceptible, and
rises by the path of analogy into realms where the notions with which
it operates are no longer imaginable. I do not wish, in speaking of an
ethical, invisible, and unimaginable entity, to derive the postulation
of this conception from science. The ethical concept transcends wholly
the field of sensible experience. It is not discovered by way of
analogy. It is frankly and overtly supersensible. It is not exemplified
in the effects it produces in the world of volition as the most
nearly metaphysical concepts of science are exemplified in the field
of phenomena by the recurrences or uniformities which they serve to
account for. The ethical concepts are not verified by their results
at all, not by recurrences of phenomena, but by the persistence of
the effort to attain that which is finitely never attained, and _by
the more explicit perception of the ideal itself_ which follows the
persistent effort; for as has been shown above, when face to face with
fundamental truth, _seeing is believing_. But I allude to these matters
in order to show that the movement in ethical thinking represented
by the system which I propose is not contrary to the present-day
movement in science, but in line with it, though beyond it. It does
not ask leave of science; it does not base its certainty on scientific
precedent; but neither does it expect a veto from the lips of science.
The worthwhileness of scientific endeavor itself depends at bottom
on the sanction which the ideal of the complete carrying out of the
reality-producing functions lends to their incomplete execution in the
world of the space and time manifold.




