CHAPTER V

THE SPIRITUAL ATTITUDE TO BE OBSERVED TOWARDS FELLOW-MEN IN GENERAL,
IRRESPECTIVE OF THE SPECIAL RELATIONS WHICH CONNECT US MORE CLOSELY
WITH SOME THAN OTHERS


_The Right to Life_

The thoughts presented above on the subject of sin naturally lead over
to the next topic, the obligations we are under regarding the life,
the property and the reputation of others. The ancient moral laws
unquestionably remain: “Thou shalt not kill”; “Thou shalt not steal”;
“Thou shalt not bear false witness.” But their application is extended
and their significance intensified by the positive definition which has
been given to the term _Spiritual_.

So long as the mere inviolateness of the human personality is
emphasized, without any defined conception of what it is that is
inviolate (the inviolateness without the infinite preciousness),
there is danger that the physical part of man will be invested with
the sacred character that belongs to the spiritual, that the two, the
spiritual and the physical parts, will be identified.

The result will be mischievous in two ways: First, while the act
of killing will be reprobated, a kind of tabu being attached to
bloodshed, the taking of the life of fellow-beings in more indirect
ways, or what may be called constructive murder, will be lightly
regarded. The following case is mentioned by a recent writer. The
directors of a railroad refused to vote the sum of five thousand
dollars to provide a certain safety appliance for their cars. Soon
after an accident occurred, in which a number of men were killed.
The accident might have been prevented had the five thousand dollars
required for the installation of the safety appliance been voted.
Now the men were undoubtedly killed by the directors of the company.
As to the difference in the degree of guilt in the case of direct
and indirect murder, there is room for casuistical debate. The
consequences it is true were not present to the directors’ minds. But
are they not responsible for the very fact that the consequences were
excluded from their view? They were intent on their dividends, and
ignored the endangered lives. But is not this the substance of their
guilt? Does not moral progress lie in the direction of extending the
sense of responsibility so as to cover the indirect taking of life?
Similarly the use of poisonous substances in industry, bad sanitation,
inadequate fire protection, must be stigmatized as indirect murder. The
Commandment “Thou shalt not kill” must extend over a far wider area
than it has covered in the past.[53]

Secondly, the positive definition of the spiritual nature enables us
to perceive more distinctly that the physical part is the means and
the spiritual part the end, and to draw the necessary consequences.
That which is means is not to be cherished if to do so would defeat
the end itself; hence the physical life is _not_ to be preserved if by
preserving it we deny or defeat the very purpose which the physical
part is to serve. So long as men have the tabu feeling about bloodshed,
the fact that life ought of right to be taken in certain instances will
seem a hopeless contradiction of the general rule against killing.
Keeping in mind the spiritual end of existence on the other hand, we
affirm unhesitatingly that it is better that a man should die than
commit a heinous crime. It was better for the young girl mentioned
in a well-known tale, threatened with outrage, and seeing no other
possible way of escape, to strangle herself with her own hair rather
than submit. According to the opinion of certain scholastic writers on
ethics, dishonor resides solely in the consent of the soul, and where
this is absent the mere physical infringement cannot leave a moral
stain. This is a helpful point of view in regard to the victims of the
atrocities of war, the inmates of certain Belgian nunneries, and the
hapless objects of unspeakable brutality in certain Polish villages.
The anguish of a pure-minded woman who becomes a mother under such
circumstances is hardly conceivable. And to discriminate between the
infamy done to her and her own unpolluted soul is a plain duty, as well
as to relieve the innocent offspring of outrage from any participation
in the guilt to which it owes its existence. But the case to which
I refer is different. It is one in which the choice remains between
voluntary death and submission to intended violation. Submission in
such a situation argues a kind of consent, or at least the absence of a
sufficient revulsion.

It is right to kill an intending murderer supposing that there is no
other way of preventing him from committing his crime, whether the
intended victim be oneself or someone else. It is not only the life
thus protected from attack that is saved, but the murderer in a sense
is saved as well, so far as he can be saved, by the intervention. Also
the members of his family are saved, humanity is saved from moral
disgrace in his person. The same reasoning applies to the position
of the extreme non-resistants. They will not, they tell us, do a
wrong to prevent a wrong. In their eyes to take the physical life of
another is in every possible instance an absolute wrong. They fail to
take account of the instrumental relation between the physical and
the spiritual parts. And on the same grounds, a defensive war, a war
to ward off aggression, may be theoretically justified. But here the
application of the theory is dubious as well as dangerous. Exceptional
cases of high-handed aggression that ought to be resisted occur, but
aggression is rarely, if ever, one-sided. As a rule, there is more or
less wrong on both sides, and the tangle of accusations and mutual
recriminations is almost impossible to unravel. Very rarely, indeed, if
ever, is right altogether on one side, and wrong on the other, though
predominant right may be on one side and predominant wrong on the
other. And aside from this, the instruments of destruction in modern
warfare have become so monstrous, the efficiency notion applied to war
has led to such ruthlessness, the attempt to distinguish between the
civilian population and the armed forces has so nearly broken down,
that right-thinking persons everywhere are now eagerly intent on how to
prevent aggression before it can take effect, rather than to resist it
after it has occurred.

 NOTE

 The casuistical question may be raised whether from this point of
 view we are not all murderers. The amount I spend on my house, food,
 recreation, might if divided prolong the life of many a child in the
 slums. Am I not then actually a parasite, that is, a murderer? It is
 this shocking scruple that has led fine people to live among the poor,
 and to try to equalize their mode of living with that prevailing in
 the environment. The motive is noble, though as a matter of fact they
 may never succeed in doing what they set out to do because they never
 actually touch bottom. There are always depths of poverty to which
 they can not descend. They may spend comparatively little, yet that
 little is far in excess of the spending of the most indigent. And had
 they stripped themselves of everything they would have been face to
 face with the _reductio ad absurdum_ of their method, for they would
 have abandoned civilization and degraded their human life to the level
 of the wayside tramp.

 What is inspiring in their example is just the immense compassion,
 the willingness to give up so much. But the method itself is not a
 solution.

 Are we then murderers, all of us? Perhaps a distinction may be drawn
 between acts which in themselves are hostile to the life of fellowmen,
 like overtaxing the worker, and acts which tend positively to maintain
 the higher values of life,—such as the providing of decent shelter,
 support and education, for the members of one’s family. It is true
 that, as Tolstoy warns us, we easily slip into indefensible luxury
 under the pretence of maintaining the higher values. But this does not
 affect the validity of the distinction itself.

 And yet the distinction does not relieve us of what may be called our
 share of the social or collective guilt. The exploiter is chargeable
 with individual guilt. I who am trying to keep up the standard of
 civilized living within my little sphere am nevertheless conscious of
 participating in the social guilt, the guilt of a society that has
 permitted and still permits such misery to exist. Well, it does exist,
 and I can do but a very little to change it. Can I then endure the
 contrast between my own lot and that of the greater number. Is it not
 true after all that if I give up the comforts, or let me say the helps
 to the maintenance of the higher values, I should be saving the lives
 of many children? Those children are dying because I am not dividing
 my possessions among the poor. Can I stand up and look at that fact,
 at those deaths?

 The only answer which it is possible to give at the point we have thus
 far reached in our exposition is: push on, perfect civilization, a way
 will eventually be found to uplift the masses and make them partakers
 of the future civilization. The other alternative, that of Tolstoy,
 is stagnation. Yet I cannot disguise from myself the fact that in the
 meanwhile, while we are trying to push on, millions are perishing.
 This is the true “burden of world pain,” not the sentimental world
 pain due to the fact that one is not having oneself the best kind of a
 time in the world, but the pain caused by the fact that while we are
 reaching forward to help the suffering masses, those masses, though
 composed of individuals morally as worth while as ourselves, and many
 of them doubtless better, if we only knew it, are perishing before
 our very eyes, and that we stand by and cannot save them. I have said
 that in the meanwhile while we are trying to push on, millions are
 perishing. The actual moral problem so often overlooked is underlined
 in the words “in the meanwhile.”

 There is one pathetic consolation. Envy is not the widespread vice
 which it is sometimes represented to be. Those who are in trouble take
 the will very largely for the deed. People in the worst conditions are
 grateful to anyone who shows a real desire to help, even if his actual
 performance does not go very far. And there is a still finer trait
 in ordinary human nature, namely, the tendency to find a certain
 vicarious relief in the joy of the few, provided that their joy be
 pure.


_The Right to Property_[54]

“Property,” according to Blackstone, “is the sole and despotic dominion
which one man claims and exercises over the external things of the
world in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the
universe.”

Orthodox jurisprudence, like orthodox religion, is characterized by the
absoluteness of its formula. It ignores the genesis of its concepts in
the long line of antecedent historical development, and it disdains to
entertain the demand for modification, though the circumstances of the
time loudly call for it.

“The sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises,”
etc., may be a fact, but it is not a right. Property can only be
regarded as a right if shown to be subservient to the ethical end,—the
maintenance and development of personality. Orthodox jurisprudence
effaces the end, and treats that which is or has been at one time a
means as if it possessed a sanctity of its own. On the other hand, the
empirical treatment of jurisprudence, in dismissing the supposedly
absolute means, tends to leave out of sight the ethical end, and to
treat the social institutions as subservient to mere convenience.

The following propositions will indicate the changes in the conception
of the right of property required by our ethical theory.

1. Property is a relation between a person or persons and things. There
can be no property right in persons, but only in things.[55]

2. The right of property faces in two directions: Toward outside nature
and toward fellow human beings. We have a right over the external
things of nature. We have a right to the services, though not to the
personality, of fellow human beings. These two aspects of the right of
property must be kept apart and defined.

It is sometimes held that the human race as a whole, as over against
nature, has the right of dominion. Nature, it is said, is our quarry,
we can take out of it the stones we need to construct the edifice
of civilization. Nature is our tool. The laws of nature, as science
discovers them, become our servants. Nature offers the raw material
which we consume. Nature has no rights as against man. But I hold
that neither has man rights as against nature, except in so far as
he rightly defines the end in the interest of which he makes use of
nature—the maintenance and development of personality.

To suppose that the right of property as the extension of personality
over things is tenable without regard to its instrumental use, to
suppose that bare appropriation of nature as of “treasure trove” is
a prerogative of man, is to lend countenance to the false notion of
occupation, or first appropriation, which has confused the ethics of
the subject in the literature of jurisprudence, and prevented a right
understanding of it. If bare appropriation be the foundation, then the
first comer has a right against his successors, since the extension
of personality over the thing has been actually accomplished by him,
and that is all there is to be said about it. Again, on this view, a
case may be made out for vested interests, that is to say, for those
who have successfully appropriated the earth, yes, and the fullness
thereof, and who having thus effectually extended their personality
over things without regard to the uses they make of their possessions,
are then to be entitled to remain indefinitely in secure ownership of
them.

Without an ethical standard, without the notion of an end to be
subserved, stubborn possession will always be able to resist
modification, and on the other hand attempts at modification will be
haphazard. Neither the human species collectively nor the individual
has a right simply to appropriate the things of the external world.
Neither the first occupier nor the last is entitled to his goods unless
he can make out a greater good in the interest of which he should be
allowed to possess them.

But the case of primary occupation is academic. It occurs on Robinson
Crusoe’s island and in legal fiction. Even when the white race invades
Africa, it does not commonly take possession of unoccupied land, but
dispossesses the natives. On what ground does it dispossess them?
Is there an ethical standard by which the dealings of the civilized
nations with the populations of Africa can be measured? Is the
introduction of the appliances of modern civilization, the opening up
to trade, a sufficient ground for the subjection or the extermination
of the inhabitants? In this connection it becomes clear how urgent a
more clarified conception of property rights is. False ideas of this
so-called right are to no small extent responsible for the massacre
of the inferior races, and the mutual slaughter of those who covet
their lands. A proclamation of the Queen of England or of the Emperor
of Germany, or the signature of an irresponsible chief to a treaty
the meaning of which he scarcely understands, transfers millions of
subjects and their territory to one or other of the European powers.
What right of property have these European powers in the territory and
the peoples acquired by them in this fashion?

The last example shows that the right of ownership, except in very
rare instances, is not in question in respect to the dealings of man
with nature, but comes into play chiefly in the relation of man to his
fellows. There are competitors to be outstripped, thwarted. There are
weaker fellow-beings to be subdued. The use of force and cunning in
acquiring property is well nigh the general rule. Are there any ethical
ideals which, if they could be realized, might disclose a better way,
might bring order into this frightful chaos, and abate the conflicts?
From the ethical ideal as outlined in previous chapters this follows:

The extension of personality over things is a right in so far as things
are employed to maintain and develop potential personality. The use of
the services of a fellowman is a right in so far as his services are
used in such a manner as to preserve and develop his personality as
well as that of the user.

In speaking of the use of the services of others we touch upon the
social aspect of the property relation, and here is the crux of the
whole matter. It is coming to be affirmed more and more that property
is a “social” concept, that it cannot be explained either as implying
a relation of the individual to outside nature, save exceptionally,
nor as a relation of the individual considered atomistically to other
atomic individuals. The social tie, it is held, is intrinsic. The
nature of man as such is social, but the word “social” in current
discussion is very ill-defined, and is commonly understood to denote
merely the fact of the interdependence of men upon one another, without
conveying the idea of a rule or standard by which the system of
interdependence may be regulated. Vague notions, such as that of social
happiness, are believed sufficient to take the place of such a standard.

Let me then consider first the bare fact of interdependence, and see
what follows from it, and how far it will take us.

Every man has manifold wants for the satisfaction of which he depends
on others. His wants are legion; his ability and opportunity to satisfy
them exceedingly limited. It is this cross relation that expresses
the so-called social nature of man. But the reciprocal dependence
of men upon one another for the satisfaction of their wants by no
means constitutes an ethical tie. The tie between the Greek master
and the Greek slave, as described by Aristotle, was social, but not
ethical. The same is true of the tie that united the Southern planter
to his negro slaves. The relation was indeed far more social than that
between the modern mill-owner and the operatives in his factory, but
still it was not ethical. The reason is clearly stated by Aristotle
himself. According to him the slave is a living tool: the purpose of
his existence is not realized in himself but in his master. He fulfils
the end of his being by setting free the higher functions exercised by
his master. But from the ethical point of view no man may be regarded
as the tool of another. Each human being is an end _per se_, and the
highest object of his existence is to be fulfilled, not in others, but
jointly in them and in himself.

I have just said that the social and the ethical views are not
synonymous or coincident, as the loose use of language in current
literature would imply. I go farther and say that the social and the
ethical point of view are even on their face contradictory. It cannot
be denied that the natural system of interdependence resembles that of
the body and its members. A hierarchy of organs and of functions is
apparent in the human body, and likewise in the social body. Some men
do the lowest kind of work. Their function appears to be to produce
food, clothing and shelter, to satisfy the mere physical wants.
Some are the hands, so to speak, of society, while only a very few
effectually represent the brain. The simile has been carried out in
detail by well-known writers, in both ancient and modern times. It
is quite true that the artist and the scientist are dependent on the
manual laborer, just as he in turn is dependent on them. But then,
consider the difference in the dignity of the services they render one
another. Was not the Greek, who saw things dispassionately as they are,
right in asserting that, taking society in the large, the purpose of
human life is fulfilled in the few, and that the greater number exist
in order that by their inferior services they may enable these few to
express humanity in its highest terms?

It seems to me that the kind of social arrangement contemplated by the
great Greek philosophers, and by some of the mediæval publicists, as
well as by certain modern thinkers, is unquestionably social. The fact
of interdependence is stressed by them. The ethical note of equality,
or, as I should prefer to put it, equivalence, is left out.

I have endeavored in a recent book to indicate how the ethical system
may be superinduced over the social system.[56] Here I am concerned
chiefly to mark as strictly as possible the distinction between the
two terms social and ethical. And I must, therefore, at once amend my
previous statement that property is a social concept by saying that it
is the concept of a social relation considered as the substratum in
which is to be worked out the ethical relation.

The general consequences of the property concept as defined are these:

1. He who will not work, neither shall he eat; or better, he who will
not work if able-bodied shall be disciplined and trained in such a
manner that he will work. The fruits of nature do not fall into the lap
of mankind. We are not living in a state of Paradise. The human race
is engaged in the arduous labor of constantly renewing the capital on
which it subsists. As a member of the race, everyone is bound to do his
part.

2. No one has a property right in harmful or superfluous luxuries,
since property is the control of external things for the maintenance
and development of personality; and luxury, so far from maintaining,
undermines personality, and hinders its development.

No one has ethically a right of property in great fortunes like those
accumulated under the modern system of industry. Whatever is in excess
of one’s needs, rightly estimated, is not appropriate to one, not
proper to one, not his property. Since the present system of ownership
cannot be changed abruptly, the idea of the stewardship of wealth has
been suggested to quiet the consciences of those who have come to
realize that they have no moral right to excessive wealth. But the idea
of stewardship should be held with fear and trembling. It is at best
a makeshift, a bridge leading over to something more sound. It may be
so taught and received as to seem to justify by philanthropic use the
possession of great fortunes. But the power to dispose of vast funds
for philanthropic uses may come to be itself a badge of superiority.
And even if this be not so, if surplus wealth be used modestly, and
with a sincere intention to apply it in the best possible way, there
is yet no surety that any individual owner will have the breadth of
vision, the experience, the insight, to discharge adequately the
function of distributor. The defects of his early education, habits
ingrained in him in the course of his business career, may lead him to
bestow lavishly in one direction while turning a deaf ear to the appeal
of other needs even more urgent and fundamental. Nothing short of the
collective wisdom of the community, the collaboration of the best, can
safely direct the surplus wealth available for social benefaction.

3. Everyone is ethically entitled to a share of the products furnished
by nature and worked up into usable shape by his fellows, and also to
the direct services of fellow human beings, in so far as that share
and those services are necessary in order to enable him to perform in
the best possible way the specific service which he in turn is capable
of rendering. Our ethical theory here supplies us with a principle
which takes the place of remuneration. There is no such thing as a just
remuneration of labor, there is no such thing as a fair wage, if the
wage be considered as the equivalent of, or the reward for the work
done. It is not possible by any process of calculation to construct
an equation between labor and reward. The laborer is assuredly
not entitled to the product of his labor, as the current formula
awkwardly puts it, for it is an entirely hopeless undertaking to try
to ascertain what the product of any man’s labor is. In the modern
forms of industry, the contributions of the different factors engaged
in production are intimately intermingled, play into one another, and
are inseparable. Neither the so-called workers alone are the producers
of wealth, nor the employers and capitalists, nor yet both together
irrespective of the labors of past generations of which they enjoy the
usufruct. The question, what is a fair wage, or a fair profit, is badly
posed. There is no such thing as a fair wage or profit in the sense of
a fair compensation for the work performed.

The proper payment of the human factors engaged in production is
unascertainable genetically, _i.e._, if one goes back to the origin
of the product. It can only be approximately determined by fixing
attention on the end to be served. And the end in each case is the
maintenance and development of personality. In other words, that is
a fair wage which suffices to enable the different functionaries
coöperating in production each to perform his function, or render
his service, in the most efficient possible manner. The solution of
the labor question must be along teleological not genetic lines.
Adequate nourishment as to quantity and quality, suitable dwellings,
educational opportunities, etc., are all indispensable to the rendering
of service, even by “common laborers.” Specific requirements come up
for consideration with respect to the different special functions, and
those who perform them.

My intention in this chapter is to indicate the bearings of the ethical
theory on living questions of the day. Nothing is more emphatic in the
programmes of the working-class than this demand for social justice.
Nothing is more discouraging than to see the futile efforts made to
define social justice by extemporizing a notion of fair adjustment
which goes to pieces in every serious labor controversy.

One more remark should be made in regard to what is meant by property
as a relation between persons and things considered as a means of
developing personality. A convenient illustration is the use of a block
of stone by a sculptor. The sculptor’s attempt at self-expression is
an effort to combine two things in themselves uncongenial, an ideal
image, and an external tangible thing, the block of stone. The mental
image does not leap from the mind upon the stone and transform it
magically into its own likeness. The external thing, the stone, offers
resistance, and the resistance limits the artist’s effort. But the
limitation itself becomes in time an indispensable aid. For the ideal
image as at first it started up in the artist’s mind was vague, and the
limitations imposed by the intractable nature of the material compel
him to articulate the image, to grasp more firmly its complex details,
and thus to become more surely possessed of it. The same is true of the
mental thing which we call the relation of cause and effect in the mind
of the scientist, and of his endeavor to impose this mental relation
on the sequence of phenomena observed by him. And the same is again
true of that supreme thing which we call the ethical ideal, and of the
effort to embody it in the social relations. The attempt to express
the ethical ideal in human society inevitably hits on limitations, and
leads to frustrations. We have in our heads fine schemes of universal
regeneration. We find elements in human nature that resent and resist
our Socialisms, our communisms. We desire to enlarge men’s moral
horizon, the field of their moral interest, to lead out from the family
to the nation, to fraternity in general. We presently discover that
we are losing the benefit of the closer ties. In the very process of
building we seem to be in danger of destroying the foundations, and to
be building in the air. In this way our formulations of the ethical
ideal are tested. We are compelled to recast them, and the frustrations
which we meet with become the means of clarifying and articulating
the ideal itself, and of enabling us to experience more vividly the
coercive impulses that go out from it.


_The Right to Reputation_

The ethical rule is to show a sacred respect for the reputation of
others. In the present discussion intellectual and moral reputation may
be considered separately.

Under the first head of intellectual reputation, certain points suggest
themselves, one of them in regard to controversies concerning priority
of scientific discovery. What is the sense of such controversies? What
difference does it make whether the law of the conservation of energy
was first enunciated by Helmholtz or by Robert Mayer, or whether the
method of fluxions was invented by Newton or Leibnitz,—not to mention
lesser contrarieties of claims? Would it not argue, on the part of
the scientists and their friends, a more entire devotion to objective
truth if they showed themselves indifferent to personal credit? The
discovery, the invention, it may be said, is important, not the
reputation of the discoverer or the inventor. Nevertheless, such
controversies are carried on in a lively spirit. And it is usually felt
that something more than vanity is at stake, that a man is entitled to
be named in connection with the productions of his mind.

Such controversies resemble a suit at law undertaken to determine a
disputed title to some valuable property. Plagiarism is different. It
is barefaced intellectual theft. The title to the property in this case
is not disputed. The plagiarist just steals an idea or a form of words
in which an idea has been happily expressed, and palms it off as his
own, hoping to escape with his stolen goods undetected. In this case
too, it seems, one might say the idea is important, not the authorship.
Nevertheless, a profound resentment is felt, not only by the author,
but by the general public, against a plagiarist.

A rule is ethical when the conduct prescribed is instrumental to the
development of personality. Respect for reputation is ethical because
reputation is a help to the development of personality. A man projects
his mind outward, so to speak, into the productions of his mind. As
a thinking being he anchors himself in outside reality. He transfers
himself, as it were, into an external thing,—a discovery, an invention,
the expression of an idea in apt language,—each a thing that goes on
existing independently of himself. To deny his connection with it is to
infringe upon his personality, to efface his personality in so far as
his personality is enshrined in his mental product.

Again, a man’s reputation as a scientist or scholar is a prop to his
personality as a thinker. A man can never be quite certain of the
validity of his thinking until it is approved by the consensus of the
competent. To win that approbation is to know that as far as he has
gone he is on sure ground. He can thence proceed, can turn toward new
problems with a sense of power and a measure of self-confidence not
previously attained. To rob him of his reputation is to deprive him of
this invaluable aid to further mental development.[57]

Coming next to moral reputation, we find that the ethical rule
requiring respect for the moral character of others is even more
exacting, and that any contravention of it deserves an even more
strenuous reprobation. The Decalogue prohibits the bearing of false
witness and this rule is extensible from courts of law to ordinary
conversation, since the principle involved is the same. The Sermon on
the Mount menacingly warns against judging others: “Judge not that ye
be not judged.” Buddha enjoins his followers to refrain from malicious
gossip, and includes a prohibition to this effect among the principal
pronouncements of his religion. All the great teachers of ethics and
religion insist on this point, perhaps because the natural propensities
of men constantly tend in the opposite direction, and are so hard
to restrain. To stab one’s neighbor in the back, morally speaking,
to insinuate base motives, to spread damaging reports about him, to
suggest as possibly and then as probably true rumors which one does not
positively know to be untrue, to allow private repugnance to take the
place of evidence,—are infringements of the moral reputation of others
with some of which notoriously many even of the so-called best people
are chargeable. I do not here speak of the grosser attacks, attacks on
character inspired by envy, rivalry, and greed. The soundness of the
rule is generally admitted, though its violations are past belief and
without number.

But is the rule itself as to moral reputation tenable? There is a
difference between intellectual and moral reputation at which we must
at least cast a glance. Intellectual reputation is a fairly safe index
of merit; moral reputation is not. A man’s mind is reflected in his
intellectual performances. Is the same true of his moral character?
Is not the moral character an interior, elusive thing? The real
character escapes the eye of the outside spectator and judge; and if
this be so, why should it be so important a matter to safeguard a man’s
moral reputation, seeing that the reputation he deserves is past
finding out? A public official, for instance, is accused of corrupt
practices. He is innocent, and his friends and he are indignant at the
damaging accusations brought against him. But if not guilty of the
palpable derelictions with which he is charged, yet, in view of his
opportunities and education, he may not be less blameworthy for other
acts with which he has not been charged, and in his heart of hearts he
knows that this is so. Why then, this outcry?

Other examples might be adduced. The honor of a young woman is attacked
by the circulation of atrocious rumors, and the reaction at this most
sensitive point is certain to be extreme when the falseness of the
accusation is exposed. But is outward decorum, correct behavior, always
a sure sign of inward purity?

There is this difference then between the intellectual and the moral
character. The one can be measured, the other cannot. But the reply
to these sophistical objections is still the same as before. The
purpose of the ethical rule is to furnish aids in the development
of personality. The aim in view is not genetic, but teleological,
not to determine how far in analyzing a man’s character down to the
bottom he may be found to be already admirable, but to help him in
attaining excellence, by progressively advancing toward strength and
virtue. And moral reputation is a great help to this end. It is a prop
on which he can lean. He who does right acts and has the credit for
them, is thereby encouraged to do other right acts. And if the inner
voice whispers, as it is sure to do in the finer natures, that the
good opinion of his fellows, founded on his correct deportment, is
undeserved, the shame of it may lead him to more determined efforts
to merit the character which, on however insufficient evidence, is
attributed to him.

Reputation is sacred because it is an almost indispensable means to
further mental and moral progress.

FOOTNOTES:

[53] _Vide_ note at the end of the Chapter.

[54] A right is a claim of one person upon another or others, and the
justification consists in its relation to personality. Rights exist
between persons for the sake of the maintenance and development of
personality.

[55] Animals, for the purpose now in hand, may be regarded as things,
being devoid of personality, though certain modifications in the
treatment of animals are prescribed by the fact that they are sentient
creatures. But there is no moral interdiction of the involuntary
servitude of animals.

[56] See Chapter VII on “An Ethical Programme of Social Reform” in _The
World Crisis_, published by D. Appleton and Company, 1915.

[57] A remark may here be in place regarding the erudition expended in
determining which of the writings attributed to some great philosopher
like Plato are spurious, and which genuine. Is the time and labor spent
on such researches worth while? The object in this case is not so much
to clear or vindicate the reputation of the philosopher, or to give him
his due, as to rescue for posterity, free from corruptions, a living
and quickening thing to which he has given birth, and which the world
cannot afford to lose. For the work of a great philosopher like Plato
is alive, and is valuable because it is still quickening. And it is
quickening, not because of any positive formulation of truth (like a
scientific law), but because of the élan of the human spirit with which
it is vibrant in attacking the eternal problems of life and destiny.
The same applies to the industry of modern critics in collecting
material wherewith to facilitate the deeper understanding of some great
poet like Dante or Goethe.




