CHAPTER III

EMERSON


I find on looking backward that my development proceeded with the help
of a series of definitions fixing my attitude toward teachers who made
a special appeal to me, and toward great historic tendencies past and
present. I was helped both by what I was able to appreciate in them,
and, where I diverged, by what they forced me to think out for myself.
Here let me acknowledge a passing debt to Emerson. As in the case
of Kant, a strong attraction drew me toward Emerson with temporary
disregard of radical differences,—although the spell was never so
potent or so persistent in the latter instance as in the former. I made
Emerson’s acquaintance in 1875. I came into touch with the Emerson
circle and read and re-read the _Essays_. The value of Emerson’s
teaching to me at that time consisted in the exalted view he takes
of the self. Divinity as an object of extraneous worship for me had
vanished. Emerson taught that immediate experience of the divine power
in self may take the place of worship. His doctrine of self-reliance
also was bracing to a youth just setting out to challenge prevailing
opinions and to urge plans of transformation upon the community in
which he worked. But I soon discovered that Emerson overstresses
self-affirmation at the expense of service. For a time indeed I
reconciled in my own fashion the two contrary tendencies. The divine
power, I argued, flows through me as a channel—hence the grandeur
which attaches to my spiritual nature. But the divine power manifests
itself in redressing the wrongs that exist in the world, and in putting
an end to such violations of personality as the sexual and economic
exploitations which disgrace human society. So for a time I continued
to walk on air with Emerson, and had my head in the clouds,—the clouds
in which Emerson enveloped me.

Out of this false sense of security, this quasi-pantheistic
self-affirmation, the experiences of the next few years effectually
roused me. I came to see that Emerson’s pantheism in effect spoils his
ethics. Be thyself, he says, not a counterfeit or imitation of someone
else. Be different. But why! Because the One manifests itself in
endless variety. Penetrating below the surface, however, one finds that
in this kind of philosophy the value of difference, to which I attach
essential importance on ethical grounds, is nothing more than that of
a foil. According to Emerson life is a universal masquerade, and the
interest of the whole business of living consists in the ever-renewed
discovery that the face behind the different masks is still the same.
Difference is not cherished on its own account. And here, as in the
case of the uniformity principle of Hebraism, I found myself dissenting.

Emerson is a kind of eagle, circling high up in the ether—_non soli
cedit_.

Emerson with his oracular sayings might have served as a priest at
Dodona or led the mysteries at Eleusis. Yet, withal, he is genuinely
American,—a rare blend of ancient mystic and modern Yankee,—a valued
poet too, but as an ethical guide to be accepted only with large
reservations.




CHAPTER IV

THE TEACHINGS OF JESUS


At about this time I began to occupy myself more seriously than I
had done before, with the study of the New Testament. I had, I think
a great advantage in my approach to it, for the very reason that I
had not been brought up in the Christian tradition. I came from the
outside, with a mind fresh to receive first-hand impressions. I had
not had instilled into me from childhood the kind of hesitant awe
that prevents impartial appraisement of excellences and of possible
deficiencies. On the other hand, as a searcher I was deeply interested
to ascertain what Christianity could give me, and to what extent it
could further my spiritual development. I had not the enforcedly
apologetic attitude; I did not come prepared to accept without question
nor yet to find fault; I came to test for my own use. Here am I, with
life and its problem before me—how can the teachings of Jesus help me
in my search, in my dire perplexities?

I must say to begin with that I was particularly struck with the
originality of Jesus’ teachings, a quality in them which to my
amazement I had found disputed, not only by Jews, but by representative
Christians. In Jewish circles it is not uncommon to speak almost
condescendingly of Christianity as of a daughter religion commissioned
to spread abroad the truths of Judaism, with such alloy as may be
needed to suit them to the apprehension of the gentiles. But Christian
teachers likewise—I remember particularly a recent sermon to that
effect—have taken the ground that Jesus added nothing new to the
ethical insight of mankind. His work, it is said, consisted merely in
supplying a sufficient motive for performing the duties which everyone
knows, but which, lacking this motive, we are supposedly impotent to
practice. This strange misapprehension of the intimate nature of Jesus’
contribution to ethical progress is largely due, I take it, to the
poverty of our moral vocabulary. Language puts at our disposal only
a few terms, such as Justice, Righteousness, Love,—which must needs
stand for a great variety of moral ideas. Thus Justice in Plato’s use
of the word, implies that “a shoemaker shall stick to his last,” that
those who perform the humble functions shall be content to perform
them in due subservience to their superiors. A very different meaning
was attached to justice by the Hebrew prophets as I have explained
in the last chapter. Again, a quite different conception of justice
is framed and stressed by modern social reformers. Now it is this
ambiguity of the moral vocabulary that conceals the novelty of Jesus’
precepts. Thus, to mention only a single capital instance, it has been
asserted that the Golden Rule as taught by Jesus is not original, but
substantially the same rule that had been laid down by Confucius 500
years before the time of Jesus. But on closer scrutiny it will be seen
that the two Golden Rules are by no means the same. As propounded
by the Chinese sage the rule appears to mean: Keep the balance true
between thyself and thy neighbor; illustrate in thy conduct the
principle of equilibrium. As impressed upon his disciples by Jesus it
means: Look upon thy neighbor as thy other self; act towards him as if
thou wert he.

To return to my point, the impression of novelty which I received
in reading the Gospels was definite and striking. The mythological
idealization of Jesus, indeed, I put aside as a thing that did not
concern me. On the other hand, to say with certain modern liberals
that he was just a man, an infinitely gracious personality, one who
exemplified in his life the virtues of forgiveness and self-sacrifice,
did not satisfy me either. Buddha too had taught forgiveness: “For
hatred is not conquered by hatred at any time; hatred is conquered by
love.” It could not then be the bare precept of forgiveness that lets
light on the secret of Jesus. And self-sacrifice—“Greater love hath no
man than this, that he should lay down his life for his friend”—had
been practiced within and without the pale of Hebraism.

That he continued the work of his Hebrew predecessors I made no doubt.
On the Hebrew side he was a prophet, or rather, a saint in Israel. But
I had just as little doubt that he took a step beyond his predecessors,
that his teachings bear upon them the signature of originality.

To put my thought briefly, I came to conclude that the ethical
originality of Jesus consists in a new way of dealing with the problem
of evil, that is, of evil in the guise of oppression. The prophets, his
predecessors, as we have seen, identified injustice with oppression;
and in the first flush of their moral enthusiasm the more optimistic
among them believed that justice as they conceived of it would
presently triumph and that oppression would cease altogether—“Arise,
shine, for thy light is come.” God would miraculously interfere, and
bring about on earth a state of righteousness. But years and centuries
passed by, and oppression, far from ceasing, became under the ruthless
administration of Rome ever more grinding and terrible. The yoke of
Rome weighed upon the Jews as it did upon other peoples; but perhaps,
because they were more independent in spirit, it galled them more
sorely. The fiery zealots among the Jews persisted in hoping that
by supreme desperate efforts, God coming to their aid, they might
yet succeed in shaking off this yoke—efforts which culminated in the
horrors of the last siege of Jerusalem. Jesus was not of their way of
thinking. He seems indeed to have believed that the end of the existing
order was near. It was too incredibly bad to last. The world would
be consumed by fire. A new earth and a new heaven would appear. But
in the meantime how accommodate oneself to the intolerable fact of
oppression? Jesus said, Resist not evil in the guise of oppression, it
is irresistible. He mentions in particular three forms of intolerable
oppression: a blow in the face, the stripping of a man of his garment,
and the coercing him to do the arbitrary bidding of another. He says,
Resist not evil, resist not oppression. Shall then evil triumph? Is the
victim helplessly at the mercy of the injurer? Shall he even be told
that in a servile spirit he must accept the indignities that are put
upon him? No; this is not the meaning. Quite a different meaning is
implied. And here the teaching of Jesus takes its novel turn. There is
a way, he says to the victim, in which you can spiritually triumph over
the evildoer, and make your peace with irresistible oppression. Use
it as a means of self-purification; pause to consider what the inner
motives are that lead your enemy, and others like him, to do such acts
as they are guilty of, and to so violate your personality and that
of others. The motives _in them_ are lust, greed, anger, wilfulness,
pride. Now turn your gaze inward upon yourself, look into your own
heart and learn, perhaps to your amazement, that the same evil streams
trickle through you; that you, too, are subject, even if it be only
subconsciously and incipiently, to the same appetites, passions, and
pride, that animate your injurers. Therefore let the sufferings you
endure at the hands of those who allow these bad impulses free rein in
their treatment of you lead you to expel the same bad impulses that
stir potentially in your breast; let this experience fill you with a
deeper horror of the evil, and prove the incentive to secure your own
emancipation from its control. In this way you will achieve a real
triumph over your enemy, and will be able to make your peace with
oppression. There are other intolerable evils in the world besides
oppression which nevertheless must be tolerated. The method of Jesus
can be applied to these also. This method I regard as a permanent
contribution to the ethical progress of humanity.

A second original trait in Jesus’ teaching I found in his conception
of the spiritual nature, and of his doctrine of love as dependent on
that conception. The conception or definition is still negative as
in the non-violation ethics of the Hebrew prophets. The spiritual
element in man is hidden. It cannot be apprehended as to what it
is substantively. The attributes ascribed to it are the effects in
which it manifests itself; this goes without saying. To define the
spiritual nature means to describe these effects, these manifestations.
According to the Hebrew predecessors of Jesus the spiritual power is
to be conceived of as that which prompts a man to respect the holy
precinct of personality in others and in himself. What the holy thing
is remains unknown. This view leads to acts of justice and mercy, as
above explained. According to Jesus the spiritual essence in man bids
him expel the inner, impure impulses that lead to external violations.
In brief, the spiritual power is conceived of in terms of purity. It
is the pure thing in man that thrusts out as alien to itself whatever
is impure—whatever is of the world, the flesh, and, in mythological
language, whatever is Satanic. In this sense I say that the definition
is negative. It marks out, indeed, a definite line of conduct; and it
even leads, as we shall presently see, to active efforts in a specific
direction. A negative principle may have certain positive results.
But in the main, nevertheless, the teaching of Jesus enlightens us as
to what shall not be rather than as to what shall be. From the Hebrew
prophets we learn that there shall not be violation of personality or
injustice, the positive concomitant being mercy; from Jesus’ teachings
we learn that there shall not be impurity in the inner forum, the
positive by-product being the doctrine of love.

Taking over the Hebrew heritage, Jesus affirmed that the spiritual
nature exists in all human beings. In every man there is presumed to
be this inner power to reject the unclean admixtures, to ward off and
repel the carnal solicitations, to withdraw from the “world,” and to
move upward toward the source of purity, which is God. The spirituality
of man consisting of purity, the Father-God, the Father of Lights,
is likewise conceived as the absolutely pure, in this sense as the
most holy. In every man there is a ray of the eternal light emanating
from the eternal luminary, and all men are one in so far as their
rays converge at the focus of Godhead. To love men is to be conscious
of one’s unity with them in the central life, and to give effect to
this consciousness. Hence Christian love, the love that Jesus taught,
is no earthly love, no mere sentiment, or outreaching of the human
affections. On the contrary, the natural human ties are repeatedly set
aside in the _logia_. To love another is to love him in God. Later the
current phrase became, to love him in Christ; that is, to think of him,
and act towards him, as if he possessed the same capacity for purity
with oneself.

The love of others in God or Christ encouraged a particular kind of
earthly beneficence, and it especially inspired the followers of
Jesus with an unparalleled zeal in works of remedial (though never of
preventive) charity. This may at first sight seem paradoxical. The
young man is advised to dispossess himself of all he has, and in the
same breath is told to distribute his possessions among the poor.
Why not rather scatter them to the winds? Why should not the poor too
cease to toil and spin and take heed for the morrow? For their simple
necessities God would provide. The two-fold attitude, however, is easy
to understand if we remember that certain acts of helpfulness have a
symbolic significance, as attesting the value we set upon the person to
whose needs we minister, much as a flower offered to a beloved person
emblematically intimates our sense of the beauty and worth of the one
to whom the tribute is offered. Christian charity, on its earthly
side, has a similar meaning and purpose. It is intended to efface the
indignity to which human beings are subjected when reduced to extreme
indigence or allowed to suffer without relief, for it is the disdain
of the spiritual personality thus evinced which Jesus disallows. He
bids his followers intimate by earthly tokens their consciousness of
the super-earthly worth of their fellow-beings. But the pursuit of
riches as such he nowhere encourages—quite the contrary. And it is
certainly a mistake to represent Jesus, as has recently been done, as
a kind of precursor of modern Socialism, and to think of him as one
who, if he had lived in our time, would have laid stress on equality
of opportunity for all to gain earthly possessions. He who advocated
wealth for none could not be supposed to have sympathized with a social
movement whose first object it is to secure wealth for all.

It is this interpretation of love that helped me to understand the
interior meaning of the doctrine of the forgiveness of enemies
as taught by Jesus, and to perceive wherein it differs from the
apparently identical mode of behavior enjoined by Buddha and the Stoic
Seneca. It plays a capital rôle in Jesus’ teaching. As illustrated
by the proto-martyr Stephen it probably effected the conversion of
Paul. Jesus says: “Bless them that curse you.” But how is it possible
to bless those that curse us? How, for instance, was it possible for
Stephen to bless the men of blood at the very moment when they were
crushing him under stones? To bless them that curse you, to bless them
that despitefully use you, means to distinguish between the spiritual
possibilities latent in them and their overt conduct, to see the human,
the potentially divine face behind the horrible mask, and to invoke the
influence of the divine power upon them in order that it may change
them into their purer, better selves.

With complete and eager appreciation of the points of excellence
contained in these teachings, with a reverence which it is impossible
to express in words for their incomparable Author, and with a large
sense of the beneficent influence which they have exercised on human
history, I still could not avoid the question, so vital for me, Have
these ethical teachings of the great Master the stamp of finality upon
them? Has Jesus really spoken the last word in ethics? Is nothing left
for us but further to expand and apply the truth which he laid down
once and for all? When theology goes, the last stand of apologetic
writers is apt to be made on the ethics. The instinct to claim finality
for the religion in which one has been brought up asserts itself in the
claim that the moral teachings at least are unexceptionable and valid
for all time to come. The searcher who is in great moral perplexities
and who seeks help for others and himself, is bound to ask and will ask
in no captious spirit, is this so?

The decisive point is whether the ethical teachings of Jesus supply
a principle which enables us to work with zest in the world, to take
the keenest interest in all the manifold activities of human society,
to embrace the world with the view of penetrating it with a spiritual
purpose and of thus transforming it. Do these teachings exhibit a
way of making the world and the flesh instrumental to the spirit, or
do they serve to turn us away from the world and its interests, to
abandon the world in despair? Is the conception of spirituality as
purity adequate? Purity is certainly one aspect of morality; is it
the sole or the principal factor in it? The other-worldly attitude
in the Gospels is certainly clearly marked. It is the background on
which the ethical precepts stand forth. Tyrrel has argued as against
Harnack for the close connection between the thought of Jesus and the
apocalyptic vision. I asked myself, Can the apocalyptic vision, that
is to say the other-worldliness, be dissociated from the ethics, or
is the relation between them necessary?[11] If the world is speedily,
almost immediately, coming to an end, then it is justifiable to prefer
celibacy to marriage, to ignore the state, to counsel disregard of the
toiling and the spinning. All of this is warranted on the assumption
that the order of things in which these institutions and activities
have their place is about to disappear.

But if this expectation is deceived, if things continue in their
ancient course, if the world and the flesh persist, taking on ever new
and more baffling shapes, how is a system of ethics which is based on
the assumption of one state of things to be reconciled with a state
of things exactly the opposite? How shall an ethical person conduct
himself in a world which his philosophy of life teaches him to reject,
but with which the necessities of his existence compel him to come to
terms day by day and hour by hour? There must then be compromise. And
the history of Christianity up to the present moment is the record of
such compromises. Monasticism was one of the earliest. A distinction
was made, so to speak, between perfect and imperfect Christians,
between a class of men and women who lived in ascetic seclusion, as if
the world did not exist, and another class, the greater number, who
managed ethically as best they could, dependent on the supererogatory
merits of the real Christians or saints to eke out their unholiness.
Another species of compromise is illustrated, especially in Protestant
countries. It appears as a division between the contracted sphere
of holiness and the circumambient sphere of the practical life, in
both of which, however, the same individual has his place. Chastity,
forgiveness of personal enemies, and the like virtues are to be
practiced in the contracted sphere of private life, the ability to
practice these virtues being derived from mystical identification
with Jesus. In the Christian’s public life no such identification is
possible, and he is left to be consciously or unconsciously unholy. As
a politician, as a competitor in the struggle for wealth, he remains
without ethical direction. The ethical ideal of the Gospels requires
for its setting the apocalyptic vision. It derives its cogency from the
belief that the world is about to perish. Can it serve as a sufficient
guide to those who must live in the world, and affirm their ethical
personality in dealing with it? In politics, in business, in science,
in art, must we not somehow see our way to the conception that these
great interests are not alien to the spiritual nature, introducing
perchance impure admixtures into it, but rather can be made subservient
or instrumental to it? Yes; but instrumental in what way? At this
point, not only the Christian system, but every one of the systems of
ethics that have arisen since then has failed. And it is, moreover,
perfectly evident that the instrumental function of the sex relation
or of the pursuit of knowledge or of patriotism cannot be determined
unless we first answer the one question which the ethical writers are
in the habit of evading—Instrumental to what end? What is the ethical
end? Instruments are means to ends—how can the means be rightly
appraised without a definite conception of the end? And if the end be
the affirmation of our ethical personality, of our spiritual nature, of
that holy thing in us without which man loses his worth (and without
which the rule of non-violation itself falls to the ground, since where
there is nothing inviolable there can be no infringement), it is plain
that we must seek a positive definition of the spiritual nature which
shall serve as a principle of regulation where the empty concept of
purity has manifestly failed.

Christian ethics has promoted the moral development of mankind in a
thousand ways. It has helped even by its mythological embodiment of a
transcendental idea to place the individual more firmly on his feet. It
has emphasized the inner springs of conduct; it has given prominence to
certain principal virtues of the private life; but, like every product
of the mind and aspirations of man, it exhibits the limitations of the
time and of the social conditions under which it arose. The conditions
have since changed. Society has become infinitely more complex, and
in consequence new moral problems have forced themselves upon men’s
attention; and with the help of Christianity itself the human race has
advanced beyond the point of view for which Christianity stands.[12]

Speaking again only for myself I could not assent to the position
that finality appertains to the ethical teachings of the Gospel, that
they or their Author have spoken the last word in ethics. I could not
persuade myself that this is so because I failed to get from these
teachings, inestimably precious as they are, an answer to the question
that most pressed upon me—Instrumental in what sense, instrumental to
what end?

FOOTNOTES:

[11] I am aware that a highly esteemed school of modern theologians
maintain that the apocalyptic element is a secondary and even an
embarrassing feature for Jesus. But I am unable to convince myself of
the justice of this view.

[12] See the similes used in the previous chapter on the growth of the
tree as manifested in the putting forth of a new branch, and the ascent
of an eminence which includes the part of the spiritual landscape
previously seen, but also that part which from the previous station was
excluded.




