CHAPTER I

THE COLLECTIVE TASK OF MANKIND AND THE THREE-FOLD REVERENCE


The social institutions, the family, the organs of education, the
vocation, the political organization, the organization of mankind, the
ideal religious society are to be treated as a progressive series. The
individual is to pass successively through them, advancing from station
to station toward ethical personality.

In designating the social institutions as an ethical series, care
must be taken not to confound the terms of the series as now existent
with the terms as they would be did they conform to their ethical
functions. For instance, even the monogamic family is as yet only in
part ethically organized. School and university are adrift as to their
ethical purpose. The majority of mankind are engaged in occupations
which it would be absurd to call vocations, and the international group
exists as yet barely in embryo. Hence when we speak of the social
institutions as a progressive series through which the individual is
to advance towards personality, we are describing the aim of social
reconstruction, not the present state of things. The spiritual nature
of man must create for itself appropriate social organs. It has been
painfully engaged in the attempt to do so since the existence of our
race on earth.

In each of the social institutions we are to distinguish between the
empirical substratum and the spiritual imprint which it is to receive.
We find in each ready to hand some natural non-moral motive or set of
motives of which we are to avail ourselves in the endeavor to evoke the
spiritual result. Thus in the family the non-moral motive is affection
due to consanguinity; in the school sociality, the school society being
the first society into which the child enters; in the vocation there
is the craving for mental self-expression, in the state, patriotism,
or the feeling we have for the larger whole in which we are included
on the basis of similarity of language, historic tradition, etc. The
natural basis of the international group of society is the empirical,
and as yet in no way ethical, fact of the commercial and industrial
interdependence of the different countries, a fact used by M. Bloch and
his more recent followers as an argument against war.

In popular literature the empirical substratum and the spiritual
relation to be produced by means of it are constantly confused. In any
genuinely ethical system they must be carefully discriminated.[69]

In each of the social institutions, or, as we may now call them, the
phases of life experience through which the individual must pass on the
way toward personality, the winning of the ethical result depends on
observance of _the three-fold reverence_. What I mean by the three-fold
reverence must be explained in some detail, especially as the reader
might otherwise be led into identifying my view with that expressed by
Goethe in _Wilhelm Meister_. The three modes of reverence mentioned
by Goethe in his sketch of the “pedagogical province” have for their
background the poet’s pantheism. The view here set forth is based on
ethical idealism.

In order to introduce my thought let me go back to the phrase
repeatedly used in Book III—“the task of humanity.” Mankind as a whole,
the generations past, present and to come, have a certain work to do, a
task to accomplish. A collective obligation rests on our race, spanning
the generations.

The spiritual conception of the collective task is the basis of the
three-fold reverence. The spiritual result, as was said above, is in
every instance to be superinduced upon an empirical substratum. The
empirical substratum in this case is mankind considered as a developing
entity, which partially reproduces in the present the mental and moral
acquisitions of ancestors, partially increases the heritage and passes
it on to the newcomers. I, as an individual, am also inextricably
linked up backward and forward with those who come before and those who
are to come after. I cannot take myself out of this web. The task laid
upon human society as a whole is also laid upon me. I am a conscious
thread in the fabric that is weaving, conscious in a general way of the
pattern to be woven.

But viewed empirically the development of humanity is haphazard. Much
is preserved from the past that ought to be cast aside. Many traces
of past error remain unexpunged in the life of the present. A mixed
stream, compounded of good and evil, passes through our veins into
our successors’. The empirical fact is simply the fact of partial
reproduction, partial augmentation and partial transmission. The
ethical conception of progress depends on the view that there is an
ideal pattern of the spiritual relation in the mind of man, destined
to become more explicit as it is tested out and that the present
generation ought to appraise the heritage of the past according to this
pattern, preserving and rejecting and adding its own quota in such a
way as to enable the succeeding generations to sift the worthful from
the worthless more successfully, and to see the ideal pattern more
explicitly.

The three-fold reverence has been described as reverence towards
superiors, equals and inferiors. For this inadequate description
I would substitute the following: In place of reverence towards
superiors, reverence for the valid work of ethicizing human relations
already accomplished in the past, reverence for the precious permanent
achievements and for those who achieved them,—the “Old Masters.” The
human race has gained a certain ethical footing in the empirical
sphere. The general task has not to be begun _ab initio_. In the act
of separating what is worth while from what is worthless, in the very
process of revision and reinterpretation, we manifest our reverence for
the past. It is thus that true historicity is distinguished from blind
conservatism. And besides, by studying the old masters, we acquire
a certain standard of excellence. Since those who have contributed
epoch-making advances in philosophy, in religion, in science, inspire
us by the grandeur of their attack on the great problems; and the
spirit of their attack, is unspeakably stimulating to us, even when we
reject their solutions. We cannot too humbly sit as disciples at the
feet of the great masters if discipleship has this meaning.

Reverence of the first type prescribes the same attitude towards
preëminent personalities among our contemporaries. They rank with the
great predecessors inasmuch as they are in a way for us predecessors.
They are in advance of us. To revere them is to endeavor to come
abreast of them, to obtain the advantage of the forward movement which
their superior capacity enabled them to initiate, and to start where
they leave off, adding our small quota.

The second kind of reverence is directed toward those who are, in
respect to their gifts and opportunities, approximately on the same
level with us, but whose gifts differ from and are supplementary
to ours. In our relation to them we may learn the great lesson of
appreciating unlikeness, and working out our own correlative unlikeness
by way of reaction.

The third kind of reverence is directed toward the undeveloped,
among whom I include the young, the backward groups among civilized
peoples, and the uncivilized peoples. We are to reverence that which
is potential in all of these individuals and groups, and we do so by
fitting ourselves to help them actualize their spiritual possibilities.
Reverence of the third kind takes the highest rank among the three.
The spiritual life of the world is a deep mine as yet explored only
near the surface. The unrealized possibilities of mankind are the chief
asset. But in order to effectuate our purpose with respect to the
undeveloped, we must have reverence toward the great Old Masters, to
gain a certain standard of excellence; and reverence towards unlikeness
in others to become ourselves differentiated individualities, and in
order to respect the unlikeness which we shall presently likewise find
in the backward and the young. So that the three reverences play into
one another and are inseparable from one another, the first two being
indispensable to the third. They are in truth a “trinity in unity.”
But the third reverence is the supreme one. The chief objective must
be the undeveloped, because our face must be turned toward the future,
because the task of mankind is as yet in its early stages. The third
reverence is supreme. Now it is only when we have grasped the meaning
of the triple reverence that we can fully appreciate the significance
of the family as the first matrix in which the reverential attitudes
are to be acquired. It is only then that we can rightly conceive of
the organs of education, and of the end upon which the activities of
school and university should converge. And similarly we shall find
our interpretation of the vocation, the state, and the international
society illuminated by this conception of the three-fold reverence.

In popular religious teaching the individual is thrust into the
foreground. His salvation as a detached entity is the principal object.
In positivism and evolutionalism society in its empirical aspect is
exalted, and the individual tends to be regarded as a stepping-stone.
In the spiritual interpretation of the collective task as outlined,
the individual remains integral and sacrosanct. The spiritual society
of which the image is to be imprinted on human society is a society
of indefeasible ethical personalities.[70] The individual even now at
his station in the present attributes to himself this lofty character
and the various obligations which he already recognizes, and which he
endeavors to fulfil, afford him ample opportunity to vindicate his
spiritual selfhood. If in addition he looks forward longingly to the
future, and to the greater spiritual fulfilment that may be expected
among posterity, this expectation is founded on the belief that what he
already possesses in germ will then be more unfolded, that the ideal
of the indefeasible worth of man of which he is already conscious
in himself will then be more completely recognized and its infinite
implications be more fully understood.[71]

FOOTNOTES:

[69] Thus the interdependence of nations in respect to their material
interests is often erroneously expatiated on as if it constituted an
actually ethical bond between them.

[70] While at the same time the ethical personality, unlike
the “windowless monads” of Leibnitz is effectuated only in the
cross-relations which subsist between each one and his spiritual
associates.

[71] I may here point out the bearings of this general point of view
on the much-mooted and confused question of the value of the study
of history. Ranke holds that the aim of the historian should be to
reproduce factually the occurrences of the past. Robinson insists on
the uses of history. But uses to what end? The history of the past is
fragmentary and full of gaps. The data with respect to some of the
most important periods are irrecoverable. The attitude of the human
race towards its own history, I take it, should be like that of an
individual towards his past. I cannot really resuscitate my past.
Memory is treacherous. Much has been forgotten. The events of my youth
are discolored when seen in the perspective of later years. I should
try to know myself as far as I can, but with a view of pressing on and
realizing with such light upon myself as I have, the ethical aim. The
same applies to mankind. And the important point is in the review to
disengage the ideas that controlled the principal social institutions
in the past, and to appraise these ideas from the standpoint of our
present ethical insight. Thus, in treating the history of the family,
we should single out the ideas that controlled the family relation, the
idea of the _patria potestas_, the feudal idea, or the connection of
the family with landed property. In writing the history of the organs
of education, we should bring into view priestly education as among the
Brahmins, musical or æsthetic education as among the Greeks, the idea
of princely education, the idea of preparation for the government of
an empire, which accounts for the system of the English universities,
the controlling idea of the German universities. And then at the end of
our survey we shall be in a better position to discern what is to be
the ideal of school and university education in an ethical democracy.
The same applies to the controlling ideas of the state, and of the
remaining social institutions.




