CHAPTER II

THE HEBREW RELIGION


The separation was not violent. There was no sudden wrenching off.
There were none of those painful struggles which many others have had
to undergo when breaking away from the faith of their fathers. It was
all a gradual, smooth transition, the unfolding of a seed that had long
been planted. I have never felt the bitterness often characteristic of
the radical, nor his vengeful impulse to retaliate upon those who had
imposed the yoke of dogmas upon his soul. I had never worn the yoke. I
had never been in bondage. I had been gently guided. And consequently
the wine did not turn into vinegar, the love into hate. The truth is, I
was hardly aware of the change that had taken place until it was fairly
consummated. One day I awoke, and found that I had traveled into a new
country. The landscape was different; the faces I encountered were
different; and looking casually into a mental mirror, as it were, I
perceived that I too had become different. And I was sure also that I
had gained, not lost, that into my new spiritual home I had taken with
me, not indeed the images of my gods, like Æneas, fleeing from Troy,
but something for which those images had stood, and which in other ways
would remain for me a permanent possession.

It has been said that the science of today lives only in so far
as it supersedes the science of yesterday. Whatever may be true
of science (and the statement is certainly not true without large
qualifications—the science of Newton and Darwin has not been
“superseded”—and it may even come to pass that outreachings of a more
ancient science frustrated at the time will hereafter be taken up anew
with fairer results than formerly were attainable), in religion at
all events there is no such thing as the bare substitution of the new
for the old. The religions of the past, at least the more advanced
religions, are not simply to be cast on the scrap heap, or treated as
exploded superstitions. There is in all of them a certain fund of truth
which may not be allowed to perish, but should be rescued out of the
wreck.

On the other hand, even the most advanced religions contain a large
admixture of error, survivals of primitive taboos, mythological
elements having their root in polytheism, while the very truths which I
have just admitted to be infinitely precious require to be restated so
as to fit them into a larger synthesis.

It is not easy to define my attitude toward the Old Masters, I mean
the Old Masters in religion, the incomparably great religious teachers
of the past, who tower above us like giants. My attitude is one of
profoundest reverence—toward the Hebrew prophets and Jesus especially.
The Hebrew religion first sounded the distinctively spiritual note.
Zoroaster had emphasized the struggle of the powers of Light and
the powers of Darkness, but the conception of light in his system
remained to a considerable extent materialistic. Buddha emphasized
Enlightenment in the sense of escape from Illusion, and in conjunction
with it sympathy for all who remain under the spell of illusion.
Confucius endeavored to walk, and taught his followers to walk, with
equipoise in the Middle Path; he emphasized what he thought to be the
cosmic principle of balance or equilibrium. Plato, taking his stand on
the highest terrestrial platform, caught, or believed himself to have
caught, sight of transcendental beauty as the ultimate principle in
things. But the prophets of Israel assigned to the ethical principle
the highest rank in man’s life and in the world at large. The best
thing in man, they declared, is his moral personality; and the best
thing in the world, the supreme and controlling principle, is the moral
power that pervades it.

The predominance of the ethical principle in religion dates from the
prophets of Israel. The religious development of the human race took
a new turn in their sublime predications, and I for one am certainly
conscious of having drawn my first draught of moral inspiration from
their writings.[6]

But nevertheless I found myself compelled to separate from the religion
of Israel. Now why was it necessary for me to take this step? Why not
continue along the path first blazed by the Hebrew prophets—smoothing
it perhaps and widening it? Why not separate the dross from the
gold, the error from the truth, explicating what is implicit in that
truth, and adapting it to the needs and conditions of the modern
age? The answer is that the truth contained in the Hebrew, and as I
shall presently show, in the Christian religion, is not capable of
such adaptation. It claims finality. I have mentioned that there is
an element of permanent value in both the Hebrew and the Christian
religion, and that it should be restated and fitted into a larger
synthesis. But this is impossible unless the Hebrew or Christian
setting be broken, unless the element to be preserved is taken out of
its context, and treated freshly and with perfect freedom. A religion
like the two I am concerned with is a determinate thing. It is a closed
circle of thoughts and beliefs. It is capable of a certain degree
of change but not of indefinite change. The limits of change are
determined by its leading conceptions—the monotheistic idea in the one
case, and the centrality of the figure of Christ in the other. Abandon
these, and the boundaries by which the religion is circumscribed are
passed.

The great religious teachers are men who see the spiritual landscape
from a certain point of view, including whatever is visible from their
station, excluding whatever is not. The religion which they originate
is thus both inclusive and sharply exclusive. What they see with
their rapt eyes they describe with a trenchancy and fitness never
thereafter to be equaled.[7] But in order to progress in religion it is
necessary to advance toward a different station, to reach a different,
a higher eminence, and from that to look forth anew upon the spiritual
landscape, comprehending the outlook of one’s predecessors in a new
perspective, seeing what they saw and much besides.

Religious growth may also be compared to the growth of a tree. To
expect that development shall continue along the Hebrew or Christian
lines is like expecting that a tree will continue to develop along
one of its branches. There is a limit beyond which the extension of a
branch cannot go. Then growth must show itself in the putting forth of
a new branch.

But let me now state with somewhat greater particularity the reasons
that compelled me to depart from the faith of Israel, and to leave my
early religious home, cherishing pious memories of it, but nevertheless
firmly set in my course towards new horizons.[8]

1. The difficulty created by the claim that Israel is an elect people,
that it stands in a peculiar relation to the Deity. This claim, at
the time when it was put forth, was neither arrogant nor unfounded.
It was not arrogant because the mission was understood to be a heavy
burden not a privilege: or if a privilege at all, then the tragic
privilege of martyrdom, a martyrdom continued through generations.
And the claim was not unfounded or preposterous at the time when it
was put forth because the Hebrews were in reality the only people who
conceived of morality in terms of holiness. It was not absurd for them
to assert their mission to be the teachers of mankind in respect to
the spiritual interpretation of morality, since there was something,
and that something infinitely important, which they actually had to
teach. Moral thinking and moral practices of course had existed from
immemorial times everywhere, but the conception of morality as divine
in its source, as spiritual in its inmost essence,—this immense idea
was the offspring of the Hebrew mind. On the other hand, I asked
myself, has not the task of Israel in this respect been accomplished?
Have not its Scriptures become the common property of the civilized
nations? And does not that teacher mistake his office who attempts to
maintain his magisterial authority after his pupils have come to man’s
estate, and are capable of original contributions? The “nations” are
not to be looked upon in the light of mere pupils. The ethical message
of Israel so far as it is sane is universalistic. It is founded on
the conviction that there is a moral nature in every human being, and
that the moral nature is a spiritual nature. And if this be so, then
the utterances, the insights, the new visions with which the spiritual
nature is pregnant, cannot be supposed to be restricted to members of
the Jewish people. If the teaching function is to be maintained it
must be exercised by all who have the gift. If there is to be an elect
body (a dangerous conception, the meaning of which is to be carefully
defined), it must consist of gentiles and Jews, of men of every race
and condition in whom the spiritual nature is more awakened than in
others, peculiarly vivid, pressing towards utterance.

2. Aside from the spiritual interpretation of morality, the mission
of the Jewish people has been said to consist in holding aloft the
standard of pure monotheism as against trinitarianism. But pure
monotheism is a philosophy rather than a religion. Taken by itself it
is too pure, too empty of content to serve the purposes of a living
faith. The attributes of omniscience, omnipotence, etc., ascribed to
Deity are highly abstract, too abstruse to be even thinkable, save
indirectly, and they certainly fail to touch the heart. As a matter
of fact it was the image of the Father projected upon the background
of these abstractions, that made the object of Jewish piety. Jahweh
is the heavenly spouse; Israel is to be his faithful earthly spouse.
The Children of Israel are pre-eminently his children. Other nations
likewise are his children,—some children of wrath to be cast out
and destroyed like the rebellious son in Deuteronomy, others to be
eventually gathered into the patriarchal household. But this view comes
back to the same general conception of the relations of Israel to other
nations which has just been discussed. Moreover, the Father image, as
representing the divine life in the world, even when extended so as to
include all mankind on equal terms, is open to a serious objection.[9]

3. If, nevertheless, the Jews have a mission, is it perhaps this: to
rehabilitate the prophetic ideal of social justice? Is it not social
justice that the world is crying for today? Were not the prophets of
Israel the great preachers of righteousness in the sense of social
justice? Did they not affirm that religion consists in justice and in
its concomitant mercifulness, but above all in justice? Did not Isaiah
say: “When ye come to tread my courts, who has demanded this of you?
Go wash you, make you clean. Put away the evil that is in your hands.
Cease to do evil; learn to do good.” And later on, “That ye let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke.” These are solemn,
marvelous words assuredly! They have been ringing down through the
ages, and still find their echo in our hearts. And yet the justice
idea of the prophets is inadequate to serve the purpose of social
reconstruction today. To go back to it would mean repristination, not
renovation. It is sound as far as it goes, but it does not go far
enough. It is negative, rather than positive; it is based on the idea
of non-violation. What we require today is a positive conception, and
this implies a positive definition of that holy thing in man that
is to be treated as inviolable. To the mind of the prophets justice
meant chiefly resistance to oppression, since oppression is the most
palpable exemplification of the forbidden violation. The prophets in
their outlook on the external relations of their people stood for the
weak, the oppressed, against the strong, the oppressor. They stood for
their own weak little nation, the Belgium of those days, against the
two over-mighty empires, Egypt and Assyria, that bordered it on either
side. In the internal affairs of Israel they espoused the cause of
the weak against the rich and strong: “Woe unto them that add house
to house and field to field, that grind the faces of the poor.” Ever
and ever again the same note resounds, the same intense, passionately
indignant feeling against violation in the form of oppression. But this
aspect of justice, as I have said, is the negative aspect,—inestimably
important, but insufficient. Where oppression does not occur, have the
claims of justice ceased? Is there not something even greater than
mere non-infringement, greater than mercifulness or kindness, which in
justice we owe to the personality of our fellows, namely, to aid in the
development of their personality? Righteousness, yes, by all means,—but
does the righteousness of the prophets of Israel exhaust or begin to
exhaust the content of that vast idea?

The universalistic ethical idea in the Hebrew religion is bound up with
and bound down by racial restrictions. The issue between monotheism
and trinitarianism is no longer a vital issue of our day. The Father
image as the symbol of Deity raises expectations which experience does
not confirm. The ideal of social justice as conceived by the prophets
of Israel is a valid but incomplete expression of what is implied in
social justice. These are weighty considerations that make it difficult
to retain the belief in the elect character attributed to the people of
Israel. There is one other, of very deep-reaching importance, that must
be noticed. An elect people is supposed to be an exemplary people, one
that sets a moral example which other nations are expected to copy. But
it has become more and more clear to me that the value of example in
the moral life has been overestimated and misunderstood. No individual,
for instance, can really serve as an example to others so as to be
copied by them. The circumstances are always somewhat different, the
natures are different, and the obligations, finely examined, are never
quite the same. In fact, the best that anyone can do for another by his
example is to stimulate him to express with consummate fidelity his
different nature in his own different way. I do not of course deny that
there are certain uniformities, chiefly negative, in moral conduct, but
I have come to think that the ethical quality of moral acts consists
in the points in which they differ rather than in those in which they
agree. The ideally ethical act, to my mind, is the most completely
individualized act.

And what is true of individuals is no less true of peoples. No people
can really be exemplary for other peoples, and in this sense elect.
Every people possesses a character of its own to which it is to give
expression in ways which I shall indicate in the last part of this
work. But the way rightly adopted by one nation cannot be a law or a
model for its sister nations. If the ideal of the modern Zionists were
realized, if the Jews were to return to Palestine, to speak once more
the language of the Bible, to cultivate their distinctive gifts, they
would not therefore produce a pattern which could be copied in Japan,
or among the 400 millions of China, or in the United States, or among
the Slavic or Latin peoples.

In concluding these reflections, I may not conceal from myself or
from others that the objection to the function of exemplariness, if
sustained, affects at the root both the theology and the ethics of the
past. If no individual can be in the strict sense an example to others,
neither can an individual Deity be an example to be copied by men,
neither can Christ be the perfect exemplar to be imitated. There can
be no single perfect exemplar. Virtues that bear the same name are not
therefore the same virtues. Often it is only the name that is the same,
not the substance; and where they are in a broad way the same, yet
there remains a difference of accent. The natures of men are unlike.
Their moral destiny is to work out the unlikeness of each in harmony
with that of the others. The moral equivalence of men, rather than
their moral equality, is for me the expression of the fundamental moral
relation.[10]

At the early stage of my career to which I am still adverting it was
urgently put to me that with all the changes that had taken place in
my inner life, I need not separate myself from the religion of the
Fathers, nay, that I might remain a servant and teacher of religion
within the Jewish fold, gradually weaning away from the beliefs which
they held those whom I might contrive to influence, and drawing them
up—such was the phrase used—to my own “higher level.” But this advice
was repelled by every inmost fibre of my being, and could not but be
utterly rejected. I was to publicly represent a certain belief with
the purpose of undermining it. I was to trade upon the simplicity of
my hearers in order to rob them of what they, crudely and mistakenly
perhaps, considered their most sacred truth, by feigning provisionally,
until I could alter their views, to be in agreement with them. Would
this be fair to them or to myself? Was I to act a lie in order to teach
the truth? There was especially one passage in the Sabbath service
which brought me to the point of resolution: I mean the words spoken
by the officiating minister as he holds up the Pentateuch scroll, “And
this is the Law which Moses set before the people of Israel.” I had
lately returned from abroad where I had had a fairly thorough course in
Biblical exegesis, and had become convinced that the Mosaic religion is
so to speak a religious mosaic, and that there is hardly a single stone
in it which can with certainty be traced to the authorship of Moses.
Was I to repeat these words? It was impossible. I was certain that they
would stick in my throat. On these grounds the separation was decided
on by me, and became irremediable.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] I still go back to that fountain-head for refreshment and
inspiration, much as a modern poet may go back to Homer, without
attempting to copy him, or as a modern sculptor or architect may go
back to the Greek artists without relinquishing his right and his duty
to help in producing a different kind of art, which perchance may one
day culminate in masterpieces like theirs, though his own performance
be but the poor beginning.

[7] Compare the ejaculatory deliverance of Isaiah, the Sermon on the
Mount, and the Parables of Jesus. Who can attempt in language to
express what they saw as they did?

[8] No seriously religious person will attempt to strike out into a
new path unless he be under inward coercion to do so. The advantages
of what is commonly called historic continuity (I have just shown
wherein real continuity consists, that of growth along the trunk, and
not of growth along the branch) are great. There is for one thing
the support derived from leaning on an ancient tradition, the proud
humility felt in passing on the torch that had been held by mighty
predecessors, the self-dedication to that which is larger than self,
_i.e._, to an institution and ideas that existed in the world before
one was born, and will exist after one is gone. There is the strength
drawn from contact with a large and powerful organization, powerful
both in sustaining one’s efforts, and in restraining and correcting
them when need be. There are, on the other side, the perils of
innovation, the errors into which one is led for lack of restraint and
correction, the too great dependence on self, the spiritual loneliness
and the lack of many gracious and useful aids to the religious life
such as a noble ritual, majestic music, the fit emotional expressions
of religious feeling, which are not to be had for the asking, the
fine embellishments that are precious in their way, and that, like
the fruits in the Gardens of the Gods, ripen slowly, and may not be
extemporized or anticipated.

[9] See Chapter IX on the Religious Society in Part IV of this volume.
It gives rise to the belief that men as individuals or collectively
are the objects of a special Providence, and that the universe is
so arranged as to be adapted to man’s needs, not to say his wishes;
whereas the facts show that man must adapt himself to the universe,
and find his physical safety and his ethical salvation in so doing.
The belief in the Father who allows not one hair of our heads to fall
unnoticed raises expectations to which actual experience fails to
correspond.

As to the issue between monotheism and trinitarianism, it has long
since become obsolescent, if not obsolete. The forward-looking men and
women of our time are absorbed in far other issues—Is the mechanical
theory propounded by science the ultimate account of things? Is the
world in which we live a blind machine? Is man a chance product of
nature, like the beasts that perish? Not is God one in unity or is He
a Triune God, but, is there a God at all? Is there a supersensible
reality? Is religion capable of a new lease of life, and of giving a
new lease of life to us who now are spiritually dead?

[10] Of many ethical types of behavior no examples whatever as yet
exist, for instance, of the ethically-minded employer or merchant,
ethically-minded in thought and in practice. The standard of ethical
behavior which we apply is at present higher and more exacting. The
standard itself indeed is in process of being defined, and there are
no illustrations of it, or none but very imperfect ones, on which to
dwell with satisfaction. But the same is true of other vocations. We
are very thankful for any examples that can be found. They seem to
prove that that which ought to be can be. But we may not lean on them
too hard. They are never quite adequate, even in their limited sphere;
and there is ever an Ought-to-be beyond that which has been even
partially realized, beyond that which has even as yet been conceived.
To make too much of example is to check moral progress. Along with a
due appreciation of past moral achievements, there should be encouraged
a spirit of brave adventure, a certain intrepidity of soul to venture
forth on voyages of discovery into unknown ethical regions, taking the
risks but bent upon the prize.




