CHAPTER IV

THE SHADOW OF SIN


If any term in the moral vocabulary stands in need of strict
redefinition, it is sin. Three elements combine to complete the idea
of sin: first, that the deed was one that ought not to have been done,
not so much because of its painful consequences to others or to self,
or to both, or, by repercussion on society as a whole; but because it
was opposed to what is intrinsically right: in other words, because it
contravened the kind of interrelation which would exist in its purity
in the ethical manifold.

Secondly, the idea of sin implies that the sinner himself is the doer
of the deed, or that there is to this extent freedom of the will. I do
not say that he is the cause of which the deed is the effect. Causality
appertains to sequent phenomena. As regards freedom of the will,
the distinction between the category of interdependence and that of
causality is vital. A long series of causes, such as bad heredity, bad
environment, etc., may have led A to determine to murder B.[51]

The notion of the freedom of the will as here viewed signifies that
no matter what the causal series may have been which leads up to the
act, when the act itself is about to be performed, when B is about to
experience the effect of A as cause, in that moment the relation of
interdependence between A and B ought to arise before the mind of A and
withhold him from completing his evil purpose.

Thirdly, it is characteristic of sin that the fuller knowledge that the
harmful deed is sinful _comes after the act_,—that it is the Fruit of
the Tree, the enlightenment of the eyes. As the serpent said: “If ye
eat of the fruit ye shall be as gods.”

Many a man has done what is called evil, and done it most deliberately,
knowing evil as evil. Remember the career of a Cæsar Borgia, the
extermination of the Caribbean Indians by the Spaniards, the outrages
on women perpetrated during the present war, the exploitation of human
labor practiced on a large scale among the civilized nations. That the
blackest crimes may be committed with a full knowledge of the horrible
consequences to the victims seems hardly to admit of doubt. Evil is
known as evil.

But evil in its character as sin cannot be fully recognized prior
to the act. In this respect the Greeks had a certain prescience of
the truth when they asserted that no one can knowingly commit evil;
only they failed to distinguish between evil and sin. A man _can_
knowingly commit evil, but cannot with full consciousness commit sin.
The knowledge of the sin is the divine elixir which may be distilled
from the evil deed (“Ye shall be as gods”), and the object of every
kind of punishment should be to extract that pain-giving but ultimately
peace-giving elixir.

Above I mentioned the criminal as the extreme type. But evils in
less formidable guise, though not on that account less evil, refined
invasions of the personality of others, spiritual oppressions,
sometimes deliberate, often unwitting, are included in everyone’s
experience. And the process of expiation, by which evil is transcended
through the recognition of sin (with its prostrating effect at first,
its strangely elevating effect later on) is alike applicable to all.
The best of men have to go through this ordeal as well as the worst.
Especially is unwitting transgression inevitable. Sophocles makes it
the text of his philosophy in the _Œdipus_, though the solution offered
is that of Greek enlightenment and not that of the more profound
ethical consciousness.

We have next, in close connection with sin, to consider the tremendous
question of responsibility, interpreted from the point of view of our
ethical principle. Responsible means answerable. Answerable to whom,
and in what sense? As commonly understood, it means answerable to God
the Law-giver, to God regarded as the Author of the moral law. God is
likened to a sovereign. Any infraction of his law is an offense against
the sovereign. Answerable means subject to the pains and penalties
which it suits the sovereign to annex to moral offences. There is no
intrinsic connection implied between pain and redemption. The pain is
supposed to break the will of the offender, or to mellow him, so that
he will in future obey the mandates of the sovereign without a murmur.

Again, responsibility may mean responsibility to society. Crime is
infectious. A fissure opening at any one point in the dykes erected
against crime may let in a flood. The social order as a whole is
threatened in every single violation of law. The offender must answer
for his defiance of the public will by being subjected to the pains or
penalties which society annexes to his crime. The object is the same
as before, to break him into submission, to fit or force him into the
social mould, to make him harmless, or if possible what is called a
“useful citizen.” No internal redemptive change in the nature of the
evildoer is contemplated, except as it may be necessary to lead him to
a useful or at least a harmless life. The antisocial attitude is to be
replaced by the social attitude. Appeals to enlightened self-interest,
and to the sympathies are commonly thought sufficient for this purpose.

Thirdly, responsibility means responsible to oneself. There is an
inner forum, a tribunal in which the spiritual self sits in judgment
on the empirical self. Conscience, the voice of this spiritual self,
pronounces the verdict. (Cf. the passages in Kant in which this figure
of speech is used.) These are metaphorical expressions.

To grasp the meaning of responsibility from the ethical standpoint, we
must lift into view the concept of _the task of mankind as a whole_,
and of the individual as a factor in the fulfilment of that task. This
introduces a momentous turn into the discussion of the subject.

The task of mankind is to arrive through its commerce with the finite
world, through its unremitting efforts to incorporate the infinite
plan within the sphere of human relations, at an increasingly explicit
conception of the ideal of the infinite universe; and through partial
success and frustration to seize the reality of that universe.
Responsibility means _participation in this task_, sharing its doom,
and attaining in oneself, in part, its sublime compensation. The
evildoer is to achieve the knowledge that his evil deed is sin, that is
to say, that it not only carries with it harm to others and indirectly
to himself, but that it is _the defeat in him_ of the task which is
set for the human race as a whole on earth. Instead of doing his share
in fulfilling this task, in gaining a footing in the finite world for
the spiritual relation of living so as to enhance the life of others
and thereby his own, he has miserably sought to enhance his life at
the expense of other life. The knowledge that he has so acted sears
his awakened soul like fire, but it is also the beginning of healing.
The transgressor, now sees what he did not see before. He sees by way
of contrast the holy pattern of relations which in his act he has
travestied, the holy laws which he has infringed, and in imputing
sin to himself for transgressing them, he at the same time proclaims
himself in his essential being holy, that is, capable of executing
them, or at least of striving unceasingly to do so. It is thus that
he opens within himself the sources of redemption, unseals the deeper
fountains of spiritual energy.

That man is responsible means that he is answerable to do his share in
discharging the task of mankind. And when he is inwardly transformed
by the consciousness of the holy laws, and of himself as intrinsically
committed to holiness, he does thereby advance the business of his kind
on earth. In him humanity does take a step forward on the spiritual
road. In him one other member of our race has been lifted out of evil,
becoming perhaps, from the spiritual point of view, a more advanced
member of the forward-pressing host than those who have never passed
through an experience like his, who have not been overtly tempted, who
have remained conventionally moral, who have not realized the evil
that remains unexpurgated within them, and have not passed through the
cleansing process of self-condemnation and rebirth.

The incongruity between the finite and the infinite order is the basis
of this doctrine of responsibility. Mankind is responsible for seeking
to embody the infinite in the finite. It fails to do so, but gains
its compensation. The individual shares this responsibility, but both
mankind and the individual jointly take a step forward whenever an
evil deed is recognized, branded and expiated as sinful. The object
of punishment, whether inflicted by society or self-inflicted, is to
promote this regeneration which is the expiation.[52]


 NOTE


 Evil in its ethical meaning presupposes worth as attaching to human
 beings. To do evil is to offend against worth. To assert the worth of
 man is to view him as one of an infinite number of beings, united in
 an infinite universe, each induplicable in its kind. Of this spiritual
 multitude ideally projected by us as enveloping human society only our
 fellow human beings are known to us. _The moral law is the law which
 reigns throughout the infinite spiritual universe applied within, the
 narrow confines of human society. It is applied within those confines,
 it is spiritual, universal in its jurisdiction._

 The task of humanity as a whole is to embody more and more the
 universal spiritual law in human relationships, and thus to transform
 and transfigure human society. In the New Testament we read the
 expression: “the light of God reflected in the face of Christ.” The
 ideal here indicated may be expressed in the phrase, The spiritual
 universe with its endless lights reflected on the face of human
 society! The task of humanity is one which can never be completed, one
 from which mankind may never desist. To see evil as sin is to see it
 as contravening the collective task of mankind, the task of weaving
 the human groups more and more into the fabric of the spiritual
 relations.

 To see evil as sin is to see any single act or series of acts ideally
 in their infinite connections. This is what I mean when I say that the
 knowledge of sin comes after the act. I do not mean that there may not
 be before the act a vague consciousness of the ramified consequences
 of evil, but that the fuller knowledge of it as sin is the fruit
 of the act. Nor do I mean that evil in its deeper significance is
 revealed to every guilty person. The opposite is obviously true. What
 I mean is that it is possible after having eaten of the Fruit of the
 Tree to gain the enlightenment, in other words, to become aware of
 the intrinsic holiness of our nature in consequence of our offense
 against the holy laws. If anyone should ask “Must I then do evil in
 order to gain the enlightenment?” the answer is that this question
 is an idle one. No one can escape doing evil. If not in its grosser
 forms, then in ways subtler and more complex, but not therefore less
 evil, every one is bound to make acquaintance with guilt. He need not
 go out of his way to seek occasion, let him see to it that he improves
 the occasion when it comes, as inevitably it will, to his spiritual
 advantage.

FOOTNOTES:

[51] The category of interdependence implies that the lines of energy
between A and B cross, so that A is subject to B’s influence, B subject
to A’s influence, simultaneously. The simultaneity of the relation
distinguishes the category of interdependence from that of causality.

[52] This implies that the evil deed shall not be lost sight of, simply
forgotten. Compare the inadequate account of repentance as given by
Goethe in _Faust_ and elsewhere.




