CHAPTER V

SOCIAL REFORM


My position at that time may be summarized as follows: There is a
divine power in the world, not individual, manifest in the moral law
as revealed in human experience. The moral law involves recognition
of the presence of a something holy in each human being. Since the
world presents innumerable examples of the grossest violation of human
personality (e.g., prostitution and exploitation of laborers), the
business immediately in hand is to make an end of these violations.
There was as yet in my mind no positive definition of personality.
Clarification and further development were promoted by the necessity of
grappling with the problems of poverty and with the attempted solutions
of the Socialists and of other social reformers. At this period, the
notion of personality in my mind being still without determinate
content, empirical matter intruded, and a species of millennialism for
a time vitiated my thinking. In order to set up a goal for humanity, I
dallied with Utopias, and flattered my imagination with the vision of
something like a state of ultimate earthly felicity. The cheap cry of
“Let us have heaven on earth” was also on my lips, though the delusion
did not last long and perhaps never penetrated very deeply.

The problem of poverty, as mentioned above, engrossed me early. I
acted as chairman of the meeting at which Henry George was first
introduced to the public in New York City. But Henry George’s
remedy,—a single draught of Socialism with unstinted individualism
thereafter—never attracted me, while his descriptions of the misery
of the poor, eloquent as they were, and fitted to awaken persons
unacquainted with actual conditions, conveyed to me no novel message. I
had before then been profoundly stirred by the chapters in Karl Marx’s
_Kapital_ in which he collects from the English Blue Books frightful
evidence of the mistreatment of laborers and especially of children in
the early part of the nineteenth century. My errands in the tenement
slums of New York had also made me fairly familiar with the bitter
facts, and throughout my life I have been in touch in a practical way
with the appalling complexus of misery and wrong which we abstractly
designate as the Labor Question. I shall not here take time to discuss
Socialism or other social reform movements in detail. My intention is
to sketch a certain philosophy of life, and to trace the steps by which
I reached it. My reaction against Socialism and related movements,
however, was a prime factor in this inner development; and it is of
this reaction and the causes of it that I must speak.

The evils inherent in poverty are, in the first place, obviously, the
privations entailed by it; secondly, the fact that the greater part
of the life of the poor is consumed in efforts to provide the bare
necessaries, the mind being thus kept in bondage to bodily needs and
prevented from rising to other interests more appropriate to rational
beings; thirdly, the fact that the first two wrongs are caused,
not wholly it is true, but yet in a large measure, by fellow human
beings.[13] The sting in poverty is not so much the hardships suffered,
as the contempt for the manhood of the poor, exhibited by their
exploiters,—the inequity being thus turned into iniquity.

Now my reaction against Socialism was and is that it neglects the
third, the moral evil, and stresses only the first and second. I
am now speaking of Marxian Socialism, with which in its rigid form
I early acquainted myself. The Marxian Socialist does not deny the
pain felt in consequence of the inequity, nor the desire of those who
suffer to become the equals of their masters; but he regards this
desire as a fact of nature explicable on deterministic grounds, a
consequence of improvement in the technique or tools of industry. He
does not deny that there are so-called moral ideas, but he considers
them epiphenomena or by-products of economic development. The tendency
toward equilibrium of power in human society, termed democracy, is to
him just a fact and nothing more. The mere desire for it apart from
the rightness of the desire is the efficient cause which leads to
social readjustments. But evidently this account of the matter will
be persuasive only in case the efficient cause proves to be really
efficient, that is to say, in case the desire for equilibration is
on the point of effectuating itself. If it is not, if the desire
of the masses for power is thwarted, if the realization of their
hopes is indefinitely postponed, then the foundations of the theory
are undermined. Hence Marxian Socialism has been coupled with and
depends on a belief which is a kind of materialistic parallel of the
apocalyptic vision of Jesus,—the belief that the end of the present
world (the world of the wage system) is close at hand, only with
the difference that the end is to be brought about not by divine
interference but automatically by the acquisition of power on the part
of the masses.

To me neither hunger nor the bondage of the mind to physical
necessities nor the bare fact of inequity seem sufficient to justify
the demand for social reconstruction, apart from moral right. If there
be no such thing as morality, or if morality be but an epiphenomenon of
economic conditions, what warrant have the hungry or the disadvantaged
for complaining? Animals, too, hunger and sicken. If man be like them
a mere chance product of nature, why should he not share their fate?
Let the weak succumb! Surely the bald fact that the democratic masses
today chafe under the yoke of their masters and demand a better state
of things, is no more a ground of obligation for the former than the
tendency toward an ultimate equilibrium in nature of which scientists
speak can be a ground of obligation. The tendency will effectuate
itself or not as the acting forces determine. There is in truth no such
thing as obligation from this point of view. Then why not fold our arms
and wait for what will happen? The notion of democracy currently held
is obnoxious to the same criticism. Leave out the moral basis in the
claim to equity, and nothing remains but the brute fact that men, being
egotists, fret under the exercise of superior power by their fellow
egotists. But let Nietzsche or some one else demonstrate that certain
higher values, higher merely because subjectively relished as higher,
are incompatible with equilibrium of power, and he will be justified
at least in his own eyes in scoffing at equality and scourging the
democratic dogs back to their kennels. No one denies that the masses
have the desire to be treated as the equals of their masters (very
inconveniently for the latter), but it is quite another matter whether
their desire ought to be gratified. Social reconstruction, in other
words, must be motivated by other considerations than those by which
according to Marx the great change is to come about.

I have not stopped to consider whether the Socialistic scheme is
workable, whether the run of mankind are capable of coöperative effort
on a large scale without the preëminent leadership of master minds;
whether Socialism, if carried out, would really breed, as it is
expected to, the sentiment of ideal brotherhood; whether the sentiment
of brotherhood itself, unless it be rooted in the closer family and
national ties, is morally sound, whether the emotional forces that
sweep through and overwhelm large aggregations of men, can be bridled
and sufficiently enlightened to promote the ends of Socialism. All such
questions as these touch the feasibility of the ideal proposed; my own
reaction was and is against the ideal _itself_. Instead of pronouncing
as some do that mankind are not yet ripe to carry out so high an
ideal, I found myself seriously challenging and finally rejecting the
very ideal on the ground that it is not a genuine moral ideal at all.
It is ethically spurious, because it omits the notion of right and
substitutes for it that of power.

A different objection lies against certain modifications of Socialism
and against many of the social reform movements of our time. In
these movements the idea of personality is not absent as in Marx’s
theory. The inherent dignity of every human being is deeply felt, and
_per contra_ the indignity of the present condition of the greater
number. Man is worth while; and for the sake of the worth in him, the
unfavorable circumstances which stifle the promise of his nature are
to be changed. My objection in this case is that the higher spiritual
nature of man, or the notion of personality, is left indefinite and
remains vaguely in the background. It supplies indeed the initial
motive for practical efforts; but the instrumental relation of the
goods of life to the supreme good is not apprehended positively. And
thus the door is left open, as we shall presently see, for corrupting
influences to enter in.

There seems, it is true, at first sight, considerable warrant for
demanding certain instant reforms without troubling about ulterior
spiritual ends. We are confronted in modern society with evils which
seem to require immediate abolition. Exploitation is palpably one of
them. It is the clearest possible case of trespass on personality. Why
not then demand respect simply for personality in general, without
inquiring into the nature of personality? Is it not beyond all
question dishonoring to human nature that some should be on the verge
of starvation while others are even themselves injured by excessive
possessions; that the energies of children should be exhausted by
premature toil; that adults should be worked like beasts of burden?
Why not leave in abeyance the definition of the supreme end, and
concentrate effort on the removal of these incontestable evils?

My answer to this is, in the first place, that we cannot gain the
best leverage even for these initial reforms without a high and
defined conception of man as a spiritual being. Efforts directed
toward improving even material conditions are apt to be fluctuating,
spasmodic, and are ever in danger of dying down, unless material
improvement is seen in its relation towards something else that
commands the highest respect—implicit respect. Sympathy alone is
altogether inadequate. It often works grave harm; it is notoriously
intermittent, at one time broadly expansive and then again contracting
upon the nearest objects. Furthermore, we can at best sympathize
genuinely with only a very limited number of persons. If anyone were
to open his heart to the sufferings of all the millions of human
beings at present engaged in conflict on the battlefields of Europe;
if he were to try to realize the indirect consequences of this war; if
he were to take a still wider sweep and embrace in his imagination
the populations of India, China, and the races of Africa, the effect
upon him would be simply paralyzing. The possible effect of one’s
sympathetic action upon this huge volume of human suffering would
appear so insignificant as to make exertion on his part seem quite
irrational. We are assisted by sympathy in the matter of social reform
by the narrowness of our horizons; and even within these narrow
boundaries the efficiency of the motive depends largely upon the
transciency of the sympathetic mood. Sympathy as a permanent attitude
would disintegrate the self.[14]

The second answer is that by ignoring the ultimate end we _install
proximate ends in its place_. The reform movements of our day abstain
from attempting to set up an ultimate good. They are content, as they
say, “to evaluate the tangible goods ready at hand.” In consequence
these tangible goods inevitably usurp the place of the supreme good.
Begin as we may with the high notion of personality, we become
materialists before we have proceeded very far, and we infect the
laboring masses with our materialism if we omit to define the relation
of proximate ends to the ultimate aim. For remember that the ultimate
end is that which prescribes the limits within which the nearer aims
are to be sanctioned,—the limit for each being the degree in which it
conduces toward the highest end. Without a goal set up, without an
explicit conception of its regulative function, the proximate ends
abound, and are likely to expand _ad indefinitum_. This is evident,
for instance, in the case of wealth-getting. The poor have not enough
wealth, the rich have too much. “Let us then redress the balance by
at least securing enough for the poor. The necessary limitations
we can discuss after they shall have at least reached the limit of
sufficiency.” But we are thus kindling the desire for wealth; and this
desire and its possible gratifications are boundless. It is in the
nature of desire to be prolific of new desire, and to aim unceasingly
at new satisfactions. First, a decent dwelling, sufficient food,
education for the children, are wanted, then luxury, then millions,
then multi-millions. Secondary motives take the place of primary ones.
Wealth becomes a token; the satisfactions it gives are no longer
related to actual wants or needs, but solely to a fantastic desire for
preëminence. Has not this been the actual history of many of those
who have risen from poverty to great riches? But the same desires are
present, though suppressed, unsatisfied, in the masses, who look up to
the few with admiration or envy. And suppressed desires are often even
more insidiously poisoning, more contaminating in their effects than
satisfied desires.

The psychological fact is that human volition as expressed in action
is always determined by some end. A means is never adopted without
there being some object or purpose in view. Leave out the ultimate aim
and the means become themselves the ends. A decent subsistence should
be treated as related to the ultimate end,— a decent living, for
example, as a means to fit the worker for the duties of fatherhood and
citizenship.

It may again be urged that what has been said is true only of the
ambitious minority, and that the masses would be quite content with a
decent subsistence if only that much could be assured them. But the
prevalence of cheap imitations of luxury among the poor points in the
opposite direction. At least in a democratic community, the ambitions
of the few are apt to be contagious. And where this is not the case, as
in some of the older countries of Europe, a certain sordid Philistinism
is apt to manifest itself. The life of the middle class in Europe is
without the restless brilliance that characterizes the upward-striving
class in America,—is not daringly but meanly materialistic. Redeeming
features are, of course, not wanting, yet how anyone can conceive the
social ideal as a state of things in which the laboring people shall
be raised to the level at present occupied by the “middle class” is
difficult for me to understand. Nor is it a sufficient rejoinder to
say that the present complexion of the middle class, its narrowness
and Philistinism, are due to isolation from the social classes
beneath them, and that the broad sentiment of universal fellowship
and fraternity, when it shall have come to prevail, will purify the
atmosphere on the middle level. I have sufficiently indicated my doubts
as to the efficiency and soundness of what is called fraternalism.

In brief, if we are to preserve a man’s respect for himself as a moral
being, we must find a ground on which he can maintain his self-esteem
apart from the material conditions in which he is placed, and in
the interval before the desirable material changes can possibly be
accomplished. This interval is certain to be long. The betterment of
social conditions is sure to be gradual. The slum ought to be abolished
immediately, but until it goes we must find a reason to respect the man
in the slums even now, and a reason why he should respect himself even
now. This reason can only be derived from the spiritual nature of man,
from the spiritual end for which he exists; and on this account, above
all others, it is indispensable that the spiritual end be defined. How
painfully social reformers may be led into error by slighting this
consideration is seen in the readiness with which some have subscribed
to the amazing opinion that the issue between chastity and dishonor for
the working-girl depends ultimately on the amount of her wages.

There are two fallacies that affect the social reform movements of
today. The substitution of power for right is one. What I venture to
call the fallacy of provisionalism is the second. This is the fallacy
of the opportunist movements. “Lead the laboring classes provisionally
up to the level of sufficiency, or of decent existence, and then we
shall see.” But man does not act without ends, and unless we define the
ultimate end, we give license to the proximate ends. In other words, we
simply cannot act provisionally. We cannot ignore our spiritual nature
without offending against it. We may start with the idea of serving it,
but without explicit definition of it we shall presently find ourselves
disgraced in all sorts of idolatries.

What I am trying to show is how I came to perceive the inadequacy
of the non-violation ethics. Its formula is: “Admit the existence of
personality; do not infringe upon it. In your actions for the good of
others, try to abolish the manifest infringements or violations. Since
there must be some positive content to the idea of good, accept the
material or empirical goods as the provisional content with the general
understanding that they are to be instrumental to the higher life but
without troubling to define exactly how.”

The aberrations to which this view leads on the side of action toward
others I have pointed out. A word now as to the injurious effect on
self. Of these the following are the most important:

1. The leader in social reform is apt to be regarded by his followers
and to think of himself as a kind of savior. It is his sincere
intention to save society from some of the glaring evils with which it
is afflicted. But if salvation is sought in the betterment of external
conditions, the social savior is apt to become the victim of a false
sense of moral security. He is likely to be off his guard at the weak
points of his own character, and to fall abruptly from high levels into
the ditch.

2. The social reformer who adopts the fallacy of provisionalism is apt
to be absorbed in the _mechanical_ details of his work,—the settlement
or the municipal reform society, or the charitable association tend
to become highly organized and efficient pieces of machinery. But
moral idealism declines in proportion as this kind of efficiency
increases,—the salt loses its savor.

3. The social reformer who sets his heart on external changes is apt to
become _impatient_ to bring about those changes. For since he attempts
to work from without inwardly, and not at the same time from within
outwardly, he has nothing to show for his pains unless the desired
outward changes are actually effected. In this way may be explained a
certain dictatorial manner, a certain arbitrariness sometimes observed
in social workers of whose earnestness and devotion there can be no
question, the preposterous outcome being that in attempting to carry
out plans of reform in a democratic community such reformers offend
against the very principle of democracy by over-riding the personality
of others.

4. The Social reformer who concentrates his attention on external
changes is apt to be ambitious of large results, to measure betterment
by statistical standards. Though quality be not overlooked, _quantity_
is likely to be over-emphasized.

5. The painful spectacle is sometimes presented of a leader in social
movements who _goes to pieces morally in his private relations_
(becomes a bad father, a worthless husband, an unscrupulous sponge on
his friends, etc.). Absorption in extensive public movements has this
danger in it that it often tends to make men neglectful of the nearer
duties.

Facts of this kind, which came repeatedly under my observation in
the course of years, drove home to my mind the conviction that the
provisional method in social reform (the method of working for external
changes without definition of the end) is morally perilous, both in its
effects on those who are to be benefited, and in its reaction on the
character of the reformer himself. I parted company with opportunism in
every one of its forms; I became more and more imbued with the belief
that no one can really help others who in the effort to do so is not
himself morally helped, i.e., whose character is not improved in every
respect, who does not become a _better_ father, husband, citizen, a
more upright man in all his relations in and because of his endeavors
to benefit society. I became convinced that the ethical principle must
run like a golden thread through the whole of a man’s life, in a word,
that social reform unless inspired by the spiritual view of it, that
is, unless it is made tributary to the spiritual, the total end of
life, is not social reform in any true sense at all.[15]

The fundamental question, therefore, echoed and re-echoed with ever
intenser insistence: “What then is the holy thing in others? What
is the supreme end or good to which all the lesser goods should be
subordinate and subservient? And what is the holy thing in me?—for
I may not spiritually sacrifice myself. My own highest good must be
achievable in agreement with that of others. What definition of the
essential end is possible that shall reconcile egoism and altruism by
transforming and transcending them? And if there be such end thinkable
and definable, how establish the applicability of this end to empirical
man, either in the person of others or in my own?”

I shall have to dwell on this subject at length in the sequel. Here at
the outset I cannot forbear expressing my sense of the obliquities, the
folly, the meanness, the cruelties which human nature often exhibits
on the empirical side when dispassionately contemplated. That there
are also finer traits in people, gleams of gold in the quartz, I do
not deny. But even in the best exemplars of the race the alloy is
not wanting. And it is an open question how far any human being, if
his whole make-up and all the circumstances that influenced him be
considered, can be called predominantly good, assuming that goodness
is a matter of desert and not of chance. How, therefore, a being that
to actual, impartial observation reveals himself as so dubiously worth
while, can be regarded as possessing the quality of transcendent worth
(which seems to be implied in the idea of personality as inviolable
and precious) will be the starting-point of my inquiry into the
philosophical first principle in the second part of this volume.

FOOTNOTES:

[13] I say _caused_, but perhaps not deliberately intended, although
there are instances of the latter. An act is diabolical when
maliciously designed to inflict a wrong on another; as rape for the
purpose of dishonoring a family. It is cruelly selfish but not fiendish
when it springs from scorn of others as if they were only fractional
human beings. The Brahmin’s attitude towards the lower castes, the
attitude of the feudal lord toward the serf, of Shakespeare’s nobility
toward the common citizens, and of some modern theorists toward the
democratic multitude, are instances in point. In such cases the moral
sense itself is astray, but there is perhaps no deliberate sinning
against the light.

[14] I have not touched upon the further question to what extent we can
really compass the happiness, except at rare moments, even of a single
human being. The altruistic philosophy is apt to confound the removal
of manifest evils with positive benefaction. But the removal of one
kind of evil lets in new kinds; and wherein then consists the gain so
far as happiness is concerned?

[15] To ward off the most serious misunderstanding, I must remind
every reader of the chapter on Social Reform, as well as on the Hebrew
religion and on the ethics of the Gospels, that I am narrating the
phases of my own development. I am not attempting to do justice to
all that is excellent in those great religions and in these great
social movements; I am trying to show at what points, despite those
excellences, I myself felt compelled to diverge from them, to push
beyond them. In regard to Socialism I recognize the immense service
it has performed in awakening the conscience of modern society to the
sufferings of the working class. And in pointing out the dangers of
opportunism, the fallacy of provisionalism, I am speaking of dangers
from which I felt that I must escape, not casting a slur on the noble
personalities that have appeared in the field of social reform during
my own time and among my friends and acquaintances. Such personalities,
because of their inbred fineness, may be immune against tendencies
which yet undeniably exist, and which therefore require to be
explicitly apprehended.




