





 OUTLINES
 OF
 MAHAYANA BUDDHISM

 BY
 DAISETZ TEITARO SUZUKI




 CHICAGO
 THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY
 1908




 PREFACE.

{v}

The object of this book is twofold: (1) To refute the many wrong
opinions which are entertained by Western critics concerning the
fundamental teachings of Mahâyâna Buddhism; (2) To awake interest
among scholars of comparative religion in the development of the
religious sentiment and faith as exemplified by the growth of one of
the most powerful spiritual forces in the world. The book is therefore
at once popular and scholarly. It is popular in the sense that it
tries to expose the fallacy of the general attitude assumed by other
religionists towards Mahâyânism. It aims to be scholarly, on the
other hand, when it endeavors to expound some of the most salient
features of the doctrine, historically and systematically.

In attempting the accomplishment of this latter object, however, the
author makes no great claim, because it is impossible to present
within this prescribed space all the data that are available for a
comprehensive and systematic elucidation of the Mahâyâna Buddhism,
whose history began in the sixth century before the Christian era and
ran through a period of more than two thousand years before it assumed
the form in which it is at present taught in the Orient. During this
long period, the Mahâyâna {vi} doctrine was elaborated by the best
minds that India, Tibet, China, and Japan ever produced. It is no
wonder then that so many diverse and apparently contradictory
teachings are all comprised under the general name of Mahâyâna
Buddhism. To expound all these theories even tentatively would be
altogether outside the scope of such a work as this. All that I could
or hoped to do was to discuss a few of the most general and most
essential topics of Mahâyânism, making this a sort of introduction
to a more detailed exposition of the system as a whole as well as in
particular.

To attain the first object, I have gone occasionally outside the
sphere within which I had properly to confine the work. But this
deviation seemed imperative for the reason that some critics are so
prejudiced that even seemingly self-evident truths are not comprehended
by them. I may be prejudiced in my own way, but very frequently I have
wondered how completely and how wretchedly some people can be made the
prey of self-delusion.

The doctrinal history of Mahâyâna Buddhism is very little known to
Occidental scholars. This is mainly due to the inaccessibility of
material which is largely written in the Chinese tongue, one of the
most difficult of languages for foreigners to master. In this age of
liberal culture, it is a great pity that so few of the precious stones
contained in the religion of Buddha are obtainable by Western people.
Human nature is essentially the same the world over, and {vii}
whenever and wherever conditions mature we see the same spiritual
phenomena; and this fact ever strengthens our faith in the universality
of truth and in the ultimate reign of lovingkindness. It is my sincere
desire that in so far as my intellectual attainment permits I shall be
allowed to pursue my study and to share my findings with my
fellow-beings.

In concluding this prelude, the author wishes to say that this little
book is presented to the public with a full knowledge of its many
defects, to revise which he will not fail to make use of every
opportunity offered him.

                                        /Daisetz T. Suzuki/.

{viii}




 CONTENTS.

{ix}

Preface

Introduction

(1) _The Mahâyâna and Hînayâna Buddhism._ Why the Two Doctrines?--The
Original Meaning of Mahâyâna.--An Older Classification of
Buddhists.--Mahâyâna Buddhism defined.

(2) _Is the Mahâyâna Buddhism the genuine teaching of Buddha?_ No Life
Without Growth.--Mahâyânism a Living Religion.

(3) _Some Misstatements about the Mahâyânism._ Why Injustice Done to
Buddhism.--Examples of Injustice.--Monier
Monier-Williams.--Beal.--Waddell.

(4) _The Significance of Religion._ No Revealed Religion.--The
Mystery.--Intellect and Imagination.--The Contents of Faith vary.

Chapter I. A General Characterisation of Buddhism.

No God and No Soul.--Karma.--Avidyâ.--Non-âtman.--The Non-âtmanness of
Things.--Dharmakâya.--Nirvâna.--Intellectual Tendency of Buddhism.

