I
LE PANNEAU


   UNDER the rose-tree’s dancing shade
      There stands a little ivory girl,
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
   With pale green nails of polished jade.

   The red leaves fall upon the mould,
      The white leaves flutter, one by one,
      Down to a blue bowl where the sun,
   Like a great dragon, writhes in gold.

   The white leaves float upon the air,
      The red leaves flutter idly down,
      Some fall upon her yellow gown,
   And some upon her raven hair.

   She takes an amber lute and sings,
      And as she sings a silver crane
      Begins his scarlet neck to strain,
   And flap his burnished metal wings.

   She takes a lute of amber bright,
      And from the thicket where he lies
      Her lover, with his almond eyes,
   Watches her movements in delight.

   And now she gives a cry of fear,
      And tiny tears begin to start:
      A thorn has wounded with its dart
   The pink-veined sea-shell of her ear.

   And now she laughs a merry note:
      There has fallen a petal of the rose
      Just where the yellow satin shows
   The blue-veined flower of her throat.

   With pale green nails of polished jade,
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl,
      There stands a little ivory girl
   Under the rose-tree’s dancing shade.


II
LES BALLONS


   AGAINST these turbid turquoise skies
      The light and luminous balloons
      Dip and drift like satin moons,
   Drift like silken butterflies;

   Reel with every windy gust,
      Rise and reel like dancing girls,
      Float like strange transparent pearls,
   Fall and float like silver dust.

   Now to the low leaves they cling,
      Each with coy fantastic pose,
      Each a petal of a rose
   Straining at a gossamer string.

   Then to the tall trees they climb,
      Like thin globes of amethyst,
      Wandering opals keeping tryst
   With the rubies of the lime.



CANZONET


      I HAVE no store
   Of gryphon-guarded gold;
      Now, as before,
   Bare is the shepherd’s fold.
      Rubies nor pearls
   Have I to gem thy throat;
      Yet woodland girls
   Have loved the shepherd’s note.

      Then pluck a reed
   And bid me sing to thee,
      For I would feed
   Thine ears with melody,
      Who art more fair
   Than fairest fleur-de-lys,
      More sweet and rare
   Than sweetest ambergris.

      What dost thou fear?
   Young Hyacinth is slain,
      Pan is not here,
   And will not come again.
      No hornèd Faun
   Treads down the yellow leas,
      No God at dawn
   Steals through the olive trees.

      Hylas is dead,
   Nor will he e’er divine
      Those little red
   Rose-petalled lips of thine.
      On the high hill
   No ivory dryads play,
      Silver and still
   Sinks the sad autumn day.



SYMPHONY IN YELLOW


   AN omnibus across the bridge
      Crawls like a yellow butterfly,
      And, here and there, a passer-by
   Shows like a little restless midge.

   Big barges full of yellow hay
      Are moored against the shadowy wharf,
      And, like a yellow silken scarf,
   The thick fog hangs along the quay.

   The yellow leaves begin to fade
      And flutter from the Temple elms,
      And at my feet the pale green Thames
   Lies like a rod of rippled jade.



IN THE FOREST


   OUT of the mid-wood’s twilight
      Into the meadow’s dawn,
   Ivory limbed and brown-eyed,
      Flashes my Faun!

   He skips through the copses singing,
      And his shadow dances along,
   And I know not which I should follow,
      Shadow or song!

   O Hunter, snare me his shadow!
      O Nightingale, catch me his strain!
   Else moonstruck with music and madness
      I track him in vain!



TO MY WIFE


                         WITH A COPY OF MY POEMS

   I CAN write no stately proem
      As a prelude to my lay;
   From a poet to a poem
      I would dare to say.

   For if of these fallen petals
      One to you seem fair,
   Love will waft it till it settles
      On your hair.

   And when wind and winter harden
      All the loveless land,
   It will whisper of the garden,
      You will understand.



WITH A COPY OF ‘A HOUSE OF POMEGRANATES’


   GO, little book,
   To him who, on a lute with horns of pearl,
   Sang of the white feet of the Golden Girl:
   And bid him look
   Into thy pages: it may hap that he
   May find that golden maidens dance through thee.



ROSES AND RUE


                                (To L. L.)

   COULD we dig up this long-buried treasure,
      Were it worth the pleasure,
   We never could learn love’s song,
      We are parted too long.

   Could the passionate past that is fled
      Call back its dead,
   Could we live it all over again,
      Were it worth the pain!

   I remember we used to meet
      By an ivied seat,
   And you warbled each pretty word
      With the air of a bird;

   And your voice had a quaver in it,
      Just like a linnet,
   And shook, as the blackbird’s throat
      With its last big note;

   And your eyes, they were green and grey
      Like an April day,
   But lit into amethyst
      When I stooped and kissed;

   And your mouth, it would never smile
      For a long, long while,
   Then it rippled all over with laughter
      Five minutes after.

   You were always afraid of a shower,
      Just like a flower:
   I remember you started and ran
      When the rain began.

   I remember I never could catch you,
      For no one could match you,
   You had wonderful, luminous, fleet,
      Little wings to your feet.

   I remember your hair—did I tie it?
      For it always ran riot—
   Like a tangled sunbeam of gold:
      These things are old.

   I remember so well the room,
      And the lilac bloom
   That beat at the dripping pane
      In the warm June rain;

   And the colour of your gown,
      It was amber-brown,
   And two yellow satin bows
      From your shoulders rose.

   And the handkerchief of French lace
      Which you held to your face—
   Had a small tear left a stain?
      Or was it the rain?

   On your hand as it waved adieu
      There were veins of blue;
   In your voice as it said good-bye
      Was a petulant cry,

   ‘You have only wasted your life.’
      (Ah, that was the knife!)
   When I rushed through the garden gate
      It was all too late.

   Could we live it over again,
      Were it worth the pain,
   Could the passionate past that is fled
      Call back its dead!

   Well, if my heart must break,
      Dear love, for your sake,
   It will break in music, I know,
      Poets’ hearts break so.

   But strange that I was not told
      That the brain can hold
   In a tiny ivory cell
      God’s heaven and hell.



DÉSESPOIR


   THE seasons send their ruin as they go,
   For in the spring the narciss shows its head
   Nor withers till the rose has flamed to red,
   And in the autumn purple violets blow,
   And the slim crocus stirs the winter snow;
   Wherefore yon leafless trees will bloom again
   And this grey land grow green with summer rain
   And send up cowslips for some boy to mow.

   But what of life whose bitter hungry sea
   Flows at our heels, and gloom of sunless night
   Covers the days which never more return?
   Ambition, love and all the thoughts that burn
   We lose too soon, and only find delight
   In withered husks of some dead memory.



PAN


                            DOUBLE VILLANELLE

                                      I

   O goat-foot God of Arcady!
   This modern world is grey and old,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   No more the shepherd lads in glee
   Throw apples at thy wattled fold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!

   Nor through the laurels can one see
   Thy soft brown limbs, thy beard of gold,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   And dull and dead our Thames would be,
   For here the winds are chill and cold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!

   Then keep the tomb of Helice,
   Thine olive-woods, thy vine-clad wold,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   Though many an unsung elegy
   Sleeps in the reeds our rivers hold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!
   Ah, what remains to us of thee?

                                     II

   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady,
   Thy satyrs and their wanton play,
   This modern world hath need of thee.

   No nymph or Faun indeed have we,
   For Faun and nymph are old and grey,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!

   This is the land where liberty
   Lit grave-browed Milton on his way,
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   A land of ancient chivalry
   Where gentle Sidney saw the day,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!

   This fierce sea-lion of the sea,
   This England lacks some stronger lay,
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   Then blow some trumpet loud and free,
   And give thine oaten pipe away,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!
   This modern world hath need of thee!




THE SPHINX


                                    TO
                              MARCEL SCHWOB
                              IN FRIENDSHIP
                                   AND
                              IN ADMIRATION



THE SPHINX


   IN a dim corner of my room for longer than my fancy thinks
   A beautiful and silent Sphinx has watched me through the shifting
   gloom.

   Inviolate and immobile she does not rise she does not stir
   For silver moons are naught to her and naught to her the suns that
   reel.

   Red follows grey across the air, the waves of moonlight ebb and flow
   But with the Dawn she does not go and in the night-time she is there.

   Dawn follows Dawn and Nights grow old and all the while this curious
   cat
   Lies couching on the Chinese mat with eyes of satin rimmed with gold.

   Upon the mat she lies and leers and on the tawny throat of her
   Flutters the soft and silky fur or ripples to her pointed ears.

   Come forth, my lovely seneschal! so somnolent, so statuesque!
   Come forth you exquisite grotesque! half woman and half animal!

   Come forth my lovely languorous Sphinx! and put your head upon my
   knee!
   And let me stroke your throat and see your body spotted like the Lynx!

   And let me touch those curving claws of yellow ivory and grasp
   The tail that like a monstrous Asp coils round your heavy velvet paws!

                                * * * * *

   A THOUSAND weary centuries are thine while I have hardly seen
   Some twenty summers cast their green for Autumn’s gaudy liveries.

   But you can read the Hieroglyphs on the great sandstone obelisks,
   And you have talked with Basilisks, and you have looked on
   Hippogriffs.

   O tell me, were you standing by when Isis to Osiris knelt?
   And did you watch the Egyptian melt her union for Antony

   And drink the jewel-drunken wine and bend her head in mimic awe
   To see the huge proconsul draw the salted tunny from the brine?

   And did you mark the Cyprian kiss white Adon on his catafalque?
   And did you follow Amenalk, the God of Heliopolis?

   And did you talk with Thoth, and did you hear the moon-horned Io weep?
   And know the painted kings who sleep beneath the wedge-shaped Pyramid?

                                * * * * *

   LIFT up your large black satin eyes which are like cushions where one
   sinks!
   Fawn at my feet, fantastic Sphinx! and sing me all your memories!

   Sing to me of the Jewish maid who wandered with the Holy Child,
   And how you led them through the wild, and how they slept beneath your
   shade.

   Sing to me of that odorous green eve when crouching by the marge
   You heard from Adrian’s gilded barge the laughter of Antinous

   And lapped the stream and fed your drouth and watched with hot and
   hungry stare
   The ivory body of that rare young slave with his pomegranate mouth!

   Sing to me of the Labyrinth in which the twi-formed bull was stalled!
   Sing to me of the night you crawled across the temple’s granite plinth

   When through the purple corridors the screaming scarlet Ibis flew
   In terror, and a horrid dew dripped from the moaning Mandragores,

   And the great torpid crocodile within the tank shed slimy tears,
   And tare the jewels from his ears and staggered back into the Nile,

   And the priests cursed you with shrill psalms as in your claws you
   seized their snake
   And crept away with it to slake your passion by the shuddering palms.

                                * * * * *

   WHO were your lovers? who were they who wrestled for you in the dust?
   Which was the vessel of your Lust?  What Leman had you, every day?

   Did giant Lizards come and crouch before you on the reedy banks?
   Did Gryphons with great metal flanks leap on you in your trampled
   couch?

   Did monstrous hippopotami come sidling toward you in the mist?
   Did gilt-scaled dragons writhe and twist with passion as you passed
   them by?

   And from the brick-built Lycian tomb what horrible Chimera came
   With fearful heads and fearful flame to breed new wonders from your
   womb?

                                * * * * *

   OR had you shameful secret quests and did you harry to your home
   Some Nereid coiled in amber foam with curious rock crystal breasts?

   Or did you treading through the froth call to the brown Sidonian
   For tidings of Leviathan, Leviathan or Behemoth?

   Or did you when the sun was set climb up the cactus-covered slope
   To meet your swarthy Ethiop whose body was of polished jet?

   Or did you while the earthen skiffs dropped down the grey Nilotic
   flats
   At twilight and the flickering bats flew round the temple’s triple
   glyphs

   Steal to the border of the bar and swim across the silent lake
   And slink into the vault and make the Pyramid your lúpanar

   Till from each black sarcophagus rose up the painted swathèd dead?
   Or did you lure unto your bed the ivory-horned Tragelaphos?

   Or did you love the god of flies who plagued the Hebrews and was
   splashed
   With wine unto the waist? or Pasht, who had green beryls for her eyes?

   Or that young god, the Tyrian, who was more amorous than the dove
   Of Ashtaroth? or did you love the god of the Assyrian

   Whose wings, like strange transparent talc, rose high above his
   hawk-faced head,
   Painted with silver and with red and ribbed with rods of Oreichalch?

   Or did huge Apis from his car leap down and lay before your feet
   Big blossoms of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured nenuphar?

                                * * * * *

   HOW subtle-secret is your smile!  Did you love none then?  Nay, I know
   Great Ammon was your bedfellow!  He lay with you beside the Nile!

   The river-horses in the slime trumpeted when they saw him come
   Odorous with Syrian galbanum and smeared with spikenard and with
   thyme.

   He came along the river bank like some tall galley argent-sailed,
   He strode across the waters, mailed in beauty, and the waters sank.

   He strode across the desert sand: he reached the valley where you lay:
   He waited till the dawn of day: then touched your black breasts with
   his hand.

   You kissed his mouth with mouths of flame: you made the hornèd god
   your own:
   You stood behind him on his throne: you called him by his secret name.

   You whispered monstrous oracles into the caverns of his ears:
   With blood of goats and blood of steers you taught him monstrous
   miracles.

   White Ammon was your bedfellow!  Your chamber was the steaming Nile!
   And with your curved archaic smile you watched his passion come and
   go.

                                * * * * *

   WITH Syrian oils his brows were bright: and wide-spread as a tent at
   noon
   His marble limbs made pale the moon and lent the day a larger light.

   His long hair was nine cubits’ span and coloured like that yellow gem
   Which hidden in their garment’s hem the merchants bring from
   Kurdistan.

   His face was as the must that lies upon a vat of new-made wine:
   The seas could not insapphirine the perfect azure of his eyes.

   His thick soft throat was white as milk and threaded with thin veins
   of blue:
   And curious pearls like frozen dew were broidered on his flowing silk.

                                * * * * *

   ON pearl and porphyry pedestalled he was too bright to look upon:
   For on his ivory breast there shone the wondrous ocean-emerald,

   That mystic moonlit jewel which some diver of the Colchian caves
   Had found beneath the blackening waves and carried to the Colchian
   witch.

   Before his gilded galiot ran naked vine-wreathed corybants,
   And lines of swaying elephants knelt down to draw his chariot,

   And lines of swarthy Nubians bare up his litter as he rode
   Down the great granite-paven road between the nodding peacock-fans.

   The merchants brought him steatite from Sidon in their painted ships:
   The meanest cup that touched his lips was fashioned from a chrysolite.

   The merchants brought him cedar chests of rich apparel bound with
   cords:
   His train was borne by Memphian lords: young kings were glad to be his
   guests.

   Ten hundred shaven priests did bow to Ammon’s altar day and night,
   Ten hundred lamps did wave their light through Ammon’s carven
   house—and now

   Foul snake and speckled adder with their young ones crawl from stone
   to stone
   For ruined is the house and prone the great rose-marble monolith!

   Wild ass or trotting jackal comes and couches in the mouldering gates:
   Wild satyrs call unto their mates across the fallen fluted drums.

   And on the summit of the pile the blue-faced ape of Horus sits
   And gibbers while the fig-tree splits the pillars of the peristyle

                                * * * * *

   THE god is scattered here and there: deep hidden in the windy sand
   I saw his giant granite hand still clenched in impotent despair.

   And many a wandering caravan of stately negroes silken-shawled,
   Crossing the desert, halts appalled before the neck that none can
   span.

   And many a bearded Bedouin draws back his yellow-striped burnous
   To gaze upon the Titan thews of him who was thy paladin.

                                * * * * *

   GO, seek his fragments on the moor and wash them in the evening dew,
   And from their pieces make anew thy mutilated paramour!

   Go, seek them where they lie alone and from their broken pieces make
   Thy bruisèd bedfellow!  And wake mad passions in the senseless stone!

   Charm his dull ear with Syrian hymns! he loved your body! oh, be kind,
   Pour spikenard on his hair, and wind soft rolls of linen round his
   limbs!

   Wind round his head the figured coins! stain with red fruits those
   pallid lips!
   Weave purple for his shrunken hips! and purple for his barren loins!

                                * * * * *

   AWAY to Egypt!  Have no fear.  Only one God has ever died.
   Only one God has let His side be wounded by a soldier’s spear.

   But these, thy lovers, are not dead.  Still by the hundred-cubit gate
   Dog-faced Anubis sits in state with lotus-lilies for thy head.

   Still from his chair of porphyry gaunt Memnon strains his lidless eyes
   Across the empty land, and cries each yellow morning unto thee.

   And Nilus with his broken horn lies in his black and oozy bed
   And till thy coming will not spread his waters on the withering corn.

   Your lovers are not dead, I know.  They will rise up and hear your
   voice
   And clash their cymbals and rejoice and run to kiss your mouth!  And
   so,

   Set wings upon your argosies!  Set horses to your ebon car!
   Back to your Nile!  Or if you are grown sick of dead divinities

   Follow some roving lion’s spoor across the copper-coloured plain,
   Reach out and hale him by the mane and bid him be your paramour!

   Couch by his side upon the grass and set your white teeth in his
   throat
   And when you hear his dying note lash your long flanks of polished
   brass

   And take a tiger for your mate, whose amber sides are flecked with
   black,
   And ride upon his gilded back in triumph through the Theban gate,

   And toy with him in amorous jests, and when he turns, and snarls, and
   gnaws,
   O smite him with your jasper claws! and bruise him with your agate
   breasts!

                                * * * * *

   WHY are you tarrying?  Get hence!  I weary of your sullen ways,
   I weary of your steadfast gaze, your somnolent magnificence.

   Your horrible and heavy breath makes the light flicker in the lamp,
   And on my brow I feel the damp and dreadful dews of night and death.

   Your eyes are like fantastic moons that shiver in some stagnant lake,
   Your tongue is like a scarlet snake that dances to fantastic tunes,

   Your pulse makes poisonous melodies, and your black throat is like the
   hole
   Left by some torch or burning coal on Saracenic tapestries.

   Away!  The sulphur-coloured stars are hurrying through the Western
   gate!
   Away!  Or it may be too late to climb their silent silver cars!

   See, the dawn shivers round the grey gilt-dialled towers, and the rain
   Streams down each diamonded pane and blurs with tears the wannish day.

   What snake-tressed fury fresh from Hell, with uncouth gestures and
   unclean,
   Stole from the poppy-drowsy queen and led you to a student’s cell?

                                * * * * *

   WHAT songless tongueless ghost of sin crept through the curtains of
   the night,
   And saw my taper burning bright, and knocked, and bade you enter in?

   Are there not others more accursed, whiter with leprosies than I?
   Are Abana and Pharphar dry that you come here to slake your thirst?

   Get hence, you loathsome mystery!  Hideous animal, get hence!
   You wake in me each bestial sense, you make me what I would not be.

   You make my creed a barren sham, you wake foul dreams of sensual life,
   And Atys with his blood-stained knife were better than the thing I am.

   False Sphinx!  False Sphinx!  By reedy Styx old Charon, leaning on his
   oar,
   Waits for my coin.  Go thou before, and leave me to my crucifix,

   Whose pallid burden, sick with pain, watches the world with wearied
   eyes,
   And weeps for every soul that dies, and weeps for every soul in vain.




THE BALLAD OF READING GAOL


                               IN MEMORIAM
                                 C. T. W.
                SOMETIME TROOPER OF THE ROYAL HORSE GUARDS
                  OBIIT H.M. PRISON, READING, BERKSHIRE
                               JULY 7, 1896



THE BALLAD OF READING GAOL


                                      I

   HE did not wear his scarlet coat,
      For blood and wine are red,
   And blood and wine were on his hands
      When they found him with the dead,
   The poor dead woman whom he loved,
      And murdered in her bed.

   He walked amongst the Trial Men
      In a suit of shabby grey;
   A cricket cap was on his head,
      And his step seemed light and gay;
   But I never saw a man who looked
      So wistfully at the day.

   I never saw a man who looked
      With such a wistful eye
   Upon that little tent of blue
      Which prisoners call the sky,
   And at every drifting cloud that went
      With sails of silver by.

   I walked, with other souls in pain,
      Within another ring,
   And was wondering if the man had done
      A great or little thing,
   When a voice behind me whispered low,
      ‘_That fellow’s got to swing_.’

   Dear Christ! the very prison walls
      Suddenly seemed to reel,
   And the sky above my head became
      Like a casque of scorching steel;
   And, though I was a soul in pain,
      My pain I could not feel.

   I only knew what hunted thought
      Quickened his step, and why
   He looked upon the garish day
      With such a wistful eye;
   The man had killed the thing he loved,
      And so he had to die.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   Yet each man kills the thing he loves,
      By each let this be heard,
   Some do it with a bitter look,
      Some with a flattering word,
   The coward does it with a kiss,
      The brave man with a sword!

   Some kill their love when they are young,
      And some when they are old;
   Some strangle with the hands of Lust,
      Some with the hands of Gold:
   The kindest use a knife, because
      The dead so soon grow cold.

   Some love too little, some too long,
      Some sell, and others buy;
   Some do the deed with many tears,
      And some without a sigh:
   For each man kills the thing he loves,
      Yet each man does not die.

   He does not die a death of shame
      On a day of dark disgrace,
   Nor have a noose about his neck,
      Nor a cloth upon his face,
   Nor drop feet foremost through the floor
      Into an empty space.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   He does not sit with silent men
      Who watch him night and day;
   Who watch him when he tries to weep,
      And when he tries to pray;
   Who watch him lest himself should rob
      The prison of its prey.

   He does not wake at dawn to see
      Dread figures throng his room,
   The shivering Chaplain robed in white,
      The Sheriff stern with gloom,
   And the Governor all in shiny black,
      With the yellow face of Doom.

   He does not rise in piteous haste
      To put on convict-clothes,
   While some coarse-mouthed Doctor gloats, and notes
      Each new and nerve-twitched pose,
   Fingering a watch whose little ticks
      Are like horrible hammer-blows.

   He does not know that sickening thirst
      That sands one’s throat, before
   The hangman with his gardener’s gloves
      Slips through the padded door,
   And binds one with three leathern thongs,
      That the throat may thirst no more.

   He does not bend his head to hear
      The Burial Office read,
   Nor, while the terror of his soul
      Tells him he is not dead,
   Cross his own coffin, as he moves
      Into the hideous shed.

   He does not stare upon the air
      Through a little roof of glass:
   He does not pray with lips of clay
      For his agony to pass;
   Nor feel upon his shuddering cheek
      The kiss of Caiaphas.

                                     II

   SIX weeks our guardsman walked the yard,
      In the suit of shabby grey:
   His cricket cap was on his head,
      And his step seemed light and gay,
   But I never saw a man who looked
      So wistfully at the day.

   I never saw a man who looked
      With such a wistful eye
   Upon that little tent of blue
      Which prisoners call the sky,
   And at every wandering cloud that trailed
      Its ravelled fleeces by.

   He did not wring his hands, as do
      Those witless men who dare
   To try to rear the changeling Hope
      In the cave of black Despair:
   He only looked upon the sun,
      And drank the morning air.

   He did not wring his hands nor weep,
      Nor did he peek or pine,
   But he drank the air as though it held
      Some healthful anodyne;
   With open mouth he drank the sun
      As though it had been wine!

   And I and all the souls in pain,
      Who tramped the other ring,
   Forgot if we ourselves had done
      A great or little thing,
   And watched with gaze of dull amaze
      The man who had to swing.

   And strange it was to see him pass
      With a step so light and gay,
   And strange it was to see him look
      So wistfully at the day,
   And strange it was to think that he
      Had such a debt to pay.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   For oak and elm have pleasant leaves
      That in the springtime shoot:
   But grim to see is the gallows-tree,
      With its adder-bitten root,
   And, green or dry, a man must die
      Before it bears its fruit!

   The loftiest place is that seat of grace
      For which all worldlings try:
   But who would stand in hempen band
      Upon a scaffold high,
   And through a murderer’s collar take
      His last look at the sky?

   It is sweet to dance to violins
      When Love and Life are fair:
   To dance to flutes, to dance to lutes
      Is delicate and rare:
   But it is not sweet with nimble feet
      To dance upon the air!

   So with curious eyes and sick surmise
      We watched him day by day,
   And wondered if each one of us
      Would end the self-same way,
   For none can tell to what red Hell
      His sightless soul may stray.

   At last the dead man walked no more
      Amongst the Trial Men,
   And I knew that he was standing up
      In the black dock’s dreadful pen,
   And that never would I see his face
      In God’s sweet world again.

   Like two doomed ships that pass in storm
      We had crossed each other’s way:
   But we made no sign, we said no word,
      We had no word to say;
   For we did not meet in the holy night,
      But in the shameful day.

   A prison wall was round us both,
      Two outcast men we were:
   The world had thrust us from its heart,
      And God from out His care:
   And the iron gin that waits for Sin
      Had caught us in its snare.

                                     III

   IN Debtors’ Yard the stones are hard,
      And the dripping wall is high,
   So it was there he took the air
      Beneath the leaden sky,
   And by each side a Warder walked,
      For fear the man might die.

   Or else he sat with those who watched
      His anguish night and day;
   Who watched him when he rose to weep,
      And when he crouched to pray;
   Who watched him lest himself should rob
      Their scaffold of its prey.

   The Governor was strong upon
      The Regulations Act:
   The Doctor said that Death was but
      A scientific fact:
   And twice a day the Chaplain called,
      And left a little tract.

   And twice a day he smoked his pipe,
      And drank his quart of beer:
   His soul was resolute, and held
      No hiding-place for fear;
   He often said that he was glad
      The hangman’s hands were near.

   But why he said so strange a thing
      No Warder dared to ask:
   For he to whom a watcher’s doom
      Is given as his task,
   Must set a lock upon his lips,
      And make his face a mask.

   Or else he might be moved, and try
      To comfort or console:
   And what should Human Pity do
      Pent up in Murderers’ Hole?
   What word of grace in such a place
      Could help a brother’s soul?

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   With slouch and swing around the ring
      We trod the Fools’ Parade!
   We did not care: we knew we were
      The Devil’s Own Brigade:
   And shaven head and feet of lead
      Make a merry masquerade.

   We tore the tarry rope to shreds
      With blunt and bleeding nails;
   We rubbed the doors, and scrubbed the floors,
      And cleaned the shining rails:
   And, rank by rank, we soaped the plank,
      And clattered with the pails.

   We sewed the sacks, we broke the stones,
      We turned the dusty drill:
   We banged the tins, and bawled the hymns,
      And sweated on the mill:
   But in the heart of every man
      Terror was lying still.

   So still it lay that every day
      Crawled like a weed-clogged wave:
   And we forgot the bitter lot
      That waits for fool and knave,
   Till once, as we tramped in from work,
      We passed an open grave.

   With yawning mouth the yellow hole
      Gaped for a living thing;
   The very mud cried out for blood
      To the thirsty asphalte ring:
   And we knew that ere one dawn grew fair
      Some prisoner had to swing.

   Right in we went, with soul intent
      On Death and Dread and Doom:
   The hangman, with his little bag,
      Went shuffling through the gloom:
   And each man trembled as he crept
      Into his numbered tomb.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   That night the empty corridors
      Were full of forms of Fear,
   And up and down the iron town
      Stole feet we could not hear,
   And through the bars that hide the stars
      White faces seemed to peer.

   He lay as one who lies and dreams
      In a pleasant meadow-land,
   The watchers watched him as he slept,
      And could not understand
   How one could sleep so sweet a sleep
      With a hangman close at hand.

   But there is no sleep when men must weep
      Who never yet have wept:
   So we—the fool, the fraud, the knave—
      That endless vigil kept,
   And through each brain on hands of pain
      Another’s terror crept.

   Alas! it is a fearful thing
      To feel another’s guilt!
   For, right within, the sword of Sin
      Pierced to its poisoned hilt,
   And as molten lead were the tears we shed
      For the blood we had not spilt.

   The Warders with their shoes of felt
      Crept by each padlocked door,
   And peeped and saw, with eyes of awe,
      Grey figures on the floor,
   And wondered why men knelt to pray
      Who never prayed before.

   All through the night we knelt and prayed,
      Mad mourners of a corse!
   The troubled plumes of midnight were
      The plumes upon a hearse:
   And bitter wine upon a sponge
      Was the savour of Remorse.

                                  * * * * *

   The grey cock crew, the red cock crew,
      But never came the day:
   And crooked shapes of Terror crouched,
      In the corners where we lay:
   And each evil sprite that walks by night
      Before us seemed to play.

   They glided past, they glided fast,
      Like travellers through a mist:
   They mocked the moon in a rigadoon
      Of delicate turn and twist,
   And with formal pace and loathsome grace
      The phantoms kept their tryst.

   With mop and mow, we saw them go,
      Slim shadows hand in hand:
   About, about, in ghostly rout
      They trod a saraband:
   And the damned grotesques made arabesques,
      Like the wind upon the sand!

   With the pirouettes of marionettes,
      They tripped on pointed tread:
   But with flutes of Fear they filled the ear,
      As their grisly masque they led,
   And loud they sang, and long they sang,
      For they sang to wake the dead.

   ‘_Oho_!’ _they cried_, ‘_The world is wide_,
      _But fettered limbs go lame_!
   _And once_, _or twice_, _to throw the dice_
      _Is a gentlemanly game_,
   _But he does not win who plays with Sin_
      _In the secret House of Shame_.’

   No things of air these antics were,
      That frolicked with such glee:
   To men whose lives were held in gyves,
      And whose feet might not go free,
   Ah! wounds of Christ! they were living things,
      Most terrible to see.

   Around, around, they waltzed and wound;
      Some wheeled in smirking pairs;
   With the mincing step of a demirep
      Some sidled up the stairs:
   And with subtle sneer, and fawning leer,
      Each helped us at our prayers.

   The morning wind began to moan,
      But still the night went on:
   Through its giant loom the web of gloom
      Crept till each thread was spun:
   And, as we prayed, we grew afraid
      Of the Justice of the Sun.

   The moaning wind went wandering round
      The weeping prison-wall:
   Till like a wheel of turning steel
      We felt the minutes crawl:
   O moaning wind! what had we done
      To have such a seneschal?

   At last I saw the shadowed bars,
      Like a lattice wrought in lead,
   Move right across the whitewashed wall
      That faced my three-plank bed,
   And I knew that somewhere in the world
      God’s dreadful dawn was red.

   At six o’clock we cleaned our cells,
      At seven all was still,
   But the sough and swing of a mighty wing
      The prison seemed to fill,
   For the Lord of Death with icy breath
      Had entered in to kill.

   He did not pass in purple pomp,
      Nor ride a moon-white steed.
   Three yards of cord and a sliding board
      Are all the gallows’ need:
   So with rope of shame the Herald came
      To do the secret deed.

   We were as men who through a fen
      Of filthy darkness grope:
   We did not dare to breathe a prayer,
      Or to give our anguish scope:
   Something was dead in each of us,
      And what was dead was Hope.

   For Man’s grim Justice goes its way,
      And will not swerve aside:
   It slays the weak, it slays the strong,
      It has a deadly stride:
   With iron heel it slays the strong,
      The monstrous parricide!

   We waited for the stroke of eight:
      Each tongue was thick with thirst:
   For the stroke of eight is the stroke of Fate
      That makes a man accursed,
   And Fate will use a running noose
      For the best man and the worst.

   We had no other thing to do,
      Save to wait for the sign to come:
   So, like things of stone in a valley lone,
      Quiet we sat and dumb:
   But each man’s heart beat thick and quick,
      Like a madman on a drum!

   With sudden shock the prison-clock
      Smote on the shivering air,
   And from all the gaol rose up a wail
      Of impotent despair,
   Like the sound that frightened marshes hear
      From some leper in his lair.

   And as one sees most fearful things
      In the crystal of a dream,
   We saw the greasy hempen rope
      Hooked to the blackened beam,
   And heard the prayer the hangman’s snare
      Strangled into a scream.

   And all the woe that moved him so
      That he gave that bitter cry,
   And the wild regrets, and the bloody sweats,
      None knew so well as I:
   For he who lives more lives than one
      More deaths than one must die.

                                     IV

   THERE is no chapel on the day
      On which they hang a man:
   The Chaplain’s heart is far too sick,
      Or his face is far too wan,
   Or there is that written in his eyes
      Which none should look upon.

   So they kept us close till nigh on noon,
      And then they rang the bell,
   And the Warders with their jingling keys
      Opened each listening cell,
   And down the iron stair we tramped,
      Each from his separate Hell.

   Out into God’s sweet air we went,
      But not in wonted way,
   For this man’s face was white with fear,
      And that man’s face was grey,
   And I never saw sad men who looked
      So wistfully at the day.

   I never saw sad men who looked
      With such a wistful eye
   Upon that little tent of blue
      We prisoners called the sky,
   And at every careless cloud that passed
      In happy freedom by.

   But there were those amongst us all
      Who walked with downcast head,
   And knew that, had each got his due,
      They should have died instead:
   He had but killed a thing that lived,
      Whilst they had killed the dead.

   For he who sins a second time
      Wakes a dead soul to pain,
   And draws it from its spotted shroud,
      And makes it bleed again,
   And makes it bleed great gouts of blood,
      And makes it bleed in vain!

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   Like ape or clown, in monstrous garb
      With crooked arrows starred,
   Silently we went round and round
      The slippery asphalte yard;
   Silently we went round and round,
      And no man spoke a word.

   Silently we went round and round,
      And through each hollow mind
   The Memory of dreadful things
      Rushed like a dreadful wind,
   And Horror stalked before each man,
      And Terror crept behind.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   The Warders strutted up and down,
      And kept their herd of brutes,
   Their uniforms were spick and span,
      And they wore their Sunday suits,
   But we knew the work they had been at,
      By the quicklime on their boots.

   For where a grave had opened wide,
      There was no grave at all:
   Only a stretch of mud and sand
      By the hideous prison-wall,
   And a little heap of burning lime,
      That the man should have his pall.

   For he has a pall, this wretched man,
      Such as few men can claim:
   Deep down below a prison-yard,
      Naked for greater shame,
   He lies, with fetters on each foot,
      Wrapt in a sheet of flame!

   And all the while the burning lime
      Eats flesh and bone away,
   It eats the brittle bone by night,
      And the soft flesh by day,
   It eats the flesh and bone by turns,
      But it eats the heart alway.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   For three long years they will not sow
      Or root or seedling there:
   For three long years the unblessed spot
      Will sterile be and bare,
   And look upon the wondering sky
      With unreproachful stare.

   They think a murderer’s heart would taint
      Each simple seed they sow.
   It is not true!  God’s kindly earth
      Is kindlier than men know,
   And the red rose would but blow more red,
      The white rose whiter blow.

   Out of his mouth a red, red rose!
      Out of his heart a white!
   For who can say by what strange way,
      Christ brings His will to light,
   Since the barren staff the pilgrim bore
      Bloomed in the great Pope’s sight?

   But neither milk-white rose nor red
      May bloom in prison-air;
   The shard, the pebble, and the flint,
      Are what they give us there:
   For flowers have been known to heal
      A common man’s despair.

   So never will wine-red rose or white,
      Petal by petal, fall
   On that stretch of mud and sand that lies
      By the hideous prison-wall,
   To tell the men who tramp the yard
      That God’s Son died for all.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   Yet though the hideous prison-wall
      Still hems him round and round,
   And a spirit may not walk by night
      That is with fetters bound,
   And a spirit may but weep that lies
      In such unholy ground,

   He is at peace—this wretched man—
      At peace, or will be soon:
   There is no thing to make him mad,
      Nor does Terror walk at noon,
   For the lampless Earth in which he lies
      Has neither Sun nor Moon.

   They hanged him as a beast is hanged:
      They did not even toll
   A requiem that might have brought
      Rest to his startled soul,
   But hurriedly they took him out,
      And hid him in a hole.

   They stripped him of his canvas clothes,
      And gave him to the flies:
   They mocked the swollen purple throat,
      And the stark and staring eyes:
   And with laughter loud they heaped the shroud
      In which their convict lies.

   The Chaplain would not kneel to pray
      By his dishonoured grave:
   Nor mark it with that blessed Cross
      That Christ for sinners gave,
   Because the man was one of those
      Whom Christ came down to save.

   Yet all is well; he has but passed
      To Life’s appointed bourne:
   And alien tears will fill for him
      Pity’s long-broken urn,
   For his mourners will be outcast men,
      And outcasts always mourn

                                      V

   I KNOW not whether Laws be right,
      Or whether Laws be wrong;
   All that we know who lie in gaol
      Is that the wall is strong;
   And that each day is like a year,
      A year whose days are long.

   But this I know, that every Law
      That men have made for Man,
   Since first Man took his brother’s life,
      And the sad world began,
   But straws the wheat and saves the chaff
      With a most evil fan.

   This too I know—and wise it were
      If each could know the same—
   That every prison that men build
      Is built with bricks of shame,
   And bound with bars lest Christ should see
      How men their brothers maim.

   With bars they blur the gracious moon,
      And blind the goodly sun:
   And they do well to hide their Hell,
      For in it things are done
   That Son of God nor son of Man
      Ever should look upon!

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   The vilest deeds like poison weeds,
      Bloom well in prison-air;
   It is only what is good in Man
      That wastes and withers there:
   Pale Anguish keeps the heavy gate,
      And the Warder is Despair.

   For they starve the little frightened child
      Till it weeps both night and day:
   And they scourge the weak, and flog the fool,
      And gibe the old and grey,
   And some grow mad, and all grow bad,
      And none a word may say.

   Each narrow cell in which we dwell
      Is a foul and dark latrine,
   And the fetid breath of living Death
      Chokes up each grated screen,
   And all, but Lust, is turned to dust
      In Humanity’s machine.

   The brackish water that we drink
      Creeps with a loathsome slime,
   And the bitter bread they weigh in scales
      Is full of chalk and lime,
   And Sleep will not lie down, but walks
      Wild-eyed, and cries to Time.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   But though lean Hunger and green Thirst
      Like asp with adder fight,
   We have little care of prison fare,
      For what chills and kills outright
   Is that every stone one lifts by day
      Becomes one’s heart by night.

   With midnight always in one’s heart,
      And twilight in one’s cell,
   We turn the crank, or tear the rope,
      Each in his separate Hell,
   And the silence is more awful far
      Than the sound of a brazen bell.

   And never a human voice comes near
      To speak a gentle word:
   And the eye that watches through the door
      Is pitiless and hard:
   And by all forgot, we rot and rot,
      With soul and body marred.

   And thus we rust Life’s iron chain
      Degraded and alone:
   And some men curse, and some men weep,
      And some men make no moan:
   But God’s eternal Laws are kind
      And break the heart of stone.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   And every human heart that breaks,
      In prison-cell or yard,
   Is as that broken box that gave
      Its treasure to the Lord,
   And filled the unclean leper’s house
      With the scent of costliest nard.

   Ah! happy they whose hearts can break
      And peace of pardon win!
   How else may man make straight his plan
      And cleanse his soul from Sin?
   How else but through a broken heart
      May Lord Christ enter in?

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

   And he of the swollen purple throat,
      And the stark and staring eyes,
   Waits for the holy hands that took
      The Thief to Paradise;
   And a broken and a contrite heart
      The Lord will not despise.

   The man in red who reads the Law
      Gave him three weeks of life,
   Three little weeks in which to heal
      His soul of his soul’s strife,
   And cleanse from every blot of blood
      The hand that held the knife.

   And with tears of blood he cleansed the hand,
      The hand that held the steel:
   For only blood can wipe out blood,
      And only tears can heal:
   And the crimson stain that was of Cain
      Became Christ’s snow-white seal.

                                     VI

   IN Reading gaol by Reading town
      There is a pit of shame,
   And in it lies a wretched man
      Eaten by teeth of flame,
   In a burning winding-sheet he lies,
      And his grave has got no name.

   And there, till Christ call forth the dead,
      In silence let him lie:
   No need to waste the foolish tear,
      Or heave the windy sigh:
   The man had killed the thing he loved,
      And so he had to die.

   And all men kill the thing they love,
      By all let this be heard,
   Some do it with a bitter look,
      Some with a flattering word,
   The coward does it with a kiss,
      The brave man with a sword!




RAVENNA


                          _Newdigate Prize Poem_
                    Recited in the Sheldonian Theatre
                                  Oxford
                             June 26th, 1878

                                * * * * *

                               TO MY FRIEND
                              GEORGE FLEMING
                                AUTHOR OF
                      ‘THE NILE NOVEL’ AND ‘MIRAGE’

                         _Ravenna_, _March_ 1877
                          _Oxford_, _March_ 1878



RAVENNA


                                     I.

   A YEAR ago I breathed the Italian air,—
   And yet, methinks this northern Spring is fair,—
   These fields made golden with the flower of March,
   The throstle singing on the feathered larch,
   The cawing rooks, the wood-doves fluttering by,
   The little clouds that race across the sky;
   And fair the violet’s gentle drooping head,
   The primrose, pale for love uncomforted,
   The rose that burgeons on the climbing briar,
   The crocus-bed, (that seems a moon of fire
   Round-girdled with a purple marriage-ring);
   And all the flowers of our English Spring,
   Fond snowdrops, and the bright-starred daffodil.
   Up starts the lark beside the murmuring mill,
   And breaks the gossamer-threads of early dew;
   And down the river, like a flame of blue,
   Keen as an arrow flies the water-king,
   While the brown linnets in the greenwood sing.
   A year ago!—it seems a little time
   Since last I saw that lordly southern clime,
   Where flower and fruit to purple radiance blow,
   And like bright lamps the fabled apples glow.
   Full Spring it was—and by rich flowering vines,
   Dark olive-groves and noble forest-pines,
   I rode at will; the moist glad air was sweet,
   The white road rang beneath my horse’s feet,
   And musing on Ravenna’s ancient name,
   I watched the day till, marked with wounds of flame,
   The turquoise sky to burnished gold was turned.

      O how my heart with boyish passion burned,
   When far away across the sedge and mere
   I saw that Holy City rising clear,
   Crowned with her crown of towers!—On and on
   I galloped, racing with the setting sun,
   And ere the crimson after-glow was passed,
   I stood within Ravenna’s walls at last!

                                     II.

      How strangely still! no sound of life or joy
   Startles the air; no laughing shepherd-boy
   Pipes on his reed, nor ever through the day
   Comes the glad sound of children at their play:
   O sad, and sweet, and silent! surely here
   A man might dwell apart from troublous fear,
   Watching the tide of seasons as they flow
   From amorous Spring to Winter’s rain and snow,
   And have no thought of sorrow;—here, indeed,
   Are Lethe’s waters, and that fatal weed
   Which makes a man forget his fatherland.

      Ay! amid lotus-meadows dost thou stand,
   Like Proserpine, with poppy-laden head,
   Guarding the holy ashes of the dead.
   For though thy brood of warrior sons hath ceased,
   Thy noble dead are with thee!—they at least
   Are faithful to thine honour:—guard them well,
   O childless city! for a mighty spell,
   To wake men’s hearts to dreams of things sublime,
   Are the lone tombs where rest the Great of Time.

                                    III.

      Yon lonely pillar, rising on the plain,
   Marks where the bravest knight of France was slain,—
   The Prince of chivalry, the Lord of war,
   Gaston de Foix: for some untimely star
   Led him against thy city, and he fell,
   As falls some forest-lion fighting well.
   Taken from life while life and love were new,
   He lies beneath God’s seamless veil of blue;
   Tall lance-like reeds wave sadly o’er his head,
   And oleanders bloom to deeper red,
   Where his bright youth flowed crimson on the ground.

      Look farther north unto that broken mound,—
   There, prisoned now within a lordly tomb
   Raised by a daughter’s hand, in lonely gloom,
   Huge-limbed Theodoric, the Gothic king,
   Sleeps after all his weary conquering.
   Time hath not spared his ruin,—wind and rain
   Have broken down his stronghold; and again
   We see that Death is mighty lord of all,
   And king and clown to ashen dust must fall

      Mighty indeed _their_ glory! yet to me
   Barbaric king, or knight of chivalry,
   Or the great queen herself, were poor and vain,
   Beside the grave where Dante rests from pain.
   His gilded shrine lies open to the air;
   And cunning sculptor’s hands have carven there
   The calm white brow, as calm as earliest morn,
   The eyes that flashed with passionate love and scorn,
   The lips that sang of Heaven and of Hell,
   The almond-face which Giotto drew so well,
   The weary face of Dante;—to this day,
   Here in his place of resting, far away
   From Arno’s yellow waters, rushing down
   Through the wide bridges of that fairy town,
   Where the tall tower of Giotto seems to rise
   A marble lily under sapphire skies!

   Alas! my Dante! thou hast known the pain
   Of meaner lives,—the exile’s galling chain,
   How steep the stairs within kings’ houses are,
   And all the petty miseries which mar
   Man’s nobler nature with the sense of wrong.
   Yet this dull world is grateful for thy song;
   Our nations do thee homage,—even she,
   That cruel queen of vine-clad Tuscany,
   Who bound with crown of thorns thy living brow,
   Hath decked thine empty tomb with laurels now,
   And begs in vain the ashes of her son.

      O mightiest exile! all thy grief is done:
   Thy soul walks now beside thy Beatrice;
   Ravenna guards thine ashes: sleep in peace.

                                     IV.

      How lone this palace is; how grey the walls!
   No minstrel now wakes echoes in these halls.
   The broken chain lies rusting on the door,
   And noisome weeds have split the marble floor:
   Here lurks the snake, and here the lizards run
   By the stone lions blinking in the sun.
   Byron dwelt here in love and revelry
   For two long years—a second Anthony,
   Who of the world another Actium made!
   Yet suffered not his royal soul to fade,
   Or lyre to break, or lance to grow less keen,
   ’Neath any wiles of an Egyptian queen.
   For from the East there came a mighty cry,
   And Greece stood up to fight for Liberty,
   And called him from Ravenna: never knight
   Rode forth more nobly to wild scenes of fight!
   None fell more bravely on ensanguined field,
   Borne like a Spartan back upon his shield!
   O Hellas!  Hellas! in thine hour of pride,
   Thy day of might, remember him who died
   To wrest from off thy limbs the trammelling chain:
   O Salamis!  O lone Platæan plain!
   O tossing waves of wild Euboean sea!
   O wind-swept heights of lone Thermopylæ!
   He loved you well—ay, not alone in word,
   Who freely gave to thee his lyre and sword,
   Like Æschylos at well-fought Marathon:

      And England, too, shall glory in her son,
   Her warrior-poet, first in song and fight.
   No longer now shall Slander’s venomed spite
   Crawl like a snake across his perfect name,
   Or mar the lordly scutcheon of his fame.

      For as the olive-garland of the race,
   Which lights with joy each eager runner’s face,
   As the red cross which saveth men in war,
   As a flame-bearded beacon seen from far
   By mariners upon a storm-tossed sea,—
   Such was his love for Greece and Liberty!

      Byron, thy crowns are ever fresh and green:
   Red leaves of rose from Sapphic Mitylene
   Shall bind thy brows; the myrtle blooms for thee,
   In hidden glades by lonely Castaly;
   The laurels wait thy coming: all are thine,
   And round thy head one perfect wreath will twine.

                                     V.

      The pine-tops rocked before the evening breeze
   With the hoarse murmur of the wintry seas,
   And the tall stems were streaked with amber bright;—
   I wandered through the wood in wild delight,
   Some startled bird, with fluttering wings and fleet,
   Made snow of all the blossoms; at my feet,
   Like silver crowns, the pale narcissi lay,
   And small birds sang on every twining spray.
   O waving trees, O forest liberty!
   Within your haunts at least a man is free,
   And half forgets the weary world of strife:
   The blood flows hotter, and a sense of life
   Wakes i’ the quickening veins, while once again
   The woods are filled with gods we fancied slain.
   Long time I watched, and surely hoped to see
   Some goat-foot Pan make merry minstrelsy
   Amid the reeds! some startled Dryad-maid
   In girlish flight! or lurking in the glade,
   The soft brown limbs, the wanton treacherous face
   Of woodland god! Queen Dian in the chase,
   White-limbed and terrible, with look of pride,
   And leash of boar-hounds leaping at her side!
   Or Hylas mirrored in the perfect stream.

      O idle heart!  O fond Hellenic dream!
   Ere long, with melancholy rise and swell,
   The evening chimes, the convent’s vesper bell,
   Struck on mine ears amid the amorous flowers.
   Alas! alas! these sweet and honied hours
   Had whelmed my heart like some encroaching sea,
   And drowned all thoughts of black Gethsemane.

                                     VI.

      O lone Ravenna! many a tale is told
   Of thy great glories in the days of old:
   Two thousand years have passed since thou didst see
   Cæsar ride forth to royal victory.
   Mighty thy name when Rome’s lean eagles flew
   From Britain’s isles to far Euphrates blue;
   And of the peoples thou wast noble queen,
   Till in thy streets the Goth and Hun were seen.
   Discrowned by man, deserted by the sea,
   Thou sleepest, rocked in lonely misery!
   No longer now upon thy swelling tide,
   Pine-forest-like, thy myriad galleys ride!
   For where the brass-beaked ships were wont to float,
   The weary shepherd pipes his mournful note;
   And the white sheep are free to come and go
   Where Adria’s purple waters used to flow.

      O fair!  O sad!  O Queen uncomforted!
   In ruined loveliness thou liest dead,
   Alone of all thy sisters; for at last
   Italia’s royal warrior hath passed
   Rome’s lordliest entrance, and hath worn his crown
   In the high temples of the Eternal Town!
   The Palatine hath welcomed back her king,
   And with his name the seven mountains ring!

      And Naples hath outlived her dream of pain,
   And mocks her tyrant!  Venice lives again,
   New risen from the waters! and the cry
   Of Light and Truth, of Love and Liberty,
   Is heard in lordly Genoa, and where
   The marble spires of Milan wound the air,
   Rings from the Alps to the Sicilian shore,
   And Dante’s dream is now a dream no more.

      But thou, Ravenna, better loved than all,
   Thy ruined palaces are but a pall
   That hides thy fallen greatness! and thy name
   Burns like a grey and flickering candle-flame
   Beneath the noonday splendour of the sun
   Of new Italia! for the night is done,
   The night of dark oppression, and the day
   Hath dawned in passionate splendour: far away
   The Austrian hounds are hunted from the land,
   Beyond those ice-crowned citadels which stand
   Girdling the plain of royal Lombardy,
   From the far West unto the Eastern sea.

      I know, indeed, that sons of thine have died
   In Lissa’s waters, by the mountain-side
   Of Aspromonte, on Novara’s plain,—
   Nor have thy children died for thee in vain:
   And yet, methinks, thou hast not drunk this wine
   From grapes new-crushed of Liberty divine,
   Thou hast not followed that immortal Star
   Which leads the people forth to deeds of war.
   Weary of life, thou liest in silent sleep,
   As one who marks the lengthening shadows creep,
   Careless of all the hurrying hours that run,
   Mourning some day of glory, for the sun
   Of Freedom hath not shewn to thee his face,
   And thou hast caught no flambeau in the race.

      Yet wake not from thy slumbers,—rest thee well,
   Amidst thy fields of amber asphodel,
   Thy lily-sprinkled meadows,—rest thee there,
   To mock all human greatness: who would dare
   To vent the paltry sorrows of his life
   Before thy ruins, or to praise the strife
   Of kings’ ambition, and the barren pride
   Of warring nations! wert not thou the Bride
   Of the wild Lord of Adria’s stormy sea!
   The Queen of double Empires! and to thee
   Were not the nations given as thy prey!
   And now—thy gates lie open night and day,
   The grass grows green on every tower and hall,
   The ghastly fig hath cleft thy bastioned wall;
   And where thy mailèd warriors stood at rest
   The midnight owl hath made her secret nest.
   O fallen! fallen! from thy high estate,
   O city trammelled in the toils of Fate,
   Doth nought remain of all thy glorious days,
   But a dull shield, a crown of withered bays!

      Yet who beneath this night of wars and fears,
   From tranquil tower can watch the coming years;
   Who can foretell what joys the day shall bring,
   Or why before the dawn the linnets sing?
   Thou, even thou, mayst wake, as wakes the rose
   To crimson splendour from its grave of snows;
   As the rich corn-fields rise to red and gold
   From these brown lands, now stiff with Winter’s cold;
   As from the storm-rack comes a perfect star!

      O much-loved city!  I have wandered far
   From the wave-circled islands of my home;
   Have seen the gloomy mystery of the Dome
   Rise slowly from the drear Campagna’s way,
   Clothed in the royal purple of the day:
   I from the city of the violet crown
   Have watched the sun by Corinth’s hill go down,
   And marked the ‘myriad laughter’ of the sea
   From starlit hills of flower-starred Arcady;
   Yet back to thee returns my perfect love,
   As to its forest-nest the evening dove.

      O poet’s city! one who scarce has seen
   Some twenty summers cast their doublets green
   For Autumn’s livery, would seek in vain
   To wake his lyre to sing a louder strain,
   Or tell thy days of glory;—poor indeed
   Is the low murmur of the shepherd’s reed,
   Where the loud clarion’s blast should shake the sky,
   And flame across the heavens! and to try
   Such lofty themes were folly: yet I know
   That never felt my heart a nobler glow
   Than when I woke the silence of thy street
   With clamorous trampling of my horse’s feet,
   And saw the city which now I try to sing,
   After long days of weary travelling.

                                    VII.

      Adieu, Ravenna! but a year ago,
   I stood and watched the crimson sunset glow
   From the lone chapel on thy marshy plain:
   The sky was as a shield that caught the stain
   Of blood and battle from the dying sun,
   And in the west the circling clouds had spun
   A royal robe, which some great God might wear,
   While into ocean-seas of purple air
   Sank the gold galley of the Lord of Light.

      Yet here the gentle stillness of the night
   Brings back the swelling tide of memory,
   And wakes again my passionate love for thee:
   Now is the Spring of Love, yet soon will come
   On meadow and tree the Summer’s lordly bloom;
   And soon the grass with brighter flowers will blow,
   And send up lilies for some boy to mow.
   Then before long the Summer’s conqueror,
   Rich Autumn-time, the season’s usurer,
   Will lend his hoarded gold to all the trees,
   And see it scattered by the spendthrift breeze;
   And after that the Winter cold and drear.
   So runs the perfect cycle of the year.
   And so from youth to manhood do we go,
   And fall to weary days and locks of snow.
   Love only knows no winter; never dies:
   Nor cares for frowning storms or leaden skies
   And mine for thee shall never pass away,
   Though my weak lips may falter in my lay.

      Adieu!  Adieu! yon silent evening star,
   The night’s ambassador, doth gleam afar,
   And bid the shepherd bring his flocks to fold.
   Perchance before our inland seas of gold
   Are garnered by the reapers into sheaves,
   Perchance before I see the Autumn leaves,
   I may behold thy city; and lay down
   Low at thy feet the poet’s laurel crown.

      Adieu!  Adieu! yon silver lamp, the moon,
   Which turns our midnight into perfect noon,
   Doth surely light thy towers, guarding well
   Where Dante sleeps, where Byron loved to dwell.

                                * * * * *

         Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty
                    at the Edinburgh University Press




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS***


******* This file should be named 1057-0.txt or 1057-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/5/1057



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

