II
LA FUITE DE LA LUNE


      TO outer senses there is peace,
      A dreamy peace on either hand
      Deep silence in the shadowy land,
   Deep silence where the shadows cease.

      Save for a cry that echoes shrill
      From some lone bird disconsolate;
      A corncrake calling to its mate;
   The answer from the misty hill.

      And suddenly the moon withdraws
      Her sickle from the lightening skies,
      And to her sombre cavern flies,
   Wrapped in a veil of yellow gauze.


THE GRAVE OF KEATS


   RID of the world’s injustice, and his pain,
      He rests at last beneath God’s veil of blue:
      Taken from life when life and love were new
   The youngest of the martyrs here is lain,
   Fair as Sebastian, and as early slain.
      No cypress shades his grave, no funeral yew,
      But gentle violets weeping with the dew
   Weave on his bones an ever-blossoming chain.
   O proudest heart that broke for misery!
      O sweetest lips since those of Mitylene!
      O poet-painter of our English Land!
   Thy name was writ in water—it shall stand:
      And tears like mine will keep thy memory green,
      As Isabella did her Basil-tree.

ROME.


THEOCRITUS


                               A VILLANELLE

   O SINGER of Persephone!
      In the dim meadows desolate
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Still through the ivy flits the bee
      Where Amaryllis lies in state;
   O Singer of Persephone!

   Simætha calls on Hecate
      And hears the wild dogs at the gate;
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Still by the light and laughing sea
      Poor Polypheme bemoans his fate;
   O Singer of Persephone!

   And still in boyish rivalry
      Young Daphnis challenges his mate;
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Slim Lacon keeps a goat for thee,
      For thee the jocund shepherds wait;
   O Singer of Persephone!
   Dost thou remember Sicily?


IN THE GOLD ROOM


                                A HARMONY

   HER ivory hands on the ivory keys
      Strayed in a fitful fantasy,
   Like the silver gleam when the poplar trees
      Rustle their pale-leaves listlessly,
   Or the drifting foam of a restless sea
   When the waves show their teeth in the flying breeze.

   Her gold hair fell on the wall of gold
      Like the delicate gossamer tangles spun
   On the burnished disk of the marigold,
      Or the sunflower turning to meet the sun
      When the gloom of the dark blue night is done,
   And the spear of the lily is aureoled.

   And her sweet red lips on these lips of mine
      Burned like the ruby fire set
   In the swinging lamp of a crimson shrine,
      Or the bleeding wounds of the pomegranate,
      Or the heart of the lotus drenched and wet
   With the spilt-out blood of the rose-red wine.


BALLADE DE MARGUERITE


                                (NORMANDE)

   I AM weary of lying within the chase
   When the knights are meeting in market-place.

   Nay, go not thou to the red-roofed town
   Lest the hoofs of the war-horse tread thee down.

   But I would not go where the Squires ride,
   I would only walk by my Lady’s side.

   Alack! and alack! thou art overbold,
   A Forester’s son may not eat off gold.

   Will she love me the less that my Father is seen
   Each Martinmas day in a doublet green?

   Perchance she is sewing at tapestrie,
   Spindle and loom are not meet for thee.

   Ah, if she is working the arras bright
   I might ravel the threads by the fire-light.

   Perchance she is hunting of the deer,
   How could you follow o’er hill and mere?

   Ah, if she is riding with the court,
   I might run beside her and wind the morte.

   Perchance she is kneeling in St. Denys,
   (On her soul may our Lady have gramercy!)

   Ah, if she is praying in lone chapelle,
   I might swing the censer and ring the bell.

   Come in, my son, for you look sae pale,
   The father shall fill thee a stoup of ale.

   But who are these knights in bright array?
   Is it a pageant the rich folks play?

   ’T is the King of England from over sea,
   Who has come unto visit our fair countrie.

   But why does the curfew toll sae low?
   And why do the mourners walk a-row?

   O ’t is Hugh of Amiens my sister’s son
   Who is lying stark, for his day is done.

   Nay, nay, for I see white lilies clear,
   It is no strong man who lies on the bier.

   O ’t is old Dame Jeannette that kept the hall,
   I knew she would die at the autumn fall.

   Dame Jeannette had not that gold-brown hair,
   Old Jeannette was not a maiden fair.

   O ’t is none of our kith and none of our kin,
   (Her soul may our Lady assoil from sin!)

   But I hear the boy’s voice chaunting sweet,
   ‘Elle est morte, la Marguerite.’

   Come in, my son, and lie on the bed,
   And let the dead folk bury their dead.

   O mother, you know I loved her true:
   O mother, hath one grave room for two?


THE DOLE OF THE KING’S DAUGHTER


                                 (BRETON)

   SEVEN stars in the still water,
      And seven in the sky;
   Seven sins on the King’s daughter,
      Deep in her soul to lie.

   Red roses are at her feet,
      (Roses are red in her red-gold hair)
   And O where her bosom and girdle meet
      Red roses are hidden there.

   Fair is the knight who lieth slain
      Amid the rush and reed,
   See the lean fishes that are fain
      Upon dead men to feed.

   Sweet is the page that lieth there,
      (Cloth of gold is goodly prey,)
   See the black ravens in the air,
      Black, O black as the night are they.

   What do they there so stark and dead?
      (There is blood upon her hand)
   Why are the lilies flecked with red?
      (There is blood on the river sand.)

   There are two that ride from the south and east,
      And two from the north and west,
   For the black raven a goodly feast,
      For the King’s daughter rest.

   There is one man who loves her true,
      (Red, O red, is the stain of gore!)
   He hath duggen a grave by the darksome yew,
      (One grave will do for four.)

   No moon in the still heaven,
      In the black water none,
   The sins on her soul are seven,
      The sin upon his is one.


AMOR INTELLECTUALIS


   OFT have we trod the vales of Castaly
      And heard sweet notes of sylvan music blown
      From antique reeds to common folk unknown:
   And often launched our bark upon that sea
   Which the nine Muses hold in empery,
      And ploughed free furrows through the wave and foam,
      Nor spread reluctant sail for more safe home
   Till we had freighted well our argosy.
   Of which despoilèd treasures these remain,
      Sordello’s passion, and the honeyed line
   Of young Endymion, lordly Tamburlaine
      Driving his pampered jades, and more than these,
   The seven-fold vision of the Florentine,
      And grave-browed Milton’s solemn harmonies.


SANTA DECCA


   THE Gods are dead: no longer do we bring
      To grey-eyed Pallas crowns of olive-leaves!
      Demeter’s child no more hath tithe of sheaves,
   And in the noon the careless shepherds sing,
   For Pan is dead, and all the wantoning
      By secret glade and devious haunt is o’er:
      Young Hylas seeks the water-springs no more;
   Great Pan is dead, and Mary’s son is King.

   And yet—perchance in this sea-trancèd isle,
      Chewing the bitter fruit of memory,
      Some God lies hidden in the asphodel.
   Ah Love! if such there be, then it were well
      For us to fly his anger: nay, but see,
      The leaves are stirring: let us watch awhile.

CORFU.


A VISION


   TWO crownèd Kings, and One that stood alone
      With no green weight of laurels round his head,
      But with sad eyes as one uncomforted,
   And wearied with man’s never-ceasing moan
   For sins no bleating victim can atone,
      And sweet long lips with tears and kisses fed.
      Girt was he in a garment black and red,
   And at his feet I marked a broken stone
      Which sent up lilies, dove-like, to his knees.
   Now at their sight, my heart being lit with flame,
   I cried to Beatricé, ‘Who are these?’
   And she made answer, knowing well each name,
      ‘Æschylos first, the second Sophokles,
      And last (wide stream of tears!) Euripides.’


IMPRESSION DE VOYAGE


   THE sea was sapphire coloured, and the sky
      Burned like a heated opal through the air;
      We hoisted sail; the wind was blowing fair
   For the blue lands that to the eastward lie.
   From the steep prow I marked with quickening eye
      Zakynthos, every olive grove and creek,
      Ithaca’s cliff, Lycaon’s snowy peak,
   And all the flower-strewn hills of Arcady.
      The flapping of the sail against the mast,
      The ripple of the water on the side,
   The ripple of girls’ laughter at the stern,
   The only sounds:—when ’gan the West to burn,
      And a red sun upon the seas to ride,
      I stood upon the soil of Greece at last!

KATAKOLO.


THE GRAVE OF SHELLEY


   LIKE burnt-out torches by a sick man’s bed
      Gaunt cypress-trees stand round the sun-bleached stone;
      Here doth the little night-owl make her throne,
   And the slight lizard show his jewelled head.
   And, where the chaliced poppies flame to red,
      In the still chamber of yon pyramid
      Surely some Old-World Sphinx lurks darkly hid,
   Grim warder of this pleasaunce of the dead.

   Ah! sweet indeed to rest within the womb
      Of Earth, great mother of eternal sleep,
   But sweeter far for thee a restless tomb
      In the blue cavern of an echoing deep,
   Or where the tall ships founder in the gloom
      Against the rocks of some wave-shattered steep.

ROME.


BY THE ARNO


      THE oleander on the wall
      Grows crimson in the dawning light,
      Though the grey shadows of the night
   Lie yet on Florence like a pall.

      The dew is bright upon the hill,
      And bright the blossoms overhead,
      But ah! the grasshoppers have fled,
   The little Attic song is still.

      Only the leaves are gently stirred
      By the soft breathing of the gale,
      And in the almond-scented vale
   The lonely nightingale is heard.

      The day will make thee silent soon,
      O nightingale sing on for love!
      While yet upon the shadowy grove
   Splinter the arrows of the moon.

      Before across the silent lawn
      In sea-green vest the morning steals,
      And to love’s frightened eyes reveals
   The long white fingers of the dawn

      Fast climbing up the eastern sky
      To grasp and slay the shuddering night,
      All careless of my heart’s delight,
   Or if the nightingale should die.



IMPRESSIONS DE THÉÂTRE


FABIEN DEI FRANCHI


                        TO MY FRIEND HENRY IRVING

   THE silent room, the heavy creeping shade,
      The dead that travel fast, the opening door,
      The murdered brother rising through the floor,
   The ghost’s white fingers on thy shoulders laid,
   And then the lonely duel in the glade,
      The broken swords, the stifled scream, the gore,
      Thy grand revengeful eyes when all is o’er,—
   These things are well enough,—but thou wert made
      For more august creation! frenzied Lear
      Should at thy bidding wander on the heath
      With the shrill fool to mock him, Romeo
   For thee should lure his love, and desperate fear
   Pluck Richard’s recreant dagger from its sheath—
   Thou trumpet set for Shakespeare’s lips to blow!


PHÈDRE


                            TO SARAH BERNHARDT

   HOW vain and dull this common world must seem
      To such a One as thou, who should’st have talked
   At Florence with Mirandola, or walked
   Through the cool olives of the Academe:
   Thou should’st have gathered reeds from a green stream
      For Goat-foot Pan’s shrill piping, and have played
      With the white girls in that Phæacian glade
   Where grave Odysseus wakened from his dream.

   Ah! surely once some urn of Attic clay
      Held thy wan dust, and thou hast come again
      Back to this common world so dull and vain,
   For thou wert weary of the sunless day,
      The heavy fields of scentless asphodel,
      The loveless lips with which men kiss in Hell.


WRITTEN AT THE LYCEUM THEATRE

