I
PORTIA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   I MARVEL not Bassanio was so bold
      To peril all he had upon the lead,
      Or that proud Aragon bent low his head
   Or that Morocco’s fiery heart grew cold:
   For in that gorgeous dress of beaten gold
      Which is more golden than the golden sun
      No woman Veronesé looked upon
   Was half so fair as thou whom I behold.
   Yet fairer when with wisdom as your shield
      The sober-suited lawyer’s gown you donned,
   And would not let the laws of Venice yield
      Antonio’s heart to that accursèd Jew—
      O Portia! take my heart: it is thy due:
   I think I will not quarrel with the Bond.


II
QUEEN HENRIETTA MARIA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   IN the lone tent, waiting for victory,
      She stands with eyes marred by the mists of pain,
      Like some wan lily overdrenched with rain:
   The clamorous clang of arms, the ensanguined sky,
   War’s ruin, and the wreck of chivalry
      To her proud soul no common fear can bring:
      Bravely she tarrieth for her Lord the King,
   Her soul a-flame with passionate ecstasy.
   O Hair of Gold!  O Crimson Lips!  O Face
      Made for the luring and the love of man!
      With thee I do forget the toil and stress,
   The loveless road that knows no resting place,
      Time’s straitened pulse, the soul’s dread weariness,
      My freedom, and my life republican!


III
CAMMA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   AS one who poring on a Grecian urn
      Scans the fair shapes some Attic hand hath made,
      God with slim goddess, goodly man with maid,
   And for their beauty’s sake is loth to turn
   And face the obvious day, must I not yearn
      For many a secret moon of indolent bliss,
      When in midmost shrine of Artemis
   I see thee standing, antique-limbed, and stern?

   And yet—methinks I’d rather see thee play
      That serpent of old Nile, whose witchery
   Made Emperors drunken,—come, great Egypt, shake
      Our stage with all thy mimic pageants!  Nay,
      I am grown sick of unreal passions, make
   The world thine Actium, me thine Anthony!



PANTHEA


   NAY, let us walk from fire unto fire,
      From passionate pain to deadlier delight,—
   I am too young to live without desire,
      Too young art thou to waste this summer night
   Asking those idle questions which of old
   Man sought of seer and oracle, and no reply was told.

   For, sweet, to feel is better than to know,
      And wisdom is a childless heritage,
   One pulse of passion—youth’s first fiery glow,—
      Are worth the hoarded proverbs of the sage:
   Vex not thy soul with dead philosophy,
   Have we not lips to kiss with, hearts to love and eyes to see!

   Dost thou not hear the murmuring nightingale,
      Like water bubbling from a silver jar,
   So soft she sings the envious moon is pale,
      That high in heaven she is hung so far
   She cannot hear that love-enraptured tune,—
   Mark how she wreathes each horn with mist, yon late and labouring
   moon.

   White lilies, in whose cups the gold bees dream,
      The fallen snow of petals where the breeze
   Scatters the chestnut blossom, or the gleam
      Of boyish limbs in water,—are not these
   Enough for thee, dost thou desire more?
   Alas! the Gods will give nought else from their eternal store.

   For our high Gods have sick and wearied grown
      Of all our endless sins, our vain endeavour
   For wasted days of youth to make atone
      By pain or prayer or priest, and never, never,
   Hearken they now to either good or ill,
   But send their rain upon the just and the unjust at will.

   They sit at ease, our Gods they sit at ease,
      Strewing with leaves of rose their scented wine,
   They sleep, they sleep, beneath the rocking trees
      Where asphodel and yellow lotus twine,
   Mourning the old glad days before they knew
   What evil things the heart of man could dream, and dreaming do.

   And far beneath the brazen floor they see
      Like swarming flies the crowd of little men,
   The bustle of small lives, then wearily
      Back to their lotus-haunts they turn again
   Kissing each others’ mouths, and mix more deep
   The poppy-seeded draught which brings soft purple-lidded sleep.

   There all day long the golden-vestured sun,
      Their torch-bearer, stands with his torch ablaze,
   And, when the gaudy web of noon is spun
      By its twelve maidens, through the crimson haze
   Fresh from Endymion’s arms comes forth the moon,
   And the immortal Gods in toils of mortal passions swoon.

   There walks Queen Juno through some dewy mead,
      Her grand white feet flecked with the saffron dust
   Of wind-stirred lilies, while young Ganymede
      Leaps in the hot and amber-foaming must,
   His curls all tossed, as when the eagle bare
   The frightened boy from Ida through the blue Ionian air.

   There in the green heart of some garden close
      Queen Venus with the shepherd at her side,
   Her warm soft body like the briar rose
      Which would be white yet blushes at its pride,
   Laughs low for love, till jealous Salmacis
   Peers through the myrtle-leaves and sighs for pain of lonely bliss.

   There never does that dreary north-wind blow
      Which leaves our English forests bleak and bare,
   Nor ever falls the swift white-feathered snow,
      Nor ever doth the red-toothed lightning dare
   To wake them in the silver-fretted night
   When we lie weeping for some sweet sad sin, some dead delight.

   Alas! they know the far Lethæan spring,
      The violet-hidden waters well they know,
   Where one whose feet with tired wandering
      Are faint and broken may take heart and go,
   And from those dark depths cool and crystalline
   Drink, and draw balm, and sleep for sleepless souls, and anodyne.

   But we oppress our natures, God or Fate
      Is our enemy, we starve and feed
   On vain repentance—O we are born too late!
      What balm for us in bruisèd poppy seed
   Who crowd into one finite pulse of time
   The joy of infinite love and the fierce pain of infinite crime.

   O we are wearied of this sense of guilt,
      Wearied of pleasure’s paramour despair,
   Wearied of every temple we have built,
      Wearied of every right, unanswered prayer,
   For man is weak; God sleeps: and heaven is high:
   One fiery-coloured moment: one great love; and lo! we die.

   Ah! but no ferry-man with labouring pole
      Nears his black shallop to the flowerless strand,
   No little coin of bronze can bring the soul
      Over Death’s river to the sunless land,
   Victim and wine and vow are all in vain,
   The tomb is sealed; the soldiers watch; the dead rise not again.

   We are resolved into the supreme air,
      We are made one with what we touch and see,
   With our heart’s blood each crimson sun is fair,
      With our young lives each spring-impassioned tree
   Flames into green, the wildest beasts that range
   The moor our kinsmen are, all life is one, and all is change.

   With beat of systole and of diastole
      One grand great life throbs through earth’s giant heart,
   And mighty waves of single Being roll
      From nerveless germ to man, for we are part
   Of every rock and bird and beast and hill,
   One with the things that prey on us, and one with what we kill.

   From lower cells of waking life we pass
      To full perfection; thus the world grows old:
   We who are godlike now were once a mass
      Of quivering purple flecked with bars of gold,
   Unsentient or of joy or misery,
   And tossed in terrible tangles of some wild and wind-swept sea.

   This hot hard flame with which our bodies burn
      Will make some meadow blaze with daffodil,
   Ay! and those argent breasts of thine will turn
      To water-lilies; the brown fields men till
   Will be more fruitful for our love to-night,
   Nothing is lost in nature, all things live in Death’s despite.

   The boy’s first kiss, the hyacinth’s first bell,
      The man’s last passion, and the last red spear
   That from the lily leaps, the asphodel
      Which will not let its blossoms blow for fear
   Of too much beauty, and the timid shame
   Of the young bridegroom at his lover’s eyes,—these with the same

   One sacrament are consecrate, the earth
      Not we alone hath passions hymeneal,
   The yellow buttercups that shake for mirth
      At daybreak know a pleasure not less real
   Than we do, when in some fresh-blossoming wood,
   We draw the spring into our hearts, and feel that life is good.

   So when men bury us beneath the yew
      Thy crimson-stainèd mouth a rose will be,
   And thy soft eyes lush bluebells dimmed with dew,
      And when the white narcissus wantonly
   Kisses the wind its playmate some faint joy
   Will thrill our dust, and we will be again fond maid and boy.

   And thus without life’s conscious torturing pain
      In some sweet flower we will feel the sun,
   And from the linnet’s throat will sing again,
      And as two gorgeous-mailèd snakes will run
   Over our graves, or as two tigers creep
   Through the hot jungle where the yellow-eyed huge lions sleep

   And give them battle!  How my heart leaps up
      To think of that grand living after death
   In beast and bird and flower, when this cup,
      Being filled too full of spirit, bursts for breath,
   And with the pale leaves of some autumn day
   The soul earth’s earliest conqueror becomes earth’s last great prey.

   O think of it!  We shall inform ourselves
      Into all sensuous life, the goat-foot Faun,
   The Centaur, or the merry bright-eyed Elves
      That leave their dancing rings to spite the dawn
   Upon the meadows, shall not be more near
   Than you and I to nature’s mysteries, for we shall hear

   The thrush’s heart beat, and the daisies grow,
      And the wan snowdrop sighing for the sun
   On sunless days in winter, we shall know
      By whom the silver gossamer is spun,
   Who paints the diapered fritillaries,
   On what wide wings from shivering pine to pine the eagle flies.

   Ay! had we never loved at all, who knows
      If yonder daffodil had lured the bee
   Into its gilded womb, or any rose
      Had hung with crimson lamps its little tree!
   Methinks no leaf would ever bud in spring,
   But for the lovers’ lips that kiss, the poets’ lips that sing.

   Is the light vanished from our golden sun,
      Or is this dædal-fashioned earth less fair,
   That we are nature’s heritors, and one
      With every pulse of life that beats the air?
   Rather new suns across the sky shall pass,
   New splendour come unto the flower, new glory to the grass.

   And we two lovers shall not sit afar,
      Critics of nature, but the joyous sea
   Shall be our raiment, and the bearded star
      Shoot arrows at our pleasure!  We shall be
   Part of the mighty universal whole,
   And through all æons mix and mingle with the Kosmic Soul!

   We shall be notes in that great Symphony
      Whose cadence circles through the rhythmic spheres,
   And all the live World’s throbbing heart shall be
      One with our heart; the stealthy creeping years
   Have lost their terrors now, we shall not die,
   The Universe itself shall be our Immortality.



THE FOURTH MOVEMENT


IMPRESSION


                               LE RÉVEILLON

      THE sky is laced with fitful red,
      The circling mists and shadows flee,
      The dawn is rising from the sea,
   Like a white lady from her bed.

      And jagged brazen arrows fall
      Athwart the feathers of the night,
      And a long wave of yellow light
   Breaks silently on tower and hall,

      And spreading wide across the wold
      Wakes into flight some fluttering bird,
      And all the chestnut tops are stirred,
   And all the branches streaked with gold.


AT VERONA


   HOW steep the stairs within Kings’ houses are
      For exile-wearied feet as mine to tread,
      And O how salt and bitter is the bread
   Which falls from this Hound’s table,—better far
   That I had died in the red ways of war,
      Or that the gate of Florence bare my head,
      Than to live thus, by all things comraded
   Which seek the essence of my soul to mar.

   ‘Curse God and die: what better hope than this?
      He hath forgotten thee in all the bliss
      Of his gold city, and eternal day’—
   Nay peace: behind my prison’s blinded bars
      I do possess what none can take away
      My love, and all the glory of the stars.


APOLOGIA


   IS it thy will that I should wax and wane,
      Barter my cloth of gold for hodden grey,
   And at thy pleasure weave that web of pain
      Whose brightest threads are each a wasted day?

   Is it thy will—Love that I love so well—
      That my Soul’s House should be a tortured spot
   Wherein, like evil paramours, must dwell
      The quenchless flame, the worm that dieth not?

   Nay, if it be thy will I shall endure,
      And sell ambition at the common mart,
   And let dull failure be my vestiture,
      And sorrow dig its grave within my heart.

   Perchance it may be better so—at least
      I have not made my heart a heart of stone,
   Nor starved my boyhood of its goodly feast,
      Nor walked where Beauty is a thing unknown.

   Many a man hath done so; sought to fence
      In straitened bonds the soul that should be free,
   Trodden the dusty road of common sense,
      While all the forest sang of liberty,

   Not marking how the spotted hawk in flight
      Passed on wide pinion through the lofty air,
   To where some steep untrodden mountain height
      Caught the last tresses of the Sun God’s hair.

   Or how the little flower he trod upon,
      The daisy, that white-feathered shield of gold,
   Followed with wistful eyes the wandering sun
      Content if once its leaves were aureoled.

   But surely it is something to have been
      The best belovèd for a little while,
   To have walked hand in hand with Love, and seen
      His purple wings flit once across thy smile.

   Ay! though the gorgèd asp of passion feed
      On my boy’s heart, yet have I burst the bars,
   Stood face to face with Beauty, known indeed
      The Love which moves the Sun and all the stars!


QUIA MULTUM AMAVI


   DEAR Heart, I think the young impassioned priest
      When first he takes from out the hidden shrine
   His God imprisoned in the Eucharist,
      And eats the bread, and drinks the dreadful wine,

   Feels not such awful wonder as I felt
      When first my smitten eyes beat full on thee,
   And all night long before thy feet I knelt
      Till thou wert wearied of Idolatry.

   Ah! hadst thou liked me less and loved me more,
      Through all those summer days of joy and rain,
   I had not now been sorrow’s heritor,
      Or stood a lackey in the House of Pain.

   Yet, though remorse, youth’s white-faced seneschal,
      Tread on my heels with all his retinue,
   I am most glad I loved thee—think of all
      The suns that go to make one speedwell blue!


SILENTIUM AMORIS


   AS often-times the too resplendent sun
      Hurries the pallid and reluctant moon
   Back to her sombre cave, ere she hath won
      A single ballad from the nightingale,
      So doth thy Beauty make my lips to fail,
   And all my sweetest singing out of tune.

   And as at dawn across the level mead
      On wings impetuous some wind will come,
   And with its too harsh kisses break the reed
      Which was its only instrument of song,
      So my too stormy passions work me wrong,
   And for excess of Love my Love is dumb.

   But surely unto Thee mine eyes did show
      Why I am silent, and my lute unstrung;
   Else it were better we should part, and go,
      Thou to some lips of sweeter melody,
      And I to nurse the barren memory
   Of unkissed kisses, and songs never sung.


HER VOICE


   THE wild bee reels from bough to bough
      With his furry coat and his gauzy wing,
   Now in a lily-cup, and now
      Setting a jacinth bell a-swing,
            In his wandering;
   Sit closer love: it was here I trow
            I made that vow,

   Swore that two lives should be like one
      As long as the sea-gull loved the sea,
   As long as the sunflower sought the sun,—
      It shall be, I said, for eternity
            ’Twixt you and me!
   Dear friend, those times are over and done;
            Love’s web is spun.

   Look upward where the poplar trees
      Sway and sway in the summer air,
   Here in the valley never a breeze
      Scatters the thistledown, but there
            Great winds blow fair
   From the mighty murmuring mystical seas,
            And the wave-lashed leas.

   Look upward where the white gull screams,
      What does it see that we do not see?
   Is that a star? or the lamp that gleams
      On some outward voyaging argosy,—
            Ah! can it be
   We have lived our lives in a land of dreams!
            How sad it seems.

   Sweet, there is nothing left to say
      But this, that love is never lost,
   Keen winter stabs the breasts of May
      Whose crimson roses burst his frost,
            Ships tempest-tossed
   Will find a harbour in some bay,
            And so we may.

   And there is nothing left to do
      But to kiss once again, and part,
   Nay, there is nothing we should rue,
      I have my beauty,—you your Art,
            Nay, do not start,
   One world was not enough for two
            Like me and you.


MY VOICE


   WITHIN this restless, hurried, modern world
      We took our hearts’ full pleasure—You and I,
   And now the white sails of our ship are furled,
      And spent the lading of our argosy.

   Wherefore my cheeks before their time are wan,
      For very weeping is my gladness fled,
   Sorrow has paled my young mouth’s vermilion,
      And Ruin draws the curtains of my bed.

   But all this crowded life has been to thee
      No more than lyre, or lute, or subtle spell
   Of viols, or the music of the sea
      That sleeps, a mimic echo, in the shell.


TÆDIUM VITÆ


   TO stab my youth with desperate knives, to wear
   This paltry age’s gaudy livery,
   To let each base hand filch my treasury,
   To mesh my soul within a woman’s hair,
   And be mere Fortune’s lackeyed groom,—I swear
   I love it not! these things are less to me
   Than the thin foam that frets upon the sea,
   Less than the thistledown of summer air
   Which hath no seed: better to stand aloof
   Far from these slanderous fools who mock my life
   Knowing me not, better the lowliest roof
   Fit for the meanest hind to sojourn in,
   Than to go back to that hoarse cave of strife
   Where my white soul first kissed the mouth of sin.



HUMANITAD


   IT is full winter now: the trees are bare,
      Save where the cattle huddle from the cold
   Beneath the pine, for it doth never wear
      The autumn’s gaudy livery whose gold
   Her jealous brother pilfers, but is true
   To the green doublet; bitter is the wind, as though it blew

   From Saturn’s cave; a few thin wisps of hay
      Lie on the sharp black hedges, where the wain
   Dragged the sweet pillage of a summer’s day
      From the low meadows up the narrow lane;
   Upon the half-thawed snow the bleating sheep
   Press close against the hurdles, and the shivering house-dogs creep

   From the shut stable to the frozen stream
      And back again disconsolate, and miss
   The bawling shepherds and the noisy team;
      And overhead in circling listlessness
   The cawing rooks whirl round the frosted stack,
   Or crowd the dripping boughs; and in the fen the ice-pools crack

   Where the gaunt bittern stalks among the reeds
      And flaps his wings, and stretches back his neck,
   And hoots to see the moon; across the meads
      Limps the poor frightened hare, a little speck;
   And a stray seamew with its fretful cry
   Flits like a sudden drift of snow against the dull grey sky.

   Full winter: and the lusty goodman brings
      His load of faggots from the chilly byre,
   And stamps his feet upon the hearth, and flings
      The sappy billets on the waning fire,
   And laughs to see the sudden lightening scare
   His children at their play, and yet,—the spring is in the air;

   Already the slim crocus stirs the snow,
      And soon yon blanchèd fields will bloom again
   With nodding cowslips for some lad to mow,
      For with the first warm kisses of the rain
   The winter’s icy sorrow breaks to tears,
   And the brown thrushes mate, and with bright eyes the rabbit peers

   From the dark warren where the fir-cones lie,
      And treads one snowdrop under foot, and runs
   Over the mossy knoll, and blackbirds fly
      Across our path at evening, and the suns
   Stay longer with us; ah! how good to see
   Grass-girdled spring in all her joy of laughing greenery

   Dance through the hedges till the early rose,
      (That sweet repentance of the thorny briar!)
   Burst from its sheathèd emerald and disclose
      The little quivering disk of golden fire
   Which the bees know so well, for with it come
   Pale boy’s-love, sops-in-wine, and daffadillies all in bloom.

   Then up and down the field the sower goes,
      While close behind the laughing younker scares
   With shrilly whoop the black and thievish crows,
      And then the chestnut-tree its glory wears,
   And on the grass the creamy blossom falls
   In odorous excess, and faint half-whispered madrigals

   Steal from the bluebells’ nodding carillons
      Each breezy morn, and then white jessamine,
   That star of its own heaven, snap-dragons
      With lolling crimson tongues, and eglantine
   In dusty velvets clad usurp the bed
   And woodland empery, and when the lingering rose hath shed

   Red leaf by leaf its folded panoply,
      And pansies closed their purple-lidded eyes,
   Chrysanthemums from gilded argosy
      Unload their gaudy scentless merchandise,
   And violets getting overbold withdraw
   From their shy nooks, and scarlet berries dot the leafless haw.

   O happy field! and O thrice happy tree!
      Soon will your queen in daisy-flowered smock
   And crown of flower-de-luce trip down the lea,
      Soon will the lazy shepherds drive their flock
   Back to the pasture by the pool, and soon
   Through the green leaves will float the hum of murmuring bees at noon.

   Soon will the glade be bright with bellamour,
      The flower which wantons love, and those sweet nuns
   Vale-lilies in their snowy vestiture
      Will tell their beaded pearls, and carnations
   With mitred dusky leaves will scent the wind,
   And straggling traveller’s-joy each hedge with yellow stars will bind.

   Dear bride of Nature and most bounteous spring,
      That canst give increase to the sweet-breath’d kine,
   And to the kid its little horns, and bring
      The soft and silky blossoms to the vine,
   Where is that old nepenthe which of yore
   Man got from poppy root and glossy-berried mandragore!

   There was a time when any common bird
      Could make me sing in unison, a time
   When all the strings of boyish life were stirred
      To quick response or more melodious rhyme
   By every forest idyll;—do I change?
   Or rather doth some evil thing through thy fair pleasaunce range?

   Nay, nay, thou art the same: ’tis I who seek
      To vex with sighs thy simple solitude,
   And because fruitless tears bedew my cheek
      Would have thee weep with me in brotherhood;
   Fool! shall each wronged and restless spirit dare
   To taint such wine with the salt poison of own despair!

   Thou art the same: ’tis I whose wretched soul
      Takes discontent to be its paramour,
   And gives its kingdom to the rude control
      Of what should be its servitor,—for sure
   Wisdom is somewhere, though the stormy sea
   Contain it not, and the huge deep answer ‘’Tis not in me.’

   To burn with one clear flame, to stand erect
      In natural honour, not to bend the knee
   In profitless prostrations whose effect
      Is by itself condemned, what alchemy
   Can teach me this? what herb Medea brewed
   Will bring the unexultant peace of essence not subdued?

   The minor chord which ends the harmony,
      And for its answering brother waits in vain
   Sobbing for incompleted melody,
      Dies a swan’s death; but I the heir of pain,
   A silent Memnon with blank lidless eyes,
   Wait for the light and music of those suns which never rise.

   The quenched-out torch, the lonely cypress-gloom,
      The little dust stored in the narrow urn,
   The gentle ΧΑΙΡΕ of the Attic tomb,—
      Were not these better far than to return
   To my old fitful restless malady,
   Or spend my days within the voiceless cave of misery?

   Nay! for perchance that poppy-crownèd god
      Is like the watcher by a sick man’s bed
   Who talks of sleep but gives it not; his rod
      Hath lost its virtue, and, when all is said,
   Death is too rude, too obvious a key
   To solve one single secret in a life’s philosophy.

   And Love! that noble madness, whose august
      And inextinguishable might can slay
   The soul with honeyed drugs,—alas! I must
      From such sweet ruin play the runaway,
   Although too constant memory never can
   Forget the archèd splendour of those brows Olympian

   Which for a little season made my youth
      So soft a swoon of exquisite indolence
   That all the chiding of more prudent Truth
      Seemed the thin voice of jealousy,—O hence
   Thou huntress deadlier than Artemis!
   Go seek some other quarry! for of thy too perilous bliss.

   My lips have drunk enough,—no more, no more,—
      Though Love himself should turn his gilded prow
   Back to the troubled waters of this shore
      Where I am wrecked and stranded, even now
   The chariot wheels of passion sweep too near,
   Hence!  Hence!  I pass unto a life more barren, more austere.

   More barren—ay, those arms will never lean
      Down through the trellised vines and draw my soul
   In sweet reluctance through the tangled green;
      Some other head must wear that aureole,
   For I am hers who loves not any man
   Whose white and stainless bosom bears the sign Gorgonian.

   Let Venus go and chuck her dainty page,
      And kiss his mouth, and toss his curly hair,
   With net and spear and hunting equipage
      Let young Adonis to his tryst repair,
   But me her fond and subtle-fashioned spell
   Delights no more, though I could win her dearest citadel.

   Ay, though I were that laughing shepherd boy
      Who from Mount Ida saw the little cloud
   Pass over Tenedos and lofty Troy
      And knew the coming of the Queen, and bowed
   In wonder at her feet, not for the sake
   Of a new Helen would I bid her hand the apple take.

   Then rise supreme Athena argent-limbed!
      And, if my lips be musicless, inspire
   At least my life: was not thy glory hymned
      By One who gave to thee his sword and lyre
   Like Æschylos at well-fought Marathon,
   And died to show that Milton’s England still could bear a son!

   And yet I cannot tread the Portico
      And live without desire, fear and pain,
   Or nurture that wise calm which long ago
      The grave Athenian master taught to men,
   Self-poised, self-centred, and self-comforted,
   To watch the world’s vain phantasies go by with unbowed head.

   Alas! that serene brow, those eloquent lips,
      Those eyes that mirrored all eternity,
   Rest in their own Colonos, an eclipse
      Hath come on Wisdom, and Mnemosyne
   Is childless; in the night which she had made
   For lofty secure flight Athena’s owl itself hath strayed.

   Nor much with Science do I care to climb,
      Although by strange and subtle witchery
   She drew the moon from heaven: the Muse Time
      Unrolls her gorgeous-coloured tapestry
   To no less eager eyes; often indeed
   In the great epic of Polymnia’s scroll I love to read

   How Asia sent her myriad hosts to war
      Against a little town, and panoplied
   In gilded mail with jewelled scimitar,
      White-shielded, purple-crested, rode the Mede
   Between the waving poplars and the sea
   Which men call Artemisium, till he saw Thermopylæ

   Its steep ravine spanned by a narrow wall,
      And on the nearer side a little brood
   Of careless lions holding festival!
      And stood amazèd at such hardihood,
   And pitched his tent upon the reedy shore,
   And stayed two days to wonder, and then crept at midnight o’er

   Some unfrequented height, and coming down
      The autumn forests treacherously slew
   What Sparta held most dear and was the crown
      Of far Eurotas, and passed on, nor knew
   How God had staked an evil net for him
   In the small bay at Salamis,—and yet, the page grows dim,

   Its cadenced Greek delights me not, I feel
      With such a goodly time too out of tune
   To love it much: for like the Dial’s wheel
      That from its blinded darkness strikes the noon
   Yet never sees the sun, so do my eyes
   Restlessly follow that which from my cheated vision flies.

   O for one grand unselfish simple life
      To teach us what is Wisdom! speak ye hills
   Of lone Helvellyn, for this note of strife
      Shunned your untroubled crags and crystal rills,
   Where is that Spirit which living blamelessly
   Yet dared to kiss the smitten mouth of his own century!

   Speak ye Rydalian laurels! where is he
      Whose gentle head ye sheltered, that pure soul
   Whose gracious days of uncrowned majesty
      Through lowliest conduct touched the lofty goal
   Where love and duty mingle!  Him at least
   The most high Laws were glad of, he had sat at Wisdom’s feast;

   But we are Learning’s changelings, know by rote
      The clarion watchword of each Grecian school
   And follow none, the flawless sword which smote
      The pagan Hydra is an effete tool
   Which we ourselves have blunted, what man now
   Shall scale the august ancient heights and to old Reverence bow?

   One such indeed I saw, but, Ichabod!
      Gone is that last dear son of Italy,
   Who being man died for the sake of God,
      And whose unrisen bones sleep peacefully,
   O guard him, guard him well, my Giotto’s tower,
   Thou marble lily of the lily town! let not the lour

   Of the rude tempest vex his slumber, or
      The Arno with its tawny troubled gold
   O’er-leap its marge, no mightier conqueror
      Clomb the high Capitol in the days of old
   When Rome was indeed Rome, for Liberty
   Walked like a bride beside him, at which sight pale Mystery

   Fled shrieking to her farthest sombrest cell
      With an old man who grabbled rusty keys,
   Fled shuddering, for that immemorial knell
      With which oblivion buries dynasties
   Swept like a wounded eagle on the blast,
   As to the holy heart of Rome the great triumvir passed.

   He knew the holiest heart and heights of Rome,
      He drave the base wolf from the lion’s lair,
   And now lies dead by that empyreal dome
      Which overtops Valdarno hung in air
   By Brunelleschi—O Melpomene
   Breathe through thy melancholy pipe thy sweetest threnody!

   Breathe through the tragic stops such melodies
      That Joy’s self may grow jealous, and the Nine
   Forget awhile their discreet emperies,
      Mourning for him who on Rome’s lordliest shrine
   Lit for men’s lives the light of Marathon,
   And bare to sun-forgotten fields the fire of the sun!

   O guard him, guard him well, my Giotto’s tower!
      Let some young Florentine each eventide
   Bring coronals of that enchanted flower
      Which the dim woods of Vallombrosa hide,
   And deck the marble tomb wherein he lies
   Whose soul is as some mighty orb unseen of mortal eyes;

   Some mighty orb whose cycled wanderings,
      Being tempest-driven to the farthest rim
   Where Chaos meets Creation and the wings
      Of the eternal chanting Cherubim
   Are pavilioned on Nothing, passed away
   Into a moonless void,—and yet, though he is dust and clay,

   He is not dead, the immemorial Fates
      Forbid it, and the closing shears refrain.
   Lift up your heads ye everlasting gates!
      Ye argent clarions, sound a loftier strain
   For the vile thing he hated lurks within
   Its sombre house, alone with God and memories of sin.

   Still what avails it that she sought her cave
      That murderous mother of red harlotries?
   At Munich on the marble architrave
      The Grecian boys die smiling, but the seas
   Which wash Ægina fret in loneliness
   Not mirroring their beauty; so our lives grow colourless

   For lack of our ideals, if one star
      Flame torch-like in the heavens the unjust
   Swift daylight kills it, and no trump of war
      Can wake to passionate voice the silent dust
   Which was Mazzini once! rich Niobe
   For all her stony sorrows hath her sons; but Italy,

   What Easter Day shall make her children rise,
      Who were not Gods yet suffered? what sure feet
   Shall find their grave-clothes folded? what clear eyes
      Shall see them bodily?  O it were meet
   To roll the stone from off the sepulchre
   And kiss the bleeding roses of their wounds, in love of her,

   Our Italy! our mother visible!
      Most blessed among nations and most sad,
   For whose dear sake the young Calabrian fell
      That day at Aspromonte and was glad
   That in an age when God was bought and sold
   One man could die for Liberty! but we, burnt out and cold,

   See Honour smitten on the cheek and gyves
      Bind the sweet feet of Mercy: Poverty
   Creeps through our sunless lanes and with sharp knives
      Cuts the warm throats of children stealthily,
   And no word said:—O we are wretched men
   Unworthy of our great inheritance! where is the pen

   Of austere Milton? where the mighty sword
      Which slew its master righteously? the years
   Have lost their ancient leader, and no word
      Breaks from the voiceless tripod on our ears:
   While as a ruined mother in some spasm
   Bears a base child and loathes it, so our best enthusiasm

   Genders unlawful children, Anarchy
      Freedom’s own Judas, the vile prodigal
   Licence who steals the gold of Liberty
      And yet has nothing, Ignorance the real
   One Fraticide since Cain, Envy the asp
   That stings itself to anguish, Avarice whose palsied grasp

   Is in its extent stiffened, moneyed Greed
      For whose dull appetite men waste away
   Amid the whirr of wheels and are the seed
      Of things which slay their sower, these each day
   Sees rife in England, and the gentle feet
   Of Beauty tread no more the stones of each unlovely street.

   What even Cromwell spared is desecrated
      By weed and worm, left to the stormy play
   Of wind and beating snow, or renovated
      By more destructful hands: Time’s worst decay
   Will wreathe its ruins with some loveliness,
   But these new Vandals can but make a rain-proof barrenness.

   Where is that Art which bade the Angels sing
      Through Lincoln’s lofty choir, till the air
   Seems from such marble harmonies to ring
      With sweeter song than common lips can dare
   To draw from actual reed? ah! where is now
   The cunning hand which made the flowering hawthorn branches bow

   For Southwell’s arch, and carved the House of One
      Who loved the lilies of the field with all
   Our dearest English flowers? the same sun
      Rises for us: the seasons natural
   Weave the same tapestry of green and grey:
   The unchanged hills are with us: but that Spirit hath passed away.

   And yet perchance it may be better so,
      For Tyranny is an incestuous Queen,
   Murder her brother is her bedfellow,
      And the Plague chambers with her: in obscene
   And bloody paths her treacherous feet are set;
   Better the empty desert and a soul inviolate!

   For gentle brotherhood, the harmony
      Of living in the healthful air, the swift
   Clean beauty of strong limbs when men are free
      And women chaste, these are the things which lift
   Our souls up more than even Agnolo’s
   Gaunt blinded Sibyl poring o’er the scroll of human woes,

   Or Titian’s little maiden on the stair
      White as her own sweet lily and as tall,
   Or Mona Lisa smiling through her hair,—
      Ah! somehow life is bigger after all
   Than any painted angel, could we see
   The God that is within us!  The old Greek serenity

   Which curbs the passion of that level line
      Of marble youths, who with untroubled eyes
   And chastened limbs ride round Athena’s shrine
      And mirror her divine economies,
   And balanced symmetry of what in man
   Would else wage ceaseless warfare,—this at least within the span

   Between our mother’s kisses and the grave
      Might so inform our lives, that we could win
   Such mighty empires that from her cave
      Temptation would grow hoarse, and pallid Sin
   Would walk ashamed of his adulteries,
   And Passion creep from out the House of Lust with startled eyes.

   To make the body and the spirit one
      With all right things, till no thing live in vain
   From morn to noon, but in sweet unison
      With every pulse of flesh and throb of brain
   The soul in flawless essence high enthroned,
   Against all outer vain attack invincibly bastioned,

   Mark with serene impartiality
      The strife of things, and yet be comforted,
   Knowing that by the chain causality
      All separate existences are wed
   Into one supreme whole, whose utterance
   Is joy, or holier praise! ah! surely this were governance

   Of Life in most august omnipresence,
      Through which the rational intellect would find
   In passion its expression, and mere sense,
      Ignoble else, lend fire to the mind,
   And being joined with it in harmony
   More mystical than that which binds the stars planetary,

   Strike from their several tones one octave chord
      Whose cadence being measureless would fly
   Through all the circling spheres, then to its Lord
      Return refreshed with its new empery
   And more exultant power,—this indeed
   Could we but reach it were to find the last, the perfect creed.

   Ah! it was easy when the world was young
      To keep one’s life free and inviolate,
   From our sad lips another song is rung,
      By our own hands our heads are desecrate,
   Wanderers in drear exile, and dispossessed
   Of what should be our own, we can but feed on wild unrest.

   Somehow the grace, the bloom of things has flown,
      And of all men we are most wretched who
   Must live each other’s lives and not our own
      For very pity’s sake and then undo
   All that we lived for—it was otherwise
   When soul and body seemed to blend in mystic symphonies.

   But we have left those gentle haunts to pass
      With weary feet to the new Calvary,
   Where we behold, as one who in a glass
      Sees his own face, self-slain Humanity,
   And in the dumb reproach of that sad gaze
   Learn what an awful phantom the red hand of man can raise.

   O smitten mouth!  O forehead crowned with thorn!
      O chalice of all common miseries!
   Thou for our sakes that loved thee not hast borne
      An agony of endless centuries,
   And we were vain and ignorant nor knew
   That when we stabbed thy heart it was our own real hearts we slew.

   Being ourselves the sowers and the seeds,
      The night that covers and the lights that fade,
   The spear that pierces and the side that bleeds,
      The lips betraying and the life betrayed;
   The deep hath calm: the moon hath rest: but we
   Lords of the natural world are yet our own dread enemy.

   Is this the end of all that primal force
      Which, in its changes being still the same,
   From eyeless Chaos cleft its upward course,
      Through ravenous seas and whirling rocks and flame,
   Till the suns met in heaven and began
   Their cycles, and the morning stars sang, and the Word was Man!

   Nay, nay, we are but crucified, and though
      The bloody sweat falls from our brows like rain
   Loosen the nails—we shall come down I know,
      Staunch the red wounds—we shall be whole again,
   No need have we of hyssop-laden rod,
   That which is purely human, that is godlike, that is God.



FLOWER OF LOVE


ΓΛΥΚΥΠΙΚΡΟΣ ΕΡΩΣ


   SWEET, I blame you not, for mine the fault
      was, had I not been made of common clay
   I had climbed the higher heights unclimbed
      yet, seen the fuller air, the larger day.

   From the wildness of my wasted passion I had
      struck a better, clearer song,
   Lit some lighter light of freer freedom, battled
      with some Hydra-headed wrong.

   Had my lips been smitten into music by the
      kisses that but made them bleed,
   You had walked with Bice and the angels on
      that verdant and enamelled mead.

   I had trod the road which Dante treading saw
      the suns of seven circles shine,
   Ay! perchance had seen the heavens opening,
      as they opened to the Florentine.

   And the mighty nations would have crowned
      me, who am crownless now and without name,
   And some orient dawn had found me kneeling
      on the threshold of the House of Fame.

   I had sat within that marble circle where the
      oldest bard is as the young,
   And the pipe is ever dropping honey, and the
      lyre’s strings are ever strung.

   Keats had lifted up his hymeneal curls from out
      the poppy-seeded wine,
   With ambrosial mouth had kissed my forehead,
      clasped the hand of noble love in mine.

   And at springtide, when the apple-blossoms brush
      the burnished bosom of the dove,
   Two young lovers lying in an orchard would
      have read the story of our love.

   Would have read the legend of my passion,
      known the bitter secret of my heart,
   Kissed as we have kissed, but never parted as
      we two are fated now to part.

   For the crimson flower of our life is eaten by
      the cankerworm of truth,
   And no hand can gather up the fallen withered
      petals of the rose of youth.

   Yet I am not sorry that I loved you—ah! what
      else had I a boy to do,—
   For the hungry teeth of time devour, and the
      silent-footed years pursue.

   Rudderless, we drift athwart a tempest, and
      when once the storm of youth is past,
   Without lyre, without lute or chorus, Death
      the silent pilot comes at last.

   And within the grave there is no pleasure, for
      the blindworm battens on the root,
   And Desire shudders into ashes, and the tree of
      Passion bears no fruit.

   Ah! what else had I to do but love you, God’s
      own mother was less dear to me,
   And less dear the Cytheræan rising like an
      argent lily from the sea.

   I have made my choice, have lived my poems,
      and, though youth is gone in wasted days,
   I have found the lover’s crown of myrtle better
      than the poet’s crown of bays.




UNCOLLECTED POEMS


FROM SPRING DAYS TO WINTER


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   IN the glad springtime when leaves were green,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   I sought, amid the tangled sheen,
   Love whom mine eyes had never seen,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   Between the blossoms red and white,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   My love first came into my sight,
   O perfect vision of delight,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   The yellow apples glowed like fire,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   O Love too great for lip or lyre,
   Blown rose of love and of desire,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   But now with snow the tree is grey,
      Ah, sadly now the throstle sings!
   My love is dead: ah! well-a-day,
   See at her silent feet I lay
      A dove with broken wings!
      Ah, Love! ah, Love! that thou wert slain—
   Fond Dove, fond Dove return again!



TRISTITÆ


               _Αἴλινον_, _αἴλινον εἰπέ_, _τὸ δ’ εὖ νικάτω_

   O WELL for him who lives at ease
      With garnered gold in wide domain,
      Nor heeds the splashing of the rain,
   The crashing down of forest trees.

   O well for him who ne’er hath known
      The travail of the hungry years,
      A father grey with grief and tears,
   A mother weeping all alone.

   But well for him whose foot hath trod
      The weary road of toil and strife,
      Yet from the sorrows of his life.
   Builds ladders to be nearer God.



THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE


   . . . _ἀναyκαίως δ’ ἔχει_
   _Βίον θερίζειν ὥστε κάρπιμον στάχυν_,
   _καὶ τὸν yὲν εἶναι τὸν δὲ yή_.

   THOU knowest all; I seek in vain
      What lands to till or sow with seed—
      The land is black with briar and weed,
   Nor cares for falling tears or rain.

   Thou knowest all; I sit and wait
      With blinded eyes and hands that fail,
      Till the last lifting of the veil
   And the first opening of the gate.

   Thou knowest all; I cannot see.
      I trust I shall not live in vain,
      I know that we shall meet again
   In some divine eternity.



IMPRESSIONS


