CHAPTER XIV.

ATHEISM AND MORALS.


Looking at the world as it is one cannot forbear a mild wonder at the
fears expressed at the probable consequences to morals of a general
acceptance of Atheism. One would have thought that the world would not
run a very great danger of becoming worse on that account, and that,
seeing the way in which all forms of rascality have flourished, and
still maintain themselves, without in the least disturbing people's
religious convictions, one might even feel inclined to risk a change in
the hopes of improvement. Mainly, indeed, one might say that those who
are affected by religious belief are such as can very well do without
it, while those who stand in urgent need of moral improvement seldom
show that their religious belief has any very beneficial effect on their
conduct.

Yet nothing is more common than to find the theist, when driven off all
other grounds of defence, protesting against a deliberate propaganda of
Atheism on the ground of its probable harmful consequences to morals.
This, not because those who have publicly professed Atheism are open to
the charge of loose living, but on account of those who at present
believe in religion, and whose loss of belief would possibly upset their
moral equilibrium. It is a curious position for a theist to take up,
since it implies that while the Atheist as we know him shows no
deterioration of character in consequence of his loss of belief, we
cannot be so certain of the present believers in deity. They are formed
of poorer clay, and once convinced that there is no God with whom they
have to reckon, there is no telling what will happen. So we are urged to
let well alone, and leave believers with their illusions lest their loss
should present us with a very unpleasant reality.

This fear is expressed in various ways, but in one way or another it is
tolerably common. The following which reached me from a well known man
of letters probably puts the argument as fairly and as temperately as it
can be put, and therefore in dealing with that I cannot be accused of
taking the theist at an unfair advantage. His conclusions are summarised
in the following paragraphs. (The summary is the author's, not mine.)

(1) The decentish code of morals which prevails in this twentieth
century is the outcome of all the human ages. From the very first,
everywhere and all the time, it has, and continues to be, inextricably
intertwined and influenced by Theistic beliefs, even when and where such
beliefs have been the crudest and most debased form of polytheism.

(2) The ethical atmosphere in which we now live, after having had such
an origin and history, remains strongly and frankly pervaded by religion
of a Theistic type. Atheist, Agnostic, and Theist alike have to live in
this atmosphere, and consciously or unconsciously, are subject to its
influence.

(3) Even if we could set up a wholly secular code of morals, derived
entirely from the exigencies of, tribal, communal, and national life, I
take it that such a code would be inadequate to form the type of
individual character we most admire, and which acts under a sense of
"ought" rather than of "must." The latter is often the mere demand of
gregarious or individual comfort and convenience; the former may be
quite opposed to the inclinations of the individual, and yet bring into
play irksome but ennobling springs of action which a purely secular code
cannot touch.

Now these statements put the case for the theist as moderately and as
well as it can be put, and I think that they are worthy of a little
careful examination. It may be observed that there is no insinuation
that Atheists are actually worse than other people, only the fear that
in the absence of some form of theism the higher ethical motive cannot
be roused, and that therefore character will suffer. Well, we are none
of us free from the contagion of our environment, and the most powerful
influences are often enough those that it would be difficult to specify
in any given instance. It is not only that the influence of the higher
members of society affect the lower. The lower is not without its
influence on the higher. But the question here is not really whether we
are all exposed to the general influence of the group to which we
belong, that, I think, is undeniable, the real question at issue is
whether the determining influence on conduct is theistic or not. And I
think it will be found that while the one thing is asserted it is the
other that is proven.

So far as the first proposition is concerned it may be taken for granted
that our present state is the product of all past evolution, and that in
the course of that evolution theistic beliefs have been closely--not
inextricably--connected with morals. But this is not alone true of
morality, it is true of every branch of human thought and of every
aspect of human life. Art, science, literature, have all been closely
connected with religious beliefs. Necessarily so. Early human history is
spent under the shadow of superstition, and its dominating influence
affects the form of every aspect of life. But as the course of
development has been to separate the essential from the non-essential
and to place most of each department of life on a self-supporting basis,
it would not seem an unreasonable conclusion that ethics will follow the
same lines. In fact, it is following the same lines. There are few
educated people nowadays who would claim that morality cannot exist
apart from religion, they are content to say, as my correspondent does,
that in the absence of religion belief the higher aspects of morality
will suffer.

Our morality, we are told, is the outcome of all the human ages. I go
further than that and assert that it is the outcome of all the human and
of all the animal ages. There is no break in nature, and to the
evolutionist the development of the human from the animal is plain. And
it should scarcely need pointing out nowadays that nearly every one of
the fundamental qualities of man can be seen in germ in the animal
world. I only emphasise the point here because it is so often forgotten
that morality is fundamentally the expression of those conditions under
which associated life is found possible and profitable, and that so far
as any quality is declared to be moral its justification and meaning
must be found in that direction. The question of incentive we will come
to later; for the moment it is enough to insist upon the fact that
morality is fashioned, in its fundamentals, with reference to facts, not
with reference to speculative beliefs. Beliefs may influence morality
for awhile, but the persistent operation of social selection secures a
general conformity between conduct and the conditions upon which life
depends. That is the fundamental fact to be remembered in all
discussions of morality, although it is the fact that is most often
ignored. Ultimately life determines moral teaching, it is not moral
teaching that determines life.

Life not alone determines morality, but it determines religion as well.
What else is the meaning of all those discarded forms of religious
belief, those bodies of dead gods, that meet the student of history as
the remains of extinct animals meet the geologist in his unravelment of
the story of the earth's vicissitudes? They are the result of a lack of
adaptation to new conditions to which they could not accommodate
themselves. Once the gods lorded it over man as the gigantic dinosaur
lorded it in his day over lesser animals. And in the one case, as in the
other, a change in the environment brought about their doom. Natural
selection determines the survival of religions as of animal forms, and a
religion to survive must become increasingly utilitarian in character,
certainly there is a point beyond which the opposite tendency cannot be
carried.

Assume, for example, that a religion existed of a grossly anti-social
character, one that teaches doctrines that are subversive of the general
social well-being. One of two things must result. If the religion is
strong enough to enforce its teaching the society it dominates will
disappear, and the religion will die out with it. If, on the other hand,
it cannot enforce its teaching, or can get it accepted only in a
modified form, then either the religion disappears in its original form,
or it is modified to get itself established. To live, religion must
establish some sort of harmony between its teachings and the conditions
of life. It may retard the development of life, but it must not retard
to the point of destruction. This is all that is really involved in what
is called the purification of religious teaching. In reality there is no
such thing. The purification is a modification, and it is modified in
order that it may become acceptable to the society in which it is
existing. The ascetic epidemic, the various disgusting sects that have
sprung into existence from time to time during the course of Christian
history, have all died out from this cause. As with the individual, so
with society, the forces of which we are conscious generally move upon
the surface. Of the underlying ones we are mostly unaware.

The truth is, then, that behind all our consciously elaborated theories
of life there are operative the unconscious or sub-conscious forces of
evolution. There is, of course, a certain area of conduct in which
speculative opinions play their part, and where actions may be
arbitrarily classed as good or bad. But this area is, of necessity,
limited, and for the reasons that have been given above. Properly
understood morality is not something very abstract, but something that
is very concrete. The underlying reason for morality is always the same,
and we are compelled to hark back to it for justification. And no
rejection of religion can alter the basis upon which morality rests.

The proposition that Atheist, Agnostic, and Theist breathe the same
atmosphere and are affected by the same influences is, therefore, one
that is two-edged. If our intellectual atmosphere is saturated with
religious influences, it is also saturated with social influences of a
much more fundamental character, and which have been perpetually
correcting religious extravagances. And it is at least open to the
Atheist to retort that we have to thank this circumstance that religious
beliefs have not been more injurious than has been actually the case.
If, for example, the ascetic epidemic of the early Christian centuries
had increased in force and had continued operative, European society
would have disappeared. That this was not the case was due to the
strength of the sexual and social instincts, against which religion was
unable to maintain its hold. In the change of opinion over the better
way to spend Sunday, or in the decay of the doctrine of eternal
damnation, we have the same point illustrated. Right through history it
has been the social instincts that have acted as a corrective to
religious extravagance. And it is worth noting that with the exception
of a little gain from the practice of casuistry, religions have
contributed nothing towards the building up of a science of ethics. On
the contrary it has been a very potent cause of confusion and
obstruction. Fictitious vices and virtues have been created and the real
moral problem lost sight of. It gave the world the morality of the
prison cell, instead of the tonic of the rational life. And it was
indeed fortunate for the race that conduct was not ultimately dependent
upon a mass of teachings that had their origin in the brains of savages,
and were brought to maturity during the darkest period of European
civilisation.

In dealing with the two first propositions I have, by implication,
answered the third--namely, that a wholly secular authentic code of
morals would be inadequate to form the highest type of character; it
might supply a "must," but it could not supply an "ought."

The first and obvious reply to an objection of this kind is that our
working code of morals is secular already. In life, if we observe
without prejudice, it is not difficult to see that one's neighbours,
friends, social class, etc., have far more force in shaping conduct than
speculative theories. In its widest sense natural selection determines
what actions shall be declared to be moral. Of this we may take the
universal feeling against homicide. This is but an expression of the
truth that social life would be impossible were it otherwise. And when
we pass from the general to the special we meet with much the same
principle operating in society. The average burglar pursues his calling
with no special sense of its wrongness, although he may have a keen
sense of its dangers. But while burgling with a fairly easy conscience,
he does flinch at breaking the code of honour set up by his
fellow-burglars. And at the other extreme we have the "gentleman" with
his code of honour which forbids him not to pay a gambling debt, but
takes no count of keeping a poor tradesman out of his money. In each of
these cases the determining factor is not theory but fact, and the fact
here is association with our fellow countrymen or with a special social
class. Morality, in short, is social or nothing. Moral laws are
meaningless apart from social life. Every moral command implies the
existence of a social medium, and it is no more than a study in history
to see how this social medium has been continuously shaping and
reshaping human nature. The determination here is not conscious, but it
is real, however much disguised it may be by various forms or theories.
And when we realise this, it is no more than a truism to say that a
change in religious belief can no more destroy morality than a change in
government can destroy society.

But in saying that the essence of morality is unreasoning I do not mean
that it is unreasonable. All I mean is that it can receive a reasonable
justification, and that no matter how lofty the development it has its
basis in the fundamental conditions of associated animal and human life.
We may surround the subject with a vague and attractive idealistic
verbalism, but we come back to this as a starting point. The love of
family, with all its attendant values, rests upon the fact of crude
sexual desire, refined, of course, during the passing of many
generations, but dependent upon it all the same. Remove the sexual
desire and the family feelings are inexplicable. Thus, the _reason_ for
the existence of the sexual instinct is race preservation, but the end
has been achieved in a quite unreasoning manner. In the animal world at
large there is certainly no conscious desire for the production of
offspring, nor is there with the mass of human beings. There is the
desire to gratify an impulse, and very little more. And for the
strengthening of an instinct there need not be, nor is there, any
consciousness of its social value. All that is necessary is that it
shall be useful. Natural selection attends to the rest.

This will, I think, supply an answer to the contention that secular
ethics can supply a "must," but not an "ought"; that is, it may show
that an individual should act in accordance with his inclinations, but
in cases where these clash with the social well being, it can supply no
reason why the former should give way to the latter.

The argument rests upon a dual confusion. First, the moral "ought" is no
more than an organised and conscious form of "must," and not something
distinct from it. One may test the matter by taking a case. A man says,
I ought so to work as to promote the general welfare of society. If we
seek to find the source of this feeling we come ultimately upon the
feeling of tribal solidarity in virtue of which certain tribes survive
in the struggle for existence. It is gregariousness struggling into
consciousness. The moral "ought" is an idealised form of the primitive
tribal "must." And the "must" of primitive life is encouraged and
developed because it is one of the conditions of survival.

The second point of confusion is based upon a supposed opposition
between individual inclinations and an ideal conception of duty. That
the two are often, as a matter of fact, in conflict, must be admitted.
And the cause is that while our inclinations represent a heritage from
the past, our ideals are a projection into the future. But the
contention is based upon their supposed permanent hostility, and that
need not be taken for granted. For the whole course of social evolution
tends to bring about a substantial identification of personal and social
well-being. More and more as the race develops it is being recognised
that there is no real individual life apart from social life, of which
it is the creation and the expression. Such antagonism as exists is the
inevitable result of a conflict between an organism and its adaptation
to a changing environment. And from this point of view the whole growth
of man is in the nature of an expansion of his sympathies and sense of
duty over an ever-widening area. The primitive egoism of the tribal
individual is extended to the nation, that of the nation to the empire,
and thence to the whole of humanity. There is no destruction or denial
of self in such cases, it is a development of the sense of self over an
enlarging area.

Finally, if a secular code of morals will not suffice, it is sheer
rhetoric to say that religion is powerful enough to operate where
naturalism fails. On the contrary, in a civilised community religious
appeals tend to become secular appeals in disguise. On the admission of
Christian advocates the two most powerful appeals that can be made are
on the one hand, in the name of the fatherhood of god, and on the other,
the conception of the Mother and the Child. And what are these but
appeals to the secular and social feelings of man in the name of
religion? It may be granted that Atheism in its appeals to mankind often
fails, but in this respect is it any worse off than religion? Why, one
of the standing complaints of religious preachers in all ages is that
their message falls so frequently on deaf ears. There is no more
certainty that the religious appeal will meet with success, than there
is that any other appeal will be successful. And there is the
unquestionable fact that morality has become stronger as the power of
religion has weakened. The higher qualities have asserted themselves
during a period of religious disintegration, and the student of morals
sees in this a promise of a further development in the future.

And to all prophecies as to the effects of Atheism on the morality of
the future there is the apt reply that they are prophecies and nothing
else. And in this respect it is dangerous for the Christian theist to
appeal to history. For while the consequences of Atheism can be no more
than a forecast, which may or may not be justified, the record of
Christianity is before the world. And we know that the period during
which the influence of Christian theism was strongest, was the period
when the intellectual life of civilised man was at its lowest, morality
at its weakest, and the general outlook most hopeless. Religious control
gave us heresy hunts, and Jew hunts, burnings for witchcraft, and magic
in the place of medicine. It gave us the Inquisition and the _auto da
fé_, the fires of Smithfield and the night of St. Bartholomew. It gave
us the war of sects and it helped powerfully to establish the sect of
war. It gave us life without happiness, and death cloaked with terror.
The Christian record is before us, and it is such that every Church
blames the others for its existence. Quite as certainly we cannot point
to a society that has been dominated by Freethinking ideas, but we can
point to their existence in all ages, and can show that all progress is
due to their presence. We can show that progressive ideas have
originated with the least, and have been opposed by the most religious
sections of society. What religion has done for the world we know; what
freethought will do we can only guess. But we are confident that as
honesty is possible without the falsity of religion, as duty may be done
with no other incentive than its visible consequences on the people
around us, so life may be lived in honour and closed in peace with no
other inspiration than comes from the contemplation of the human stream
from which we emerge and into which we finally go.




