CHAPTER XV.

ATHEISM INEVITABLE.


Between Theism and Atheism the logical mind may halt, but it cannot rest
for long, and in the end the logic of fact works its way. Compromise,
while it may delay the end without preventing its inevitability, is
quite out of place in matters of the intellect. In the world of practice
compromise is often unavoidable, but in that of ideas the sole concern
should be for truth. When Whately said that the man who commenced by
loving Christianity more than truth would continue by loving his own
sect more than any other, and end by loving himself more than all, he
placed his finger on the great moral danger of compromise where opinion
is concerned. It begins, ostensibly, by considering the respect due to
an opponent's case, it continues by sacrificing the respect that is due
one's own, and it ends by giving a new sense of value to the very
opinion it aims at destroying. "No quarter" is the only sound rule in
intellectual warfare, where to take prisoners is only one degree less
dishonouring than to be taken captive oneself. And the value of an
opinion is never wholly in the opinion itself. No small part of its
worth is derived from the way in which it is held, and the importance
which is placed upon it.

When Professor Tylor said that the deepest of all divisions in the
history of human thought was that which divided Animism from
Materialism, he was saying what I have been endeavouring to say, in
another manner, in the foregoing pages. Atheism and supernaturalism are
fundamental divisions in human thought, and divisions that connote an
irreconcilable antagonism. The terms not only mark a division, they are
the badges of a movement, the indication of a pilgrimage. Dr. Tylor's
own work and the work of his fellow labourers tell the story in detail,
and although no one is in a position to write "finis" to it, there is no
doubt as to what its end will be. And the manner of the pilgrimage is
quite plain. The starting point is the creation by the befogged
ignorance of primitive man of that welter of ghosts and gods which make
so much of early existence a veritable nightmare. The journey commences
in a world in which the "supernatural" is omnipresent, in which man's
chief endeavours is given to win the good will or avert the anger of the
ghosts and gods to whom he has himself given being. And the end, the
last stage of the pilgrimage, is a world in which mechanical operations
take the place of disembodied intelligences, or of supernatural powers.
From a world in which the gods are everything and do everything to a
world in which the gods are nothing and do nothing. The story of that
transition is the record of one of the greatest revolutions that has
happened in the history of mankind. Its real greatness and far-reaching
significance is not always adequately recognised, even by those who
welcome it gladly. Indeed, the narrower interests that suffer from this
revolution are more keenly alive to its importance than are those who
benefit from its consummation. That is, perhaps, what one ought to
expect from the known course of human history. For history would not be
what it is, nor would reforms be so difficult of accomplishment were it
not possible to persuade the slave that his servitude guards him from
the very evils it perpetuates.

Incidentally the nature of that revolution has been indicated in the
preceding pages. But a more connected view will form a fitting close to
this work. Nothing more than the barest of outlines can be attempted,
but such as it is it may serve to illustrate the truth that Atheism is
more than the speculative philosophy of a few, that it is in sober truth
the logical outcome of mental growth. So far as any phase of human life
can be called inevitable Atheism may lay claim to being inescapable. All
mental growth can be seen leading to it, just as we can see one stage of
social development giving a logical starting point for another stage,
and which could have been foretold had our knowledge of all the forces
in operation been precise enough. Atheism is, so to speak, implicit in
the growth of knowledge; its complete expression is the consummation of
a process that began with the first questionings of religion. And the
completion of the process means the death of supernaturalism in all its
forms.

Religion, it has already been said, is something that is acquired, and
although that sounds little better than a commonplace, yet reflection
proves it to contain an important truth. For it is in the nature of the
acquisition that its significance lies. Whatever be the earliest stages
of religion it is at all events clear that its earliest form is in the
nature of a hypothesis, even though only of the semi-conscious kind that
exists when man is brought into touch with some new and overpowering
experience. Religious ideas are put forth in explanation of something.
But all explanation whether by savage or civilised man, must be in terms
of existing knowledge. No other method is possible. We must explain the
unknown in terms of the known, and our explanation will be the more
elaborate and the nearer the truth as our knowledge of the nature of the
forces are the more exact and extensive. A knowledge of the laws of
condensation and evaporation enables a modern to give an explanation of
the meaning of a shower of rain that is simply impossible to man in an
earlier stage of culture. In every case the facts are the same, and in
each case the explanation given depends upon the knowledge acquired.

Now one radical distinction between an early and a modern explanation of
the world is that whereas the former moves from within outward, the
latter moves from without inward. Uncivilised man explains the world by
himself; civilised man explains himself by the world. The savage
describes the world in terms of his own feelings and passions, the
scientist regards human qualities as resulting from the relation which
man holds to the forces around him. The process, while presenting a
radical difference in form, is yet fundamentally one in essence.
Ignorant of all that we connote by such an expression as "natural
forces," whatever explanation is offered by the savage is necessarily in
terms of the only force with which he is acquainted. But it happens that
the only forces which he then fancies he understands are those
represented by his own organisation. What he is conscious of doing is
prompted by his own will and intelligence. He hurts when he is angry, he
rewards when he is pleased, and he makes the same assumption regarding
the things around him. So far as he explains nature he vitalises it.
Vital force becomes the symbol of all force. And this result expresses a
mental law that is universally operative. The civilised mind differs
from the savage mind not because the brain functions differently in the
two cases, but solely in consequence of the wider and truer knowledge of
the causes of natural phenomena which civilised man possesses. We arrive
at different conclusions because we start from different premises.
Inevitably, therefore, the first attempt of man to deal with nature
takes the form of assuming the operation of a number of personal
intelligences. Natural objects are alive, and everything that happens to
man, from the cradle to the grave, is thought of as being either alive
or controlled by living beings. The world is filled with a crowd of
ghostly beings exercising more or less discordant functions. Against
this riot of gods the conception of natural law developes but slowly.
Quite apart from the natural inertia of the human mind, the fact of
questioning the power of these assumed beings involves to the primitive
mind an element of grave danger. All sorts of things may happen if the
gods are offended, and in self-defence the tribe feels bound to suppress
the critic of religion and of religious ideas. But once the step is
taken, the area over which the gods rule is to that extent restricted,
and with that step Atheism may be said to be born.

What Lange said in the opening sentences of his classic "History of
Materialism," that "Materialism is as old as philosophy, but not older,"
may be said with equal truth of Atheism. That, too, is as old as
philosophy, since it begins with man's attempts to break away from that
primitive interpretation of nature which sees in all phenomena the
action of personal intelligences. It is of no importance in which branch
of knowledge the departure was made, whichever department one takes the
process can be seen at work. Astronomy appears to have been the branch
of knowledge in which the powers of the gods were earliest restricted,
although it was not until the discoveries of Copernicus, Galileo,
Newton, and Laplace were given to the world that "God" vanished
altogether from that region. Geology follows with the teaching that
chemical, thermal, and other known forces leave nothing for the gods to
accomplish. Biology and sociology, dealing with more complex forces, are
much later in the field, but they tread the same path. They provide a
refuge for "God" for awhile, but it is evident that their complete
dispossession is no more than a question of time. And even though the
very complex character of the forces working in these latter departments
should prevent us ever acquiring the same degree of prevision that
exists in other classes, no difference will be made to the general
result. The principle will be fairly established and our ignorance of
details will no longer be made the ground for assertions which, if made
at all, should rest upon the most exact knowledge. "God" will be left
with nothing to do, and man will not for ever go on worshipping a God
whose sole recommendation is that he exists, nor will the common sense
of civilised people hold on to a hypothesis when there is nothing left
for that hypothesis to explain.

The single and outstanding characteristic of the conception of god at
all times and under all conditions is that it is the equivalent of
ignorance. In primitive times it is ignorance of the character of
natural forces that leads to the assumption of the existence of gods,
and in this respect the god-idea has remained true to itself throughout.
Even to-day whenever the principle of "God" is invoked a very slight
examination is enough to show that the only reason for this being done
is our ignorance of the subject before us. Why does anyone assume that
we must believe in God in order to explain the beginnings of life? Why
is "God" assumed to be responsible for the order of nature? Why must we
assume "God" to explain mind? The answer to these and to all similar
questions is that we do not know, in the sense that we know the cause of
planetary motions, how these things came to be. It is not what we know
about them that leads to the assumption of god, but what we do not know.
And the converse of that is that so soon as knowledge replaces ignorance
"God" will be dispensed with. It is never a case of believing in God
because of the actual knowledge we possess, but always the appeal to
weakness and ignorance. From this point of view the colloquial "God only
knows!" expresses the appeal to ignorance even more clearly than the
elaborate argument of the sophisticated apologist.

This aspect of the matter was well put by Spinoza. Believers in the
argument from design, he says, have a method of argument that is a
reduction, not to the impossible, but to ignorance. Thus,


     If a stone falls from a roof on to someone's head and kills him,
     they will demonstrate by their new method that the stone fell to
     kill the man; for if it had not by God's will fallen with that
     object, how could so many circumstances (and there are often many
     concurrent circumstances) have all happened together by chance.
     Perhaps you will answer that the event is due to the facts that the
     wind was blowing, and the man was walking that way. "But why," they
     will insist, "was the wind blowing, and why was the wind at that
     very time blowing that way?" If you again answer, that the wind had
     then sprung up because the sea had begun to be agitated the day
     before, the weather having been previously calm, and that the man
     had been invited by a friend, they will again insist: "But why was
     the sea agitated, and why was the man invited at that time?" So
     they will pursue their question from cause to cause, till at last
     you take refuge in the will of God--in other words, the sanctuary
     of ignorance. (Appendix to _Ethics_; pt. 1)


The sanctuary of ignorance "God" has always been, and the sanctuary of
ignorance it will remain to the end. It has no other function in life. A
consciousness of this is shown by the upholders of Theism in the
eagerness with which they welcome every supposed demonstration of the
impotence of science, and of the resistance everywhere offered to the
development of scientific advance.

So far, then, as the progress of life makes for the growth of knowledge,
so far may we safely claim that the development of thought makes for
Atheism, as we have just said, and to do the religious world justice it
has always been quick to realise this, and every great scientific
generalisation--as well as many smaller ones, has been resisted on the
ground that they were atheistic in character and tended to take the
control of the world out of God's hands. Present-day theists are apt to
condemn this attitude of their predecessors, but it can hardly be denied
that the logic lies with the earlier representatives. A God who does
nothing might, for all practical purposes, as well be non-existent. And
a God who is merely in the background of things, who may be responsible
for their origin, but having originated them surrenders all control over
their operations, is hardly more serviceable. The modern theist saves
his God only by leaving him a negligible quantity in a universe he is
supposed to sustain and govern.

And it cannot be too often emphasised that the whole basis of exact or
positive science is atheistic--that is, it is compelled to ignore even
the possibility of the existence of God. Every scientific generalisation
rests upon the constancy of natural forces. On no other basis is it
possible to give a scientific interpretation to what has gone before or
to anticipate what is to happen in the future. Every scientific
calculation assumes that in the world with which it deals causation is
invariable and universal. But if we are to assume the operations of a
"God" at any time or point every scientific calculation would have to be
accompanied with the D.V. of a prayer meeting. To argue from the past to
the future would be futile. God might have operated then, no one could
be certain he will operate now. Or he might have operated in the far
past, but he might not in the future. In either case the assumption of a
God would be fatal to exact scientific calculations. Thus in sheer self
defence, in order to preserve its character as science, science is
compelled to discard even the possibility of the existence of a
controlling intelligence. As one eminent theistic advocate admits,
"Science has no need, and indeed, can make no use, in any particular
instance of the theistic hypothesis."[6] It is only when supernaturalism
is partly excluded from human thought that science can be said to really
commence its existence; and in proportion as our conception of the
universe becomes that of an aggregate of non-conscious forces--or of a
single force with many forms producing given results under given
conditions, only then does our view of the universe reach completion.

A study of the nature and tendency of human development does, therefore,
provide a very strong presumption in favour of atheism. All growth here
is in favour of atheism and away from theism. In the beginning we have
the gods everywhere and dominating everything. They do everything and
control everything. "God" is the one universal primitive hypothesis. And
all subsequent development is to its discrediting. There is no growth in
the idea of god, there is only an attenuation. The gods grow fewer as
the race approaches maturity. Their activities cease as man becomes
aware of the character of the forces around him. And it may be further
noted that this decline of the belief in deity is brought about as much
by sheer pressure of experience as by pure reason. The majority of
people do not reason themselves out of the belief in god, they outgrow
it. People cease to believe in the gods because they experience no
compulsion to believe in them. The logic of fact is ultimately more
powerful than the logic of theory, and as environmental forces brought
the gods into existence, so environmental forces carry them out again.

Now Atheism does but make explicit in words what has long been implicit
in practice. It takes the god-idea, examines it, and explains it out of
existence. It admits the reality of gods as it admits the reality of
ghosts and fairies and witches. They are subjective, not objective,
realities. Atheism takes the god-idea, explains its origin, describes
its subsequent development, and in so doing indicates its ultimate fate.
In this sense Atheism is, as I have said, no more than the final stage
of a long historical process. The theistic phase of thought is an
inevitable one in human evolution, but it is no more a permanent one
than is the belief in hobgoblins. One might here paraphrase Bacon and
say, "A little philosophy inclineth a man to belief in the gods, but
depth in philosophy leads to their rejection as a false and useless
hypothesis." It is true that thinking brought the gods into the world;
it is also true that adequate thinking carries them out again.

The cardinal truth is, of course, that the hypothesis of mind in nature
does not owe its existence to an exact knowledge of things but to its
absence. Its origin must be sought in a pre-scientific age and its
persistence in a number of extraneous circumstances which have
perpetuated a belief that would otherwise have inevitably disappeared.
And it would indeed be a matter for surprise if this belief--said by
theists to be of all beliefs the most profound--should be the one
speculation on which savage thought has justified itself. On no other
question did the primitive mind reach truth. Universally its
speculations concerning the world were discovered to be wrong. On this
one topic we are asked to believe that the savage was absolutely right.

From the age of fetichism--rightly called by Comte the creative age in
theology--the history of the god-idea has been a history of a series of
modifications and rejections. Scarce an invention that has not slain a
god, scarce a discovery has not marked the burying-place of a discarded
deity. Criticism reduced the gods in number and limited them in power.
Advancing knowledge pushed them back till nature, "rid of her haughty
lords," is conceived as a huge mechanism, self-acting, self-adjusting,
and self-repairing. Even in the mouths of religionists "God" to-day
stands for little more than a force. We must not describe him as
personal, as intelligent, or as conscious, and between this and the
existence assumed by atheistic science it is impossible to detect any
vital difference. Atheism, then, takes its stand upon the observed trend
of human history, upon a scrutiny of the facts of nature, and upon an
examination of the origin and contents of the god-idea. And upon these
grounds it may fairly claim to be irrefutable and inevitable.
Circumstances may obstruct its universal acceptance as a reasoned mental
attitude, but that merely delays, it does not destroy the certainty of
its final triumph.

With the supposed direful consequences that would follow the triumph of
Atheism I have not dealt with at length. These are the bugbears which
the designing normally employ in order to frighten the timid and
credulous. Mental uprightness and moral integrity are certainly not the
property of one religion, nor can it be said with truth that they belong
to any. And examining the histories of religion it is a fair assumption
that in whatever direction the world may suffer from the disappearance
of religion there will be no moral catastrophe. Looking at the whole
course of human history, and noting how the vilest and most ruinous
practices have been ever associated with religion, and have ever relied
upon religion for support, the cause for speculation is, not what will
happen to the world when religion dies out, but how human society has
managed to flourish while the belief in the gods ruled.

Fortunately for human society nature has not left the operation of the
fundamental virtues dependent upon the acceptance of this or that theory
of the world. The social and family instincts, which are inseparable
from our nature as men and women, and which operate in ways of which we
are largely unconscious, are the grounds of all the higher and finer
virtues, and while a change in opinion may affect their operation here
and there, it can never alter their fundamental character. Conduct, in
short, comes from life, it is not the creation of a theory to be
dismissed by resolution or refashioned by a vote.

What Atheism would mean in practice would be an enormous concentration
of energy upon purely human affairs, and a judgment of conduct in terms
of human happiness and prosperity. And that certainly furnishes no cause
for alarm. It is, indeed, our greatest need. We need an awakening to the
untapped power and possibilities of human nature. If the gods die, man
their creator still lives; and the creative energy which once covered
the face of nature with innumerable gods, which spent itself in the
attempt to win their favour, and which called forth a heaven in the
endeavour to redress the wrongs of earth, may, if properly applied, yet
cover the earth with homes in which men and women, rendered purer by
love and stronger by knowledge, will rise superior to the fabled gods
before whom they once bowed in blind adoration.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] Prof. Ward "Naturalism and Agnosticism" Vol. I., p. 23.







