CHAPTER XII.

SPENCER AND THE UNKNOWABLE.


We have already referred to the use made by religionists of Spencer's
"Unknowable." This theory was not without its forerunners, and in
England was already in the field in the teachings of Hamilton and
Mansel. Spencer gave it a still greater vogue. As he presented it, it
came before the world with all the prestige attaching to its association
with one of the most comprehensive of modern thinkers, and one of the
most influential in the schools of evolutionary philosophy. It was also
connected with a world theory that claimed to be strictly scientific in
its character. It became not only a fashion in certain circles, it
founded a school, and gained numerous followers in the religious world.
Its author propounded it as a basis on which to reconcile religion and
science, and many were ready to accept it as such. Printed in all the
glory of capital letters, appearing sometimes as "The Ultimate Reality,"
sometimes as the "Unconditioned," sometimes as an "Infinite and Eternal
Energy," it was equally impressive under all its forms. It provided just
that solemn kind of formula that the religious mind is accustomed to
hear, and if it was as meaningless as the Athanasian Creed, is was, for
that reason, quite as satisfying. It gave all the comfort of a religious
confession of faith, and it has been the parent of a whole host of more
recent apologies for God.

In itself the "Unknowable" was harmless enough. Its philosophic value
is not great, its scientific utility is nil. To say that everything
proceeds from an "Ultimate Reality" is not very helpful, and to follow
on with the declaration that we know nothing about it, and that it would
be of no use to us if we did, does not sound very encouraging. It
reminds one of the description of the horse that had only two
faults--one that it was hard to catch, and the other that it was no good
when it was caught. We repeat with all solemnity the formula that all
things proceed from an infinite and eternal energy, and that this is the
Ultimate Reality, and then find that in relation to any and every
question we are precisely where we were. Its acceptance in certain
religious circles, and its use later, may be taken as evidence of the
fact that what the pious mind longs for is not sense but satisfaction.

Still there remains cause for wonder that this "Unknowable" should ever
have been taken as affording foundation for the belief in deity. The
most extreme materialist or Atheist need not be in the slightest degree
disconcerted on being told things proceed from an "Infinite and Eternal
Energy." It is only what the Atheist has said, minus the capital
letters. He has affirmed his conviction, that all phenomena result from
the permutations of matter and force, which are eternal because no time
limit can be placed to their operations. And you do not add anything
material to the statement by printing it in capital letters. That the
Spencerian abstraction should have been taken as a substitute for deity
proves how desperate the situation is. Drowning men clutch at straws,
and a disintegrating deity hopes to renew his strength by the lavish
use of capital letters.

For, after all, what the theist needs is, not an eternal energy, but a
personality. An inscrutable existence will not do. There is no dispute
that something exists. There is no quarrel over mere existence. It is
with the nature of what exists and the mode of its operation that the
issue arises. The theist needs a special kind of energy, a special form
of existence, a special kind of "reality" if his case is to be
established. It will not do for Mr. Spencer to assure him that this
"Ultimate Reality" is higher than personal. How Mr. Spencer knows that
something, the nature of which is unknown, is higher than something
else, is more than one can tell. But that does not matter. Higher or
lower, it is all the same. Either way it is different from personal, and
if it is different it is not the same, it is not personal. Whatever
other qualities this "Ultimate Reality" has or lacks, it must have that
one if it is to be of use to the theist. And to say that it is higher
than personal is to say that it is not personal at all, and to repeat in
a roundabout manner what the Atheist has been saying all the time.

What now is Spencer's theory of an ultimate reality that must for ever
remain unknowable? Following a line of thought that had been steadily
gaining ground since Hume--although much older than Hume--Spencer holds
that in final analysis all our knowledge is a knowledge of mental states
and their relations. Beyond this we _know_ nothing, and can never know
anything. Nevertheless, while we cannot know anything beyond
consciousness, the conditions of thinking oblige us to assume that
something exists as the cause of our states of mind. Just as black
implies something that is not black, hard something that is not hard, so
we must conceive, as against the conditioned, relative existence of our
conscious states, an unconditioned, absolute existence as their cause.
It is this assumed, but completely unknown cause of our conscious
states, and of all else, that Spencer distinguishes as the Unknowable,
the Unconditioned, the Absolute, etc., and which appears to have brought
so much consolation to hard-pressed theists.

I have no intention of discussing here the philosophic value of the
"Unknowable." But one may say, in passing, that even from that point of
view Spencer is untrue to his own Agnosticism in speaking of the
Unconditioned as the _cause_ of phenomena. For causation is a category
of the conditioned, it belongs to the world we know. It is not something
that exists beyond consciousness, it is something that is supplied by
consciousness and which possesses validity only within the world of
phenomena. On Spencer's own theory of relativity a cause only exists in
relation to an effect. Destroy the one and you destroy the other. Thus,
if the Unknowable is a cause of phenomena it ceases to be the
unconditioned and becomes part of the phenomenal order. If, on the other
hand, it is not part of the phenomenal sequence, it cannot stand to
phenomena in a genuine casual relation. It is, however, only fair to
point out that between the Unknowable and the evolutionary philosophy of
Spencer the only connection between them is that they are both in the
same work. In all probability it is an unconscious survival of
Spencer's earlier theism, which was active at the time the Synthetic
Philosophy was originally planned, but which became more and more
attenuated as Spencer grew older, and disappears entirely from the more
important volumes of the series. And but for the help it has been
supposed to give the belief in god, the "Unknowable" would only have
ranked as a harmless speculation of no value to anyone or to anything.
This is substantially admitted in a postscript to the 1899 edition of
"First Principles." At the conclusion of the section entitled "The
Unknowable," he says:--


     The reader is not called on to judge respecting any of the
     arguments or conclusions contained in the foregoing five chapters
     and in the above paragraphs. The subjects on which we are about to
     enter are independent of the subjects thus far discussed; and he
     may reject any or all of that which has gone before while leaving
     himself free to accept any or all of that which is now to come.


In other words, the "Unknowable" is a pure abstraction, having no
organic connection with the Synthetic Philosophy, or indeed with any
philosophy of value. Mr. Spencer's warning to his readers seems to quite
justify Mr. Bradley's rather caustic comment, "I do not wish to be
irreverent, but Mr. Spencer's attitude towards his Unknowable strikes me
as a pleasantry, the point of which lies in its unconsciousness. It
seems a proposal to take something for God simply and solely because we
do not know what the devil it can be." (Note to p. 128 of _Appearance
and Reality_.)

The curious thing is that Mr. Spencer really offers his readers two
theories of the nature of religion. One is contained in his "Principles
of Sociology," and so far as it traces all religious ideas to the
delusions and illusions of the primitive savage is substantially that
held by all modern anthropologists. The other is contained in his "First
Principles," and the two theories, like parallel lines, never meet.
Though born in the same brain they are quite distinct, and even
contradictory.

The substance of this second theory may be summarised as follows:--

1. The conditions of human thought compel the recognition of an
unknowable reality of which all phenomena are the expression.

2. The function of religion, from the earliest time, has been the
assertion of the existence of an unknowable reality, and to keep alive a
consciousness of the insoluble mystery surrounding it.

3. The function of science is to deal with the known and the knowable,
with all that is presented in experience, with the world of phenomena
exclusively.

4. Religion having for its subject matter the unknown and unknowable,
while science has for its subject matter the known and the knowable,
religion and science are not antagonistic, but complementary. Conflicts
only arise when one trespasses on the other's department, and a
recognition of the true line of demarcation effectually reconciles these
hitherto hostile forces.

A very obvious criticism of number one is in affirming a consciousness
of an "Unknowable," its quality of unknowableness is annihilated.
Existence can only be predicated of that which affects consciousness in
some manner; and so far as I have the slightest apprehension or
consciousness of anything existing, to that extent it ceases to be the
unknowable. Our knowledge of it may be imperfect or altogether
erroneous; we may feel it impossible that we should ever rightly
understand it; but so far as we think about it we are bound to
assimilate it to the best of our knowledge, even though it be only under
the category of force. In brief, "unknowableness" is not a property or
quality by which a thing may be apprehended; it is a name for complete
mental vacuity. It does not refer to the thing itself, it refers only to
us. It is a pure negation which Spencer, by sheer verbal play converts
into a quasi-positive conception. A consciousness of things unknown can
never be more than a consciousness of ignorance. There is only one way
to prove the existence of an unknowable, and that is to know nothing
about it--not even to know that there is something about which we know
nothing.

But, says Spencer, "to say that we cannot know the absolute is, by
implication, to affirm that there is an absolute." Certainly, if we take
an infirmity of language to be the equivalent of a necessity of
existence, not otherwise. When I say that we cannot know a four-sided
triangle I do not affirm by implication that a four-sided triangle
exists. I am asserting that the phrase, a four-sided triangle, involves
conceptions that cannot be brought together in consciousness, and so
dismiss it as being without meaning.

The truth is that every one of Spencer's attempts to prove the existence
of an unknowable turns out on examination to be no more than a proof of
the existence of an unknown, and this is not disputed at any time or by
anyone. Thus, after being told that a known cannot be thought of apart
from an unknown, we are informed:--


     Positive knowledge does not, and never can, fill the whole region
     of possible thought. At the utmost reach of discovery there arises,
     and must ever arise, the question, What lies beyond? As it is
     impossible to think of a limit to space so as to exclude the idea
     of space lying outside that limit, so we cannot conceive of any
     explanation profound enough to exclude the question, What is the
     explanation of the explanation?


With this we can all agree, but it does not bring us any nearer an
"unknowable." It is perfectly true that thought can never be
comprehensive enough to exhaust the possibilities of existence, since it
is of the essence of thinking to limit and define. But it is a sheer
impossibility to think of what lies beyond the boundary of our knowledge
as unknowable, so far as we think of it at all, we must conceive it as
the unknown but possibly knowable. The unknown can only be thought of
thus because it is only as it is, by assumption, brought into line with
what is already known that it can be thought about at all. We are
compelled to think of what lies beyond the limits of our actual
knowledge in the same way as a traveller thinks of the fauna and flora
of an untravelled country. The new region may present many new features,
but until actual observation has taken place, these new features will
only be thought of as more or less unusual combinations of known animal
and vegetable life. They are substantially identical with what is
already known.

No stranger notion ever occurred to a great thinker than that religion
and science represent parallel and distinct lines of development, each
having its own sphere of operation. It is all the more remarkable when
we remember that with Spencer "religion" means all religion, past and
present, civilised and savage. And no one is more precise in pointing
out how all religious ideas find their beginnings in the conditions of
primitive life. And that being the case, one wonders whether we are to
picture primitive man as a profound metaphysical philosopher,
speculating on that which lies behind phenomena, contemplating an
"insoluble Mystery," and paying homage to an "Ultimate Reality"? Nothing
could be more absurd. Thinking begins in concrete images, not in
abstractions. We have only to note the development of intelligence in
children to realise this. And primitive man, not being a mystic nor a
metaphysician, bases his religion, not upon a reality that transcends
experience, but upon a presumed fact, and what is to him the best known
of all facts. And even with modern men it may safely be said that they
worship God for what they believe they know about him, not because they
believe him to be unknown and unknowable.

Spencer himself may be cited in support of this. In his "Principles of
Sociology," where the Unknowable plays no part whatever, he concludes
after an elaborate survey of the facts, that the imagination of
primitive man is reminiscent, not constructive; his power of thought is
feeble, he is without the quick curiosity of civilised man, there is an
absence of the conception of causation, he accepts things as they
appear, without any vivid desire to inquire into their real nature or
their connection with other events, and is without abstract ideas.
Clearly, here is not a very promising subject from which to derive even
the germ of the idea of a "Reality transcending experience." Spencer
also, and quite properly, insists that religious ideas are, under the
condition of their origin, national ideas; that we must accept the truth
that the laws of thought are everywhere the same, and that, given the
data as known to primitive man, the inference drawn by him is a
reasonable inference.

With this we agree, but it gives the death blow to the previous
statement as to the essential nature of religion, and its essential
differentiation from science. For given the constitution of the
primitive mind, its ignorance of causation and general lack of
knowledge, religion commences not in some search after an eternal
reality, but in a natural misunderstanding of observed facts. Primitive
religion is just a reasoned misunderstanding of phenomena that in later,
and better informed ages, are given an altogether different explanation.

That this is so, Spencer himself makes plain. For he shows, step by
step, how the experience of dreams, echoes, shadows, etc., combine to
produce the belief in unseen agencies differing in no essential from man
save that of possessing greater power and in being invisible. From
dreams and other subjective experiences he derives the idea of a double,
from death that of a ghost. Hence the ceremonies round the grave, and
the attention paid to the double of the dead man, which subsequently
developes into ancestor worship. The same train of thought gives a
double to objects other than human beings. Hence Animism, Totemism, and
their numerous subsidiary developments. Spencer insists, not only that
"all religions have a natural genesis," but also that "behind
supernatural beings of all orders" there has been in every case a human
personality--in other words, every god is developed from a ghost,
"ancestor worship is the root of every religion." To this he will admit
no exception, and referring to the Jewish religion, he asks
contemptuously:--


     Must we recognise a single exception to the general truth thus far
     verified everywhere? While among all races in all regions, from the
     earliest times down to the present, the conceptions of deities have
     been naturally evolved in the way shown, must we conclude that a
     small clan of the Semitic race had given to it supernaturally a
     conception which, though superficially like the rest, was in
     substance absolutely unlike them.


And in about half a dozen pages he shows conclusively that the Biblical
God had exactly a similar origin to other gods.

Now if this account of religious origins means anything at all (and in
spite of differences between anthropologists it is in substance the
account of the origin of religion given by all) it means that instead of
religion and science moving along parallel lines, religion is simply
primitive science. Religion and science, as a very able theistic writer
says, "touch and oppose each other as rival methods of explaining, not
solely or mainly the life and nature of man, but the universe taken as a
whole, man forming a part of it." (W. H. Mallock, _Religion as a
Credible Doctrine_, p. ii.) Both are concerned with the same facts, and
their respective claims to consideration depend entirely on their
ability to explain the facts. For the reasons given by Spencer, man's
earliest interpretation of things is inevitably vitalistic. Ghosts--the
primitive protoplasm from which the gods are made--are assumed, and once
assumed dominate the savage intelligence. Fear combines with ignorance
to resist any conception that will wrest power from the hands of these
extra-natural agents, "Nature's haughty lords," rule all, and their
dynasty is the hardest of all to overthrow.

In spite, however, of all opposition the mechanical theory of things
develops, and in developing establishes a clear division between the two
conceptions of nature. But the line of demarcation is not that stated by
Spencer. Religion no more asserts the existence of an "Unknown Verity,"
than it asserts a fourth dimension of space. Nor is science concerned
with denying the existence of something of which we know nothing, and
can never know anything. The essential feature of religion is that it
offers a vitalistic explanation of the world as against the mechanical
explanation offered by science. And in this religion stands for the
earlier as against the later expression of human knowledge. It is the
eternal champion of savage thought against civilised intelligence. Its
whole significance lies in the persistence of animistic modes of
thinking under civilised conditions.

This conclusion, be it observed, is one that is quite borne out by
Spencer's own explanation of the nature of religion. Nor do we know of a
more remarkable instance of a front rank thinker propounding in one
part of his work a theory bearing no relation whatever to the remaining
portion, and in addition disproving his own theory at every point.

Spencer's reconciliation of science and religion, which in one form or
another is continually in evidence, is only one degree less remarkable
than the fact of its being accepted by so many religionists as
satisfactory. Following the line of his untenable theory that religion
and science pursue parallel lines, he points out that "the agent which
has effected the purification (of religion) has been science." That is,
the growth of the mechanical theory has driven back the vitalistic one.
This is purification only in the sense that a defaulting cashier
purifies the firm he robs. "As fact or experience proves that certain
familiar changes always happen in the same sequence, there begins to
fade from the mind the conception of a special personality to whose
variable will they were before ascribed." This process of annexation is,
says Spencer, science teaching religion its true function. As a matter
of fact, science has given religion no instruction, it has merely issued
prohibitions. It has warned religion that there are certain things it
must not meddle with, certain departments on which it must not encroach.
In this way religion has been forced farther and farther back, until it
is left with what? Not with anything that can be known, or is known; it
is left supreme in the kingdom of nowhere, ruling over an empire of
nothing at all. And so long as religion strives for a more tangible
possession so long must there be a conflict between science and
religion. But--"as the limits of possible cognition are established, the
causes of possible conflict will diminish. And a permanent peace will be
reached when science becomes fully convinced that its explanations are
proximate and relative; while religion becomes fully convinced that the
mystery it contemplates is ultimate and absolute." So, when science has
monopolised the entire field of human knowledge, actual and possible,
and when religion is satisfied that it knows nothing, and never can know
anything of the object of its worship, that it can offer nothing in the
shape of counsel or advice, but that its function is to sit in owl-like
solemnity, contemplating nothing, meanwhile offering man an eternal
conundrum that he must everlastingly give up, then, and not till then,
there will be peace between science and religion. And this is called a
reconciliation. Mr. Spencer finds two combatants engaged in deadly
conflict, he murders one and offers the other the corpse, with the hope
that now they will live peacefully together. The scientist is asked to
be content with all there is. The religious man is asked to find comfort
in the reflection that science must eventually monopolise the entire
field of knowledge, but that, in return, religion will be left free to
work in an unknowable region, to occupy itself with an unknowable
object, and to eternally cry "all is mystery" in an amended philosophic
version of the Athanasian Creed.

As a piece of humour this is superb. So also is the following: "Science
has been obliged to abandon the attempt to include within the boundaries
of knowledge that which cannot be known, and so has yielded up to
religion that which of right belonged to it." Capital! Science gives up
to religion that which cannot be known, and as it does not know what it
is, that cannot be known, it surrenders to religion absolute vacuity as
the proper sphere for its operations. And even this is accompanied with
the proviso that if it happens to have made a mistake, the ceded
territory will be at once reclaimed. Science would certainly be
vindictive if after having murdered religion it declined to live
peaceably with its corpse.

The distinction between science and religion is, in truth, neither
fundamental nor original. It is one that arises gradually in the history
of mental development. And, therefore, when a man such as Professor
Arthur Thomson describes religion as being concerned with the
recognition of the existence of an independent "spiritual reality," the
reply is that religion commences as just an explanation of nature in
terms of the then existing knowledge and culture. Religion is just a
crude form of science. The separation of the world into a religious and
a scientific sphere arises when the religious interpretation of natural
happenings gets discredited by advancing knowledge. If one takes such an
illustration as that of witchcraft the nature of the process is clear.
First we have the interpretation of certain forms of dementia and
delusion in terms of religion. Later we have the same facts interpreted
in terms of positive knowledge and the religious explanation is
rejected. And that, in a sentence is the whole history of religion, once
we have cleared away the verbiage with which the subject is surrounded.

The truth of what has just been said is often obscured by
unintelligible talk of growth in religion. It is claimed that we acquire
truer views of deity, and a process of growth is asserted analogous to
that which meets us in knowledge in general. Let us see what truth there
is in this.

In ordinary instances when we speak of growth we imply one of three
things. Either there is increase in size, or there is an enlargement of
function, or there is an increase in knowledge. So long as we keep to
these plain meanings of "growth" there can be no confusion. But none of
these meanings fit the case of religion. Certainly there has been no
increase in the size of religion--it does not, that is, cover a larger
area. On the contrary it is continually being warned off more and more
territory. It becomes more and more a negligible quantity. One need not
go back to primitive times to prove this, any country will supply
instances. The displacement of religious by other considerations is
observable on all sides.

There has certainly been no growth in the functions exercised by
religion. Its function as law-giver in the physical world is now
definitely abandoned, and all it asks is that science will let it alone.
In ethics and sociology it still maintains a precarious kind of an
existence, but it no longer claims supreme power. It is content to urge
its utility as a source of inspiration, to rank as one among a number of
other forces that are frankly secular in nature. Finally there has been
no growth in the shape of an extension of knowledge of the object of
religious belief. Of the nature of deity we know no more than did our
earliest ancestors. In earlier generations the nature of God, his aims
and intentions, were discussed with the same degree of confidence that
one now sees displayed in discussing schemes of sanitation. The modern
believer is now more anxious to impress upon the world how little he
knows about God, or how little it is possible for him to know. This is
not surprising except in the fact that it is called religious growth.
And if this be a sign of growth one wonders what would be considered
indications of decay. Historically religious life presents us, not with
a process of growth, but one of shrinkage. To reduce the gods from many
to few, and from a few to one is not growth. To limit the functions of
deity from those of a direct, particular, and universal character, to an
indirect, general form is not growth. To refine the idea of a personal
deity until it becomes that of a mere abstract force, is not growth. All
these are so many modifications of the religious idea under pressure of
advancing knowledge--so many attempts to state religion in such a way
that it can conflict with nothing we know to be true because it answers
to nothing of which we are certain.

The idea of God, the idea of religion, does not begin in a mystery or in
some abstract conception, but in an assumed knowledge of certain
concrete facts of experience. Man believes in the gods because of what
he thinks he knows about them, not because of what he does not know. The
talk of a mystery is the jargon of a priesthood which finds it
profitable to keep the lay mind at a distance. Increased emphasis is
placed on mystery because religious teachers are alive to the danger of
basing their beliefs upon matters that can be brought to the test of
experience. Mystery mongering is not the beginning of religion, but a
sign of its approaching demise. Mysticism, too, is no more than a cover
for a sanctuary that has been emptied of all worthy of respect. But if
religion is to really live, it must have some knowledge, no matter how
little or how imperfect, of the subject with which it professes to deal.
A religion that does not possess this, but is compelled to hand over the
whole of life to secular science, signs its own death warrant. It
commits suicide to save itself from execution. And as people realise
this they turn to clear-eyed science for guidance, leaving religion to
such representatives of primitive animism as still survive in a
civilised community.




