
Transcriber's Note: Italics are indicated by _underscores_.




  Not Paul, But Jesus


  BY JEREMY BENTHAM, ESQR.,--The Eminent
  Philosopher of Sociology, Jurisprudence,
  &c., of London.


  With Preface Containing Sketches of His Life and
  Works Together with Critical Notes by John
  J. Crandall, Esqr., of the New Jersey Bar--author
  of Right to Begin and Reply




EDITOR'S PREFACE.


Jeremy Bentham, an eminent English judicial or jural philosopher, was
born in London, February 15, 1748, and died at Westminster, his
residence for six years previously, June 6, 1832. His grandfather was a
London Attorney; his father, who followed the same profession, was a
shrewd man of business, and added considerably to his patrimony by land
speculations. These London Benthams were probably an offshoot from an
ancient York family of the same name, which boasted a Bishopric among
its members; but our author did not trouble himself to trace his
genealogy beyond the pawnbroker. His mother, Alicia Groove, was the
daughter of an Andover shopkeeper. Jeremy, the eldest, and for nine
years the only child of this marriage, was for the first sixteen years
of his life exceedingly puny, small and feeble. At the same time, he
exhibited a remarkable precocity which greatly stimulated the pride and
affection of his father. At five years of age he acquired a knowledge of
musical notes and learned to play the violin. At four or earlier, having
previously learned to write, he was initiated into Latin grammar, and in
his seventh year entered Westminster School. Meanwhile, he was taught
French by a private master at home and at seven read Telemaque, a book
which strongly impressed him. Learning to dance was a much more serious
undertaking, as he was so weak in his legs.

Young as he was, he acquired distinction at Westminster as a fabricator
of Latin and Greek verses, the great end and aim of the instruction
given there.

When twelve years old, he was entered as a Commoner at Queen's College,
Oxford, where he spent the next three years. Though very uncomfortable
at Oxford, he went through the exercises of the College with credit and
even with some distinction. Some Latin verses of his, on the accession
of George III, attracted a great deal of attention as the production of
one so young. Into all of the disputations which formed a part of the
College exercises, he entered with zeal and much satisfaction; yet he
never felt at home in the University because of its historical monotony,
and of all of which he retained the most unfavorable recollections.

In 1763, while not yet sixteen, he took the degree of A.B. Shortly
after this he began his course of Law in Lincoln's Inn, and journeyed
back and forth to Oxford to hear Blackstone's Lectures. These lectures
were published and read throughout the realm of England and particularly
in the American Colonies. These were criticised by the whole school of
Cromwell, Milton and such followers as Priestly and others in England
and many in the Colonies in America. Young Bentham returned to London
and attended as a student the Court of the King's Bench, then presided
over by Mansfield, of whom he continued for some years a great admirer.

Among the advocates, Dunning's clearness, directness and precision most
impressed him. He took the degree of A.M. at the age of 18, the
youngest graduate that had been known at the Universities; and in 1772
he was admitted to the Bar.

Young Bentham had breathed from infancy, at home, at school, at college
and in the Courts, an atmosphere conservative and submissive to
authority, yet in the progress of his law studies, he found a striking
contrast between the structural imperialism of the British Empire as
expounded by Blackstone and others of his day, and the philosophical
social state discussed by Aristotle, Plato, Aurelius, the struggling
patriots of France, and the new brotherhood, then agitating the colonies
of America.

His father had hoped to see him Lord-Chancellor, and took great pains to
push him forward. But having perceived a shocking contrast between the
law as it was under the Church imperial structure and such as he
conceived it ought to be, he gradually abandoned the position of a
submissive and admiring student and assumed a position among the school
of reformers and afterwards the role of sharp critic and indignant
denouncer.

He heroically suffered privations for several years in Lincoln's Inn
garrett, but persevered in study. He devoted some of his time to the
study of science. The writings of Hume, Helvetius and others led him to
adopt utility as the basis of Morals and Legislation. There had
developed two distinct parties in England: The Radicals and
Imperialists. The Radicals contended that the foundation of Legislation
was that utility which produced the greatest happiness to the greatest
number.

Blackstone and the Ecclesiastics had adopted the theory of Locke, that
the foundation of Legislation was a kind of covenant of mankind to
conform to the laws of God and Nature, as interpreted by hereditarily
self-constituted rulers.

Bentham contended that this was only a vague and uncertain collection of
words well adapted to the promotion of rule by dogmatic opinions of the
Lords and King and Ecclesiastics in combination well calculated to
deprive the people of the benefits of popular government. He conceived
the idea of codifying the laws so as to define them in terms of the
greatest good to the greatest number, and devoted a large share of the
balance of his life to this work.

In 1775 he published a small book in defense of the policy of Lord North
toward the Colonies, but for fear of prosecution it was issued by one
John Lind and extensively read. A little later he published a book
entitled "A Fragment on Government." This created a great deal of
attention. Readers variously ascribed the book to Mansfield, to Camden
and to Dunning. The impatient pride of Bentham's father betrayed this
secret. It was variously interpreted as a philosophical Treatise and a
Critical Personal Attack upon the Government. But he persevered in the
advocacy of his principals of Morals and Government. He hoped also to be
appointed Secretary of the Commission sent out by Lord North to propose
terms to the revolted American Colonies. But as King George III had
contracted a dislike to him, he was disappointed in his plan of
Conference with the Colonies. His writings were, however, more
appreciated in France. He was openly espoused as a philosopher and
reformer by D'Alimbert, Castillux, Brissat and others. But in the
meantime some such men as Lord Shelbourne, Mills and others became his
friends and admirers, and encouraged him to persevere with his
philosophical Code of laws, largely gleaned from the ancient
philosophers of liberty and equality which had been smothered and
superseded by military and Church imperialism.

In 1785 he took an extensive tour across the Alps and while at Kricov on
the Dou, he wrote his letters on Usury. These were printed in London,
which were now welcomed by the people largely on account of his
reputation in France as a philosopher of popular government. In the
meantime, Paley had printed a treatise on the Principle of applying
utility to morals and legislation. He determined to print his views in
French and address them to that people then struggling for liberal
government.

He revised his sheets on his favorite penal Code and published them
under the title of "An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation." The Principles enunciated in this treatise attracted the
attention of the liberals in France, as well as England and America.
Mirabeau and other French publishers spread his reputation far and wide.

Meanwhile, Bentham with the idea of aiding the deliberations of the
States General of France, and encouraged by the liberals on both
continents, and especially such men as Franklin, Jefferson and others,
printed a "Draft of a Code for the organization of a Judicial
Establishment in France," for which services the National Assembly
conferred on him the Citizenship of France by a decree, August 23, 1792,
in which his name was included with those of Priestly, Paine,
Wilberforce, Clarkson, Mackintosh, Anacharsis, Clootz, Washington,
Klopstock, Kosiosco, and several others.

In the meantime, in his travels, he conceived an extensive plan of
Prison reform which he strenuously urged the Crown Officers and the
English Parliament to adopt. After several years of strenuous labors and
the expenditure of a large part of the patrimony left him by his father,
the enterprise was thwarted by the refusal of the King to concur with
Parliament in the enterprise. This scheme is fully set forth in the
histories of the reign of George III. But to avoid persecution under the
drastic penal Codes of England, Bentham boasted that he was a man of no
party but a man of all countries and a fraternal unit of the human race,
he had come to occupy at home the position of a party chief.

He espoused with characteristic zeal and enthusiasm the ideas of the
radicals, who, in spite of themselves, were ranked as a political party.
He went, indeed, the whole length, not merely republicanism, but on many
points of ancient democracy including Universal Suffrage and the
Emancipation of all Colonies.

No matter how adroitly the Contention was managed, the Imperialists
insisted that it was merely resurrecting the historic struggle of the
days of Cromwell and his "bare bones." The Church establishment by way
of the Lords and Bishops and Bishop Lords was the real foundation of the
Crown rule in all its ramifications. This superstructure was protected
by all forms of penal laws against "lease" Majesty and even the
appearance of Church Creed heresy. The Radicals always confronted by
Crown detectives were compelled to be very wary in their attacks upon
this that they called imperial idolatry and were compelled to move by
indirect and flank attacks.

The upheaval by Martin Luther in the reign of Henry VIII at the Council
of Trent and others over the Divine authenticity of the Athanasian Creed
never abated among the humanitarians of England or France. But in the
presence of criminal inquisitions too barbarous to mention, the Radicals
were handicapped and were compelled to work strategically and by pits
and mines beneath the superstructure of Church imperialism. The Church
structure as established in Europe is by common consent based upon the
hypothesis of Divinity in the life, works, and dogmas of one Saul of
Tarsus, or as denominated Paul, or the canonized St. Paul. The
substantial Creed might well be denominated Paulism. Hence the legendary
Paul has been one of the points of attack by the rationalists of the
centuries.

While many of the contemporaries of Bentham both in England, America and
the Continent denied the verity of the whole Mosaic cosmogony and
historiology, yet Bentham seemed to ignore this task as superserviceable
and unimportant. He and his school of Radicals were devoted to the life
works and teachings of Jesus. Jesus was the idol of his school and he
heartily espoused the task of eliminating Paul as the nemesis of Jesus
and his Apostles, and a character invented and staged by imperialists to
subordinate the toiling classes to the production of resources to
subserve their personal luxuries.

Bentham began writing a philosophic analysis of the Church's pretensions
concerning the divine agency of Paul. After several years of examination
and study, and while he was writing his famous treatise entitled "The
Rational of Judicial Evidence" afterwards collected and published by
Mill, he finished the manuscript criticisms of Paul and entitled them
"Not Paul but Jesus."

For fear of prosecution for direct heresy or denunciation of the Creed
of the Church, he evaded the use of his own name as writer of the
Criticism and used the name of Conyers Middleton, a Cambridge Divine,
who by his writings had created a great deal of disturbance. He had been
convicted twice for heresy. He had been dead fifty years when Bentham
introduced him in the first lines in the Introduction to his Criticisms
herein published (See Introduction). Bentham, no doubt, intended to
evade prosecution, as it will be seen that his name does not appear in
the book, and yet at the same time used the name most obnoxious to the
Church in all its history.

In 1729 Middleton published his "Letter from Rome" in which he boldly
essayed to demonstrate that the then religion of the Roman Church was
derived from their heathen ancestral idolaters. He published other works
on the uses of miracles and prophecy. But Bentham's "Not Paul but Jesus"
did not long remain anonymous. It was read extensively in France and
America. But this treatise formed a part of the labor of his life, which
was to promote the theory of the social state based upon "The greatest
good to the greatest number, and subordinate the whole to rational
calculations of utility." These views he continually urged in the form
of Codification so as to eliminate all pretensions of hierarchical
control by historical divine prophets, the faithful souls and agents of
Kings and princes. In the meantime, he was indefatigable in his attacks
upon the English System of Jurisprudence, which was being operated in
America as a kind of paternal inheritance. Dumont, in 1811, compiled
from the manuscripts of Bentham a complete code which was readily
adopted in France, because it conformed so closely to the old Roman
procedure which was held tenaciously in France.

In the meantime, by importunity of Lord Brougham and others, and
particularly of his friends in America, such as Adams, Franklin and
others, he wrote to Madison offering his services to draw up a complete
code of laws for the United States. Mr. Madison caused these ideas to be
spread broadcast by pamphlets as pamphleteering was much in vogue for
such purposes in those days. But on account of our dual form of
government, and as the code would apply to the States separately, the
scheme as a whole failed. But some of the Governors, especially those
of Pennsylvania, Virginia and New Hampshire, got hold of the manuscripts
and many of the provisions were adopted and still obtain.

In the meantime, Mr. Mill had collected his manuscripts on "The
Rationale of Judicial Evidence" and published them in 5 vols. They
shortly became a part of the libraries of the lawyers and statesmen of
England, and especially in the United States. His manuscripts on "Not
Paul but Jesus" were extensively read and universally admitted to be
rational and sound in point of rational jural demonstration. During this
time, Thomas Jefferson had been writing on the same subject and after
reading the prints of Bentham, he abandoned the part directed to the
criticism of Paul, but he arranged chronologically all of the verses
from the four gospels that pertain to the career of Jesus, omitting,
however, every verse or paragraph that to his mind was ambiguous or
controversial, and every statement of fact that would not have been
admitted as evidence in a Court of Justice. The original copy of what is
denominated as "Jefferson Bible," is now preserved in the National
Museum at Washington. It was purchased by the Government as a memento of
the author of the Declaration of Independence.

This "The Thomas Jefferson Bible" has lately been republished by David
McKay, 604 S. Washington Sq., Philadelphia. The treatise "Not Paul but
Jesus" was published in 1825. The printing art was not as well advanced
as at present, and the division of subjects for discussion and
correlation were not arranged strictly methodically, so the Editor has
rearranged some of the titles with a view to improve the order of
sequence. With this change, every word has been preserved.

It will all the time be borne in mind that the examination is Judicial
and the Character Paul had to be staged from many points of view and
examination. Jeremy Bentham has revolved him in the limelight of
inquisition with a thoroughness that commands the attention of all
thoughtful readers. With this view the Editor hopes to be justified in
its republication by the reading and inquiring public.

                                             J. J. CRANDALL.




INTRODUCTION.


Illustrious, in the church of Jesus in general, and in the church of
England in particular, is the name of CONYERS MIDDLETON. Signal was, and
is, the service rendered by him to the religion of Jesus. By that bold,
though reverend, hand, it now stands cleared of many a heap of
pernicious rubbish, with which it had been incumbered and defiled, by
the unhallowed labours of a succession of writers, who,--without
personal intercourse with the founder, any more than we have now,--have,
from the mere circumstance of the comparative vicinity of their days to
those in which he lived, derived the exclusive possession of the
imposing title of _Fathers of the Church_, or, in one word, _The
Fathers_.

So able, so effectual, has been this clearance, that, as it has been
observed by the Edinburgh Reviewers,--speaking of course of protestants,
and more particularly of English protestants,--till one unexpected
exception, which it mentions, had presented itself, they had thought
that in no man's opinion were those writers any "longer to be regarded
as guides, either in faith or morals."

One step further was still wanting. One thorn still remained, to be
plucked out of the side of this so much injured religion,--and that was,
the addition made to it by _Saul of Tarsus_: by that _Saul_, who, under
the name of _Paul_, has,--as will be seen, without warrant from, and
even in the teeth of, the history of Jesus, as delivered by his
companions and biographers the four evangelists,--been dignified with
the title of _his_ apostle: his _apostle_, that is to say, his
_emissary_: his _emissary_, that is to say, _sent out_ by him: sent out,
by that Jesus, whose immediate disciples he so long persecuted and
destroyed, and whose person,--unless dreaming of a person after his
death, or professing to have dreamt of him, is seeing him,--he never
saw.

In the course of the ensuing examination, the subject of _miracles_ has
come, unavoidably, under consideration. On this delicate ground, it has
been matter of no small comfort to the author, to behold precursors,
among divines of different persuasions, whose reputation for piety has
not been diminished by the spirit of critical inquiry which accompanies
it. Such were Mede, Sykes, and others, whose ingenious labours were, in
the case called that of the _daemoniacs_, employed in the endeavor to
remove the supernatural character, from what, in their eyes, was no more
than a natural appearance. On the success of these their labours, any
judgment would here be irrelevant. Not altogether so the observation,
that in no instance does it appear to him that any such latitude of
interpretation has been employed, as that which, on that occasion, was
found necessary for the conversion of _devils_ into _diseases_.

The _dissentions_ which, at all times, have had place among persons
professing the religion of Jesus, are but too notorious. The
_mischiefs_, produced by these dissentions, are no less so. These
dissentions, and these mischiefs--in what have they had their source? In
certain words. These words, of whom have they been the words? Of Jesus?
No: this has not been so much as pretended. Of Paul, and of Paul alone:
he giving them all along not as the words of Jesus, but as his own
only:--he all along preaching (as will be seen) in declared opposition
to the eleven who were undisputedly the apostles of Jesus: thus, of Paul
only have they been the words.

That, by these words, and, consequently, by him whose words they were
and are, all the mischiefs, which have been imputed to _the religion of
Jesus_, have been produced,--in so far as the dissentions, from which
these mischiefs flowed, have had these words for their subjects,--cannot
be denied. But, moreover, in these same words, that is to say, in the
doctrines delivered by them, cannot but be to be found the origin, and
the cause, of no small part--perhaps of the greatest part--of the
_opposition_, which _that religion, with its benevolent system of
morals_, has hitherto experienced. If this be so, then, by the clearing
it of this incumbrance, not only as yet unexampled purity, but
additional extent, may not unreasonably be expected to be given to it.

It was by the frequent recurrence of these observations, that the author
of these pages was led to the inquiry, whether the religion of Paul,--as
contained in the writings ascribed to Paul, and with a degree of
propriety which the author sees no reason to dispute,--whether the
religion of Paul has any just title to be considered as forming a part
of the religion of Jesus. The result was in the negative. The
considerations, by which this result was produced, will form the matter
of the ensuing pages.

If, by cutting off a source of useless privations and groundless
terrors, comfort and _inward peace_ should be restored or secured;--if,
by cutting off a source of bitter animosity,--good-will, and peace from
_without_, should be restored or secured;--if, by the removal of an
incongruous appendage, acceptance should be obtained for what is good in
the religion commonly ascribed to Jesus;--obtained at the hands of any
man, much more of many, to whom at present it is an object of
aversion;--if, in any one of these several ways, much more if in all of
them, the labours of the author should be crowned with success,--good
service will, so far, and on all hands, be allowed to have been rendered
to mankind.

Whosoever, putting aside all prepossessions, feels strong enough in
mind, to look steadily at the originals, and from _them_ to take his
conceptions of the matter, not from the discourses of others,--whosoever
has this command over himself, will recognise, if the author does not
much deceive himself, that by the two persons in question, as
represented in the two sources of information--the Gospels and Paul's
Epistles,--two quite different, if not opposite, religions are
inculcated: and that, in the religion of Jesus may be found all the
_good_ that has ever been the result of the compound so incongruously
and unhappily made,--in the religion of Paul, all the _mischief_, which,
in such disastrous abundance, has so indisputably flowed from it.

1. That Paul had no such commission as he professed to have;--2. that
his enterprize was a scheme of personal ambition, and nothing more;--3.
that his system of doctrine is fraught with mischief in a variety of
shapes, and, in so far as it departs from, or adds to, those of Jesus,
with good in none;--and that it has no warrant, in anything that, as far
as appears from any of the four gospels, was ever said or done by
Jesus;--such are the conclusions, which the author of these pages has
found himself compelled to deduce, from those materials with which
history has furnished us. The grounds of these conclusions he proceeds
to submit to the consideration of his readers.




PLAN OF THE WORK.


The work may be conceived as divided into five parts.

1. In Part the first, the five different, and in many respects
discordant, accounts given of Paul's conversion, which, in these
accounts, is of course represented as being not only _outward_ but
_inward_, are confronted, and, so far as regards inward conversion,
shown to be, all of them, untrue: and, immediately after, the state of
things, which produced, accompanied, and immediately followed, his
outward conversion,--together with the time and manner in which that
change was declared,--is brought to view. This part occupies the first
two chapters.

2. Part the Second is employed in showing,--that, from the first
commencement, of the intercourse, which, upon the tokens given of his
outward conversion, took place at Jerusalem between him and the
apostles, Acts 9:27, to the time when,--in consequence of the
interposition of the Roman commander, to save him from the unanimous
indignation of the whole people, more particularly of the disciples of
the apostles,--he was conveyed from thence under guard to Rome, a space,
according to the commonly received computation, not less than six and
twenty years, (Acts 21 and 23), no supernatural commission from Jesus,
nor any inward conversion, was,--either by those distinguished servants
and companions of Jesus, or by their disciples at Jerusalem,--believed
to have place in his instance. This part occupies eight chapters: to
wit, from the 3d to the 10th inclusive.

3. In Part the Third, in further proof of the insincerity of his
character,--in addition to an oath proved to be false, are brought to
view two unquestionably false assertions:--each having for its subject a
matter of prime importance,--each deliberate and having in view a
particular purpose: the one, a false account of the number of the
witnesses to the resurrection of Jesus; 1 Cor. 15:6; the other, a
prediction of the end of the world before the death of persons then
living; 1 Thes. 4, 15, 16, 17. This part occupies Chapters 11 and 12.

4. Part the Fourth is employed in showing,--that no proof, of his
alleged supernatural commission from the Almighty, is deducible, from
any account we have, of any of those scenes, in which he is commonly
regarded as having exercised a power of working miracles. For, that not
only he himself never made exercise of any such power,--on any of those
occasions, on which the demand for it, for the purpose of overcoming the
disbelief entertained of his story by the Apostles, was extreme,--but,
neither on those, nor any other occasions, did he ever take upon himself
to make reference, to so much as any one instance of any such proof of
special authority from the Almighty, as having been exhibited by him on
any other occasion: that, for the belief in any such gift, we have no
other ground, than the relations contained in the history called "_The
Acts of the Apostles_," or, for shortness, _The Acts_: and that such
throughout is,--on the one hand, the nature of the occurrence itself, on
the other hand, the character of the representation given of it,--that,
to a disbelief in the exercise of any such supernatural power, it is
not necessary that any such imputation as that of downright and wilful
falsehood should be cast upon the author of that narrative: the
occurrences in question being, mostly, if not entirely, such as lie
within the ordinary course of nature,--but, upon which, either by the
fancy, or by the artifice of the narrator, a sort of supernatural
colouring has been superinduced. For this purpose, these supposed
miracles are, each of them, separately brought to view and examined.
This part occupies the 13th chapter.

5. Part the Fifth is employed in showing, that,--even if, on all these
several occasions, the exercise of a power of producing supernatural
effects had, by unequivocal statements, been ascribed to Paul by the
author of the Acts,--such testimony, independently of the virtual
contradiction given to it by the above-mentioned circumstantial
evidence,--could not, with any propriety, be regarded as affording
adequate proof--either of the fact of Paul's having received a divine
commission, and thereby, having become, inwardly as well as outwardly, a
convert to the religion of Jesus--either of that radical fact, or so
much as of any one of the alleged achievements, which, upon the face of
the accounts in question, are wont to present themselves as miraculous:
for that, in the first place, it is only by error that the history in
question has been ascribed to Saint Luke: it being, in respect of the
account given of the circumstances accompanying the ascension of Jesus,
inconsistent with the account given in the gospel of Saint Luke, when
compared with Acts 1:3 to 12,--and as to those attendant on the death of
Judas, inconsistent with the account in Saint Matthew 27:3 to 10 and
Acts 1:16 to 20: and moreover, such being the whole complexion of his
narrative, as to render it incapable of giving any tolerably adequate
support to any statement whereby the exercise of supernatural power is
asserted. This part occupies Chapter 14.

In Part the Sixth, to give additional correctness and completeness, to
the conception supposed to be conveyed, of the character of Paul and his
attendant historiographer, jointly and severally considered,--a conjunct
view is given of _five_ reports of his five trials, as reported in the
Acts. This part has been added since the publication of the
above-mentioned Summary View. It occupies Chapter 15 of the present
work.

Chapter XVI. and last, winds up the whole, with some general
observations on the self-declared oppositeness of Paul's Gospel, as he
calls it, to that of the Apostles: together with an indication of a real
Antichrist, in compensation for the fabulous one, created by Paul, and
nursed by the episcopal authors and editors of the Church of England,
translators of the Bible: and by Chapter 12 of the present work, the
imaginary Antichrist is, it is hoped, strangled.

At the time of the publication of the Summary View,--for the more
complete and satisfactory demonstration of the relative insufficiency of
the narrative in question, a short but critical sketch was, as herein
stated, intended to be given, of the parts not before noticed of the
_History of the Church_,--from the ascension of Jesus, being the period
at which that narrative commences, to that at which it terminates,--to
wit, about two years after the arrival of Paul at Rome, Acts 28: the
history--to wit, as deducible from the materials which, in that same
narrative, are brought to view: the duration of the period being,
according to commonly received computations, about 28 or 30 years[A]:
the author of "_The Acts_" himself,--if he is to be believed,--an
eyewitness, during a considerable portion of the time, to the several
occurrences which he relates.

On this occasion, and for this purpose,--the history in question had
been sifted, in the same manner and on the same principles, as any
profane history, in which, in a series of occurrences mostly natural, a
few, wearing a supernatural appearance, are, here and there,
interspersed: as, for instance, in Livy's, and even in Tacitus's Roman
History: on the one hand, the authority not being regarded as affording
a sufficient foundation, for a belief in the supernatural parts of the
narrative; nor, on the other hand, the sort of countenance, given to the
supernatural parts, as affording a sufficient reason, for the disbelief
of those, which have nothing in them that is unconformable to the
universally experienced course of nature.

In respect of _doctrine_, the conclusion is--that no point of doctrine,
which has no other authority than that of Paul's writings for its
support, can justly be regarded as belonging to the religion of
Jesus,--any more than if, at this time of day, it were broached by any
man now living: that thus, in so far as he is seen to have _added_
anything to the religion of Jesus, he is seen to set himself _above_ it
and _against_ it: that, therefore, if this be true, it rests with every
professor of the religion of Jesus, to settle with himself, to which of
the two religions, that of Jesus and that of Paul, he will adhere: and,
accordingly, either to say, _Not Jesus but Paul_,--or, in the words of
the title to this work, _Not Paul but Jesus_.[B]

FOOTNOTES:

[A] To prevent, if possible, an embarrassment, which might otherwise be
liable to have place on the part of the reader,--and therewith, the idea
of inconsistency, as having place here and there in the work,--the
following indication may be found to have its use.

A cloud of uncertainty, to the length of one or two years, hangs over
the duration of the period embraced by this work: namely, that between
the point of time at which the conversion of Paul is stated to have
taken place, and the point of time at which the history, intituled The
Acts of the Apostles, as therein declared, concludes:--a point of time,
posterior by two years to that of his arrival at Rome.

[B] For making the requisite separation, between the two religions of
Jesus and the religion of Paul,--an instrument, alike commodious and
unexceptionable, has--for these many years, though, assuredly, not with
any such view,--been presented to all hands, by Doctor _Gastrell_, an
English and Church of England Bishop: namely, in a well-known work,
intituled _The Christian Institutes_: date of the 14th Edition, 1808. It
is composed of a collection of points of faith and morality, and under
each are quoted the several texts, in the New Testament, which are
regarded by the author as affording grounds for the positions indicated.
If then, anywhere, in his composition of the ground, passages, one or
more, from this or that Epistle of Paul, are employed,--unaccompanied
with any passage, extracted from any of the four Gospels,--the reader
may, without much danger of error, venture to conclude, that it is to
the religion of Paul alone, that the point of doctrine thus supported
appertains, and not to the religion of Jesus. As to any of the Epistles,
which bear the name of any of the real Apostles of Jesus,--a
corresponding question may perhaps be here suggesting itself. But, with
regard to the design of the present work, scarcely will they be found
relevant. For, when compared with the sayings of Jesus as repeated in
the four Gospels, scarcely will they be found exhibiting any additional
points of doctrine: never, pregnant with any of those dissentions,
which, from the writings of Paul, have issued in such disastrous
abundance. Only lest they should be thought to have been overlooked, is
any mention here made, of those documents, which, how much soever on
other accounts entitled to regard, may, with reference to the question
between the religion of Jesus and the religion of Paul, be, as above,
and without impropriety, stated as irrelevant.




TABLE I.


OUTWARD CONVERSION.

     _Showing at one view, under the head of Paul's Conversion, the
     different accounts from which the inference is drawn that the
     Conversion was outward only, not inward._


VISION I. ACTS ACCOUNT.

Ch. ix. 1-9.

    1.--But Saul, yet breathing threatening and slaughter against the
    disciples of the Lord, went unto the High Priest, and asked of him
    letters to Damascus unto the synagogues, that if he found any that
    were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to
    Jerusalem. And as he journeyed, it came to pass that he drew nigh
    unto Damascus: and suddenly there shone around about him a light out
    of heaven: and he fell upon the earth, and heard a voice saying unto
    him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou,
    Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for
    thee to kick against the pricks: (1) but rise, and enter into the
    city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. And the men that
    journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing the voice,--but
    beholding no man. And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes
    were opened, he saw nothing; (old version "no man") and they led him
    by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. And he was three days
    without sight, and did neither eat nor drink.


II. PAUL'S FIRST PERSONAL ACCOUNT.

As per Acts xxii. 3-11.

    I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city,
    at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strict manner
    of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as ye all are
    this day: and I persecuted this Way unto the death, binding and
    delivering into prisons both men and women. As also the High Priest
    doth bear me witness, and all the estate of the elders: from whom
    also I received letters unto the brethren; and journeyed to
    Damascus, to bring them also which were there unto Jerusalem in
    bonds, for to be punished. And it came to pass, that, as I made my
    journey, and drew nigh unto Damascus, about noon, suddenly there
    shown from heaven a great light round about me. And I fell unto the
    ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why
    persecutest thou me? And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said
    unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. And they
    that were with me beheld in deed the light, but they heard not the
    voice of him that spake to me. And I said, What shall I do, Lord?
    And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it
    shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do.
    And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by
    the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus.


III. PAUL'S SECOND PERSONAL ACCOUNT.

As per Acts xxvi. 9-20.

    I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things
    contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. And this I also did in
    Jerusalem: and I both shut up many of the saints in prison, having
    received authority from the Chief Priests, and when they were put to
    death, I gave my vote against them. And punishing them oftentimes in
    all the synagogues, I strove to make them blaspheme; and being
    exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto foreign
    cities. Whereupon as I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and
    commission of the Chief Priests, at midday, O, king, I saw on the
    way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining
    round about me and them that journeyed with me. And when we were all
    fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying unto me in the Hebrew
    language, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee
    to kick against the goad. And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And the
    Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. But arise, and stand
    upon thy feet: for to this end have I appeared unto thee, to appoint
    thee a minister and a witness both of thee, to appoint thee a
    minister and a witness both of the things wherein thou hast seen me,
    and of the things wherein I will appear unto thee; delivering thee
    from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I send thee, to
    open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from
    the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive remission of sins
    and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in me.
    Wherefore, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
    vision: but declared both to them of Damascus first, and at
    Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the
    Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works
    worthy of repentance.


IV. PAUL'S ALLUSIONS.

I. As per Paul to Corinth. i. xv. 8.

    And last of all, as unto one born out of due time, he appeared to
    me, also.


II. As per Paul to Gal. i. 12, 15, 16, 17.

    12. For neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but
    it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.

    15. But when it was the good pleasure of God, who separated me, even
    from my mother's womb,

    16. And called me through his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I
    might preach him among the Gentiles; immediately I conferred not
    with flesh and blood:

    17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles
    before me: but I went away into Arabia; and again I returned unto
    Damascus.


II. VISION 2.--ANANIAS'S.

_I. Acts Account._

ix. 10-16.

    10. Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and
    the Lord said unto him in a vision, Ananias! And he said, Behold, I
    am here, Lord. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go to the
    street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas
    for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth: and he
    hath seen a man named Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on
    him, that he might receive his sight. But Ananias answered, Lord, I
    have heard from many of this man, how much evil he did to thy saints
    at Jerusalem: and here he hath authority from the chief priests to
    bind all that call upon thy name. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy
    way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the
    Gentiles and kings, and the children of Israel: for I will shew him
    how many things he must suffer for my name's sake.


III. ANANIAS'S VISIT TO PAUL.

_I. Acts Account._

ix. 17-22.

    And Ananias departed, and entered into the house; and laying his
    hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord even Jesus, who appeared
    unto thee in the way which thou camest, hath sent me, that thou
    mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And
    straightway there fell from his eyes as it were scales, and he
    received his sight; and he arose and was baptized; and he took food
    and was strengthened.

    And he was certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus.
    And straightway in the synagogues he proclaimed Jesus, that he is
    the Son of God. And all that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not
    this he that in Jerusalem made havock of them which called on his
    name? and he had come hither for this intent, that he might bring
    them bound before the chief priests. But Saul increased the more in
    strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving
    that this is the Christ.


_II. Paul's Account._

As per Acts xxii. 12-16.

    xxii. 12. And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well
    reported of by all the Jews that dwelt there, came unto me, and
    standing by me said unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And
    in that very hour I looked up on him. And he said, The God of our
    fathers hath appointed thee to know his will, and to see the
    Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth. For thou shalt be
    a witness for him unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard. And
    now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
    sins, calling on his name.




NOT PAUL, BUT JESUS




