CHAPTER IX.

     _Paul disbelieved continued--The Fourth and Last Jerusalem Visit.
     The Purpose concealed: Opposition universal; among his own
     Disciples, and among those of the Apostles._


SECTION 1.

MOTIVES TO THIS VISIT.

Of this momentous visit to say what were the real objects, must in a
great part be left to conjecture:--to inferences drawn from the known
circumstances of the case. By himself, as will be seen, they were
concealed with the most persevering anxiety.

But, in default of direct evidence, the point may without much danger of
error be settled by circumstantial evidence. The common objects of
political concupiscence--money, power and vengeance--were all before his
eyes: _money_--in no less a quantity than that of the aggregate mass of
the property of the whole church:--that fund, for the management of
which, the Apostles' seven trustees, under the name of Deacons, were not
more than sufficient:--that fund, by which the repulsed concupiscence of
the sorcerer of Samaria had so lately been excited:--_power_, that
which was exercised by the direction of the consciences of the whole
number of the faithful, some time before this, not less in number than
three thousand: _vengeance_, for the repeated rebuffs, by which, at the
interval of so many years from each other, his endeavours to supplant
the Apostles had been repelled.

In a general point of view, ambition,--rival ambition,--the same motive
which sent Caesar to Rome, may be stated as having sent Paul, at this
time, to Jerusalem: to Jerusalem--the metropolis of the Christian world,
by design; and thence, eventually and undesignedly, to the metropolis of
the whole civilized world.

By two opposite desires--two antagonizing but correspondent and mutually
explanatory desires--desires, in both parts intense and active, the
external marks of which are sufficiently visible in two different
quarters,--the nature as well as prevalence of this motive, will, it is
believed, be found sufficiently proved:--a desire, in the breast of the
self-constituted Apostle, to establish himself in the original
metropolis of the Christian world:--a desire on the part of the
Apostles--of the Apostles constituted by Jesus--to keep him out of it.


SECTION 2.

THE VISIT ANNOUNCED BY PAUL AND DEFERRED.

Ephesus, at which place he had arrived not long after his departure from
Corinth, where he had made a stay, as it should seem, of more years than
one,[45] touching in the way at Cenchrea, where he shaved his head for
the performance of a vow--Ephesus is the place, at which, by the author
of the Acts, Paul is for the first time made to speak of himself, as
harbouring, having in mind the making of this visit: and on that
occasion, the visit is spoken of, as being the subject of a settled
determination, and in particular as being the time fixed upon by him for
the execution of this design. Acts 18:20, 21. "When they, the Jews at
Ephesus, desired him to tarry longer with them, he consented not; but
bade them farewell, saying, I must _by all means keep this feast_ that
cometh in Jerusalem: but I will return again to you if God will."

As to the keeping of this or any other feast at Jerusalem or at any
other place--if it was under any such notion as that of contributing to
his own personal salvation by any such Mosaic work, it was an object
inconsistent with his own principles--with his own so repeatedly and
strenuously advocated principles:--and the like may be said of the
head-shaving and the vow, performed by him, at Cenchrea, in his way to
Ephesus from Corinth: and moreover, in this last-mentioned instance,
more particularly in contradiction with a precept so positively
delivered by Jesus, namely, _Swear not at all_,--if, under swearing, the
making of vows is to be understood to be included.

Of this design, the next intimation which occurs in the Acts, is in the
next chapter, Acts 19:21, "When these things were ended," namely, the
discomfiture of the exorcists, and the burning of the books of curious
arts at Ephesus,--"Paul, it is said, _purposes in the spirit_, when he
had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying,
After I have been there, I must also see Rome."

Fortunate it is for the credit--either _of the spirit_, or of Paul, or
of the author of the Acts, that it was on this second occasion only, and
not on the first, that it was _in the spirit_ that he proposed to go to
Jerusalem by the then next feast: for, notwithstanding the "_must_" and
the "_by all means_,"--so it is, that between those his two
determinations as above, no less a space of time than two years is
stated as elapsing, on one occasion, at one and the same place.[46] And
this place--what was it? it was Ephesus: the same place, at which, on
his departure from it, the first determination was declared: after
which, and before this his second visit to Ephesus,--he is represented
as having visited Cæsarea and Antioch.

The next mention, is that which occurs in the next chapter, chapter
20:16. "Paul," we are there told, being then at Miletus, "had determined
to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he
hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of
Pentecost."

At Miletus it is, that he sends for, and receives, from Ephesus, a
number of his adherents in that place. Upon their arrival, he is
represented as making a formal speech to them: and now, he not merely
proposes in the spirit, as before, but is "_bound in the spirit_," to go
thither.[47] Vain would be the attempt to ascertain, with any approach
to exactness, the interval of time, during which the operation of the
spirit remained in a sort of suspense between _purpose_ and
_obligation_: it may have been months, only: it may have been years.

While, by one spirit, Paul was thus urged on, every now and then,
towards Jerusalem;--by the same spirit, or by another spirit, he was
pulled back.[48]

In the very next verse, Acts 20:22, in which he speaks of his being
"bound in the spirit unto" that place, not knowing, as, in his speech,
he thereupon adds,--"not knowing the things that shall befall me
there,"--he goes on, and says: "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in
every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of
these things," says he, ver. 24, "move me, neither count I my life dear
unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the
ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God."

To raise, in the breast of Paul, the expectation, that of his proceeding
in the course it was his way to take in preaching that religion, to
which, from a persecutor, he had, in appearance, become a convert,
affliction, in a variety of shapes, might prove to be the
fruits,--needed no information from the spirit; if, by receiving
information from the spirit, he meant any communication of a
supernatural kind--anything beyond information in the ordinary
shape;--be the effect--be the purpose, good or bad,--such is the lot,
that awaits innovation in the field of politics--the spiritual part
included, as well as the temporal--at all places, and all times.

A passage, which now presents itself, helps to show how easily and
copiously, out of a few words, written in ancient times, mysteries and
miracles have been manufactured in modern times. In Acts 20:22, we have
seen Paul, "_bound in the spirit_," as he is made to assure us, to go
unto Jerusalem. In the next chapter, 21:4, we find disciples ... who
said to Paul, "_through the spirit_," that he should _not_ go up to
Jerusalem. Oh! what a useful word this word _spirit_! Let a man say
plainly and simply, I shall go, or be going, to Jerusalem--or, Don't go
to Jerusalem,--his words go for no more than they are worth: in either
case, with a proper proposition to introduce it, add the word "spirit,"
the matter becomes serious. Out of a word or two, you thus add to the
Godhead a third person, who talks backward and forward for you, and does
for you whatever you please.

At so small a price, even to this day, are manufactured, every day, a
sort of _verbal_ miracles, which, as many as are disposed, are welcome
to improve into real ones.

To reconcile men to this expedition of Paul's, the spirit was the more
necessary,--inasmuch as it was not in his own power, or even in that of
any one of his numerous attendants and dependants, to assign so much as
one ostensible reason for it.

That, to the advancement of religion--of the religion of Jesus--no such
presence of his was necessary;--that no good could result from it;--that
much evil could not but result from it;--was obvious to all eyes. Of the
original number of the Apostles,--for aught that appears, not less than
eleven were still remaining on the spot: men, to every one of whom, all
acts and sayings of Jesus were, by memory, rendered so familiar:--men,
on the part of some of whom, and, at any rate, on the part of the chief
of them, Peter,--there was no want of zeal and activity. While to these
men a single city, or, at the utmost, one small region--composed the
whole field of exertion--the whole earth besides is left open by them
to Paul: still, such is the ravenousness of his ambition, nothing can
content him, but he must be intruding himself--thrusting his restless
sickle into their ripening harvest.


SECTION 3.

THE DESIGN INDEFENSIBLE.

All this--is it not enough? Well then, take this one other--this
concluding proof. In the teeth of all their endeavours, and among them,
some that will be seen extraordinary enough, to prevent it,--was
undertaken the fourth and last of his four recorded visits to their
residence--Jerusalem.

But, in the first place, in the utter indefensibility of the design,
shall be shown the _cause_, of the opposition so universally made to it.

Tired of a mixture of successes and miscarriages,--disdaining the
conquests he had been making in so many remote, and comparatively
obscure regions of the world,--he had formed--but at what precise time,
the documents do not enable us to pronounce--the determination, to
exhibit his glories on the two most illustrious of theatres:--in the two
capitals--Jerusalem, of the Jewish, and now of the Christian world;
Rome, of the whole classical heathen world:--and in the first place,
Jerusalem, now, for the fourth time since his conversion. It was at
Ephesus, as we have seen, this determination was first declared.

To Rome, he might have gone, and welcome: namely, in so far as his
doctrines could have confined themselves within the limits of those of
Jesus: which, however, it will be seen, they could not: but, success
being moreover supposed, nothing but good could such visit have had for
its result.

But, by a visit to any place other than Jerusalem, various were the
points of spleen and ambition, that could not have been satisfied.
Nothing would serve him, but, over that Edom Jerusalem, he would, in the
first place, cast forth his shoe.

Unless the eleven most confidential servants, selected by Jesus himself
to be the propagators of his religion, were altogether unworthy of the
task thus allotted to them,--nothing to the good purposes of that
religion could be more palpably unnecessary, nothing to the purposes of
peace and unity more pernicious, than the intrusion thus resolved upon.
That the number of these legitimately instituted Apostles had as yet
suffered any diminution, is not, by any of the documents, rendered so
much as probable. Neither in the works of Paul himself, nor in that of
his historiographer, is any intimation to any such effect to be found.
In their own judgments, had there been any need of coadjutors--any
deficiency of hands for the spiritual harvest,--they well knew how to
supply it. Of the sufficiency of such knowledge, they had given the
most incontestable proofs: the election of Matthias was the fruit of it.
They showed--and with a disinterestedness, which has never since had,
nor seems destined to have, any imitators--that, in the Christian world,
if government in any shape has divine right for its support, it is in
the shape of democracy;--representative democracy--operating by
universal suffrage. In the eye of the Christian, as well as of the
philosopher and the philanthropist, behold here the only legitimate
government: the form, the exclusion of which from the Christian world,
has been the object of that league, by which, by an unpunishable, yet
the most mischievous--if not the only mischievous--sort of blasphemy,
the name of Christian has been profaned.

This method of filling offices, was no more to the taste of Paul, than
to that of a Napoleon or a George. He determined to open their eyes, and
prove to them by experience, that monarchy,--himself the first
monarch--was the only legitimate form of government. The difficulties of
the enterprise were such as could not escape any eyes:--least of all his
own: but to die or conquer was his resolve: so he himself declares.[49]
What, in case of success, would have been the use made by him of it? The
fate of the Apostles may be read in the catastrophe of Saint Stephen:
the vulgar herd would, in his eyes, have been as declaredly foolish as
the Galatians. Gal. 3:1. "O, foolish Galatians!" Who did bewitch you,
etc.

The invasion was not less inconsistent with good faith, than with
brotherly love, peace and unity. It was a direct violation of the
_partition-treaty_: that treaty, of which he gives such unquestionable
evidence against himself, in the boast he makes of it to his Galatians.
Gal. 2:9. "When James, Cephas (Peter), and John, who seemed to be
pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me
and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should go unto the
heathen, and they unto the circumcision."


SECTION 4.

OPPOSITION MADE TO IT BY HIS OWN ATTENDANTS AND OTHER ADHERENTS.

To find so much as the colour of a reason for this perfidy, was too much
for the ingenuity of his attendant panegyrist. In the eyes of the whole
body of his attendants, of whom the historian was one, so completely
unjustifiable was his design in every point of view,--they joined in a
remonstrance to him, beseeching him to give it up.


ACTS 21:12 to 14.

     And when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place,
     besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.--Then Paul answered, What
     mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be
     bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord
     Jesus.--And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The
     will of the Lord be done.

At no such loss, however, was Paul himself: for this, and for everything
else it was his will to do, he had a reason ready made. It was no less
concise and economical than convenient: a word, and no more than a word,
was the price paid for it:--_revelation_ was that word.[50] So he
assures his "foolish" Galatians: and if they were foolish enough to
believe it, these, though first, have not been last, in the career of
foolishness.

Allow a man but the use of this one word, so it be in the sense in which
Paul here uses it--admit the matter of fact, of which it contains the
assertion,--the will of that man is not only sufficient reason, but
sufficient law, for everything: in all places, and to all persons, his
will is law. The will of this man is the will of that God, by whom this
revelation of it has been made to him: the will of God, what man shall
be audacious enough to dispute?

The motives, which gave birth to this act of perfidy and hostility, will
now be visible enough, to every eye, that dares to open itself to them.
At the time in question, they were too manifest to need mentioning: and
at the same time too unjustifiable, to bear to be mentioned by his
dependent historian, when speaking of the opposition, which, even on the
part of his own dependents, it produced. They besought him--with tears
they besought him: but, as to the reflections by which these tears were
produced, they could not bear the light: it was not for a declared
adherent to give them utterance. The sort of colour, put upon the
project by Paul, with the help of one of his phrases--this was the only
colour that could be found for it. It was for the _name_ of the Lord
Jesus, Acts 21:13, that he was ready--"ready, not to be bound only, but
also to die." For the name? O, yes, for the name at all times; for, in
the name of Jesus, he beheld from first to last his necessary support:
and of the Lord Jesus, nothing, as we shall find,--nothing from first to
last, did he ever employ but the name. But, to be bound at Jerusalem--to
die at Jerusalem--to be bound--to die--supposing this to take
place,--where--to the religion of Jesus--would be, where could be, the
use of it? There, at Jerusalem, the Apostles--the real Apostles of
Jesus:--executing, without either dying or being bound for it, the
commission, which to them had been really given by Jesus.


SECTION 5.

OPPOSITION MADE TO IT BY THE APOSTLES AND THEIR DISCIPLES.

Thus indefensible and deplorable, in the eyes even of his own
dependents,--it may be imagined in what light the invasion presented
itself at Jerusalem, to those who found themselves so cruelly menaced by
it.

At the first place, at which, after a voyage of some length, they landed
on their way to Judea,--they found the alarm already spread. This place
was Tyre: there they found "disciples," Acts 21:4, "who said to Paul,"
and "through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem." It was
through _their spirit_, that they bade him not to go; but _his
revelation_, as we have seen, bade him to go, notwithstanding:--his
revelation was too strong for their spirit. If it was from the _Lord
Jesus_, as he all along informs us, that his revelation came, while
their spirit was the _Holy Spirit_, otherwise called the _Holy
Ghost_,--already another schism was produced: a schism, in a council
still higher than that of the Apostles.

At Ptolemais, on the road from Tyre to Jerusalem, they stayed but one
day: Acts 21:7, not long enough, it should seem, for any fresh marks of
opposition to this enterprise to manifest themselves.

Continuing their approach to the metropolis, the next day they came to
Cæsarea, Acts 21:4, "The house," then "entered into," was that of
Philip, there styled the Evangelist, one of the seven trustees, who,
under the name, rendered in the English translation by that of Deacon,
at the recommendation of the Apostles, had been chosen by universal
suffrage, for the management of the pecuniary affairs of the Church.
Here they took up their quarters: and here a fresh scene awaited them.

In the person of a man, whose name was Agabus, the Apostles and their
associates had found, as we have seen, an agent of approved talents, and
usefulness: to him they had been indebted, for the most important
service, of a temporal nature, which the history of the church in those
days furnishes:--the supply of money already received, as above
mentioned, from the first-born daughter of the church--the church of
Antioch, in Syria. At this place, Cæsarea, as a last resource, this
same Agabus, or another, was, as it should seem, dispatched to meet--at
any rate did meet--the self-appointed Apostle in his way; and, in the
character of a _prophet_, for so _this_ Agabus is styled, strained every
nerve, in the endeavour to divert the invader from the so anxiously
apprehended purpose.

Whoever he was, employed on this occasion, but employed in vain, were
all the treasures of his eloquence. The Holy Ghost was once more, and by
name, set in array against Paul's Lord Jesus. The powers of verbal and
oral eloquence were not thought sufficient: action--and not only of that
sort which, in the eyes of Demosthenes, was an object of such prime
importance, but even pantomime--was employed in aid. Acts 21:11. As to
argument--fear in the bosom of the Church, for a life so precious, was
the only one, which the skill of the orator could permit him to employ:
as to fear for their own sakes, and resentment for the injury which they
were predestinated to suffer,--these were passions, too strongly felt
to be avowed. "He took Paul's girdle," Acts 21:11, "and bound his own
hands and feet, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews
at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him
into the hands of the Gentiles."

Supposing the Agabus mentioned on this occasion, to be the same Agabus
as he who was mentioned on the occasion of the apprehended
dearth--supposing this to be he--and no reason presents itself in favour
of the contrary supposition--well known indeed must he have been to
Paul, since it was by his means that Paul was indebted for the
opportunity of paying, to Jerusalem, that second visit of his, from
which, as we have seen, so little fruit was reaped.

The singular circumstance here is, the manner, in which, on this second
occasion, mention is made of this name--Agabus: "a certain prophet named
Agabus," Acts 21:10. Whether this was, or was not, the same as the
former Agabus,--this mode of designation presents itself as alike
extraordinary. If he _was_ the same,--in that case, as, by the addition
of the adjunct "a certain prophet," a sort of cloud is thrown over his
identity,--so, by so simple an expedient as that of the non-insertion of
these redundant words, the clouds would have been dispelled. If he was
_not_ the same,--so expressive being the circumstances, by which
identity stands indicated--namely, the quarter _from_ whence the same;
the quarter _to_ which the same; the importance of the mission, and the
demand for talents and influence, in both cases so great; on this
supposition, to prevent misconception, no less obvious than urgent was
the demand, for some mark of distinction, to be added on this second
occasion: in a word, for that sort of mark of distinction, which, on
other occasions; may, in this same history, be seen more than once
employed: witness _that John_, twice distinguished by the name of _John,
whose surname was Mark_. Acts 22:25, _ib._ 25:37.

Hence a suspicion, nor that an unnatural one--that, in this history, the
part, in which the name Agabus occurs for the first time, and the part,
in which that same name occurs for the second time, were not the work of
the same hand.

With or without the assistance of the Holy Ghost, with the like
importunity, though in a tone corresponding to the difference of
situation, was a dissuasion, to the same effect, added, with one voice,
by the adherents, of whom the suite of the self-appointed Apostle was
composed, and by all the other Christians then present. "And when we
heard these things," says the author of the Acts, "both we, and they of
that place, Cæsarea, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem." Acts
21:12.

The Holy Ghost, whom all the rest of the Church had for their advocate,
was no equal match for the Holy Ghost whom Paul had for his adviser.
"What mean ye," says he, "to weep and to break mine heart? for I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of
the Lord Jesus." Acts 21:13. To a Holy Ghost so highly seated,
submission from a Holy Ghost of inferior rank, was the only course left.
"When he could not be persuaded, concludes the historian, we ceased,
saying, The will of the Lord be done."

Paul die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus? He, Paul, this
self-constituted Apostle, who, upon his own showing, had never seen
Jesus? for the name of Jesus, forsooth, die at Jerusalem? at that
Jerusalem, at which the indisputable Apostles had been, and continued to
be, living and labouring, in the service of that same holy name, each of
them, or they are much misrepresented, not less ready and willing, both
to live and upon occasion to die for it, than he could be? Was it then
really to die for the name of Jesus? was it not rather to live? to live
for his own name, for his own glory, for his own profit, and for the
pleasure of depriving of their flock those shepherds of souls, by whom
his pretensions had been disallowed, his glory disbelieved, his advances
received with that distrust and jealousy, for which the long and bitter
experience they had had of him, afforded so amply sufficient a warrant?
men, in whose eyes, though in the clothing of a shepherd, he was still a
wolf?

What was he to die for? By whose hands was he to die? By no danger,
since he had ceased to be their declared persecutor, had any Christians,
in their character of Christians, whether disciples or preachers, then,
or at any time, been menaced;[51] of no such danger, at any rate, is
any, the slightest, intimation ever to be found: if any danger awaited
him, it was by himself, by his own restless and insatiable ambition, by
his own overbearing and ungovernable temper, that it was created. Had he
but kept to his agreement; had the whole of the known world, with the
single exception of Judea, been wide enough for him: no danger would
have awaited him:--he and Jerusalem might have remained in peace.

What service that _they_ could not, could _he_ hope to do to the cause?
For doctrine, they had nothing to do but to report the discourses; for
proof, the miracles which they had witnessed. To this, what could _he_
add? Nothing, but facts, such as we have seen, out of his own head,--or,
at best, facts taken at second hand, or through any number of removes
from _them_,--and, in an infinity of shapes and degrees, travestied in
their passage.

In this account, the curious thing is--that upon the face of it, the
Holy Ghost of prophet Agabus is mistaken: nothing happened in the manner
mentioned by him: for, in the same chapter comes the account of what did
happen, or at any rate is, by this same historian, stated as that which
happened:--by no Jews is the owner of the girdle bound: dragged by the
people out of the temple,--by that same people he is indeed attempted to
be killed, but bound he is not: for, with his being bound, the attempt
to kill him is not consistent: binding requires mastery, and a certain
length of time, which killing does not: a single blow from a stone may
suffice for it.

As to the Jews delivering him unto the hands of the Gentiles,--it is by
the Gentiles that he is delivered out of the hands of the Jews: of the
Jews, the endeavour was--to deprive him of his life; of the Gentiles, to
save it.


SECTION 6.

PLAN OF THE APOSTLES FOR RIDDING THEMSELVES OF PAUL.

In this important contest, the Holy Ghost of Agabus was predestinated to
yield to the irresistible power of Paul's Lord Jesus. He made his entry
into Jerusalem, Acts 21:17, and the very next day commenced the storm,
by which, after having been on the point of perishing, he was driven, at
last, as far as from Jerusalem to Rome, but the particulars of which
belong not to the present purpose.

What _is_ to the present purpose, however, is the company, which, upon
this occasion, he saw. James, it may be remembered, was one of the three
Apostles--out of the whole number, the only three who, on the occasion
of the partition treaty, could be prevailed upon to give him the right
hand of fellowship. Into the house of this James he entered: and there
what he saw was an assembly, met together for the purpose, of giving him
the advice, of which more particular mention will be made in its place.
It was--to clear himself of the charge,--a charge made against him by
the Jewish converts,--of teaching all the Jews, which are among the
Gentiles, to forsake Moses, and of inculcating that doctrine by his own
example, Acts 21:20-24. Well! at this assembly who were present?
Answer--the Elders--all of them: of the Apostles with the single
exception of James, at whose house it was held, not one: not even
John,--not even Peter:--the two other Apostles, by whom on their part,
the treaty had been entered into:--Peter, the chief of the
Apostles;--John "the disciple," John 19:26; 20:2; 21:7-20, whom Jesus
loved. The nerves of James it appears, from other tokens besides this,
were of a stronger texture than those of either of these his two
colleagues; he alone stood the brunt. As for Peter, he had been so
"withstood to his face" by Paul on the occasion of his first visit,
that he had no stomach to be so withstood a second time.

James, it may be remembered, was the Apostle, at whose motion, against
the opinion and speech of Peter, the resolution insisting upon certain
Jewish observances, on the part of heathen converts to the Church, was
carried.

Here then, in support of the proposition maintained, by James,--here,
was an assembly of the rulers of the Church convened: the Elders--the
elected coadjutors of the Apostles all of them present: of the Apostles
themselves, not one: James excepted, whose presence, it is evident,
could not, on this occasion, be dispensed with. Of this assembly, the
object, and sole object, was--the insisting upon Paul's taking, for the
sake of the peace of the Church, a certain measure. Now, the measure
thus insisted upon, what was it? The clearing himself of a certain
charge then mentioned. And this charge, what was it? A charge--of which,
consistently with truth,--of which without such direct falsehood, as if
committed would be notorious,--he could not clear himself. In this case,
one of two things would absolutely be the result. Either he would be
rash enough to commit the falsehood,--in which case his reputation and
power of disturbing the peace of the Church would be at an end; or,
shrinking from the summons, he would virtually confess himself guilty:
in which case likewise, he would find his situation, in the midst of an
universally adverse multitude, no longer tenable.

For this clearance, a ceremony was prescribed to him:--a ceremony, the
effect of which was--to declare, in a manner, beyond all comparison,
more solemn and deliberate than that of anything which is commonly
understood by the word _oath_,--that he had not done anything, of that
which he stood charged with having done, and which it could not but be
generally known that he had done. Witness those Epistles of his, which
in another place we shall see, Ch. 12:--Epistles in which he will be
seen, so frequently, and upon such a variety of occasions, and in such a
variety of language, not only proclaiming the needlessness of
circumcision--its uselessness to salvation,--but, in a word, on all
points making war upon Moses.

No course was so rash, that Paul would shrink from it, no ceremony so
awful, or so public that Paul would fear to profane it. Of the
asseveration, to which he was called upon to give, in an extraordinary
form, the sanction of an oath, the purport was universally notorious:
the falsity, no less so: the ceremony, a solemnity on which the powers
of sacerdotal ingenuity had been exhausted, in the endeavour to render
is efficaciously impressive. Place of performance, the most sacred among
the sacred: act of entrance, universally public, purpose universally
notorious; operations, whatever they were, inscrutably concealed from
vulgar eyes: person of the principal actor occasionally visible, but at
an awful elevation: time, requisite for accomplishment, Acts 21:27, not
less than seven days: the whole ceremony, effectually secured against
frequent profanation, by "charges" too heavy to be borne by the united
power of four ordinary purses.[52] With all the ingredients of the most
finished perjury in his breast,--perfect consciousness, fixed
intentionality, predetermined perseverance, and full view of the
sanction about to be violated,--we shall see him entering upon the task,
and persevering in it. While the long drama was thus acting in the
consecrated theatre, the mind of the multitude was accumulating heat
without doors. The seven days necessary, were as yet unaccomplished,
when indignation could hold no longer: they burst into the sacred
edifice, dragged him out, and were upon the point of putting him to
death, when the interference of a Roman officer saved him, and became
the first link in that chain of events, which terminated in his visit to
Rome, and belongs not to this place.

Thus much, in order to have the clearer view of the plan of the
Apostles, and of the grounds of it, from which will be seen the
unexceptionableness of it, it seemed necessary for us here to
anticipate. But such rashness, with the result that followed--the
Apostles, in their situation, how could they have anticipated it?

Baffled, in their former endeavours to keep the invader from entering
the holy city--that holy city, with the peace of which his presence was
so incompatible, such was the course which they devised and embraced
from driving him out of it. For the carrying of this measure into
effect, a general assembly of the governing body of the Church was
necessary. At this assembly had no Apostle been present, it could not,
in the eyes of the Church at large, have been what it was necessary it
should appear to be. Though, of the whole number of the Apostles, no
more than one was present,--yet, his being the house at which it was
held, and the others, whether summoned or no, being expected of course,
by the disciples at large, to be likewise present,--the Elders being
likewise "_all_" of them present,--this attendance was deemed
sufficient: as to the other Apostles--all of them but the one whose
presence was thus indispensable,--abhorrence, towards the man, whose
career had in their eyes commenced with murder, continued in imposture,
and had recently been stained with perfidy,--rendered the meeting him
face to face, a suffering too violent to be submitted to, when by any
means it could be avoided.

On this occasion, the opinion, which, as we have seen, cannot but have
been entertained by them, concerning Paul and his pretensions to
Revelation, and to a share equal to their own in the confidence of
Jesus,--must not, for a moment, be out of mind.

The whole fellowship of the Apostles,--all others, to whom, at the time,
anything about the matter was known, believed his story to be, the whole
of it, a pure invention. In their eyes it was a fabrication: though we,
at this time of day--we, who of ourselves know nothing about it, take
for granted, that it was all true.

For proving the truth of it, all we have are his own accounts of it: his
own accounts, given, some of them, by himself directly: the rest
ultimately, his being the only mouth from which the accounts we have
seen in the _Acts_ could have been derived. Bearing all this in mind,
let us now form our judgment on the matter, and say, whether the light,
in which the Apostles viewed his character and conduct, and the course
pursued by them as above, was not from first to last, not only
conformable to the precepts of their master, but a model of patience,
forbearance, and prudence.

FOOTNOTES:

[45] Acts 18:11. "He continued there, at Corinth, a year and six
months."--18. "And Paul tarried there yet a good while, and then took
his leave."

[46] Acts 19:10. "And this continued by the space of two years; so that
all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews
and Greeks."

[47] Acts 20:22. "And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there."

[48] Acts 20:23. "Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city,
saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me."

[49] Acts 20:24. "But none of these things move me, neither count I my
life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and
the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God."

Acts 21:13. "Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break my
heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem
for the name of the Lord Jesus."

[50] Gal. ii. 2. "I went up by revelation."

[51] In Acts 12:1, King Herod is indeed spoken of as having "stretched
forth his hands to vex certain of the Church, and he killed," it is
said, "James, the brother of John, with the sword." Then comes the story
of Peter's imprisonment and liberation. But the cause of these
inflictions had nothing to do with religion: the proof is--nor can there
be a more conclusive one--to no such cause are they attributed.

[52] Acts 21:23, 24. "We have four men, say the Apostles and Elders, we
have four men which have a vow on them:--Them take, and purify thyself
with them, and be at charges with them."




