CHAPTER VIII.

     _Interview the Fourth.--Peter at Antioch.--Deputies to Antioch from
     Jerusalem, Judas and Silas.--Paul disagrees with Peter and
     Barnabas, quits Antioch, and on a Missionary Excursion takes with
     him Silas. What concerns the Partition Treaty, down to this Period,
     reviewed.--Peter and the Apostles justified._


SECTION 1.

PAUL'S ACCOUNT OF THIS INTERVIEW QUOTED.--ACTS ACCOUNT OF WHAT FOLLOWED
UPON IT.

We now come to the last of the four different and more or less distant
occasions on which a personal intercourse, in some way or other, is
recorded as having had place, between Paul on the one part, and the
Apostles or some of them on the other, antecedently to that, on which
Paul's history, so far as any tolerably clear, distinct, and material,
information has descended to us, closes. Of this interview, the scene
lies at Antioch: Peter having, for some consideration no otherwise to be
looked for than by conjecture, been led to pay a visit, to that place of
Paul's _then_ habitual abode, after, and, as seems probable, in
consequence of, Paul's third recorded visit to Jerusalem--his
_Deputation Visit_.

Let us now cast an eye on the documents. Respecting Paul's disagreement
with Peter, the only one we have, is that which has been furnished us
by Paul himself. It consists of the following passage in his Epistle to
his Galatians.

GALATIANS 2:11 to 16.

     But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
     because he was to be blamed.--For before that certain came from
     James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he
     withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the
     circumcision.--And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him;
     insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their
     dissimulation.--But when I saw that they walked not uprightly
     according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before
     _them_ all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of
     Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles
     to live as do the Jews?--We _who are_ Jews by nature and not
     sinners of the Gentiles,--knowing that a man is not justified by
     the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we
     have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
     faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works
     of the law shall no flesh be justified.

Let us now see the account, given in the Acts, of what passed in
Antioch, in relation to Paul, Barnabas and Silas,--during a period,
which seems to be either the same, or one in contiguity with it,
probably antecedent to it.

ACTS 15:35 to 41.

     Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching
     the word of the Lord with _many others_ also.--And some days after,
     Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren,
     in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see
     how they do.--And Barnabas determined to take with them John whose
     surname was Mark.--But Paul thought not good to take him with them,
     who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to
     the work.--And the contention was so sharp between them, that they
     departed asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark and
     sailed unto Cyprus;--And Paul chose Silas and departed, being
     recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.--And he went
     through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.

With regard to Paul's separation from Barnabas, departure from Antioch,
and taking Silas for a companion,--we have nothing from Paul himself:
nothing, from any other source, than, as above, the Acts.

In Paul's account, however, may be seen a passage, Gal. 2:13, by which
some light is thrown upon the breach of Paul with Barnabas. In the Acts,
though the _"contention" is said to be "sharp,"_ no cause is stated for
it, other than a difference respecting the choice of a companion:
namely, on an excursion, which they are represented as having agreed to
make, in the company of each other, as before.

But, according to Paul, he had had cause of complaint, against his old
friend Barnabas, on another account. Barnabas had sided with the
Apostles: Barnabas had been "carried away with their dissimulation"; by
the dissimulation of those Apostles of Jesus, the virtuous simplicity of
the self-constituted Apostle, so he desires his Galatian disciples to
believe, had been foiled.


SECTION 2.

PAUL DISAGREES WITH PETER--AND BARNABAS--QUITS ANTIOCH, TAKING SILAS
FROM THE APOSTLES.

In no place can this man exist, but to exercise hostility or provoke it:
with no man can he hold intercourse, without acting towards him, if not
in the character of a despot, in that either of an open and audacious,
or in that of a secret adversary, or both. Against Peter, at Jerusalem,
in his Deputation Visit, he is intriguing, while he is bargaining with
him. With the same Peter, when arrived at Antioch, he quarrels: for, at
Antioch, Peter was but a visitor--a stranger; Paul, with Barnabas for
his constant supporter, was on his own ground: no betrayed rulers
_there_ to fear--no persecuted Christians. He quarrels--so he himself
informs his Galatians--he quarrels with the chief of the Apostles: he
"withstands him to his face." Why? because, forsooth, "he was to be
blamed." In conclusion, to such a pitch,--by the degree of success,
whatever it was, which by this time he had experienced,--to such a pitch
of intemperance, had his mind swelled--he quarrels even with Barnabas:
with Barnabas--in all his three antecedent visits to Jerusalem, his
munificent protector, and steady adherent: with that Barnabas, in whose
company, and under whose wing, one of his missionary excursions had
already been performed. Acts 11:19-27; Ib. 2:37-40.

At Antioch, the number of his competitors could not but be considerable:
at Antioch, the number of years, which he appears to have passed in that
city, considered,--the number of his enemies could not be small. He
accordingly plans, and executes, a new missionary excursion. He stands
now upon his own legs: no Barnabas now,--no necessary protector, to
share with him in his glory: to share with him, in equal or superior
proportion, in the profit of his profession: in that profit, the image
of which, in all its shapes, was flitting before his eyes,--and which we
shall accordingly see him gathering in, in such unequalled exuberance.
He now looks out for a humble companion--an assistant: he finds one in
Silas: that Silas, whom, with Judas Barsabas, we have seen come to
Antioch, deputed by the Apostles and their disciples, to conclude, in
that second metropolis, the negotiation, commenced in the first
metropolis of the new Christian world. Deserter from the service in
which he was sent, Silas enlists in that of the daring and indefatigable
adventurer. Thus much, and no more, do we learn concerning him: for, in
the picture drawn in the Acts, no character is given to him, except the
being found in company with Paul, in some of the places which Paul
visits: except this exercise of the locomotive faculty, nothing is there
to distinguish him from the common stock of still-life.

From this fourth recorded epoch in the intercourse between Paul and the
Apostles, we now pass to that which stands fifth and last, to wit: that
which was produced by his fourth and last visit to Jerusalem:--his
_Invasion Visit_, A.D. 62.

In the interval, come four years,--occupied by a series of successive
excursions and sojournments,--in the course of which, all mention of
Silas is dropped, without remark: dropped, in the same obscure and
inexplicit manner, in which the historian affords to the reader,
supposing him endowed with the requisite degree of attention, the means
of discovering, Acts 16:10, that not long after the commencement of this
same period, the historian himself, whoever he was, was taken into the
train of the self-constituted Apostle. To the reader is also left the
faculty, of amusing himself in conjecturing, about what time, and in
what manner, this latter event may have taken place; an event, from
which such important consequences have resulted.

Of these portions of Paul's life, some view will come to be taken, in a
succeeding chapter, under another head:--under the head of Paul's
supposed miracles: for, it is in the account given of his achievements
and adventures, and of the transactions in which, in the course of this
period, he was engaged,--it is in the course of this account, that we
shall have to pick up, the supposed accounts of supposed miracles,
which, in this part of the Acts history lie interspersed. This review
must of necessity be taken, for the purpose of placing in a true light,
the evidence, supposed to be thus afforded, in support of his claims to
a supernatural commission.

To this change of connection on the part of Silas,--from the service of
the Apostles of Jesus to that of the self-constituted Apostle,--the
character of _defection_ on the part of Silas,--_seduction_ on the part
of Paul,--may here be ascribed without difficulty. By the Apostles, one
Gospel was preached--the Gospel of Jesus:--we see it in the Evangelists.
By Paul, another and different Gospel was preached:--a Gospel, later and
better, according to him, than that which is to be seen in the
Evangelists:--a Gospel of his own. If, even down to this time, mutual
prudence prevented an open and generally conspicuous rupture,--there was
on his part, at any rate, an opposition. If, to men, whose conduct and
temper were such as they uniformly appear to have been,--any such word
as _party_ can, without disparagement, be applied, here were two
_parties_. He, who was _for_ the self-constituted Apostle, was _against_
the Apostles of Jesus. In a word, in the language of modern party,
Silas was a _rat_.


SECTION 3.

THE PARTITION TREATY, AND THE PROCEEDINGS, IN RELATION TO IT, DOWN TO
THIS PERIOD, REVIEWED.

In regard to the Partition Treaty,--taking the matter from Paul's first,
or Reconciliation Visit, A.D. 35, to his departure from Antioch, on his
missionary excursion, after the interview he had had at that city with
Peter,--the state of the affairs, between Paul and the Apostles, seems
to have been thus:--

1. On the occasion, and at the time, of his first Jerusalem Visit--his
Reconciliation Visit--a sort of reconciliation--meaning at least an
outward one--could not,--consistently with the whole train, of what is
said of his subsequent intercourse and interviews with the
Apostles,--could not but have taken place.

2. Of this reconciliation, the terms were--that, on condition of _his_
preaching in the name of Jesus,--_they_ would not, to such persons in
Jerusalem and elsewhere, as were in connection with them,--_speak_ of
him any longer in the character of a persecutor: for, by his
disobedience and breach of trust, as towards the Jerusalem constituted
authorities,--such he had put it out of his power to _be_ any longer:
not speak of him as a persecutor, but, on the contrary, as an
associate:--he taking up the name of Jesus: and preaching--never in his
own, but on every occasion in that holy, name.

3. On this occasion,--it being manifest to both parties, that, by his
intimate acquaintance with the Greek language, and with the learning
belonging to that language, he was in a peculiar degree well qualified
to spread the name of Jesus among the Gentiles in general;--that is,
among those to whom the Jewish was not a vernacular language;--whereas
their acquaintance with language was confined to their own, to wit, the
Jewish language;--on this occasion, it followed of course, from the
nature of the case, and almost without need of stipulation,
that,--leaving to _them_, for the field of their labours, Jerusalem, and
that part of the circumjacent country, in which the Jewish alone was the
language of the bulk of the population,--_he_ should confine his
exertions, principally if not exclusively, to those countries, of which
Greek was, or at any rate Hebrew was not, the vernacular language.

To him, at that time, it was not in the nature of the case, that
absentation from Jerusalem, or any part of the country under the same
dominion, should be matter of regret. Within that circle, he could not,
for any length of time, abide publicly, for fear of the legal vengeance
of the constituted authorities: nor yet among the Christians; although
from their chiefs he had obtained, as above, a sort of prudential
endurance; considering the horror, which his persecution of them had
inspired, and the terror, with which, until his conversion had been
proved in the eyes of all by experience, he could not as yet fail to be
regarded.

Whatever was the object of his concupiscence,--whether it were the
fund--and we have seen how attractive the bait was--which, at that time,
in that metropolis of the Christian world, offered itself to an
ambitious eye,--still, though his opportunities had as yet confined his
exertions to the _second_ city in that increasing world, his eyes never
ceased looking to the _first_.

Twice, accordingly, between the first of his Visits,--his Reconciliation
Visit--and this his last interview with Peter,--we see him visiting that
inviting spot: each time, protected and escorted by the munificent
Barnabas and his influence--to make him endurable: each time with a
public commission--to make him respected:--the first time with money
in his hand--to make him welcome.

That, all this while, neither _good faith_ nor _prudence_ were capable
of opposing to the violence of his ambition, any effectual check,--is
abundantly manifest.

That _good faith_ was not, we learn distinctly from himself. For though,
from the very nature of the two correlative situations, it is out of all
question, as above, that, without some agreement to the effect above
mentioned, he could not, even with the benefit of every possible means
of concealment, have been preserved for two days together from the
vengeance which pressed upon him, from _below_ as well as from _above_;
yet still was he, by his secret intrigues, Gal. 1:11, violating the
treaty, at the expense of those upright, patient, and long-suffering
men, to whose observance of it, he was every day indebted for his life.


SECTION 4.

PETER AND THE APOSTLES JUSTIFIED AS TO THE FINANCIAL STIPULATION IN
THE TREATY, AND THE SUCCEEDING MISSIONARY LABOURS OF PETER AMONG
THE GENTILES.

Of the financial stipulation, the account we have has been seen:--an
account given by one of the parties to it--Paul:--the other party
being--the Apostles. In the instance of Paul, in the demonstration,
supposed to be given of it, the worldliness, of the motives which gave
birth to it, has in a manner been taken for granted. Well, then, if in
the one instance such was the character of it,--in the other instance,
can it have been any other? The question is a natural one; but not less
so is the answer. For note, the stipulation is express--that, by
Paul--by Paul out of the profits of his vocation--the poor, meaning the
poor of Jerusalem--the poor among the disciples of the Apostles--should
be remembered. Remembered, and how? Remembered, by payment of the
money--into the hands, either of the Apostles themselves, or, what comes
to the same thing, some other persons, in connection with them, and
acting under their influence. Now, then, once more. Of the man, by whom
the money was to be _paid_--of this man, the motives, you say, were
worldly: is it credible then, that they should have been less so, in the
instance of the men by whom they were to be _received_?

Answer. Oh! yes, _that_ it is. Between the two cases, there is this
broad difference. Whatever Paul might receive, he would receive for
himself: whatever, after payment made, under the treaty, to the use of
the Jerusalem poor, he retained,--he might retain for his own use. But
the Apostles--that which, if anything, they received, in the name of the
poor, and as for the use of that same poor,--would they--could they, for
their own use, retain it, or any part of it? Not they, indeed. Not in
their hands were the poor's funds: not in theirs, but in a very
different set of hands:--in the hands of a set of trustees--of the
trustees already mentioned in this work, Ch. 2--of those administrators,
whose function, to every reader who has not the Greek original in view,
is so unfortunately disguised by the word _Deacons_. And these deacons,
by whom appointed? By the Apostles? No; but, by the whole communion of
the saints--by the whole number of the members of the Christian
commonwealth;--and in the way of free election,--_election, on the
principle of universal suffrage_. Monarchists and Aristocrats! mark
well!--_of universal suffrage_.

So much for the treaty itself. Now, as to the subsequent conduct of the
parties, under it, and in relation to it. As to the partition--Paul to
the Gentiles, Peter and his associates to the Jews--such was the letter
of it. Such being the letter--what, at the same time, was the spirit of
it? Manifestly this: on the one hand, that the field, to which Paul's
exertions should apply themselves, and confine themselves, should be
that field, for the cultivation of which, with any prospect of success,
he was exclusively qualified: on the other hand, that the field, to
which their exertions should apply themselves and confine themselves,
should be that, for the cultivation of which, they were--if not
exclusively, at any rate more peculiarly, qualified. In a word--that, of
all that portion of the world, that presented itself as open to the
exertions, of those who preached in the name of Jesus,--they should
reserve to themselves that part which was already in their possession,
to wit, Jerusalem, and its near neighbourhood, together with such parts
of Judea, and its neighbourhood, of which their own language, the
Hebrew, was the vernacular language: this minute portion of the world
reserved, all the rest was to be left open to him: over every other part
of it he was to be at liberty to cast forth his shoe. Judea--the country
of the Jews? say, rather, the Jews themselves:--the Jews wherever found:
for, revelation apart, it was in _language_, that Paul's
pretensions--his exclusive qualifications--consisted. The Apostles spoke
nothing but Hebrew: Paul was learned, and eloquent, in a certain sort,
in Greek.

In regard to the interpretation to be put upon this treaty,--suppose any
doubt to have place,--in the word _Gentile_, would obviously the seat
and source of it to be to be found. Suppose, on the one hand _persons_
to be the objects, of which it was meant to be designative,--then, let
there be but so much as one single uncircumcised man in Jerusalem, or
elsewhere,--to whom, in the view of gaining him over to their communion,
the Apostles, or, with their cognizance, any of their disciples,
addressed themselves,--here would, on _their_ part, be a breach of the
treaty. Suppose, on the other hand, _places_ to be the objects, of which
it was meant to be designative,--on that supposition, within that tract
of country, within which alone, the necessary means, of communicating
with the bulk of the population, were in their possession,--they might
apply themselves, to all persons without restriction: and this, still
without any real breach of the agreement--of the spirit and real import
of the agreement.

In respect either of _persons or places_, by the agreement, according to
this--the obvious sense of it--what was it that Paul gave up? In truth,
just nothing. Had his mind been in a sober state,--strange indeed, if
the field thus afforded by the whole heathen world, was not wide enough
for his labour: in all parts of it he could not be at once; and the most
promising parts were open to his choice. Cessation of Paul's
hostilities excepted, what was it that the Apostles gained? Not much
more.

As already observed--what was not gained by it, is what is above: what
was really gained by it, is what follows.

What Paul gained was--exemption from the annoyance, which otherwise he
would everywhere have been exposed to have received, by being designated
as the quondam notorious persecutor, and still unreconciled enemy, of
the Apostles and their disciples:--in a word, of all others who preached
in the name of Jesus.

That which the Apostles actually gained, was--that confirmation and
extension of their influence, which followed of course, upon every
extension, received by that field, within which the influence of the
name of Jesus was extended.

That which, besides what is above, they _ought to_ have gained, but did
not gain, is--exemption from all such annoyance, as could not but be
inflicted on them, in proportion as Paul, preaching to persons, to whom
_they_ had access, a Gospel which was his, and not theirs,--should,
while in pretence and name an associate, be, in truth and effect, an
adversary and opponent.

This is what--though they not only should have gained, but might also
reasonably have expected to gain--they did _not_ gain. For, not to
insist any more on his secret intrigues in Jerusalem itself, and his
open opposition in the second Jerusalem, Antioch, as above; we
shall--when we come to the next and last of his interviews with the
Apostles on the occasion of his Invasion Visit--see, to what lengths the
madness of his ambition carried him, in that birthplace and metropolis
of the Christian world.

By the sort of connection, which, notwithstanding such obvious and
naturally powerful principles of discrimination, have on each occasion,
been visible, as between the undoubted Apostles, and this self-styled
one--three distinguishable questions cannot but, from time to time, have
been presenting themselves:--1. The sort of countenance--partial, cold,
and guarded as it was--shown by the old established and goodly
fellowship to the ever-intruding individual--is it credible? 2. Can it,
in fact, have been manifested, in conjunction with a disbelief, on their
part, of his pretensions to a degree of supernatural favour with the
Almighty, equal or superior to their own? 3. And, if not only possible,
but actual--was it, in point of morality, justifiable?

By a few obvious enough considerations, an answer--and, it is hoped, a
not altogether unsatisfactory one,--may be given to all these questions.

As to whatever was natural in the course of the events, Barnabas was
necessary to the rising Church: and Paul was, all along, necessary, or,
at least, was so thought, to Barnabas.

1. Barnabas was necessary to the Church. Already, it has been seen, how
preeminent was the support received by it from his munificence. In him,
it had found at once the most liberal of benefactors, and, unless Peter
be an exception, the most indefatigable of agents. On the part of no one
of even the chosen servants of Jesus, do proofs of equal zeal and
activity present themselves to our view.

In an ensuing chapter, we shall see Peter trying his strength among the
Gentiles. Yet, from the direction thus given to his Apostolic zeal, no
violation of the treaty, it will be seen, can with justice be imputed to
him, if the interpretation above given to the word _Gentiles_ be
correct.

1. In the first place,--according to the Acts, the date of this
excursion is _antecedent_ to that third interview, which took place on
the occasion of Paul's third Jerusalem Visit--his Deputation Visit: that
is to say, to the time, at which, and not before, though, if the above
reasoning be just, in a sort of general terms the preliminaries had been
agreed upon, the general preliminary arrangements were followed,
confirmed, explained, and liquidated, by more particular ones.

2. In the next place--of all the places,--which, in the course of this
excursion of Peter's, are mentioned as having been visited by
him,--there is not one, that Paul is mentioned as having ever visited:
whereas, in the first of them that is mentioned, the Apostles are
mentioned as having already a band of disciples.[42]

3. In the third place,--the date, assigned to this excursion of Peter's,
is, by several years, antecedent even to the first, of the several
excursions of Paul's, of which mention is made in the Acts. In the
received chronology--date assigned to the commencement of Peter's
excursion, A.D. 35; date assigned to Paul's first excursion, A.D. 45.

While Peter was thus occupying himself, Paul was still at Tarsus:[43] at
Tarsus--his own birthplace--whereto,--in consequence of the danger, to
which his life had been exposed by his first Jerusalem Visit, his
Reconciliation Visit,--he had taken his flight.[44]

4. In the fourth place,--notwithstanding the perpetual hostility of
Paul's mind, as towards Peter and the rest of the Apostles,--on no
occasion, on the score of any breach of this article in the partition
treaty, is any complaint, on the part of Paul, to be found. When
dissatisfaction is expressed, doctrine alone is mentioned by him as the
source of it: doctrine, the ostensible; dominion, the original and real
source.

Spite of the treaty,--spite of the manifest interest, of the only
genuine religion of Jesus--the Gospel taught by the Apostles,--still in
places to which they had access--in places in which, in consequence,
they had formed connections,--he persisted in intruding himself:
intruding himself, with that Gospel which he says himself, was his, not
theirs--and not being theirs, was not Jesus's:--intruding himself, in
places, in which, even had his Gospel been Jesus's, _their_ connections
being established, there existed no demand for him and _his_. Can this
be doubted of? If yes, all doubt will at any rate be removed,
when,--spite of all the endeavours that could be employed, either by
them or by his own adherents, to prevail upon him to desist,--we shall
see him entering Jerusalem on his Invasion Visit: as if, while, for
preaching the religion of Jesus, all the world, with the exception of
the Jewish part of it, was not enough for this intruder,--the Apostles
of Jesus--eleven in number, with their elected associate,
Matthias,--were not, all together, enough, for that small part of it.

The _name_ he preached in, _that_ indeed not his own, but Jesus's: but
the _doctrine_ he preached--the Gospel, as he called it--not _Jesus's_,
nor anybody else's, but his own. All this, as he has the assurance to
declare,--all this did he preach without their knowledge. And why
without their knowledge? because, as he himself has the still more
extraordinary assurance to _declare_--for _confession_ is the result not
of assurance, but weakness--because, as he himself acknowledges,--if so
it had been, that this Gospel of his had come to the knowledge of the
Apostles--of those associates, to whom he was all along holding out the
right hand of fellowship, this Gospel of his could not have been
listened to--this preaching of his would have been in vain.

Already, however--for in this he may be believed--already, throughout
this _first_ intercourse, though the expression is not used till he came
to speak of the _third_,--already must the right hand of fellowship have
been held out, and on both sides: and, what followed of course,--and was
not only affirmed by his statement, but demonstrated by the result,--on
this last occasion was the treaty again brought upon the carpet and
confirmed, after such modifications as it may naturally have received,
from the consideration of intervening incidents.

FOOTNOTES:

[42] Acts 9:32. "And it came to pass, as Peter passed through all
quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda."

[43] Acts 11:25. "Then departed Barnabas for to seek Saul." A.D. 43.

[44] Acts 9:30, "Which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to
Cæsarea and sent him forth to Tarsus."




