CHAPTER XIII.

     _Paul's supposable Miracles explained._


SECTION 1.

OBJECTIONS, APPLYING TO THEM IN THE AGGREGATE.

But, it may be said, Paul's alleged commission from God was certainly
genuine; for it is proved by his miracles. Look at the Acts, no fewer
than twelve miracles of his you will find. If then taken by themselves,
for want of that accurate conception of the probative form of evidence,
to which maturer ages have given birth, the account of the miracle by
which his conversion was wrought fails of being completely
satisfactory,--look at his miracles, the deficiency will be filled up.
The man, to whom God had imparted such extraordinary powers--powers so
completely matchless in these our times,--can such a man have been a
liar--an impostor? a liar for the purpose of deceit--of giving support
to a system of deception--and that a lucrative one? An imposition so
persevering as to have been carried on, from youth to death, through,
perhaps, the greatest part of his life?

The observation is plausible:--the answer will not be the less
satisfactory.

The answer has two branches: one, _general_, applying to all the alleged
miracles in question, taken in the lump: the other _particular_,
applying to the several miracles separately considered.

Observations applying to the whole together are, the following:

1. Not by Paul himself, in any one of his own Epistles, is any such
general assertion made, as that he had received from God or from
Jesus,--or, in a word, that he was in possession of, any such power, as
the power of working miracles.

2. Nowhere in the account given of his transactions by the author of the
Acts, is he in any of his speeches represented as making reference to
any one act of his in the character of a miracle.

3. Nowhere in that same account, is he represented as stating himself to
be in possession of any such powers.

4. Not by the author of the Acts, is he spoken of as being in possession
of any such power.

5. Nowhere by the author of the Acts, is he in any general terms spoken
of, as producing any effects, such as, in respect of the power necessary
to the production of them, approach to those spoken of as having been
produced by Simon Magus; by that declared impostor, in whose instance,
no such commission from God is represented as having been received.

6. Neither on the occasion of his conversion, nor on any other occasion,
is Paul stated to have received from Jesus any such power as that of
working miracles:--any such power as the real Apostles are--in Mark
16:15, 16, 17, 18--stated to have received from Jesus.

Was it that, in his own conception, for gaining credence to his
pretension of a commission from Jesus--from Jesus, styled by him the
Lord Jesus--any need of miracles, or of a persuasion, on the part of
those with whom he had to deal, of _his_ having power to work miracles?
By no means. Of the negative, the story told by him of the manner of his
conversion is abundant proof. Of the efficient cause of this change in
his mind, the account given, is plainly given in the character of the
account of a miracle. But of this miracle, the proof given consists
solely in his own evidence: his own statement, unsupported by that of
any other person, or by reference to that of any other person: his
account, of the discourse, which on the occasion of the vision, in which
nothing was seen but a flood of light, he heard from the Lord Jesus: his
own account, of the vision, which he says was seen by Ananias: his own
account, of that other vision, which, according to Ananias, he, Paul,
had had, but of which Paul himself says nothing.

In the work of his adherent and sole biographer, the author of _the
Acts_,--we have five speeches, made by him, in vindication of his
conduct, in the character of a preacher of the religion of Jesus; and,
from his own hand, Epistles out of number: yet nowhere is any reference
made, to so much as a single miracle wrought by his own hand, unless the
trance which he falls into when he is alone, and the vision which he
sees, when nobody else sees anything, are to be placed to the account of
miracles. Miracles? _On_ him, yes; _by_ him, no. True it is, that, on
one occasion, he speaks in general terms of "signs and wonders," as
having been wrought by him. But vague, in the highest degree, is the
import, as well as wide the extent, of those general terms: nor is it by
any means clear, that, even by himself, any such claim was meant to be
brought forward, as that of having exhibited any such manifestations of
supernatural power, as are commonly regarded as designated by the word
_miracles_. In the multitude of the persons, whom, in places so widely
distant from one another, he succeeded in numbering in the list of his
followers--in the depth of the impression, supposed to have been made on
the heart of this or that one of them--in all or any one of these
circumstances, it was natural he should himself behold, and, whether he
did or no, use his endeavours to cause others to behold, not only so
many sources of wonder, but so many circumstances; all conspiring to
increase the quantity of that confidence, which, with so much industry,
and, as far as appears, with such brilliant success, he was labouring
to plant in every breast: circumstances, serving, in the minds of his
adherents in general, in the character of a sign or proof, of the
legitimacy of his pretension, as above.

But, of any such supernatural power as that which is here in question,
could any such loose and vague expressions be reasonably regarded as
affording any sort of proof? No:--unless whatsoever, in the affairs of
men, can justly be regarded as _wonderful_, ought also to be regarded as
a miracle.

In one passage, and one alone, either in the Acts or in his own
Epistles, is he found laying any claim, how distant and vague soever, to
any such power, as having ever been exercised by him. And, in this
instance, no one individual incident being in any way brought to view or
referred to, what is said will be seen to amount absolutely to nothing,
being nothing more than, without incurring any such interpretation as
that of imposture, is at the present time continually averred by
Christians of different sects.

He who makes so much of his _sufferings_, had he wrought any miracles,
would he have made nothing of his _miracles_?

In the next place, although it must be admitted, that, on several
occasions, by his sole biographer and professed adherent, viz., the
author of the Acts, a sort of colour of the marvellous seems endeavoured
to be laid on; laid on over the incident itself, and over the part,
which on that occasion was taken by him; yet on no one of these
occasions, unless perhaps it be the last--of which presently,--does the
account, given by him of what passed, wear any such complexion as shall
render it matter of necessity, either to regard it as miraculous, or to
regard the biographer, as having on that occasion asserted a complete
and downright untruth.


SECTION 2.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE I.--ELYMAS THE SORCERER BLINDED.--_Acts_ 13:6 to 12.

1. Of these supposable miracles, the first that occurs is that which had
for its subject Elymas the sorcerer.

At Paphos, in the island of Cyprus,[77] Paul and his associate Barnabas
are sent for, by "the deputy of the country," Sergius Paulus, who
desires to hear the word of God. But at that same place is a certain
Jew, of the name of Barjesus, alias Elymas,--a sorcerer by profession,
who "withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith." To
this man, it is not said, either where or when, Paul is thereupon
represented as making a short speech, at the end of which, after calling
him a child of the devil, and so forth; he says to him, "_Thou shalt be
blind, not seeing the sun for a season_. Thereupon," continues the
story, "immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went
about seeking some to lead him by the hand. Then the deputy," it
concludes, "when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the
doctrine of the Lord."

Supposing this story to have had any foundation in fact,--of the
appearance of blindness thus exhibited, where shall we look for the
cause? In a suspension of the laws of nature, performed by the author
of nature, to no other assignable end, than the conversion of this Roman
governor? At no greater expense, than that of a speech from this same
Paul, the conversion of a king,--King Agrippa--if the author of the Acts
is to be believed, was nearly effected. "Almost," says Agrippa, "thou
hast persuaded me to become a Christian." So often as God is
represented, as operating in a direct--however secret and
mysterious--manner, upon the heart, _i.e._, the mind, of this and that
man,--while the accounts given of the suspension of the laws of nature
are comparatively so few--to speak in that sort of human language, in
which alone the nature of the case admits of our speaking, if the
expense of a miracle were not grudged,--might not, in the way above
mentioned, by a much less lavish use of supernatural power, the same
effect have been produced? viz., by a slight influence, exercised on the
heart of governor Paulus?

Whatsoever may have been the real state of the case,--thus much seems
pretty clear, viz., that at this time of day, to a person whose judgment
on the subject should have, for its ground, the nature of the human mind
as manifested by experience,--another mode of accounting for the
appearance in question will be apt to present itself as much more
probable. That is--that, by an understanding between Paul and
Elymas--between the ex-persecutor and the sorcerer--the sorcerer, in the
view of all persons, in whose instance it was material that credence
should be given to the supposed miracle,--for and during "_the season_"
that was thought requisite, kept his eyes shut.

The sorcerer was a Jew:--Paul was also a Jew. Between them here was
already one indissoluble bond of connection and channel of intercourse.
Elymas, by trade a sorcerer, _i.e._, an impostor--a person of the same
trade with Simon Magus, by whom so conspicuous a figure is cut in the
chapter of this history--was a sort of person, who, on the supposition
of an adequate motive, could not naturally feel any greater repugnance,
at the idea of practicing imposition, at so easy a rate as that of
keeping his eyes shut, than at the idea of practicing it, in any of the
shapes to which he had been accustomed:--shapes, requiring more
dexterity, and some, by which he would be more or less exposed, to that
detection, from which, in the mode here in question, it would be
altogether secure.

But Paul--was he in a condition to render it worth the sorcerer's while
to give this shape to his imposture? Who can say that he was not? Yes:
if to a certain degree he had it in his power, either to benefit him or
to make him suffer? And who can say but that these two means of
operating, were one or other, or both of them, in his power? As to the
sorcerer's betraying him, this is what he could not have done, without
betraying himself.

True it is, that, by acting this under part,--this self-humiliating
part,--so long as Paul stayed, so long was the sorcerer, not the first,
but only the second wonder-worker of the town. But no sooner did Paul's
departure take place, than Elymas, from being the second, became again
the first.


SECTION 3.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE II.--AT LYSTRA, CRIPPLE CURED.--_Acts_ 14:8 to 11.

Second of these supposed miracles,--cure of the cripple at Lystra.

This miracle makes a bad match with the before-mentioned one.

Seeing a man at Lystra, neither man's name, nor place's, except in that
general way, nor time, in any way mentioned,--seeing a man in the guise
of a cripple, "_Stand upright on thy feet_," says Paul to him with a
loud voice. "And," continues the story, "he leaped and walked,
steadfastly beholding and perceiving that he had faith to be healed."
Chorus of the people thereupon, "The Gods are come down to us in the
likeness of men."

To the production of an appearance of this sort, what was necessary? a
real miracle? No, surely: so long as a vagrant was to be found, who,
without any risk, could act a part of this sort for a few pence, in an
age so fertile in imposture.

True it is, that this same man, whoever he was, is represented as being
"impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never
had walked." But these words, how much more than any other words, of the
same length, in the same number, did the writing of them cost the author
of this story? As to the correctness of his narratives,--of the
self-contradictory accounts given by him of Paul's conversion, a sample
has been already given. As to detection, supposing this circumstance
false,--detection is what the account thus given of it renders
impossible. For--this same cripple, what was his name? from birth to
this time, where had he been living? Of this nothing is said. That, at
Lystra, or anywhere else, the account was ever made public, is neither
affirmed, nor so much as insinuated: not but that it might have been
published, and, at the same time, though as to everything but the scene
that exhibited itself to outward appearance, false,--might not have
found any person, at the same time able and willing to contradict the
falsity, and thus naturalize the miracle.


SECTION 4.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE III.--DIVINERESS SILENCED.--_Acts_ 16:16-18.

While Paul and his suite,--of whom, according to the author of the Acts,
he himself was one,--were at Philippi,--a Roman colony, and capital of a
part of Macedonia,--among their hearers, is Lydia--a purple-seller of
the City of Thyatira. Being converted, she receives the whole party into
her house.

From this house, on their way to prayers,--probably in a Jewish
synagogue,--they are met by a certain damsel, as nameless as the
lame-born cripple, who, being possessed of a spirit of divination, or of
Python, brings to her masters, for masters it seems she had more than
one, much gain by soothsaying. Here then is a female, who, by being
possessed by or with a spirit,--a real spirit, whether devil or a spirit
of any other sort,--is converted into a prophetess, and, doubtless, in
the main a false prophetess.

In the present instance, however, she is a true prophetess: for,
following Paul and his suite, she runs after them, saying, "These men
are the servants of the Most High God, which show unto us the way of
salvation. And this did she many days."

If, instead of a demon, it had been an angel, that took her vocal organs
for the instrument of his communications, it is difficult to say, in
what manner he could have deserved better at the hands of these
"servants," real or pretended, "of the Most High God."

Yet, from some cause or other that does not appear, so it was it
seems,--there was something about her with which Paul was not well
pleased. "Being grieved, he turns and says,"--not to the damsel herself,
but to the spirit, which _possessed her_, or rather, since for the
benefit of her masters, it brought her so much gain, which _she
possessed_,--"I command thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come out
of her."

Amongst the superstitions of that and other ages, one was--the notion of
a property, possessed by such and such words--possessed, by these mere
evanescent sounds--by the air of the atmosphere, when made to vibrate in
a certain manner:--a property, of working effects in endless abundance
and variety, and those, too, supernatural ones. In some instances, the
wonders would be wrought by the words themselves, whatsoever were the
mouths by which they were uttered. In other instances, they required,
for the production of the effects, a person, who being possessed of a
particular and appropriate power, should, for the purpose of giving
exercise to such his power, give them passage through his lips. Of this
latter kind was the present case. The command issued as above, "he," for
it was a he-spirit, "came out of her," the damsel, "the same hour."

When the devil that Josephus saw expelled, came out of the man, the
channel at which he made his exit, being manifest, it was accordingly
specified: it was the man's _nose_. This was something to know:
especially, in relation to an occurrence, the time of which was at so
great a distance from our own. At the same time, however, other
particulars present themselves, by which curiosity is excited, and for
want of which, the information thus bestowed must be confessed to be
rather imperfect. What the shape of the devil was? what the substance?
whence he last came? to what place, to what occupation, after being thus
dislodged, he betook himself, and so forth: not to speak of many others,
which howsoever instructive and satisfactory it would have been to be
acquainted with, yet now that all acquaintance with them is hopeless, it
would be tedious to enumerate.

In the present instance, not only as to all these particulars, has the
historian,--eyewitness as it should seem he was of everything that
passed,--left us in the dark; but, neither has he vouchsafed to afford
us that single article of information, scanty as it was, for which, as
above, in the case mentioned by Josephus, we are indebted to Josephus:
to Josephus--that most respectable and instructive of the uninspired
historians of his age.

In relation to this story, as well as to those others, the same question
still presents itself:--if told of the present time,--if spoken of in
some newspaper, as having happened in the present year,--exists here any
person, even among the most ignorant populace, with whom it would obtain
any permanent credence?

But, a reported state of things--which, if reported as having had place
in the present century, would, by its disconformity to the manifest
state of things, and the whole course of nature, be regarded as too
absurd and flagrantly incredible to deserve to be entitled to a
moment's notice,--what is there that should render it more credible,
when reported as having happened in this same world of ours, at any
anterior point of time?


SECTION 5.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE IV.--AT PHILIPPI, AN EARTHQUAKE: PAUL AND SILAS
FREED FROM PRISON, A.D. 53.

The passage, in which these events are related, is in Acts 16:19-40,
inclusive.

On this occasion three principal events are narrated;--the incarceration
of Paul, an earthquake, and the liberation of Paul. Between the
earthquake and the liberation of this prisoner, what was in reality the
connection? In the answer there is not much difficulty: The same as that
between the earthquake and any other event that took place after it.
But, by an answer thus simple, the purpose of the narrator would not
have been answered: the purpose was--to induce, on the part of his
readers, the belief--that it was for the purpose of bringing about the
liberation of the self-constituted Apostle of Jesus, that the earth was
made to shake. As to the liberation, by means altogether natural was
that event produced: so he himself has the candour to inform us. Of this
quasi-miracle, or of the last-mentioned one, Philippi, capital of
Macedonia, was the theatre. By order of the magistrates of that town,
Paul and his attendant had been beaten one evening, and thrown into
prison: next morning, came to the jailor an order of these same
magistrates, and in obedience to it the prisoners were discharged. That,
in the minds of these magistrates, there was any connection, between the
earthquake and the treatment they had given to these adventurers, is not
so much as insinuated. The purpose, which it had in view, was answered:
it was the ridding the town of a pair of visitors, whose visit to it had
produced disturbance to existing institutions. Acts 16:20-40.

Be it as it may with regard to the historiographer,--that it was an
object with his hero to produce a notion of a connection between the
stripes and the imprisonment he had undergone on one hand, and the
earthquake on the other, is manifest enough. The person, in whose mind
the prisoner had endeavoured to produce the idea of such a connection,
was the jailor: and, for its having in this instance been successful,
there seems little difficulty in giving credit to the historiographer.
Everything that appears to have been said, either of Paul or by Paul,
tends to show the wonderful strength of his mind, and the facility and
promptitude, with which it enabled him to gain the ascendency over other
minds. In the language of the place and time, he had bid the
fortune-telling damsel cease her imposture, and the imposture ceased.
Acts 16:18. Committed to prison he formed a project for making a
proselyte of the keeper: and, in this too, and in so small a compass of
time as a few hours, there seems reason to believe he was successful. In
his presumption, in daring to execute the sentence of the law upon so
holy a person, the keeper saw the cause of the earthquake; and, whether
by Paul any very strenuous endeavours were used to correct so convenient
an error in geology, may be left to be imagined. Paul, when introduced
into the prison, found no want of comrades: how then happened it, that
it was to Paul's imprisonment that the earthquake, when it happened, was
attributed, and not to any of his fellow-prisoners? Answer: It happened
thus.

Of the trade, which, with such brilliant success, Paul,--with this
journeyman of his,--was carrying on, a set of songs with the name of God
for the burthen of them, constituted a part of the capital, and, as it
should seem, not the least valuable. When midnight came, Paul--the
trader in godliness--treated the company in the prison with a duet: the
other prisoners, though they shared in the benefit of it, did not join
in it. While this duet was performing, came on the earthquake; and Paul
was not such a novice as to let pass unimproved the opportunity it put
into his hand.

The historiographer, if he is to be believed, was at this time in Paul's
train, as well as Silas; for so, by the word _we_, in the tenth verse of
this same chapter, he, as it were, silently informs us. The beating and
the imprisonment were confined to the two principals; by his comparative
insignificance, as it should seem, the historiographer was saved from
it. From the relation, given to him by Paul or Silas, and in particular
by Paul,--must this conception, formed by the historiographer of what
passed on the occasion, have of course been derived. It was coloured of
course in Paul's manner: and in his colouring, there was of course no
want of the marvellous. By the earthquake, not only were "foundations
shaken" and "doors opened," but "bands loosened." The "feet" of the two
holy men had been "made ... fast in the stocks," ver. 24: from these
same stocks, the earthquake was ingenious enough to let them out, and,
as far as appears, without hurt: the unholy part of the prisoners had
each of them bands of some sort, by which they were confined; for, ver.
26, "everyone's bands were loosed:" in every instance if they were
locked, the earthquake performed the office of a picklock. Earthquakes
in these latter days, we have but too many, in breaking open doors they
find no great difficulty; but they have no such nicety of touch as the
earthquake, which produced to the self-constituted Apostle a family of
proselytes: they are no more able to let feet out of the stocks, or
hands out of hand-cuffs, than to make watches.

These elucidations being furnished, the reader is desired to turn to the
text, and lay before him: to reprint it would require more paper than he
might choose to see thus employed.

As to the name of God and the name of Jesus, the two names, it should
appear, were not--on the occasions in question--used at random. When the
fortune-telling damsel was the subject of Paul's holy labours, she
having been in some way or other already gained, ver. 17, the case was
already of a sort, in which the name of Jesus Christ, the name under
which the self-constituted Apostle enlisted all his followers,--might be
employed with advantage.

When Paul and Silas were committed to prison, no such name as that of
"Jesus Christ" would as yet have served. Of "Jesus Christ" neither had
the keeper as yet heard anything, nor had the other prisoners. But, of
God, in some shape or other, they could not but have heard all of them:
_God_ accordingly was the name, by which at this time the sensibilities
of the persons in question were to be worked upon. When the earth
trembled, the jailor trembled likewise: he "came trembling and fell
down," ver. 29, before Paul and Silas. And brought them out, ver. 30,
and said, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" Now then was the time come
for the enlistment--for the enlistment in the spiritual warfare against
the devil and his angels: in the as yet new name of "the Lord Jesus
Christ" were these recruits accordingly enlisted, as now, for the
purpose of carnal warfare, in the name of King George. "And they said,"
continues the narration, ver. 31, "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved, and thy house."


SECTION 6.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE V.--AT CORINTH, PAUL COMFORTED BY THE LORD IN AN
UNSEEN VISION, A.D. 54.--_Acts_ 18:7-11.

A vision, being a species of miracle, could, no more than a pantomime,
have place without some expense. In the present case, as in any other, a
natural question is--What was the object to be accomplished, upon which
the expense--whatever it was--was bestowed? The answer is--The keeping
his attendants, whoever they were, in the necessary state of
obsequiousness: for no other is perceptible. To the dependants in Paul's
train, it was no very uncommon sentiment to be not quite so well
satisfied with the course he took, as he himself was. Corinth was at
this time the theatre of his labours: of the men, whoever they were, who
had staked their fortunes upon _his_, some,--the historiographer, as it
should seem, of the number,--there were, whose wish it was to change the
scene. In that Gentile city,--the chief ruler of the Jewish synagogue,
Crispus by name--this man, besides another man, of the name of Justus,
"whose house joined hard to" that same synagogue, had become his
converts: "and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were
baptized." Eyes, however, there were, in which the success, whatsoever
it was, was not yet enough to afford a sufficient warrant for his stay.
A vision was necessary, and a vision accordingly, or at least a
something, which was called by that name, made its appearance. "Thus
spake the Lord," says the historiographer, ver. 9, "Thus spake the Lord
to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not
thy peace.----For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt
thee; for I have much people in this city." Nor was the vision without
its effect; for, as the next verse informs us, ver. 11, "He continued
_there_ a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them."

That which, on this occasion, may be believed without much difficulty
is, that the word thus taught by Paul was Paul's word: and, that which
may be believed with as little, by those, whoever they may be, who
believe in his original conversion-vision, is--that it was God's word
likewise. From Paul himself must the account of this vision have been
delivered to the historiographer: for, unless at the expense of a sort
of miracle, in the shape of an additional vision at least, if not in
some more expensive shape, no information of any such thing could have
reached him. In these latter days, no ghost is ever seen but in a
_tete-a-tete_: in those days, no vision, as far as appears, was ever
seen but in the same degree of privacy. A vision is the word in these
pages, because such is the word in the authoritative translation made of
the historiographer's. That which Paul is related to have heard,
is--what we have just seen as above: but that, upon this occasion
he saw anything--that he saw so much as a flash of light, this is
what we are not told: any more than by what other means he became so
well assured, that the voice which he heard, supposing him to have heard
a voice, was the Lord's voice. In these latter days,--inquiries, of
some such sort as these, would as surely be put, by a counsel who were
against the vision,--as, in the case of the Cock-lane Ghost, which
gave so much exercise to the faith of the archlexicographer,
were put by the counsel who were against the ghost; but, by a
sort of general understanding,--than which nothing can be more
convenient,--inquiries, such as these,--how strictly soever in season
when applied to the 19th century of the vulgar ear, are altogether
out of season, as often as they are applied to the commencement of it.

As to the speaking by a vision, the only intelligible way, in which any
such thing can really have place, is that, which under the pressure of
necessity has been realized by the ingenuity of dramatists in these
latter days. Such is the mode employed, when the actors, having been
struck dumb by the tyranny of foolish laws, and consequently having no
auditors, convey to the spectators what information seems necessary, by
an appropriate assortment of gold letters on a silk ground: whether the
Lord who, on this occasion, according to Paul, spoke to the eyes of
Paul, came provided with any such implement, he has not informed us.
Without much danger of error, we may venture to assert the negative:
for, if such was the mode of converse, there was nothing but what might
happen without sign or wonder: and, on this supposition, no addition was
made by it, to those signs and wonders, which, as has been seen, it was
his way to make reference to, in the character of evidence.


SECTION 7.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE VI.--AT EPHESUS, DISEASES AND DEVILS EXPELLED BY
FOUL HANDKERCHIEFS.--_Acts_ 19:1-12.

At Ephesus, Paul makes a stay of between two and three years; for "two
years" together, disputing "daily in the school of one Tyrannus," "so
that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both
Jews and Greeks.

"And God," continues the history, "wrought special miracles by the hands
of Paul."

These "_special_ miracles," what were they? Of the whole number, is
there so much as a single one particularized? No; not one. _Special_ as
they are, the following is the account, and the only account given of
them. "So that," continues the history, "from his body were brought unto
the sick, handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them,
and the evil spirits went out of them."

No circumstances whatever particularized, name of the person, name of
the place, description of the time--nothing, by means of which, in case
of falsity _in toto_, or incorrectness in circumstance, the misstatement
might have been exposed,--to what degree of credence, or so much as
consideration with a view to credence, vague generalities such as these,
can they present so much as the slightest claim? If allusions such as
these are to pass proof, where is the imposture, to which proofs--proofs
sufficient in number and value--can ever be wanting?

Opposed as Paul was, wherever he went,--by gainsayers or
persecutors, or both--sometimes successful, sometimes altogether
unsuccessful,--sometimes in a slight degree successful--in so much as
any one occasion, either in this history, or in any one of his own
numerous Epistles, do we find so much as a single one of these
"_special miracles_," any more than of any other miracles, brought to
view by him, or so much as alluded to by him, in the character of proofs
of the commission to which he pretended? Answer: No, not one.

Diseases cured, evil spirits driven out, by handkerchiefs and
aprons!--by handkerchiefs and aprons brought from a man's body! Diseases
cured and devils seared away by foul linen! By Jesus--by any one of his
Apostles--were any such implements, any such eye-traps ever employed?
No; never. As to diseases, if by such means a disease had been
_propagated_, the case would have been intelligible enough. But what was
wanted was a miracle: and this would have been no miracle. The price,
received by the holy wearer for any of these cast-off habiliments--the
price, of the precious effluvia thus conveyed--by any such little
circumstance, had it been mentioned, some light might have been cast on
what was done.

One thing, indeed, may be stated with some assurance: and this is--that,
after a man, well or not well, had received one of these same dirty
handkerchiefs, or of these same dirty aprons, no evil spirit in him was
visible.

One other thing may also be stated with no less confidence:--this is
that, infection out of the question, and supposing Paul free from all
contagious disease, if, without handkerchief or apron, the disease would
have had its exit,--by no such handkerchief or any such apron was the
exit of it prevented.

Note, that all this time, according to this man, the author of the Acts,
he himself was in Paul's suite. Yet, taking credit for all these
miracles--taking credit thus for miracles out of number, not so much as
one of them all does he take upon himself to particularize.[78]


SECTION 8.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE VII.--AT EPHESUS, EXORCISTS SCEVAS
BEDEVILED.--_Acts_ 19:13-20.

Thus it is that, as under the last head has been observed, of all these
alleged successful exhibitions, not so much as a single one is
particularized.

In lieu, however, of these successes of Paul's, something of a story to
a certain degree particularized we have. But this is--what? a successful
performance of Paul's? No: but an unsuccessful attempt of certain
persons,--here termed exorcists,--who took upon themselves to act
against him in the character of competitors.

Well, then: when the time came for demonstrating supernatural powers by
experiment, these exorcists--these impostors, no doubt it was intended
they should be deemed--made a very indifferent hand of it. Good: but the
true man, Did he go beyond these same impostors? Not he, indeed: he did
not so much as attempt it. But, let us hear his historiographer, who all
this while was at his elbow. Acts 19:13-20. "Then certain of the
vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had
evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by
Jesus, whom Paul preacheth.

"And there were," continues the narrative, ver. 14, "seven sons of
Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so." Thus far the
narrative.

The sons of the chief of the priests? Such men styled not only
_exorcists_ but _vagabonds_? If they are not here, in express terms,
themselves styled _vagabonds_, at any rate, what is here imputed to them
is the doing those same things, the doers of which have just been
styled, not only _exorcists_, but at the same time _vagabonds_. But let
us continue, "And the evil spirit," ver. 15, "answered and said, Jesus,
I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?--And the man, in whom the evil
spirit was, leaped on them and overcame them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded." Thus far
the narrative.

To whatsoever order of beings the hero of this tale may have
belonged;--whatsoever may have been his proper appellative,--a man with
two natures, one human, the other diabolical,--a man with a devil in
him, a madman,--or a man in his sound senses counterfeiting a diabolized
man or a madman,--the tale itself is surely an eminently curious one. Of
these human or superhuman antagonists of his--of these pretended masters
over evil spirits--the number is not less than seven: yet, in comparison
of him, so feeble and helpless are they all together, that he not only
masters them all seven, but gets them down, all seven together, and
while they are lying on the ground in a state of disablement, pulls the
clothes off their backs: but whether one after another, or all at the
same time, is not mentioned. Be this as it may, hereupon comes a
question or two. While he was stripping any one of them, what were the
others about all that time? The beating they received, was it such as to
render them senseless and motionless? No: this can scarcely have been
the case; for, when the devil had done his worst, and their sufferings
were at the height, out of the house did they flee, wounded as they
were.

"Jesus I know, and Paul I know," says the mysterious hero, in the
fifteenth verse. Hereupon an observation or two calls for utterance.
Supposing him a man, who, knowing what he was about, counterfeited the
sort of being, who was half man, half devil,--one-half of this speech of
his, namely, _Paul I know_, may without much difficulty be believed.
But, upon this supposition, forasmuch as he acted with so much effect
against these rivals of Paul's,--a supposition not less natural, to say
the least of it, is--that to Paul he was not unknown, any more than Paul
to him: in a word, that on this occasion, between the evil spirit and
the self-constituted Apostle, a sort of understanding had place. Be this
as it may, how extraordinary a person must he not have been, to
undertake the complete mastery of seven men at once! Seven men, all of
them young enough to have a father, not only living, but officiating as
a priest: and at the same time, all of them old enough, if not to
exercise, mastery over evil spirits, at any rate to undertake it!

In Paul's suite, all this time, as far as appears, was the author of
this narrative. The scene thus exhibited--was he then, or was he not,
himself an eyewitness of it? On a point so material and so natural, no
light has he afforded us.

Another circumstance, not less curious, is--that it is immediately after
the story of the unnamed multitudes, so wonderfully cured by foul
clothes,--that this story of the devil-masters discomfited by a
rebellious servant of theirs, makes its appearance. Turn now to the
supposed true devil-master--on this score, what was it that he did? Just
nothing. The devil,--and a most mischievous one he was,--_he_ was doing
all this mischief:--the man, who had all such devils so completely in
his power, that they quit possession, and decamp at the mere sight or
smell of a dirty handkerchief or apron of his;--he, though seeing all
this mischief done,--done by this preëminently mischievous as well as
powerful devil,--still suffers him to go on;--and not any the least
restraint in any shape, does he impose upon him; but leaves him in
complete possession of that receptacle, which, according to the
narrative, he wanted neither the power nor the will to convert into an
instrument of so much mischief. Was it from Paul himself, that, on this
special occasion, for this special purpose, namely, the putting down
these presumptuous competitors, this mysterious being received so
extraordinary a gift? This is not said, but not improbably, as it should
seem, this was the miracle, which it was intended by the historian
should be believed.

Occasions there are--and this we are desired to believe was one of
them--in which the impossibility of a thing is no bar to the knowledge
of it.

"And this was known," continues the narrative, ver. 17, "And this was
known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus: and fear fell
on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified."

Now, supposing this thing known, the fear stated as the result of it may
without difficulty be believed:--fear of being treated as those sons of
the chief of the Jewish priests had been: fear of the devil, by whom
those, his unequal antagonists, had been thus dealt with: fear of the
more skilful devil-master, under whose eye these bunglers had been thus
dealt with.

But the name here said to be _magnified_--the name of the Lord
Jesus--how _that_ came to be _magnified_: in this lies all the while the
difficulty, and it seems no small one.

The _name_, on this occasion, and thus said to be employed, whose was
it? It was, indeed, the Lord Jesus's. But was it successful? Quite the
contrary. It made bad worse. In the whole of this business, what was
there from which the name of Jesus could in any shape receive
magnification? Yes: if after the so eminently unsuccessful use, thus
made of it by those exorcists, a successful use had, on the same
occasion, been made of it by Paul. But, no: no such enterprise did he
venture upon. Madman, devil, counterfeit madman, counterfeit devil,--by
proxy, any of these he was ready to encounter, taking for his proxy one
of his foul handkerchiefs or aprons: any of this sort of work, if his
historiographer is to be believed, he was ready enough to do by proxy.
But, in person? No; he knew better things.

"And many that believed," concludes this part of the narrative, ver. 18,
"came and confessed, and showed their deeds." Yes; supposing there were
any, by whom all this or any part of it was believed,--that they spoke
and acted in consequence, may be believed without much difficulty: and,
with this observation may the story, and the sort of elucidation
endeavouring to be given of it, be left to close.


SECTION 9.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE VIII.--MAGICAL BOOKS BURNT BY THE
OWNERS.--_Acts_ 19:19, 20.

Such as it was, the supposable miracle last mentioned was not without
its supposed fruit: destruction of property, such as it was--destruction
of property, and to an amount sufficiently wonderful for the
satisfaction of any ordinary appetite for wonders. But let us see the
text. It follows in the verse 19, next after that, in which mention is
made, as in the last preceding section, of what was done by the "many
who believed."

"Many of them also," ver. 19, "which used curious arts, brought their
books together, and burned them before all men; and they counted the
price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver." "So
mightily," ver 20, "grew the word of God, and prevailed." And there ends
the story of the books of curious arts.

As to the sum total, nothing can be more precise: as to the items, could
the list of them be but produced, this would be indeed a treasure. As to
the denomination _magical_, given in the title of this section to those
books, styled books "_of curious arts_,"--in the text, short is the only
apology that need be made for it. Of the number of those _curious arts_
could not, most assuredly, have been any of the arts included at present
under the name of _fine arts_; of the character of the _arts_ here
designated by the appellation of _curious_, a sufficient indication is
afforded by the story, by which the mention of them is, as above,
immediately preceded. They were the arts, by which effects were
undertaken to be produced, such as the self-constituted Apostle
undertook to produce by so much more simple means. How vast soever were
the collection, what would be the value of it,--the whole taken
together,--when so much more than could be done by everything which it
professed to teach, could be done by about a score or a dozen words, on
the single condition, that the lips by which they were uttered were
properly commissioned lips, not to speak of the still more simple
operation of the touch of a used handkerchief?

Of the state of art and science in the wake of the great temple of
Diana, the representation here given is of itself no small curiosity.
Books of curious arts--all of them arts of imposture--books, employed,
all of them, in teaching the most secret of all secrets--books of this
description, so well known to all men, as to bear a market-price! a
market-price, so well known to all men, as if it were the price of bread
and butcher's meat: and, in the single town of Ephesus, these books so
numerous,--such the multitude or the value,--or rather the multitude as
well as value, of them taken in the aggregate, that the price, that had
been given for such of them as were thus given up, and which are only
part, and, as it should seem by the word _many_, not the larger part, of
the whole number, of those, which, at that same place, were at that same
time in existence,--was, upon summing up, found actually to amount, so
we are required to believe, to that vast sum.

Of the aggregate, of the prices that had been paid, we are told, for
this smaller part of the aggregate number of the books, then and there
existing on this single subject,--inadequate, indeed, would our
conception be of it were we to regard it as not exceeding the value of
the whole library collected by King George the Third, and given by his
successor to the English part of his subjects. _Data_, though not for
numeration, yet sufficient for conception, are by no means wanting. To
consult Arbuthnot, or any successor of his, would be mere illusion; in
so far as the value of money is unknown, prices in money serve but to
deceive. History--and _that_ the most appropriate history--has furnished
us with much surer grounds. Thirty pieces of silver, Matt. 28:3-10, was
the purchase-money of the field, called _the potters' field_, bought for
a burying-ground, with the money received and returned by the traitor,
Judas, as the reward for his treachery. Suppose it no more than half an
acre. What, in English money of the present day, would be the value of
half an acre of land in or close by a closely built metropolis? A
hundred pounds would, assuredly, be a very moderate allowance. Multiply
the hundred pounds by fifty thousand, you have five millions; divide the
five millions by thirty, you have, on the above supposition, 166,666_l_.
and odd for the value of these books. Look to the English translation,
look to the Greek original, the pieces of silver are the same.


SECTION 10.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE IX.--AT TROAS, EUTYCHUS FOUND NOT TO BE
DEAD.--_Acts_ 20:7-12.

In this story may be seen another example, of the facility with which,
when men are upon the hunt for miracles, something may be made out of
nothing: the most ordinary occurrence, by the addition of a loose word
or two, metamorphosed into a miracle.

Paul, one evening, was treating his disciples with a sermon: he was at
the same time treating them, or they him, with a supper. The
architecture of the house was such, that, under favourable
circumstances, a fall might be got from the top of it, or thereabouts,
to the bottom, without much difficulty. If any difficulty there was, on
the occasion in question it was overcome. According to circumstances,
sermons produce on different minds different effects: from some, they
drive sleep; in others, they produce it. On the occasion in question,
the latter was the effect experienced by a certain youth. His station
is represented as being an elevated one:--so elevated that, after
the fall he got from it, it may be believed without difficulty, he
lay for some time motionless. Paul "went down" to him, we are told,
and embraced him. The youth received the embrace; Paul, the praise
of tender-heartedness:--this is what may be asserted with a safe
conscience, though it be without any special evidence. Trifling,
however, is the boon he received from that congregation, in comparison
of what he has been receiving from so many succeeding ones--the
reputation of having made so brilliant an addition to the catalogue of
his miracles. By the accident, whatever may have been the interruption,
given by it to the festivity, no end was put to it. Sermon and supper
ended, the rest of the congregation went their way: and with them went
the youth, to whom had anything serious happened, the historian would
scarcely have left us uninformed of it.

On this occasion, between the hero and his historian, there is somewhat
of a difference. The historian will have it, that when Paul reached the
body he found it dead. Paul's own account of the matter is the direct
contrary: so the historian himself informs us. Here then the historian
and his hero are at issue. But, the historian, having the first word,
makes, if we may venture to say so, a rather unfair advantage of it, and
by this same first word gives a contradiction to what he makes his hero
say in the next. "He was taken up dead," says the historian, who was or
was not there: "His life is in him," says the preacher, who was there
beyond dispute.

But let us see the text.

ACTS 20:7-12.

     7. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came
     together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart
     on the morrow, and continued his speech till midnight.--And there
     were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered
     together.--And there sat in a window a certain young man named
     Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long
     preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third
     loft, and was taken up dead.--And Paul went down, and fell on him,
     and embracing him, said, Trouble not yourselves, for his life is in
     him.--When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread,
     and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he
     departed.--And they brought the young man alive, and were not a
     little comforted.

At this time of day, any such contrariety might produce some
embarrassment; but, when it is considered how long ago the thing
happened, no such uneasy sensation is experienced. A supposition, by
which all embarrassment is excluded, is so immediately obvious, as to be
scarce worth mentioning. When Paul reached the body, the soul was
already in the other world; but, with the kisses goes a whisper, and the
soul comes back again. Whether from indolence or from archness, there is
something amusing in the course the historian takes for enlivening his
narration with these flowers: he sketches out the outline, but leaves it
to our imaginations to fill it up.


SECTION 11.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE X.--ON SHIPBOARD, PAUL COMFORTED BY AN ANGEL.

ACTS 27:20-25.

     And when neither sun nor stars appeared for many days, and no small
     tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be preserved was
     thenceforth taken away.--But after long abstinence Paul stood in
     the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened to me,
     and not have loosed from Crete, but have prevented this harm and
     damage.--And now I exhort you to be of good courage: for there
     shall be no loss of life among you, but of the ship, _there shall
     be loss_.--For there stood by me this night an angel of that God,
     whose I am, and whom I serve, saying,--Fear not, Paul, thou must be
     brought before Caesar; and lo, God hath graciously given to thee
     all who sail with thee.--Wherefore, Sirs, be of good courage: for I
     believe God, that it will be as it hath been told me.

The sea being stormy, the crew are alarmed. The storm, however, is not
so violent, but that Paul is able to make a speech, and they to hear it.
To keep up their spirits, and, at the same time, let them see the sort
of terms he is upon with the Almighty, he tells them a story about an
angel. The angel had been sent to him upon a visit, and was but just
gone. The business of the angel was to quiet the mind of the Apostle.
The matter had been settled. The precious life was in no danger: and,
not only so, but, out of compliment to him, God had been pleased to
grant to him the lives of all who were happy enough to be in his
company.

In the situation, in which so many lives are represented as being
placed,--no very severe condemnation can easily be passed upon any
little fraud, by which they might be saved. But, is it really to be
believed, that this angel, whom, in a deckless vessel, for the vessels
of _those_ times were not like the vessels of present times, no person
but Paul either saw or heard, was really sent express from the sky by
God Almighty, on such an errand? If not, then have we this additional
proof,--if any additional proof can be needed,--to help to satisfy
us,--that, where a purpose was to be answered, falsehood, or as he would
have called it _lying_, was not among the obstacles, by which Paul would
be stopped, in his endeavours to accomplish it.


SECTION 12.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE XI.--AT MALTA, A REPTILE SHAKEN OFF BY PAUL
WITHOUT HURT.--_Acts_ 28:1-6.

A fire of sticks being kindled, a reptile, here called a viper, is
represented as "coming out of the heat," and fastening on Paul's hand.
On beholding this incident,--"the barbarous people," as the inhabitants
are called, whose hospitality kindled the fire for the relief of the
shipwrecked company, concluded that Paul was a murderer: and were,
accordingly, in expectation of seeing him "swollen, or fallen down dead
suddenly." Nothing of this sort happened, their next conclusion was,
_that he was a God_. As such, did these barbarians, as did the civilized
inhabitants of Lystra, sacrifice to him, or in any other way worship
him? No: these conceptions of theirs reported, there the story ends.

Of this story, what is to be made? At this time of day, among Christians
in general, what we should expect to find is, that it passed for a
miracle. But, if by miracle is meant, not merely an accident, somewhat
singular and extraordinary,--but, by a special act of Almighty power, an
effect produced, by means disconformable to the uniform course of
nature,--it might be too much to say, that even by the reporter himself,
it is for the decided purpose of its being taken for miracle, that it is
brought to view.

If, however, the design was not here, that the incident should be taken
for a miracle,--the story amounted to nothing, and was not worth the
telling. But, if it _is_ to be made into a miracle, where is the matter
in it, out of which a miracle can be made?

The reptile--was it really a viper? Neither the barbarians of Malta, nor
the reporter of this story, nor in a word, at that time of day, any
other persons whatever, were either very complete or very correct, in
their conception of matters belonging to the field of natural history.
At present, reptiles are crawling creatures. At this time of day, when
_leeches_ are excepted, to fasten upon the part they have bitten is not
the practice with any reptiles that we know of. If, instead of _viper_,
the Greek word had been one that could have been translated
_leech_,--the story would have been probable enough, but, were it only
for that very reason, no miracle could have been made out of it. Shaken
down into the fire, that is, into the burning fuel,--a small reptile,
such as a leech, how brisk soever in the water, would be very apt to be
overpowered by the heat, before it could make its escape: with a reptile
of the ordinary size of a viper, this would hardly be the case.

Be this as it may, "he felt,"--so says the story,--"he felt no harm."
How came it that he felt no harm? Because the Almighty performed a
miracle to preserve him from harm? So long as eyes are open, causes out
of number--causes that have nothing wonderful in them--present
themselves to view before this. "The beast," as it is translated, "was
not a viper":--if really a viper, it happened, at that moment, not to be
provided with a competent stock of venom: it had already expended it
upon some other object:--by some accident or other, it had lost the
appropriate tooth. Not to look out for others,--any mind that was not
bent upon having a miracle at any price, would lay hold of some such
cause as one of these, sooner than give itself any such trouble as that
of torturing the incident into a miracle.

To bring under calculation the quantity of supernatural power necessary
to the production of a given effect is no very easy task. At any
rate,--without more or less of expense in a certain shape, nothing in
that way could ever be done. In the case here in question, what could
have been the object of any such expense? Was it the saving the
self-constituted Apostle the pain of a bite? The expense then, would it
not have been less--the operation, so to speak, more economical--had a
slight turn been given to Paul's hand, or to the course of the reptile?
But, in either case, neither would the name of the Lord, nor--what was
rather more material--that of his Apostle, have received that
glorification which was so needful to it.

Any such design, as that of giving an unequivocal manifestation of
Almighty power, such as should stand the test of scrutiny, testifying
the verity of Paul's commission to the end of time,--any such design
could the incident have had for its final cause? A more equivocal,--a
less conclusive,--proof of the manifestation of supernatural power,
seems not very easy to imagine.

Here then comes once more the so often repeated conclusion:--the
narrative began to be in want of a miracle, and the miracle was made.

In those days, among that people, miracles were so much in course, that
without a reasonable number of them, a history would hardly have
obtained credence: at any rate it would not have obtained readers, and
without readers no history can ever obtain much credence.


SECTION 13.

SUPPOSABLE MIRACLE XII.--AT MALTA, DEPUTY PUBLIUS'S FATHER
CURED.--_Acts_ 28:7-10.

"In the same quarters," says the story--it follows immediately upon that
of the viper. "In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of
the island, whose name was _Publius_, who received us and lodged us
three days courteously.--And it came to pass, that the father of Publius
lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flux, to whom Paul entered in and
prayed, and laid his hands on him and healed him.--So when this was
done, others also which had diseases in the island, came and were
healed.--Who also honoured us with many honours, and when we departed,
they laded us with such things as were necessary."

Of the fevers, which, within the compass of any given spot, and any
given space of time, have place, it almost always happens, that a
certain number go off of themselves. Of, perhaps, all sorts of
fever,--at least of almost all sorts at present known, thus much is
agreed upon by all physicians:--they have at least two regular courses,
one of which terminates in death, the other or others in recovery.
Supposing the person in question to have had a fever,--what is pretty
clear is--that, if _of itself_, it would have taken a favourable
termination, there was nothing, in the forms employed by Paul, viz.,
utterance of prayers and imposition of hands, that could have any
natural tendency to _cause_ it to take an unfavourable one.

But--the course afterwards taken by the fever, was there anything in it
to distinguish it from the ordinary favourable course? If not, in that
case, so far from miraculous, there is nothing that is so much as
wonderful in the case.

Note here two things--the narrator one of the party; the narrative so
loose and uncircumstantial. But _to see_ is one thing; _to narrate_,
another.

Three days, it seems, and no more, did Paul and his suite stay at the
house of this Publius. Was it during that time, or not till afterwards,
that Paul performed on him those ceremonies, of which healing is
represented as having been the consequence? Was it within that same
space of time, or not till afterwards, that the healing is supposed to
have taken place? As to the English word _healing_, it cannot be accused
of being indecisive. But in some languages they have words, by which a
very convenient veil is thrown over the result. In the languages in
question, for the endeavour to heal, whether successful or unsuccessful,
the word employed is the same. The Latin affords one of these convenient
words, _curo_. The Greek has another, _iasato_, and in the Greek
original of this history, this is the word employed.

In a case where a ceremony and nothing else is trusted to, it being
supposed that the patient really has the disease, the safe and prudent
course is, so to order times and seasons, that between the time of
performing the ceremony, and the time at which restoration to health is
expected to take place, the time shall have come for the practitioner to
have shifted quarters; for, in this case, this is an interval more or
less considerable during which it being taken for granted that the
desired result will take place of course, reward, in the shapes of
profit and honour, will pour in upon the scientific head.

Here, as elsewhere, not only no _symptoms_ are particularized, but no
_place_ is mentioned: no _time_ is particularized, no _persons_ are
mentioned as _percipient witnesses_: even the individual who was the
subject of the cure is not mentioned by name.

As to the givers of the supposed honours and presents--persons are
indeed mentioned:--mentioned, but no otherwise than by the name of
_others_. One individual alone is particularized: particularized as
having received the benefit of these ceremonies. This is the father of
Publius. This man, to use the phraseology of the passage, was _also
healed_. But--this man who was he? He was no less a person than the
father of the chief man in the island. Well then, what are the honours,
what the allotment of "_such things as were necessary_?" What were the
proofs of gratitude, afforded by this man, who was so much better able
to afford such presents, than any of those other persons cured? By such
proofs of remuneration, some evidence--some circumstantial
evidence,--supposing them exhibited at a proper time, would have been
afforded, in proof of the reality of the service. But, neither by the
person thus spoken of as healed, nor by his son--the chief man in the
island,--is it said that any such proofs were afforded. For such a
silence when the case of an individual was brought to view, coupled with
the express declaration made, of gifts presented by persons
unnamed,--three cases cannot but present themselves, as being any one of
them more probable, than that, on this occasion, a real miracle was
performed. One is--that there was no disease, perhaps no such person:
another is, that though there was a disease, it went off of itself: the
third is, that it never went off at all.

One thing may be asserted without much fear of contradiction:
and that is, that in this country, if in terms such as these,
accounts were inserted in the public prints;--accounts of diseases
cured without medicine;--diseases cured by nothing but words and
gesticulations;--though the accounts given were ever so numerous, not
the smallest notice would they be thought worthy of,--not the smallest
attention would they receive from anyone, unless it were for the joke's
sake.

What is more,--numerous are the publications, in which, encompassed
with circumstantiality in all manner of shapes, not only the names of
the fortunate patients are mentioned, but under the signatures of those
patients declarations made, assuring the public of the reality of the
cure,--and yet, when at the same time, by competent persons, due inquiry
has been made, it turns out after all that no such cure has been
performed.

Accounts, which would not be believed were they to come out at a time of
so widely diffused knowledge, are they to be believed, merely because
the time they belonged to,--facts and accounts together,--was, as to all
such matters, a time of universal ignorance? The less a man understands
the subject, the more firmly is he to be believed, as to everything he
says of it? Or is it that, between then and now, _men_ and _things_ have
undergone a total change? and, if so, when did it take place?


SECTION 14.

CONCLUSION: THE SUPPOSABLE MIRACLES CLASSED AND SUMMED UP.

Inferences,--conveying more or less of instruction,--may, perhaps, be
found deducible,--at any rate our conception of the whole series taken
together, will be rendered so much the clearer, by bringing the same
supposed marvels again under review, arranged in the order of time.

For this purpose, the time may be considered as divided into three
periods.

In the first are included--those, which are represented as having had
place during the time when at the outset of his missionary expedition,
Paul had Barnabas for his associate. Of these there are two, viz. 1. At
Paphos, A.D. 45, Sorcerer Elymas blinded. 2. At Lystra, A.D. 46, cripple
cured. Of this part of the expedition, the commencement, as in the
current account, placed in the year 45.

In the second period are included--those, which are represented as
having had place, during the time when Paul, after his separation from
Barnabas, had Silas for his associate, and the unnamed author of the
Acts for an attendant. This ends with his arrival at Jerusalem, on the
occasion of his fourth visit--the Invasion Visit.

In the current accounts, this event is placed in the year 60. Within
this period, we have the seven following supposed marvels: 1. At
Philippi, A.D. 53, divineress silenced. 2. At Philippi, A.D. 53,
earthquake: Paul and Silas freed from prison. 3. At Corinth, A.D. 54,
Paul comforted by the Lord in an unseen vision. 4. At Ephesus, A.D. 56,
diseases and devils expelled by Paul's foul handkerchiefs. 5. At
Ephesus, A.D. 55, Exorcist Scevas bedeviled. 6. At Ephesus, A.D. 56,
magic books burned by the owners. 7. At Troas, A.D. 59, Eutychus found
not to be dead.

In the third period are included--those which are represented as having
had place, in the interval between his forced departure from Jerusalem
for Rome, and his arrival at Rome.

In the current accounts, this event is placed in the year 62. Within
this concluding period, we have the following supposed marvels: 1. On
shipboard, A.D. 62, Paul comforted by an angel. 2. At Malta, A.D. 62, a
reptile shaken off by Paul without his being hurt. 3. At Malta, A.D. 62,
Deputy Publius's father cured by Paul of some disorder. Year of all
these three last marvels, the same as that of Paul's arrival at Rome.
Total number of supposed marvels, twelve.

To the first of these three periods belong two supposed marvels, which,
supposing them to have any foundation in truth, present themselves as
being, in a greater degree than most of the others, exposed to the
suspicion of contrivance. A moderate sum, greater or less according to
the state more or less flourishing of his practice, might suffice to
engage a sorcerer, for a few minutes or hours, to declare himself
struck blind: a still more moderate sum might suffice to engage an
itinerant beggar, to exhibit himself with one leg tied up, and after
hearing what was proper to be heard, or seeing what was proper to be
seen, to declare himself cured.

This was the period, during which Paul had Barnabas, or Barnabas Paul,
for an associate. In these cases, if fraud in any shape had place,--it
is not without reluctance, that any such supposition could be
entertained, as that Barnabas--the generous, the conciliating, the
beneficent, the persevering Barnabas--was privy to it. But, times and
temptation considered, even might this supposition be assented to, on
rather more substantial grounds, than that which stands in competition
with it: namely, that for the production of two effects,--comparatively
so inconsiderable, and not represented as having been followed by any
determinate effects of greater moment,--the ordinary course of nature
was, by a special interposition of Almighty power, broken through and
disturbed.

Is it or is it not a matter worth remarking--that, of all these twelve
supposed occurrences, such as they are,--in not more than four is the
hero represented,--even by his own attendant, historian, and
panegyrist,--as decidedly taking any active part in the production of
the effect? These are--the blinding of the sorcerer, the cure of the
cripple, the silencing of the divineress, the curing of Deputy Publius's
father: the three first, at the commencement of this supposed
wonder-working part of his career; the last,--with an interval of
fifteen years between that and the first,--at the very close of it. In
the eight intermediate instances, either the effect itself amounted to
nothing, or the hero is scarcely represented as being instrumental in
the production of it. These are--the being let out of prison after an
earthquake had happened--being comforted, whether by God or man, in a
vision or without one--having handkerchiefs, by which, when he had done
with them, diseases and devils were expelled--being present when a gang
of exorcists were beaten and stripped by a devil, whom they had
undertaken to drive out of a man--being in a place, in which some
nonsensical books were burned by their owners--being in a house, in
which a youth said to be dead, was found not to be so--being comforted
by an angel, who had the kindness to come on board ship
uninvited--shaking off a reptile, without being hurt by it.

Whatever store may be set at this time of day upon all these marvels,
less cannot easily be set upon them by anybody than was by Paul himself.
For proof, take the whole tenor of his own Epistles, as well as the
whole tenor of his visions, as delivered by his attendant. Numberless as
were the scrapes he got himself into,--numberless as were the hosts of
enemies he everywhere made himself,--open as all ears were to everything
that presented itself as marvellous,--unable as men were to distinguish
what could be done from what could not be done,--pressing as was at all
times the need he had of evidence, that could arrest the hands of
enemies,--on no occasion do we find him calling into his aid, so much as
a single one of all these supposed irrefragable evidences.

FOOTNOTES:

[77] _And they had also John to their minister_, 13:5. What _John_ was
this? Answer, see chap. 15:37 to 40. This appears to have been that
John, whose surname was Mark, who was the cause of the angry separation
of Paul from Barnabas.

[78] Another branch of his trade, already mentioned in this same
chapter, as having been carried on by him in this same place, namely,
Ephesus,--and which, where circumstances created a demand for the
article, appears to have been more profitable than that of expelling
devils or diseases,--is _that_, of which the Holy Ghost was the subject.
This power of conferring--that is to say, of being thought to
confer--the Holy Ghost,--such, and of such sort was the value of it,
that Simon Magus, as there may be occasion to mention in another
chapter, had, not less than one-and-twenty years before this, offered
the Apostles money for it. Acts 8:18-24, A.D. 34. This power, two
preceding verses of the same 19th chapter, namely the 5th and 6th,
represent Paul as exercising: and, whatsoever was the benefit derived,
twelve is the number of the persons here spoken of as having received
it.

Acts 19:5-7. After "they," the above twelve, v. 7, disciples, v. 9,
"were baptized, v. 5, in the name of the Lord Jesus;" when Paul, v. 6,
"had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they
spake with tongues, and prophesied." Here then, if, by thus laying on of
hands, it is by _Paul_ that any operation is performed, it is the
conferring of "the Holy Ghost." But this power, whence had Paul received
it? Not from Jesus, had the self-constituted Apostle received this gift,
whatever it was, any more than he had baptism, by which ceremony, as
appears from Acts 8:16, it was regularly preceded: as in the case of the
magician it actually had been. Not from Jesus: no such thing is anywhere
so much as pretended. Not from the Apostles, or any of them; from two,
for example, by commission from the rest--as in the case of Peter and
John, Acts 8:14-19:--no such thing is anywhere so much as pretended. In
no such persons could this--would this--their self-declared superior,
have vouchsafed to acknowledge the existence, of a power in which he had
no share. On this occasion, as on every other, independently of the
Apostles did he act, and in spite of the Apostles.

As to the "_speaking with tongues and prophesying_," these are
pretensions, which may be acknowledged without much difficulty.
_Tongues_ are the organs most men speak with. As to _prophesying_, it
was an operation that might as well be performed after the fact as
before the fact: witness in Luke 22:64, "Prophesy, who is it that smote
thee?" Read the Bible over from beginning to end, a _prophet_, whatever
else be meant, if there be anything else meant, you will find to have
been _a politician: to prophesy_ was to talk _politics_. Make a new
translation, or, what would be shorter, a list of _corrigenda_, and
instead of _prophet_ put _politician_,--a world of labour, now employed
in explanations, will be saved.




