Chapter V., speaking of _that_--his second Jerusalem Visit, by the name
of the _Money-bringing Visit_.

But,--what may easily enough have happened, distance in time and place,
together considered, is--that to those particulars, which composed no
more than the surface of the business, _their_ knowledge was confined:
while _we_, though at the distance of more than seventeen centuries,
know more or less of the inside of it,--let into it, as we have been, by
the author of the Acts.

As to their arriving sooner or later, at the suspicion, or though it
were the discovery, that the money had not, any part of it, reached the
hands it was intended for, nor was in any way to do so,--what bar could
the apprehension of any such result oppose, to the enterprise,
systematic, as we see it was, of the creator of Antichrist? When, to a
man, who occupies a certain situation in the eye of the political world,
calls for accounts are become troublesome,--Scipio might have informed
him, if he had not well enough known of himself, how to answer them.

When a charge made upon you is true--evidence full against you,
and none to oppose to it,--fly into a passion, magnify your own
excellence--magnify the depravity of your adversaries. This mode, of
parrying a charge, is perfectly well understood in our days, nor could
it have been much less well understood in Paul's days. As for _his_
adversaries, Paul had a storm _in petto_ at all times ready for them:
for the materials, turn to any page of his Epistles: whatever, in this
way, he had for rivals,--_that_ and more he could not fail to have for
accusing witnesses. To the creator of Antichrist--sower of tares between
Pharisees and Sadducees,--whatever were the charges, defence, the most
triumphant, could never be wanting: arguments, suited with the utmost
nicety, to the taste of judges. He would warn them, against false
brethren, and liars, and wolves, and children of Satan, and so forth:
he would talk to them, about life and death, and sin and righteousness,
and faith and repentance, and this world and that world, and the Lord
and resurrection: he would talk backwards and forwards--give nonsense
for mystery, and terror for instruction: he would contradict everybody,
and himself not less than anybody: he would raise such a cloud of words,
with here and there an _ignis fatuus_ dancing in the smoke,--that the
judges, confounded and bewildered, would forget all the evidence, and
cry out _Not Guilty_ through pure lassitude.

As to us,--the case being now before us, what shall be our verdict?
Obtaining money on false pretences is the charge. Guilty shall we say,
or not guilty? Obtainment on a certain pretence, is proved by _direct_
evidence--his own evidence: proof, of falsity in the pretence, rests, as
it could not but rest, on _circumstantial_ evidence.

One observation more: for another piece of circumstantial evidence has
just presented itself: it consists of the utter silence, about the
receipt of the money or any particle of it,--when, if there had been any
such receipt, occasions there were in such abundance for the mention of
it. A.D. 57, in his first to his Corinthians,--there it is, as we have
seen, that he urges them to lay by money for him, declaring it is for
the saints at Jerusalem; and that on this same errand it is, that he is
going to Macedonia,--and that in his way to Jerusalem he will give them
another call, to receive, for that same purpose, the intermediate
produce of these proposed _saving-banks_. In his letter to the Romans,
written the next year, A.D. 58--written at Corinth,--then it is, that he
has already made the said intended money-gathering visit, and with
success:--with success not only in Macedonia, as he had proposed, but in
Achaia likewise: and, with this money in his hand, and for the purpose
of delivering the money to those for whom he obtained it;--for this
purpose (he says) it is, that he is at that moment on his way to
Jerusalem--the place of their abode. This is in the year A.D. 58. Well
then: after this it is, that he takes up his abode at Ephesus. And when,
after his contests with the church silversmiths there, he departs from
thence, whither does he betake himself? To Jerusalem? No: he turns his
back upon Jerusalem, and goes for Macedonia (Acts xx. 1.) then into
Greece, where he stays three months; and purposes, Acts 20:3, to return
through Macedonia. A.D. 60, it is, that, for the first time, Acts 20:16,
any intention of his to visit Jerusalem is declared, he having coveted
no man's silver or gold, as his historian, Acts xx. 33, makes him assure
us. When, at length he arrived there, what his reception was, we have
seen. Had any of the _money_ been received there, would such as we have
seen have been the reception given to the _man_? When, by the Christians
at Jerusalem, Agabus was sent to him, to keep him if possible from
coming there,--is it in the nature of things, that they should have
already received any of it, or been in any expectation of it? In what
passed between him and the Elders, headed by the Apostle James, is any
the slightest allusion made to it? When, in Cæsarea, all in tears, Acts
21:12, 13, his attendants were striving, might and main, to dissuade him
from going to Jerusalem,--did he say anything about the money--the money
he had been so long charged with? Oh no; not a syllable: to Jerusalem he
is resolved to go indeed: Oh yes: but not the shadow of a reason can he
find for going there.

When arrived at Jerusalem, the brethren, says the Acts 20:17, received
him gladly. The brethren: yes, what adherents he had, would of course
receive him gladly, or at least appear to do so. But the money? On their
side, was anything said about the money? Not a syllable. Either at this
time by his own hand, or any time before, by other hands, had they
received this money, or any considerable part of it, could they have
received him otherwise than not only gladly, but gratefully?

All the time, the hero was thus employed in money-craving and
money-gathering, the historian, let it never be out of mind, was of the
party: four years before, A.D. 53, had he been taken into it; yet not
any the least hint about these money-matters does he give. So far indeed
as regarded what was avowedly for Paul's own use, neither could the
receipt nor the craving of the money from their customers, have been
unknown to him; for this was what they had to live upon. But the letters
his master wrote--wrote to their customers everywhere--letters, in which
the demand was made, for the so much more extensive purpose,--of these,
so many of which have reached these our times, the contents may to him
have easily enough remained a secret: little reason had he to expect,
none at all to fear, the exposure,--which now, at the end of more than
seventeen centuries, has, at length, been made of them,--confronted, as
they may now be, with the particulars he himself has furnished us with.

FOOTNOTES:

[13] Acts vii. ver. 47. Speech of St. Stephen. "But Solomon built him an
house. Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as
saith the prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what
house will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of my
rest?" In itself, perfectly comfortable all this, to the dictates of
reason and the instruction of Jesus: but not the less clear blasphemy
against the Mosaic law.

[14] Acts ix. ver. 1 and 2. "And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, _went_ unto the _High
Priest_,--And _desired_ of him letters to Damascus to the Synagogues,
&c."

[15] Acts xxii. ver. 5. "As also the High Priest doth bear me witness,
and all the estate of the Elders: from _whom also I received letters_
unto the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring them which were there
bound unto Jerusalem for to be punished."

[16] Yet, for even at the outset, after certain "days spent with the
disciples," and employed of course in receiving from them the necessary
instructions, he preached Jesus with such energy and success as not only
to "confound," Acts ix. 19 to 24, the unbelieving among the Jews, but to
provoke them to "take counsel to kill him."

[17] Paul, says--2nd Cor. 11:6--"For though I be rude in speech yet am I
not in knowledge nay, in everything we have made it manifest among all
men to you-ward, or did I commit a sin in abasing myself that ye might
be exalted, because I preached to you the Gospel of God for naught? I
robbed other Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto
you; and when I was present with you I was in want, I was not a burden
on any man; for the brethren, when they came from Macedonia supplied the
measure of my want, and in everything I kept myself from being
burdensome unto you and so I will keep myself. As the truth of Christ is
in me no man shall stop me of this glorying in the regions of Achaia,
&c."

When ever we get a Temperamental and psychological view of Paul, we see
verified the deductions of the author of this treatise, that he was a
transparent imposter. An unscrupulous adventurer. With talent well
adapted to dogmatically command the attention of the ignorant and
especially those of organized hereditary idolatry, the extreme vanity,
the vain glorious pretensions of this new priest was well adapted to
obtain obsequious complacence from such people. He always presents
himself in a controversial spirit of self-exaltation.

His egotistic diction could hardly be made more manifest than in the
terms above quoted, to wit:--"I robbed other Churches taking wages of
them that I might minister unto you, &c." It presents a striking
contrast to the benevolent and fraternal spirit of Christ and his
disciples.

[18] N.B. The editor at this place inserts pages of discussion--which
the author exhibited by way of an appendix. At the expense of a little
redundancy and incongruity the editor inserts it in this place.--Ed.

[19] According to the Acts' account, this same stoning, if it was the
same, was much in the style of that same resurrection of Eutychus, which
we have seen in Chapter xiii. §. 10. As to Paul, when this martyrdom had
been suffered by him,--"some" says Acts xiv. 19, were "supposing he had
been dead:" and on that supposition, "drew him out of the city." Paul,
on the other hand, thought otherwise: he supposed himself alive, and, on
that supposition, he walked off, as if nothing had been the matter with
him. "Certain Jews ... say verses 19 and 20, having stoned Paul, drew
him out of the city, supposing he had been dead. Howbeit, as the
disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came into the city: and
the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe."




