CHAPTER V.

     _Paul disbelieved_ continued.--_Jerusalem Visit II._
     _Money-bringing Visit._--_Barnabas accompanying him from Antioch._


SECTION 1.

AT ANTIOCH, AGABUS HAVING PREDICTED A DEARTH, MONEY IS COLLECTED FOR THE
JERUSALEM SAINTS.

At his own house it was, that we last left our self-declared Apostle: at
his own birthplace--Tarsus: what we have next to see is--what drew him
from thence.

All this while there were other disciples that had not been idle. To the
new religion, already was Antioch, Antioch in Syria, become a new
Jerusalem.

Upon the dispersion of the Jerusalem Christians, occasioned by
the judicial murder of the sainted trustee of the poor's
fund--Stephen,--some of them, among whom were some natives of
Cyprus,--in which island was situated the property of the son of
consolation, Barnabas,--had betaken themselves to that same island,
others to that same city of Antioch in Syria.

ACTS xi. 19-24.

     19. Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
     arose about Stephen, travelled as far as Phenice and Cyprus, and
     Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only.--And
     some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which, when they were
     come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord
     Jesus.--And the hand of the Lord was with them; and a great number
     believed, and turned unto the Lord.--Then tidings of these things
     came unto the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they
     sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.--Who,
     when he came and had seen the grace of God, was glad; and exhorted
     them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
     Lord.--For he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost and of faith:
     and much people was added unto the Lord.

Of these, some addressed themselves exclusively to the _Jews_: others
ventured so far, as to make an experiment upon the _Grecians_.
Unfortunately, these terms are, neither of them, wholly free from
ambiguity. By the word _Jews_, may have been meant either Jews by
_birth_ and _abode_, or Jews by _religion_: by the word _Grecians_,
either Jews who, born or dwelling within the field of quondam Grecian
dominion, used the Greek as their native language,--or Greeks, who were
such, not only by language, but by religion. In this latter case, their
lot was among the Gentiles, and much more extraordinary and conspicuous
was the importance of the success.

"They which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel." Such, in his
own words, 1 Cor. 9:14, is the maxim laid down by Paul, for the
edification of his Corinthian disciples. To save doubts and disputation,
he prefaces it with the assurance--"even so hath the Lord ordained." No
great need of support from revelation, seems to attach upon a maxim so
natural, and so reasonable: from the time of the first planting of the
Gospel, it appears to have been, as indeed it could not fail to be,
universally acted upon; saving such few exceptions as a happy union of
zeal, with sufficient pecuniary means, might render possible.

How, under the Apostolical aristocracy, it had been acted upon in
Jerusalem, has been seen already. The time was now come,--for its being
established, and acted upon in Antioch.

At Jerusalem, under the spiritual dominion of the Apostles,
lived a man of the name of _Agabus_. Among the endowments,--of
which, in the character of _qualifications_, a demand was by some
understood to be created, by the business of propagating the new
religion,--qualifications, a list of which, according to his conception
of it, Paul, 1 Cor. 12:10, has given us,--was one, which, among these
endowments, was called the "_gift of prophecy_":--a gift, under which,
as under that of speech in general, particularly when applied to
occasions of importance, the faculty of _prediction_--of forming correct
judgments respecting future contingencies--would, if not necessarily,
very frequently at least, come to be included.

In the instance of the _prophecy_ here in question, this same
prospective faculty, it should seem, was actually included.

The _fact_, for the purpose of predicting, or giving information of
which, this useful emissary was, on the present occasion, sent from
Jerusalem to Antioch,--was--that of signifying, that there should be a
great dearth: an _inference_ deduced from it, was--that, at this same
Antioch, for the relief of the brethren at Jerusalem, _contributions_
should be collected, and sent to Jerusalem.

ACTS xi. 27-30.

     27. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto
     Antioch.--And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and
     signified by the spirit that there should be a great dearth
     throughout all the world; which came to pass in the days of
     Claudius Caesar.--Then the disciples, every man according to his
     ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in
     Judea:--Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands
     of Barnabas and Saul.

In the calamity of _dearth_ may be seen one of those events, of
which--especially if the time of it be not predesignated with too rigid
an exactness--a prediction may be hazarded,--and even by any
man,--without much risk of falling under the disgrace attached to the
appellation of _a false prophet_. Of this observation, an
exemplification seems to have been afforded, in the present instance.
With not unaccustomed prudence,--"the spirit," by which, on this
occasion, the calamity was "signified," forbore, as we see, from the
fixation of any particular year--either for the prophecy, or for the
accomplishment of it. "The days of Claudius Caesar" are mentioned as the
time of the accomplishment. By agreement of all chronologists,--the
duration of his reign is stated as occupying not less than thirteen
years. Whether this same reign had then already commenced,--is not, on
this occasion, mentioned: from the manner in which it is mentioned, the
negative seems not improbable; if so, then to find the time which the
prophecy had for finding its accomplishment to the definite term of
thirteen years, we must add another, and that an indefinite one.

According to the situation, of the individuals by whom the word is
employed,--_worlds_ vary in their sizes. Of the dearth in question, the
whole world, "all the world," is, by the author of the Acts, stated as
having been the afflicted theatre: "great dearth throughout all the
world." Acts 11:28. As to the rest of the world, we may leave it to
itself. For the purpose then and now in question, it was and is
sufficient--that two cities, Jerusalem and Antioch, were included in it.
The calamity being thus universal,--no reason of the ordinary kind is
given, or seems discoverable--why, of any such contribution as should
come to be raised, the course should be--from Antioch to Jerusalem,
rather than from Jerusalem to Antioch. Inquired for, however, on
religious ground,--a _reason_ presents itself, without much difficulty.
What Rome became afterwards, Jerusalem was then--the capital of _that
world_, which now, for the first time, received the name of _Christian_.
According to one of the sayings of Jesus--if Paul, his self-appointed
Apostle, is to be trusted to--of them it was pronounced "_more blessed
to give than to receive_":[28] but in the eyes of the successors of St.
Peter at all times,--and at this time, as it should seem, in his own--it
was _more blessed to receive than give_.


SECTION 2.

BARNABAS AND PAUL DISPATCHED WITH THE MONEY TO JERUSALEM.

Of the _amount_ of the eleemosynary harvest, no intimation is to be
found. As to the _consequence_ of it, Barnabas, we see, is the man
stated as having, with obvious propriety, been chosen for the important
trust: Barnabas--of whose opulence, trustworthiness, steadiness, and
zeal, such ample proofs, not to speak of those subsequent ones, which
will be seen in their place, had already manifested themselves. In
consequence of the information, already received by the Mother Church
in Jerusalem, of the prosperity of the Daughter Church, Acts 11:20, 21,
planted, as above, in the capital of Syria,--this most active of all
Christian citizens had been sent to give increase to it.

But, of the talents and activity of Paul, his indefatigable supporter
and powerful patron had had full occasion to be apprized. Accordingly,
without the aid of this his not less indefatigable helper, still was the
strength of the rising church, in the eyes of the patron, incomplete. "A
prophet," says a not ill-grounded proverb, "has no honor in his own
country." In his native city, among the witnesses of his youth, Paul had
indeed found _safety_: but, as the nature of the case manifests, in a
circle, from which respect stood excluded by familiarity, safety had not
been accompanied with _influence_: and, in eyes such as those of Paul,
safety without influence was valueless. Under these circumstances,--the
patron, going to Tarsus in person in quest of his protegé, could not
naturally find much difficulty in regaining possession of him, and
bringing with him the so highly-valued prize, on his return to Antioch.
"Then," says the Acts, 11:25, 26, "departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to
seek Saul: And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch."

At this place, with their united powers, they had been carrying on their
operations for the space of a twelvemonth, when the petition for
pecuniary assistance was received there.

As for Paul,--from the moment of his conversion, notwithstanding the ill
success of his first attempt,--the prime object of his ambition--the
situation of President of the Christian Commonwealth--had never quitted
its hold on his concupiscence. Occasions, for renewing the enterprise,
were still watched for with unabated anxiety:--a more favourable one
than the one herein question, could not have presented itself to his
fondest wishes. The entire produce, of the filial bounty of the Daughter
Church, was now to be poured into the bosom of the necessitous Mother.
For the self-destined head of that rising Church, two more acceptable
occupations, than those which one and the same occasion brought to him,
could not have been found:--First, the collection of the
contributions;--and then the conveying of them, to the place of their
destination. Of the labours of such agents, in such circumstances, the
success, we are told, they found, was a natural result. "Then," says the
Acts 11:29, 30, "Then the disciples, every one according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea:--Which
also they did; and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and
Saul." Thus much as to the _public_ purpose. Very different was the lot
of Paul's _personal_ project. What the elders could not have any
objection to the receipt of, was--the money. But, what they had an
insuperable objection to, was--the receipt of the yoke of this their
outwardly-converted, but once already rejected, persecutor. This second
enterprise,--though still under the same powerful leader, and produced
by such flattering prospects,--succeeded no better than the first.
Five-and-twenty verses after, we are told of the _termination_ of this
their second Jerusalem visit; and this is all we hear of it: "And
Barnabas and Saul," says the Acts 12:25, "returned from Jerusalem, when
they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose
surname was Mark." This same John Mark they got by their expedition: and
this, for anything that appears, was all they got by it.

Between the mention of their arrival at Jerusalem, and the mention of
their departure from thence,--comes the episode about Peter:--his
incarceration and liberation under Herod; and the extraordinary death of
the royal prosecutor,--of which, in its place. As to the interval,--what
the length of it was, and in what manner, by Paul, under the wing of the
Son of Consolation, it was occupied,--are points, on which we are left
altogether in the dark: as also, whether the _time_ of these adventures
of Peter, the _mention_ of which stands inserted between the mention of
the two occurrences in the history of Paul, was comprised in that same
interval.

FOOTNOTES:

[28] Acts 20:35. It is in the parting scene--when about to break from
his dissuading disciples, and enter upon his invasion project--that Paul
is represented as saying to them: "Remember the words of the Lord Jesus,
how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive." Whence this
self-appointed and posthumous Apostle of Jesus got these words of
Jesus--if such they were--must be left to conjecture. In the works of
the four received biographers of Jesus, with _Cruden_ and his
_Concordance_ for guides, all search for them has been fruitless.




