CHAPTER VI.

     _Paul disbelieved continued.--His third Jerusalem Visit.--Paul and
     Barnabas delegated by Antioch Saints, to confer on the Necessity of
     Jewish Rites to Heathen Converts to the Religion of Jesus._


SECTION 1.

OCCASION OF THIS VISIT.

We come now to the transaction, on the occasion of which, the grand
object of Paul's ambition received, in part, its accomplishment: namely,
that, by which,--though without any such popular election as, in the
instance of Matthias, had been necessary to constitute a man an
associate to the Apostles,--he was, in some sort, taken by them into
fellowship, and admitted, with their consent, into a participation of
their labours.

This occasion was--the dispute, which, in the Syrian Antioch, took
place, according to the author of the Acts, on the question--whether,
under the religion of Jesus, circumcision was necessary to salvation: a
question, in which,--whether explicitly or no,--was implicitly, it
should seem, and perhaps inextricably, understood to be involved, the so
much wider question--whether, under that same new religion, the old
ceremonial law should, in any part of it, be regarded as necessary.

On this same occasion, two important subjects present themselves to view
at the same time: the one, a question of _doctrine_ relative to
circumcision, as above; the other, a question about _jurisdiction_, as
between Paul on the one part, and Peter, with or without the rest of the
Apostles.

As to what concerns the debate about circumcision, we have no other
evidence than the statement of the author of the Acts.

As to what concerns the jurisdiction question, we have the evidence of
Paul himself, as contained in his letter to the Galatian converts: and
an original letter, howsoever dubious the correctness of the author in
respect of matters of fact, is more trustworthy than a multitude of
anonymous narratives.[29]

In respect of the progress made by the religion of Jesus,--Antioch, it
has already been observed--the Syrian Antioch--had become a second
Jerusalem; and, so far as concerned the Gentiles at large, its maritime
situation gave to it a convenience, that was not shared with it by that
inland city.

At the time here in question,--the Gentiles had received more or less of
instruction, from three different sets of teachers:--1. from the
disciples who had been driven from Jerusalem by the tragical death of
Saint Stephen; 2. from Saint Peter, principally on the occasion of the
excursion made by him to Lydda, Saron, Joppa, and Cæsarea; and 3. from
Paul and Barnabas, on the occasion, and by the means, of the long tour,
made by them for that special purpose, as above.

At this maritime metropolis of the faith, the new religion was spreading
itself,--and, as far at least as depended on exemption from all
disturbance from without, in a state of peace and tranquility;--when, by
a set of _nameless_ men from Judea,--if to the author of the Acts credit
is to be given on this point, for by him no mention is made of any one
of their names,--the harmony of the Church was disturbed.

Converts as they were to the religion of Jesus, yet,--in their view of
the matter, if the author of the Acts is to be believed, without
circumcision, no salvation was to be had.

By Paul it is said, "they came from James," Gal. 2:12, which is as much
as to say that they were sent by James: and accordingly, when James's
speech is seen, by him will these scruples of theirs be seen advocated.

If the Gospel history, as delivered by the Evangelists, is to be
believed,--nothing could be more inconsistent, on many occasions with
the practice, and at length with the direct precepts, of Jesus, than
this deference to the Mosaic law: if human prudence is to be
regarded,--nothing could be more impolitic--nothing more likely to
narrow, instead of extending, the dominion of the Church. On this
principle, no man who was not born a Jew, could be a Christian without
first becoming a Jew, without embracing the Mosaic law; and thus loading
himself with two different, and mutually inconsistent, sets of
obligations.

From Paul, this conceit,--as was natural,--experienced a strenuous
resistance. No recognition as yet had Paul received, from the body of
the Apostles. In Jerusalem, for anything that appears,--though this was
at least seventeen years after the death of Jesus--they remained
alive--all of them:--at any rate the two chiefs of them, if Paul is to
be believed, who, Gal. i. 19, says he saw them, namely, Saint Peter "and
James, the Lord's brother": which two, he says, he saw, out of a number,
the rest of whom, he studiously assures his Galatians that he did not
see: though by his historiographer, Acts 15:4, by his all-comprehensive
expression, "_the Apostles_," we are desired to believe, that he saw all
of them.[30] Whichever be the truth,--at Jerusalem, the metropolis of
Judaism, no employment could, under these circumstances, be reasonably
expected for Paul: whereas, _out_ of Judea,--wherever the language of
Greece was the mother tongue, or familiarly spoken,--the advantage,
which, in every address to the Gentiles, he would have over those
unlearned Jews, was universally manifest.

Such, however, were the impressions, made by these unnamed manufacturers
and disseminators of scruples, who, if Paul is to be believed, came from
James the brother of our Lord--that, by the whole Church, as it is
called, of Antioch, a determination was taken--to send to Jerusalem, to
the Apostles and the Elders that were associated with them, a numerous
mission, headed by Paul and Barnabas, who are the only two persons
named. Accordingly, out they set, "after having been brought on their
way," says the author of the Acts, 15:3, "by the _Church_," which is as
much as to say, by the whole fraternity of Christians there established.


SECTION 2.

THE DELEGATES HOW RECEIVED.--COUNCIL OF APOSTLES AND ELDERS.

Against the pretensions of a man thus supported, vain, on the part of
the original and real Apostles, would have been any attempt, to resist
the pretensions of this their self-constituted rival: they, Barnabas and
Paul, were received, says the author of the Acts, of the Church and of
the Apostles and Elders.[31]

Arrived at Jerusalem, Paul and Barnabas told their own story--related
their adventures and experiences--declared, to use the language of the
Acts 15:4, all things that God had done unto them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notwithstanding the utmost exertion of Paul's ever-ready
eloquence,--some, it is stated, there were, who, believers as, in a
certain sort, they were in the religion of Jesus,--were not to be
persuaded, to give up so much as a single tittle of the Mosaic law:
these were, as it was natural they should be, of the sect of Pharisees.
"There rose up," says the Acts 15:5, "certain of the sect of the
Pharisees which believed, saying that it was needful to circumcise them
(the Gentiles), and to command them to keep the law of Moses."

       *       *       *       *       *

Of these private discussions, the result was--the convocation of an
assembly of the managing body, in which, associated with the Apostles,
we find others--under the name of _Elders_.

How, on an occasion, on which the proposed subject of determination was
a question of such cardinal importance to the religion of Jesus;--how it
should have come to pass, that the Apostles, to whom alone, and by whom
alone, the whole tenor of the acts and sayings of Jesus had been made
known--made known by an uninterrupted habit of exclusive intimacy, and
especially during the short but momentous interval between his
resurrection and ascension;--how it should have happened, that, to the
Apostles, any other persons not possessed of these first of all titles
to credence and influence, should have come to be associated,--is not
mentioned. Upon no other authority than that of this author, are we to
believe it to be true? On the supposition of its being true,--there
seems to be, humanly speaking, but one way to account for it. That which
the Apostles, and they alone, _could_ contribute to the cause, was--the
authority and the evidence resulting from that peculiar intimacy: what
they could _not_ contribute was--money and influence derived from
ordinary and external sources: to the exclusive possession of these
latter titles to regard, will, therefore, it should seem, be to be
ascribed, supposing it credited, the circumstance of an incorporation
otherwise so incongruous.

"Received," say the Acts 15:4, they were.--But by whom received?--By the
Church, by the Apostles, by the Elders, says that same history in that
same place. By _the_ Apostles: to wit--so as any one would conclude--by
_all_ the Apostles--by the whole fellowship of Apostles.

       *       *       *       *       *

Whether in any, and, if so, in what degree that conclusion is correct,
we have no determinate means of knowing.

       *       *       *       *       *

If, however, it was so to the utmost,--nothing appears in favor of the
notion, that between Paul on the one part, and the Apostles and their
disciples on the other, there existed at this time any real harmony.
For, in what character was it that he made his appearance? In that of a
commissioned envoy, from the whole body of the Church, established in
that station, which was next in importance to Jerusalem, to which he was
sent. And who was it that, at that time, as on both the former times,
he, Paul, had in his company? Still his constant patron and associate
Barnabas--the munificent friend and patron of that church which he was
visiting--the indefatigable Barnabas.

By Paul himself, in his Epistle to the Galatians, 2:9, 10, 11, the idea
of any such extensive cordiality,--say rather of cordiality to any the
smallest extent,--is pretty plainly negatived.[32] On that occasion, it
was that of the Partition Treaty, what his interest required was--that,
on the part of the Apostles and their disciples, the concurrence given
to it, should appear as extensive as possible. If then they had all of
them, really and personally concurred in it,--or even if the contrary
had not been notorious, this is the conception which he would have been
forward to convey and inculcate. No such notion, however, does he
venture to convey. When speaking of them in general terms--of no
affection on either side, more kindly than that of ill humor, does he
give any intimation. Gal. 2:6. "Of those who seemed to be somewhat,
whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me: God accepted no man's
person: for they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing
to me."

When, again, he comes to speak of the sort of intercourse, such as it
was, which he had with the Apostles,--who are the persons that he speaks
of? All the Apostles? the body of the Apostles in general?--No: James,
Cephas, the Hebrew name of which Peter is a translation, and John: these
three, and no more. These are the men, whom, to him Paul and his
protector Barnabas in conjunction, he on that same occasion speaks of,
as "giving the right hand of fellowship:" to wit, for the purpose of the
Partition Treaty, the terms of which immediately follow.

And, even of these men, in what way does he speak? As of men "who seemed
to be pillars:" so that, as to what concerned the rest of the Apostles,
he found himself reduced to speak no otherwise than by conjecture. And
this same "right hand of fellowship"--what was their inducement for
giving it?--It was, says he, that "they perceived the grace that was
given unto me": _i.e._, in plain language, and ungrounded pretension
apart,--the power, which they saw he had, of doing mischief:--of
passing, from the character of a jealous and restless rival, into that
of a declared enemy: into that character, in which he had originally
appeared, and with such disastrous effect.

Immediately after this comes the mention of the visit, made by Peter to
Antioch: and therefore it is, that, no sooner is Peter--that chief of
the Apostles of Jesus--mentioned,--than he is mentioned, as a man whom
this Paul "withstood to his face, because he was to be blamed." Gal.
2:11.

Peter was to be blamed: those other Jews that were come to Antioch from
James--they were to be blamed. Barnabas, under whose powerful
protection,--by the Church at Jerusalem, her justly odious persecutor
had, at three different times, been endured,--he too was to be blamed.
He too was, at that time, to be blamed; and, as will be seen presently
after, openly quarrelled with; and, if on this point the Acts are to be
believed, parted with. Acts 15:39. "And the contention was so sharp
between them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so
Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus."


SECTION 3.

DEBATES--COURSE CARRIED BY JAMES AGAINST PETER.

Of what passed at this assembly, the only account we have--the account
given to us by the author of the Acts--is curious:--curious at any rate;
and whether it be in every particular circumstance true or not,--in so
far as it can be depended upon, instructive.[33]

We have the persons mentioned as having spoken: they are, in the order
in which they are here enumerated, these four:--to wit, Peter, Barnabas,
Paul and James. Of the speech of Peter, the particulars are given: so
likewise of that of James: of Barnabas and Paul, nothing more than the
topic.

Against the Mosaic law _in toto_, we find Peter; and such contribution
as he is represented as furnishing to this side of the cause in the
shape of argument. On the same side, were Barnabas and Paul: what they
furnished was matter of fact:--namely, in the language of the Acts,
"what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by
them:"--in plain language, the success they had met with among the
Gentiles.

On this question, on the side of the chief of the Apostles, were--the
manifest interest of the religion of Jesus as to extent of
diffusion,--the authority derived from situation,--the express command
of Jesus as delivered in the Gospel history,--and Jesus' own practice:
not to speak of the inutility and unreasonableness of the observances
themselves. Yet, as far as appears from the author of the Acts,--of
these arguments, conclusive as they would or at least should have
been,--it appears not that any use was made: the success, he spoke of as
having been experienced by himself among the Gentiles,--in this may be
seen the sole argument employed in Peter's speech. Thus,--in so far as
this report is to be believed,--thus, upon their own respective
achievements, did,--not only Paul but Peter,--rest, each of them, the
whole strength of the cause.

Spite of reason, religion, and Jesus, the victory is in this account,
given to James--to Jesus' kinsman, James. The motion is carried: the
course proposed, is a sort of middle course--a sort of compromise. At
the hands of Gentile proselytes, in deference to the Mosaic law,
abstinence from four things is required: namely, meats offered to
idols, blood, things strangled: these, and the irregularities of the
sexual appetite,--whatsoever they were, that were meant by the word,
rendered into English by the word _fornication_.

If any such decision were really come to,--by nothing but
necessity--necessity produced by the circumstances of place and
time--will it be found excusable. Abstinence from food killed in the way
of sacrifice to heathen gods, on the occasion of public sacrifices: yes;
for, for such food, little relish could remain, on the part of persons
devoted to the religion of Jesus: from fornication, yes; for, for a
sacrifice in this shape, even among the Gentiles, some preparation had
been made by stoicism. But, as to blood and things strangled,[34] that
is to say, animals so slaughtered as to have more blood left in their
carcasses than the Mosaic law would allow to be left in them--animals
slaughtered otherwise than in the Jewish manner,--thus forbidding
teachings of the religion of Jesus, to eat a meal furnished by Gentile
hands,--this, as above observed, was depriving them of their most
favourable opportunities, for carrying their pious and beneficent
purposes into effect, by adding to the number of believers.

Altogether remarkable is the consideration, upon the face of it, by
which, if the historian is to be believed, this decision was produced.
"For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being
read in synagogues every sabbath day," Acts 15:21. May be so: but what
if he has? what is that to the purpose? Good, if the question were about
the Jews: but, it is _not_ about the Jews: the Gentiles, and they only,
are the subjects of it. And the Gentiles--what know or care _they_ about
Moses? what is it that is to send _them_ into the synagogues, to hear
anything that is "read in synagogues"?

By this imaginary abstinence from blood,--for, after all, by no exertion
of Mosaic ingenuity could the flesh ever be completely divested of the
blood that had circulated in it,--of this perfectly useless prohibition,
what would be the effect?--Not only to oppose obstacles, to the
exertions of Christian teachers, in their endeavors to make converts
among the Gentiles,--but, on the part of the Gentiles themselves to
oppose to them a needless difficulty, in the way of their conversion, by
rendering it impossible for them, consistently with the observance of
this prohibition, to associate with their unconverted friends and
families at convivial hours. Thus much as to what concerns the
Gentiles.[35]

Since, and from that time, the religion of Jesus has spread itself:--we
all see to what extent. Spread itself: and by what means? By means of
the decision thus fathered upon the Apostles? Upon the Apostles, the
Elders, and the whole Church?--No: but in spite of it, and by the
neglect of it.

Charged with a letter, containing this decision, did Paul, together with
his friend Barnabas, return from Jerusalem,--if the author of the Acts
is to be believed,--to the society of Christian converts, by which he
had been sent thither: charged with this letter, carrying with it the
authority of the whole fellowship of the Apostles. Paul himself--he
Paul--what sort of regard did he pay to it? _He wrote against it with
all his might._ No more Jewish rites! No more Mosaic law! Such is the
cry, that animates the whole body of those writings of his which have
reached us.


SECTION 4.

RESULT, SUPPOSED APOSTOLIC DECREE AND LETTER TO ANTIOCH, WHICH, PER
ACTS, PAUL CIRCULATES.

Of a decision, agreed upon and pronounced to the above effect--a
decision expressed by a decree;--and of a copy of that decree, included
in and prefaced by a letter addressed to the saints at Antioch,--were
Paul and Barnabas, along with others who were associated with them, on
their return to that city, the bearers:--that is to say, if, as to these
matters, credence is given, to the statement, made by the author of the
Acts; by whom the alleged decree and letter are given, in words, which,
according to him, were their very words:--these words are those which
follow:

ACTS 15:22 to 32.

     22. Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with the whole church,
     to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and
     Barnabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren.--And they wrote
     letters by them after this manner: The Apostles and elders, and
     brethren, _send_ greeting unto the brethren which are of the
     Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia.--Forasmuch as we have
     heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with
     words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye _must_ be circumcised, and
     keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:--It seemed good
     unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto
     you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,--Men that have hazarded
     their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.--We have sent
     therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things
     by mouth.--For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay
     upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;--That ye
     abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
     things strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep
     yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.--So when they were
     dismissed, they came to Antioch; and when they had gathered the
     multitude together, they delivered the epistle.--_Which_ when they
     had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.--And Judas and Silas,
     being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many
     words, and confirmed _them_.

Supposing it genuine,--a most curious, important and interesting
document, this letter and decree must be allowed to be. Supposing it
genuine: and, in favor of its genuineness, reasons present themselves,
which, so long as they remain unopposed, and no preponderating reasons
in support of the contrary opinion are produced, must decide our
judgment.

Not long after the account of the acceptance given at Antioch to this
decision,--comes that of a conjunct missionary excursion from that place
made by Paul, with Timotheus, and perhaps Silas, for his companion. At
the very commencement of this excursion--if, in the decree spoken of,
this decree is to be understood as included; and there seems no reason
why it should not be, they are represented as taking an active part in
the distribution of it. Acts 16:4. "And says the historian, as they"
(Paul, &c.) "went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees
for to keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders that were at
Jerusalem."

That, by Paul, this token, of association with the Apostles, should at
that time be exhibited and made manifest, seems altogether natural. It
affords a further proof, of the need, which, at that period of his
labors, he regarded himself as having, of the appearance--the outward
signs at least--of a connection with the Apostles.

True, it is, that the persuasion of any such need is altogether
inconsistent with that independence, which, in such precise and lofty
terms, we have seen him declaring in his Epistle to his Galatians,--is
sufficiently manifest. But, in the current chronology, the date,
ascribed to that Epistle, is by five years posterior, to the date
ascribed to the commencement of this excursion: date of the excursion,
A.D. 53; date of the Epistle, A.D. 58: difference, five years: and five
years are not too great a number of years, for the experience of success
and prosperity, to have raised to so high a pitch, the temperature of
his mind.[36]

Even before this time, we find him even outstretching the concessions,
which, in that decree, in the case of the Gentiles, in compliance with
the scruples of the Jewish disciples they had to deal with, we have been
seeing made by the Apostles, in favor of the Mosaic law.
Abstinence--from meat offered to idols, from blood, from things
strangled, and from fornication--composed all the Mosaic observances
exacted in that decree. To these, he, in his practice, at this time,
added another, and _that_, in respect of extent, in a prodigious degree
a more important one: to wit, the submitting to circumcision. For, to
this painful observance,--in which a submission to all the other Mosaic
observances was implied,--he had already subjected his new convert
Timotheus, whom, in this excursion, in addition to Silas, he took with
him for a companion. Born of a Greek father as he was,--adult as he
was,--he took him, says the historian, and circumcised him. Circumcised
him--and why?--"_Because of the Jews, which were in those
quarters._"[37]

FOOTNOTES:

[29] Acts xv. 1 to 4:--"1. And certain men which came down from Judea,
taught the brethren, _and said_, Except ye be circumised after the
manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.--2. When therefore Paul and
Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them, they
determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go
up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders about this question.--3.
And being brought on their way by the Church, they passed through
Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they
caused great joy unto all the brethren.--4. And when they were come to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and
Elders; and they declared all things that God had done with them."

[30] Gal. i. 18, 19. "Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to
see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.--9. But other of the
Apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother."

Acts 15:4. "And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church, and of _the_ Apostles and Elders; and they declared all
things that God had done with them."

The cause of this contrariety lies not far beneath the surface. Paul had
one object in view; his historiographer another. In the two passages,
they wrote at distant times, and with different purposes. In his address
to his Galatian disciples, Paul's object was to magnify his own
importance at the expense of that of the Apostles: to establish the
persuasion, not only of his independence of them, but of his superiority
over them. The generality of them were not worth his notice; but having
some business to settle with them, Peter, the chief of them, he "went"
to see, and James, as being "the Lord's brother," he vouchsafed to see.
On that particular occasion, such was the conception which Paul was
labouring to produce: and such, accordingly, was his discourse. As for
the historiographer, his object was, of course, throughout, to place the
importance of his hero on as high a ground as possible. But, in this
view, when once Paul had come to a settlement with the Apostles, the
more universal the acceptance understood to have been received by
him--received from the whole body of Christians, and from those their
illustrious leaders in particular,--the better adapted to this his
historiographer's general purposes would be the conception thus
conveyed: accordingly they were received, he says, "of the Church, and
the Apostles, and Elders."

[31] Acts xv. 4. "And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were
received of the Church and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared
all things that God had done unto them."

[32] Gal. ii. 6. "But of those who seemed to be somewhat, whatsoever
they were, it maketh no matter to me: God accepteth no man's person: for
they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me.--And
when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the
grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right
hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto
the circumcision.--Only they would that we should remember the poor; the
same which I also was forward to do.--But when Peter was come to
Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed."

[33] Acts 15:5-21. 5. "But there rose up certain of the sect of the
Pharisees which believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise
them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.--And the Apostles
and Elders came together for to consider of this matter.--And when there
had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and
brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us,
that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel and
believe.--And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving
them the Holy Ghost, even as _he did_ unto us;--And put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.--Now therefore why
tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?--But we believe that
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as
they.--Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to
Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought
among the Gentiles by them.--And after they had held their peace, James
answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me:--Simon hath
declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of
them a people for his name.--And to this agree the words of the
prophets; as it is written,--After this I will return, and will build
again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build
again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up:--That the residue of men
might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is
called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things.--Known unto God are
all his works from the beginning of the world.--Wherefore my sentence
is,--that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned
to God:--But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions
of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from
blood.--For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him,
being read in the synagogues every sabbath day."

[34] After the word blood, the mention made of things strangled seems to
have been rather for explanation than as a separate ordinance. Of
strangling, instead of bleeding in the Jewish style,--what the effect
would be, other than that of retaining blood, which the Mosaic ordinance
required should be let out, is not very apparent.

[35] Another observation there is that applies even to the Jews. By
Moses were all these several things forbidden. True: but so were a vast
multitude of other things, from, which (after the exceptions here in
question) the prohibition is, by this decision, taken off. These things,
still proposed to be prohibited, as often as they entered a synagogue,
they would hear prohibited: but, so would they all those other things,
which, by this decision, are left free.

[36] In the account of this excursion, Galatia--now mentioned for the
first time in the Acts,--is mentioned, in the number of the countries,
which, in the course of it, he visited. It stands fourth: the preceding
places being Derbe, Lystra, Iconium and Phrygia. Acts 16:1 to 6. In Acts
18:23, "He ... went over [all] Galatia ... strengthening the disciples."

[37] Acts 16:1 to 3. Then came he to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a
certain disciple was there named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman,
which was a Jewess and believed: but his father was a Greek:--Which was
well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.--Him
would Paul have to go forth to him, and took and circumcised him,
because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew all that
his father was a Greek.




