CHAPTER XI.

     _Paul disbelieved continued.--Paul's fourth Jerusalem Visit
     continued.--Perjurious was the Purpose of the exculpatory Oath
     commenced by him in the Temple._


SECTION 1.

GENERAL PROOF OF THE PERJURY FROM THE ACTS.

We have seen the indignation produced by Paul's invasion of the dominion
of the Apostles: we have seen it carried to its height, by his
commencement of, and perseverance in, the exculpatory ceremony, for the
purpose of which he made his entrance, and took up his lodgment in the
temple. We have seen the fruits of that same indignation: we have seen
the general result of them. What remains is--to give a clearer and more
explicit conception, than can as yet have been given, of the _cause_ of
it.

This was--neither more nor less, than an universal persuasion--that the
assertion,--to which, on his part, this ceremony had for its object the
attaching the sanction of an oath,--was, to his full knowledge, false:
the oath employed being, in its form, beyond comparison more impressive,
than any that has been known to be at any time in use, in this or any
other country: and that, accordingly, the confirmation given to the
falsehood, in and by means of that most elaborate and conspicuous
ceremony, was an act of _perjury_: of perjury, more deliberate and
barefaced, than anything, of which, in these days, any example can have
place.

That, on this occasion, the conduct of the self-constituted Apostle was
stained with perjury, is a matter, intimation of which has unavoidably
come to have been already given, in more parts perhaps of this work than
one. But, for a support to a charge, which, if true, will of itself be
so completely destructive of Paul's pretensions--of all title to
respect, at the hands of every professor of the religion of Jesus--no
slight body of evidence could have been sufficient.

For this purpose, let us, in the first place, bring together the several
elementary positions, proof or explanation of which, may be regarded as
necessary, and at the same time as sufficient, to warrant, in this case,
a verdict of _guilty_.

To these charges, is immediately subjoined such part of the evidence, as
is furnished, by the account of the matter, as given in the Acts: in
another section will be brought to view the evidence, furnished by Paul
himself, in his Epistles. The evidence from the Acts is of the
_circumstantial kind_: the evidence from the Epistles is _direct_.

1. To Paul was imputed as a misdeed, the having recommended the
forsaking of the Mosaic law. Recommended, namely, to such disciples of
his as, having been born and bred under it, were found by him settled in
some Gentile nation. Proof, Acts 21:21, ... "They," 'the Jews which
believe,' ver. 20, "are informed of thee, that thou teachest all the
Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, that they
ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the
customs."

2. To a great extent, the imputation was well grounded: for, to a great
extent, it had been his practice, to give the recommendation thus
described. Of this position the proof will follow presently.

3. By Paul, the truth of this imputation was utterly denied: denied by
the opposite denegatory assertion: and, the imputation being as above
well grounded,--in so far as any such denegatory assertion had been made
by him, he had knowingly uttered a wilful falsehood.

4. In proof of the sincerity of this denial, it was proposed to Paul, on
the part of the Apostles and Elders, to give a confirmation of it, by
the performance of a certain appropriate ceremony.

5. The ceremony thus proposed, was one that was universally understood,
to have the effect of attaching, to any assertion, connected with it for
the purpose, the sanction of an oath.

6. Knowing such to be the effect of the ceremony, he gave his assent to
the proposition, and determined, by means of it, to attach the sanction
of an oath to such his denial, as above: and thereby, the assertion
contained in that denial, being, as above, to his knowledge, false,--to
commit, in that extraordinary solemn and deliberate form and manner, an
act of perjury.

7. In pursuance of such determination, he accordingly repaired for that
purpose to the temple and had his abode therein for several days: the
completion of the requisite number being no otherwise prevented, than by
the irruption of the indignant multitude, assured as they were of his
being occupied in the commission of a perjury.

Proof of charges 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 21:23, 24, 26, 27, 28.

23. "_We_, the Apostles and the Elders, or at least the Apostle James,
ver. 18, have _four men_, which have a _vow_ on them;

24. "Them take, and _purify thyself with them_, and be _at charges_ with
them, that ... _all_ may know that those things, whereof they were
informed concerning thee, are _nothing_; but _that_ thou thyself also
walkest orderly, and keepest the law.

26. "Then Paul took the men, and _the next day purifying himself with
them_ entered into the temple, to _signify_ the accomplishment of the
days of purification, until that an _offering_ should be offered for
every one of them.

27. "And when the _seven days were almost ended_, the Jews, which were
of Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and
laid hands on him.

28. "Crying out, Men of Israel, help; This is the man, that teacheth all
men everywhere _against_ the people, and _the law_, and this place: and
further brought Greeks also into the temple; and hath _polluted_ this
holy place."

Of the perjuriousness of Paul's intent, a short proof, namely of the
circumstantial kind, is thus already visible, in the indignation
excited,--its intensity, its immorality, and the bitter fruits of it.
Will it be said no? for that the indignation had, for its adequate
cause, his being thought to have spoken slightingly of the law in
question--it being the law of the land,--and that, to this imputation,
the ceremony, it being, as above the performance of a _vow_, had no
reference? Assuredly no: no such interpretation will be found tenable.
True it is, that, by the persuasion, that he had thus been dealing by
the Mosaic law,--by this persuasion, without need of anything else, the
indignation may well have been produced: but it could only have been by
the knowledge, that, upon his having been called upon to confess the
having so done, or to deny it, he had, in this most extraordinary and
universally conspicuous mode, given continuance and confirmation to his
denial--it could only have been by _this_ knowledge, that the excitement
was raised up to so high a pitch. For, What was it that the information
had charged him with? It was the forsaking Moses. What was the purpose,
for which the recommendation was given to him--the recommendation to
perform this ceremony? It was the _purifying_ himself, "that all might
know" that the information was groundless. "That those things," say the
Apostles with the Elders to him, "whereof they," the thousands of Jews
which believe, ver. 20, "were informed against thee were
_nothing_:"--"to _purify thyself_," says the official translation: more
appositely might it have said _to clear thyself_: for in that case, the
idea of an _imputation_ would clearly enough, though but implicitly,
have been conveyed: whereas, to some minds, the idea conveyed by the
word _purify_ may perhaps be no other than that of some _general_
cleansing of the whole character, by means of some physical process, to
which, in so many minds, the psychological effect in question has, by
the influence of artifice on weakness, been attached.

Such then, namely, the clearing himself of the imputation by so solemn a
confirmation of the denial of it,--such was the purpose, for which, in
the most unequivocal terms, his performance of the ceremony was
recommended: such, therefore, was the purpose for which it was
commenced; such, accordingly, was the purpose for which it would have
been consummated, but for the interruption which it experienced:
experienced not from his hands, but from hands among which, there seems
sufficient reason to believe, were the hands, if not of the very persons
by whom it had been recommended, at any rate of those who till that time
had been in use to be guided by their influence.

To this interpretation, what objection is there that can be opposed? If
any, it can only be that which to some minds may perhaps be suggested by
the word _vow_.

But the fact is--this word _vow_ is a mistranslation: the proper word
should have been _oath_. By an oath everyone understands at first
mention an _assertory_, not a _promissory_, declaration: by a _vow_, a
_promissory_, not an _assertory_ one. But an _assertory_ declaration, as
every one sees, is the only sort of declaration, that admits of any
application to the case in question. By nothing that, in Paul's
situation, a man could _promise_ to do, in addition to the performance
of the ceremony, could any evidence be given, of a man's having, or not
having, done so and so, in any time _past_.

That by that which was actually done, that which was essential was
considered as having been done,--is proved, by what is put into Paul's
mouth in relation to this subject, in his defence against the accusation
brought afterwards against him, before the Roman governor _Felix_, by
the spokesman of the Jewish constituted authorities, _Tertullus_. There
it is, that, beyond all doubt, what he is speaking of, is his CLEARANCE,
as above: for there also, the word in the official translation, as well
as in the Greek original, is _purified_: in the past tense, purified.
This being assumed, it follows, as a necessary consequence, that either
in the course of that part, which at the time of the irruption, was
already elapsed of the _seven days'_ ceremony, in the temple; or, what
seems more probable, antecedently to the commencement of it, a
denegatory declaration--a declaration denying the fact charged in the
accusation,--had been made: for, that the ceremony itself was never
accomplished, is what is expressly stated:--of the term of seven days
stated as necessary to the accomplishment of it, no more than a part, it
is said, had elapsed, when the final interruption of it took place.

To return to the time of Paul's entrance into the temple.

Thus, as hath been seen, stands the matter, even upon the face of the
official English translation. But in verse 26, the word employed in the
Greek original, removes all doubt. "Then," says the translation, "Paul
took the men, and the next day _purifying himself_ with them, entered
into the temple." Purifying himself, in the present tense, says the
translation: and, even this alone taken into consideration, the
purifying process, whatever it was, might be supposed to have been but
commenced before the entrance into the temple, and as being thus as yet
in pendency, waiting the exit out of the temple for its accomplishment.
Thus it is, that, in the translation, the verb is in the present tense,
_purifying himself_: but, in the Greek original, it is in the past
tense, _having purified_ himself: so that, in the original, the
purification, whatever it may have been, is in express terms stated as
having, even before his entrance into the temple, already accomplished.

Note that, if the historian is to be believed, he had on this occasion,
the fullest opportunity, of being, in the most particular manner,
acquainted with everything that passed. For, when, as above, the
recommendation was given to Paul, on his appearance before the Apostle
James and the Elders,--he, the historian, was actually present, "And the
day following," says he, Acts 21:18, "_Paul went in with us unto James_;
and all the Elders were present."

Supposing _that_ the true interpretation,--of what use and effect then,
it may perhaps be asked, was the ceremony, of which the temple was the
theatre? The answer has been already given. It cannot have been any
other than the attaching, to the declaration that had been made, the
sanction, of an oath. Without the ceremony performed in the temple, the
declaration was a declaration _not_ upon oath, and as such not regarded
as sufficient evidence:--evidence, in the shape which, the historian
says, had been actually required for the purpose: when the ceremony, of
which the temple was the theatre, had been gone through, and the last of
the number of days, required for its accomplishment had been
terminated;--then, and not before, it was regarded as having been
converted into the appropriate and sufficient evidence. Thus it was,
that this seven days' ceremony was no more than an elaborate substitute
to the English ceremony of kissing the book, after hearing the dozen or
so of words pronounced by the official functionary.

On this occasion, the Greek word rendered by the word _vow_, is a word
which in its ordinary sense was, among Gentiles as well as Jews, exactly
correspondent to our word _prayer_. But, the idea denoted by the word
_prayer_, applies in this case with no less propriety to an _assertory
oath_ than to a _promissory vow_. Directly and completely, it designates
neither. In both cases an address is made to some supposed supernatural
potentate: in cases such as the present, beseeching him to apply the
sanction of punishment to the _praying_ individual, in the event of a
want of sincerity on his part: in this case, in the event of his not
having done that which, on this occasion, he declares himself to have
done, or, what comes to the same thing, his having done that which he
declares himself _not_ to have done: in the other case, in the event of
his not doing that which he has promised to do, or doing that which he
has promised _not to do_.[55]

All this while, it is not in a direct way, it may be observed, that this
word _vow_ is employed, and application made of it to Paul's case: not
in speaking of Paul himself in the first instance, but after speaking of
the _four other men_, whom it is proposed he should take for his
comrades, on his entrance into the temple. "We have four men," James and
the Elders are made to say, Acts 21:23, 24, "We have four men which have
a vow on them: Them take, and purify thyself with them ... that ... all
may know, that those things, whereof they," the multitude, ver. 22,
"were informed concerning thee, are nothing": no otherwise, therefore,
than by the case these four men were in, is the case designated, in
which it is proposed to Paul to put himself.

As to the case these four men were in,--no otherwise than on account of
its connection with the case Paul was in,--is it in anywise of
importance. As probable a supposition as any seems to be--that of their
being in the same case with him: accused, as well as he, of teaching
"Jews to forsake Moses:" for, between their case and his, no intimation
is given of any difference: and, as the _"purifying himself"_ is what is
recommended to him, so is it what they are stated, as standing
eventually engaged to do on their part. If then, in _his_ instance,
purifying himself means--clearing himself of a charge made against
_him_,--so in their instance must it naturally, not to say necessarily,
have meant--clearing themselves of some charge made against _them_.
Moreover, when, as above, he is, in the Greek original, stated as having
actually purified himself, before his entrance into the temple, so are
they likewise; for it is "_with them_," that his purification is stated
as having been performed.

This being assumed, it might not be impossible to find a use for the
word _vow_, even in its proper sense--its _promissory_ sense: for, what
might be supposed is--that before the entrance into the temple, at the
same time with the _denegatory declaration_, a _vow_ was made--a solemn
_promise_--to enter into the temple, and back of the declaration with
the sanction of an oath, by going through the ceremony. But, forasmuch,
as, in the import of the Greek word, no such idea, as that of a
_promise_, is comprised,--the only use of this interpretation would
be--to save the translators from the imputation of an impropriety, with
which it seems rather more probable that they stand chargeable.

All this while, of Paul's conduct on this occasion, to what part was it
that the blame belonged?--Surely, not to the endeavour, to wean men from
their attachment to the Mosaic laws: for thus far he copied Jesus; and
in copying did not go against, but only beyond, the great original. True
it is, that, in so doing, he served his own personal and worldly
purposes: not less so, that, in this subserviency, he found the
inducement by which his conduct was determined: for, by how much
stronger men's attachment would continue to be to the dead lawgiver, by
so much, less strong would it be to the living preacher. But, in so far
as a man's conduct is serviceable to mankind at large, it certainly is
not rendered the less serviceable, or the less laudable, by his being
himself included in the number. The blame lay then--not in teaching men
to forsake Moses: for, thus far, instead of being blame-worthy, there
was nothing in his conduct, that did not merit positive praise. What
there was amiss in his conduct--in what, then, did it consist? Plainly
in this, and this alone: namely, that, on being taxed with having so
done,--instead of avowing and justifying it, he denied it: and, having
denied it, scrupled not to add to the falsehood the aggravation of such
extraordinarily deliberate and solemn perjury, as hath been so plainly
visible. And, to what purpose commit so flagrant a breach of the law of
morality? Plainly, to no other, than the fixing himself in Jerusalem,
and persevering in a project of insane and selfish ambition, which, in
spite of the most urgent remonstrances that could be made by his most
devoted adherents, had brought him thither: for, he had but to depart in
peace, and the Apostles of Jesus would have remained unmolested, and the
peace of Christendom undisturbed.

An article of evidence, that must not be left unnoticed,--is the part
taken, on this occasion, by the historiographer. Nowhere does this
eyewitness take upon himself to declare,--nowhere so much as to
insinuate--that of the charge, thus made upon his hero, there was
anything that was not true: nowhere does he so much as insinuate, that
the declaration by which he says Paul had cleared himself of the charge,
and, as we have seen, _before_ his entrance into the temple for the
purpose of enforcing it by the sanction of an oath,--was anything short
of a downright falsehood. After this, he makes a defence for Paul before
Felix;[56] he makes a defence for Paul before Festus;[57] he makes a
defence for Paul before Festus and Agrippa;[58] and, on no one of all
those occasions, is the defence anything to the purpose. He, indeed,
makes Paul declare, that he, Paul, had always been a strict observer of
the Mosaic ordinances. This may have been either true or false: but,
true or false, it was equally foreign to the purpose. Not improbably, it
was, in a considerable degree, true: for if, while he gave to other Jews
his assurance, that the operations in question, burthensome as they
were, were of no use, he himself continued to bear the burthen
notwithstanding,--the persuasiveness of his advice would naturally be
augmented by the manifestation thus given of disinterestedness. It may
accordingly have been true: but, false or true, it was equally foreign
to the purpose: the question was--not what he had done himself; but what
he had recommended it to others to do.


Thus--from everything that appears, by all such persons as had the best
means of information--the charge made upon him was _believed_,--let it
now be seen, whether we should not be warranted in saying, _known_,--to
be true.

As to "_The Jews of Asia_,"--and the mention made of this class of men,
as the instigators of the tumult--can any support be derived from it,
for the inference, that it was by something else in Paul's conduct, and
not by any such perjury as that in question, that the vent, thus given
to the indignation, was produced?[59] No, assuredly: altogether
inconsistent would any such supposition be, with the main part of the
narrative. Whoever were the persons with whom the manual violence
originated;--whatever were the reproaches cast upon the invader on other
grounds;--the purpose--the sole purpose--for which he entered upon the
ceremony, is rendered as plain as words can make it. It was the
clearing himself of the charge of teaching Jews to forsake Moses: and,
supposing the fact admitted, everything, in the way of justification,
being, before such a tribunal, manifestly inadmissible,--of no such
charge was it possible for him to clear himself, without denying the
truth of it. But, according to the historian, to confirm this denial, by
the solemnity, whatever it was,--was the purpose, and the sole purpose,
of it: of this, the negative assertion, contained in the denial, being
untrue, and, by him who made it, known to be so,--confirming such
denial, by the solemnity,--call it _oath_--call it _vow_--call it
anything else,--was committing an act of perjury: and, to believe that
such his denial was false, and yet not believing him guilty of
perjury--at any rate, on the supposition of the accomplishment of the
solemnity--was not possible. How numerous so ever may have been the
other causes of provocation, given by him--how numerous so ever, the
different descriptions of persons to whom they had been given;--no
disproof could, by all of them put together, be given, by this
solemnity, to the denial in question,--supposing it false.

To the present purpose, the only question is--whether, by Paul, on the
occasion in question, an act of perjury was, or was not, committed?
not--what was the cause, whether that, or any other, of any indignation
of which he was the object. Even therefore, might it be allowed, that a
_vow_, in the sense of which it is contradistinguished from an _oath_,
was performed by him, or about to be performed,--still it would not be
the less undeniable, that it was for the purpose of converting the
simple declaration into a declaration upon oath, that he entered upon
the solemnity: and that, therefore, if in the simple declaration there
was anything to his knowledge false, the consequence is--that by his
converting it into a declaration upon oath, he rendered himself guilty
of perjury.

The observation, thus applied, to what is said of the "_Jews of Asia_,"
will be seen to be applicable, and, with equal propriety, to what is
said about his being charged with "bringing _Greeks into the temple_:"
and, in particular, about his being supposed to have brought in "_The
Ephesian Trophimus_:" and moreover, what may, in this last case, be
observable, is--that this about the Greeks is expressly stated as being
a _further_ charge, distinct from the main one: nor yet is it so much as
stated, that, by any such importation, to what degree so ever offensive,
any such effect, as that signified by the word _pollution_ was produced.

Not altogether destitute of probability seems the supposition, that
these two circumstances--about the Jews of Asia, and about
Trophimus--may have been thrown in, by this adherent of Paul's, for the
purpose of throwing a cloud of confusion and obscurity over the real
charge: and if so, the two circumstances, with the addition of the three
different defences, put into the hero's mouth, on the three several
occasions of the endeavour,--must be acknowledged to have been employed,
not altogether without success.

Here then closes that part of the evidence, which, to the purpose of a
judgment, to be passed at this distance of time from the facts, may be
considered as so much _circumstantial_ evidence: in the next section may
be seen that part, which comes under the denomination of direct
evidence.


SECTION 2.

PROOF FROM THE EPISTLES.

We come now to the _direct_ evidence: that evidence--all of it from
Paul's own pen:--all of it from his own Epistles. It consists in those
"teachings to forsake Moses," which will be now furnished, in such
unequivocal terms and such ample abundance, in and by those fruits of
his misty and crafty eloquence:--in the first place, in his letter to
the disciples, which he had made, or hoped to make at Rome:--date of it,
according to the received chronology, about four years anterior to the
time here in question:--in the next place, in two successive letters to
the disciples, whom, it appears, he had made at Corinth:--both these
addresses, set down, as belonging to the same year as the one to the
Romans. Moreover, in his so often mentioned Epistle to the Galatians,
matter of the same tendency is to be found. But, this last being,
according to that same chronology, of a date posterior by some years to
the time, at which the charge of having preached the sort of doctrine in
question was, on the present occasion, made,--it belongs not to the
present question, and is therefore left unemployed. And, in the same
case, is some matter that might be found in his Epistles to the
Thessalonians.

1. First then as to the Mosaic "law and customs," taken in the
aggregate.

On this subject, see in the first place what the oath-taker had said to
his _Romans_.


     Rom 15:14. "I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there
     is nothing unclean of itself; but to him that esteemeth anything to
     be unclean, to him it is unclean."--17. "For the kingdom of God
     is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
     Holy Ghost."

     Rom 3:20. "_By the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be
     justified_ in his, God's sight; for by the law is the knowledge of
     sin."

     Rom. 3:27, 28, 29, 30, 31. "Where is boasting then? It is excluded.
     By what law? of works? Nay; but by the law of the faith.--
     Therefore, we conclude, that _a man is justified by faith without
     the deeds of the law_.--Is _he_ the God of the Jews only? is
     _he_ not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:--
     Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by
     faith, and uncircumcision through faith.--_Do we then make void_
     _the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law._"

     Rom. 10:9. "... if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
     Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him
     from the dead, thou shalt be saved.[60]--12. For there is no
     difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over
     all is rich unto all that call upon him.--For whosoever shall
     call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved."[61]

     Rom 14:2. "... one believeth that he may eat all things: another
     who is weak, eateth herbs.--Let not him that eateth despise him
     that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that
     eateth; for God hath received him.--_One man esteemeth one day
     above another: another esteemeth every day alike._[62]"

     1 Cor. 6:12. "_All things are lawful unto me_, but all things are
     not expedient:" or _profitable_ margin, "all things are lawful for
     me, but I will not be brought under the power of any.--_Meats
     for the belly_, and _the belly for meats_; but God shall destroy
     both it and them."

     1 Cor. 8:8. "But _meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we
     eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the
     worse_.--Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will
     eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to
     offend."

     1 Cor. 9:19-23. 19. "For though I be free from all men, yet have I
     made myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more.--_And
     unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews_; to
     them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain
     them that are under the law:--_To them that are without law, as
     without law_, being not without law to God but under the law to
     Christ, _that I might gain them that are without law_.--To the
     weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all
     things to all men, that I might by all means save some.--And
     this I do for the Gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof
     with you."

     2 Cor. 3:12 to 17. "Seeing then that we have such hope, we use
     great plainness of speech.--And not as _Moses, which put a vail
     over his face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly
     look to the end of that which is abolished_.--But their minds
     were blinded; for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken
     away in the reading of the Old Testament; which vail is done away
     in Christ.--But even unto this day, _when Moses is read, the
     vail is upon their heart_.--Nevertheless _when it shall turn to
     the Lord, the vail shall be taken away_.--Now the Lord is that
     spirit; and where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty."

Now as to _circumcision_ in particular.

     Rom. 2:25, 26, 27, 28, 29. "For _circumcision verily profiteth, if
     thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy
     circumcision is made uncircumcision.--Therefore if the
     uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his
     uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?_--And shall not
     uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge
     thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the
     law?--For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is
     that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:--But he is a
     Jew, which is one inwardly: and circumcision is that of the heart,
     in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men,
     but of God."

     Rom. 3:1, 2. "What advantages then hath the Jew? or what profit is
     there of circumcision?--Much every way: chiefly, because that
     unto them were committed the oracles of God."

     Rom. 4:9, 10, 11, 12. "_Cometh this blessedness then upon the
     circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also?_ for we say
     that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.--How was
     it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in
     uncircumcision. Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.--And
     he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness
     of the faith which _he had yet_ being uncircumcised: that he might
     be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
     circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them
     also:--And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the
     circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of
     our father Abraham, which he had being _yet_ uncircumcised."

     Rom. 15:8. "Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the
     circumcision for the truth of God to confirm the premises made unto
     the fathers."

     1 Cor. 7:18. "Is any man called being circumcised? let him not
     become uncircumcised. _Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not
     be circumcised.--Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
     nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God._"

From any one individual, who, in either of these distant cities, had
seen any one of these same Epistles,--let it now be seen whether
information of their contents, supposing it credited, would not have
sufficed to produce those effects, the existence of which is so
unquestionable. Not but that the same rashness, which suffered him to
furnish such abundant evidence against himself in those distant regions,
could scarce fail to have given birth to credence in abundance, of
various sorts, and of a character, which, on that occasion, would be
much more impressive.

FOOTNOTES:

[55] On this occasion, supposing the purpose of this ceremony to be, as
here contended, no other than that of applying, to a declaration
concerning a matter of fact, the supernatural penal sanction, by which
it was converted into an oath,--a natural enough subject of inquiry
is--to what cause is to be attributed the extraordinary length thus
given to it?--seven days at the least; to which, upon examination, would
be found virtually added, as much greater a length of time, as the holy
person, to whose custody the oath-taker consigned himself, might be
pleased to prescribe. Answer, without difficulty,--the affording time
and pretence for the exaction of his _surplice fees_:--namely, those
established by law,--with the addition of others, to as large an amount,
as the need which the oath-taker had of the accommodation thus to be
afforded to him, could engage him to submit to. As to the length of
time,--in the passage in question, the translation exhibits some
obscurity: nor is it altogether cleared up by the original. A
determinate number of days, to wit, seven, is indeed mentioned, ver. 27,
but immediately before this, ver. 26, comes a passage, from whence it
seems unquestionable, that, whatever were the time a man had been thus
detained, he was not to be let out, until, over and above what good
things it had been made necessary he should bring in with him, a further
payment, and as it should seem, in a pecuniary shape, had been made: "to
signify," says ver. 26, "the accomplishment of the days of purification,
until that an offering should be offered for every one of them." "And
when _the seven_ days were _almost_ ended," continues ver. 27:
immediately after which comes the account of the tumult, by which they
were prevented from being _quite_ ended.

As to the phrase--"_to signify the accomplishment of the days_," what
seems to be meant by it is--to make known when the number requisite for
the completion of the train of operations had been _accomplished_. But,
to make known when that number had been _accomplished_, it was
previously requisite to make known when it had _commenced_: and, for
making _this_ known, the act, probably a public one, of making entrance
into the temple, was employed.

As to the origin, as well as particular nature, of the ceremony,--though
no such word as _Nazarite_ is here employed, on turning to the Book of
_Numbers_, chapter the sixth, it will be manifest, that the ceremony
here in question is the same as that, by which, according to the receipt
there given, any man whatever, whether, and any woman also, must be left
to conjecture, might be converted into a _Nazarite_. _Nazarite_ is from
a Hebrew word, which meant originally neither more nor less than a
person _separated_. A person consigned himself to the custody of "_the
priest of the congregation_:" or, as we should now say, the _parson of
the parish_. The ceremony accomplished, the patient was thereby put into
a state of appropriate sanctity: and, from this metamorphosis, as the
priest and the Nazarite could agree, any inference might be drawn, and
any purpose at pleasure accomplished. Neither to the _extent_ of the
inference, nor therefore to the _purpose_ designed, were any limits
visible. Everything depended upon the priest: for, though of certain
particular operations made requisite, a most particular list is given,
all of them of the most insignificant character in themselves, yet so
thickly and so plainly sown are the seeds of _nullity_, that, when all
the appointed fees, of which there is also an enormous list[IV.], had
been paid, it would still lie at the option of the priest, to pronounce
the whole procedure null and void, unless, and until any such final
compliment as he chose to expect, were paid to him. Among the most
obviously, as well as extensively convenient purposes, to which it was
capable of being applied, is this of which the present case affords an
example: namely, the manufacturing of evidence: could he but find means
to satisfy the priest, a man might, to all legal purposes, and even to
the satisfaction of all appropriately disposed minds, prove, and with
conclusive effect, any thing to be false, which everybody knew to be
true. By fabrication, falsification, or suppression of evidence, what is
the right that may not be usurped? what is the wrong that may not, with
success and impunity, be committed?

In the Mosaic law, immediately before _this_ institution Numbers, chap.
5., comes another, by means of which every man, who was tired of his
wife, might, in another way, with the assistance of a priest--and, for
aught that appears, any priest--clear himself of that incumbrance. All
the man had to do was--to _say_ he was "_jealous_" of her: the priest
thereupon took charge of her. If priest and husband were agreed, "_the
water of jealousy_" did its office: if not, the woman remained
imprisoned. Against the superhuman evidence, afforded by the purifying
process here in question, no quantity of human evidence was to be
available. In like manner, to warrant this poisoning process, not any
the smallest particle of human evidence was necessary: the case in which
it is to be performed, is "_if there be no witness against her, neither
she be taken_," says the text, _Numbers_ 5. 13. Verily, verily, not
without sufficient cause, did Jesus, from first to last, take every
occasion, to weaken the attachment of the people, to a system of law, of
which those institutions afford two, among so many samples. Yet, while
in the very act of depreciating it, is he represented as declaring his
purpose to be the _fulfilling it_: Matt. 5. 17. for, such was the verbal
veil, which the prejudices he had to encounter, rendered it necessary to
him at the moment, to throw over the tendency of his endeavors. Fulfill
the very law he was preaching against? Yes: but in one sense only:
namely, by fulfilling--not the real purpose of it,--the establishment of
the corrupt despotism of the priesthood,--but the professed purpose of
it, the good of the community: in regard to the law, fulfilling, in a
word, whatever there was that was good in it, whatever there was that
deserved to be fulfilled. Jesus, in whose opinion death was too severe a
punishment, for a wife, in the case of a breach, on _her_ part, of a
contract, the breach of which was by the _other_ contending party
practised with impunity--Jesus, who accordingly, in saving the offender,
exposed to merited disgrace the sanguinary law--was doubtless still
further from approving, that parish priests, in unlimited numbers,
should poison innocent women for the accommodation of their husbands, or
sell licenses to commit every imaginable wrong by perjury.

_Vow_ is _oath_: this is not the only occasion, in which the
self-constituted Apostle, if his historiographer is to be believed, took
the benefit, whatever it was, of this ceremony. In Acts 18:16, he
"_shaved his head_," it is said, at Cenchrea:--why?--"for he had a vow
upon him." What the vow was, we are not told; this, however, we know, as
well from Acts 21:26, as from Numbers 6, he could not have got anything
by it, had the parson of the parish of Cenchrea been otherwise than
satisfied with the "_offering_" that was made.

[IV.] In the bargain between vow-maker and vow-sanctifier, the following
list of fees, provided for sanctifier, by _Excellent Church_ of that
country, in those days whatever they were,--may serve to show the use of
it to one of the contracting parties. To complete our conception of the
nature and effects of the arrangement, nothing is wanting, but that
which so unhappily must for ever remain wanting--a history of the
_purposes_, to which from the commencement of the government to the
dissolution of it, the solemnity had been applied on the vow-maker's
side. Of these purposes, we must content ourselves as well as we can
with the sample, for which we are here indebted to the author of the
Acts. The table of fees is as follows:

It is extracted from the Book of Numbers, chapter 6:1 to 21.

Fees to be paid in all cases: fees liquidated in quantity, and thence in
value.

       { 1. He lamb of the first year, one.
    I. { 2. Ewe-lamb of the first year, one.
       { 3. Ram without blemish, one.

Fees, not liquidated in quantity, and thus left to be liquidated in
quantity, and thence in value, by the will of the priest.

       { 4. Basket of unleavened bread, one.
       { 5. Parcel of cakes of fine flour mingled with oil.
   II. { 6. Parcel of wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, one.
       { 7. Meat-offering, one.
       { 8. Drink-offerings--numbers and respective quantities not
            liquidated.

Fees payable, on a contingency: a contingency not describable without
more time and labour, than would be paid for by the result.

  III. {  9. Turtle-doves or pigeons, two.
       { 10. Lamb of the first year, one.

IV. Mysterious addition, the liquidation of which must be left to the
Hebrew scholar. Ver. 21. "Besides _that_ that his hand shall get:"
(whose hand? priest's or vow-maker's?) "according to the vow which he
vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation:"--probable
meaning, according to the purpose, for which he performed the
ceremony--the advantage which he looked for from it.

Moreover, by any one whose curiosity will carry him through the inquiry,
causes of _nullity_ may be seen as sedulously and copiously provided, as
if by the _astutia_ of an English judge, or pair of judges, to whose
profit the fees were to be received: effect of the nullity, of course,
repetition; necessity of repeating the process, as in case of _new
trial_ or _arrest of judgment_, with the fees.

Religion was thus no less aptly served at Jerusalem, under Mosaic
institutions,--than Justice is to this day, under matchless constitution
and English institutions, at Westminster.

[56] Paul at the suit of Tertullus, A.D. 60. Acts 24:1, 2, 5, 6, 9, 11,
18.

"And after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the elders,
and with a certain orator named Tertullus, who informed the governor
against Paul.--And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse
him,--Saying, We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of
the sect of the Nazarenes:--Who also hath _gone about to profane the
temple_; whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.--And
the Jews also assented, saying, that these things were so.--Then Paul,
after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered,--Thou
mayest understand, that they are yet but twelve days since I went up to
Jerusalem for to worship.--Whereupon certain Jews from Asia _found me
purified in the temple_, neither with multitude nor with tumult."

[57] Paul before Festus alone, A.D. 60. Acts 25:7, 8.

"And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stood
round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which
they could not prove:--While he answered for himself, Neither against
the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Caesar,
have I offended anything at all."

[58] Paul before Festus and Agrippa, A.D. 62. Acts 26:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 20, 21.

"Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.
Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself:--I think
myself happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day
before thee, touching all the things whereof I am accused of the
Jews;--Especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs and
questions which are among the Jews; wherefore I beseech thee to hear me
patiently.--My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first
among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews;--Which knew me
from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most
straightest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee.--And now I stand
and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our
fathers:--Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God
day and night, hope to come. For which hope's sake, King Agrippa, I am
accused of the Jews.--20. But showed first unto them of Damascus and at
Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and then to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for
repentance.--For these causes, the Jews _caught me in the temple_, and
went about to kill me."

[59] "And when the seven days were almost ended," says Acts 21:27, "_the
Jews which were of Asia_, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up
all the people, and laid hands on him."

[60] A cheap enough rate this, at which salvation is thus put up. Of
what use then morality? Of what use is abstinence from mischievous acts,
in what degree so ever mischievous? "Oh! but," says somebody, "though
Paul said this, he meant no such thing:" and then comes
something--anything--which it may suit the defender's purpose to make
Paul say.

[61] Another receipt for making salvation still cheaper than as above.
Not so Jesus. Matt. 7:21: "_Not every one that saith unto me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven_; but he that doeth the
will of my Father which is in heaven."

[62] Behold here the degree of importance attached by Paul to
_sabbaths_.




