CHAPTER XII.

     More Falsehoods.--Resurrection Witnesses multiplied.--World's End
     predicted.--To save credit, Antichrist invented.


SECTION 1.

RESURRECTION-WITNESSES MULTIPLIED.

After what has been seen of the seven days' course of perjury, proofs of
simple falsehood will be apt to appear superfluous. To make certainty
more sure, two preeminent ones shall, however, be brought to view. They
may have their use, were it only as examples of the palpableness, of
those falsehoods, which, for so many hundreds of years, and through so
many generations of commentators, are, under favourable circumstances,
capable of remaining undetected. The extravagance of the addition, made
by the audacious stranger, to the number of the Resurrection-witnesses,
as given by themselves:--the predicted end of the world in the prophet's
own lifetime,--and the creation of Antichrist for the purpose of putting
off that catastrophe,--may even be not altogether unamusing, by the
picture they will give, of that mixture of rashness and craftiness,
which constitutes not the least remarkable, of the ingredients in the
composition of this extraordinary character. Moreover, Antichrist being
in the number of the bug-bears, by the images of which many an enfeebled
mind has not yet ceased to be tormented;--putting an extinguisher upon
this hobgoblin may have the serious good effect, of calming a mass of
disquietude, which how completely soever groundless, is not the less
afflicting, to the minds into which it has found entrance.

First, as to the resurrection-witnesses. In relation to a fact of such
cardinal importance, the accounts which have reached us from the four
biographers of Jesus are not, it must be confessed, altogether so clear
as could have been wished. But, on so ample a subject, howsoever
tempting the occasion, anything that could here be offered, with any
promise of usefulness, would occupy far too much space, and be by much
too wide a digression from the design of the present work.[63]

Sufficient to the present purpose will be the observation, that nothing
can be more palpably or irreconcileably inconsistent with every one of
them, than the amply and round number, thus added by the effrontery of
this uninformed stranger, to the most ample that can be deduced from any
of the accounts, thus stated as given by the only description of
persons, whose situation would give to their testimony the character of
the best evidence.

Behold now the account of the number and of the persons in Paul's own
words. It is in the fifteenth chapter of the first of his two letters to
his Corinthians. "Moreover, brethren," ver. 1, "I declare unto you the
Gospel, the good news, which I _preached_ unto you, which also ye have
received, and wherein ye stand.--By which also ye are saved, if ye
keep in memory what I preached unto you unless ye have believed in
vain.--For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures:--And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third
day, according to the Scriptures:--And that he was seen of Cephas,
then of the twelve:--After that, he was seen of _above five hundred
brethren at once_; of whom the greater part remain unto this present,
but some are fallen asleep.--After that he was seen of James, then of
all the Apostles.--And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one
born out of due time.--For I am the least of the Apostles, which am
not meet to be called as Apostle, because I persecuted the church of
God."[64]

As to the five hundred brethren at once, with the additions _in petto_,
the more closely the Gospel accounts are looked into, the more entire
will be a Man's conviction of the extravagance of this account. In
addition to the eleven Apostles that remained after the death of the
traitor Judas, it may be matter of question, whether so much as a single
individual can be found, who, in any one of the Gospels, is stated as
having, after the death of Jesus, received from the testimony of sense,
the demonstration of his presence. Of the percipient witnesses in
question, not to waste space and time in needless discussions, taking a
round number, and including both sexes taken together, no number
approaching to twenty can be made out from any one of the four Gospel
accounts, nor from all of them taken together. To what end then
substitute, to less than twenty, more than five hundred? To what, but to
supply by falsehood the deficiency left by truth. The thing to be done
was the coming up to the expectations, whatever they might be, of his
Corinthians. Number twenty,--said he to himself,--may perhaps fall
short: well then, strike out the twenty, and set down five hundred. Thus
did the self-constituted Apostle take a leaf out of the book of the
unjust steward. Luke 16:1-20.

Now then as to mutually contradictory numbers--that given by the four
Evangelists, and that given by this one stranger,--to which shall we
give credence? As to the Evangelists,--whether, in the situation in
which they were, and writing for the purposes for which they
wrote,--these most intimate of the associates of the departed Jesus, and
percipient witnesses of the several facts in question,--all of them
spoken of in the same narration, all of them so fully apprised of the
whole real number--could have been disposed, any one of them, to get
down a number _short_ of the truth,--may be left to anyone to imagine.

But, according to Paul's calculation, the truth would not come up to his
purpose:--to his particular purpose: a number, such as could not fail of
doing so, was therefore to be substituted.

_Five hundred_ was as easily written as _twenty_. Had Jerusalem, or any
place in its neighbourhood, been the place, to which this letter of his
was to be addressed, some caution might have been necessary. But
Corinth--a place so remote from the scene of action--being the abode of
the disciples, to whom this letter of his was addressed,--and the
letters themselves, not destined to be seen by any other than devoted
eyes,--Invention found herself at ease.

Meantime, while Jesus was thus magnified, Paul was not to be forgotten.
Insufficient still would be the cloud of witnesses, unless himself were
added to it. "Last of all," says he, 1 Cor. 15:8, "he," Jesus, "was seen
of me also." Seen by him Paul? at what place? at what time? At the time
of his conversion, when hearing a voice and seeing light, but nothing
else? But the whole constellation of his visions will here be crowding
to the reader's view, and any more particular reference to them would be
useless: suffice it to observe, that on no other occasion, either does
Paul himself, or his historiographer for him, take upon himself to say,
that he had ever seen Jesus any otherwise than in a _vision_,
whatsoever may have been meant by this so convenient term. On no
occasion is it so much as pretended, either by him or for him, that _in
the flesh_ Jesus was ever seen by him. By no fingers of his
murder-abetting hand, had ever been so much as pretended to have been
probed, the wounds of Jesus. Yet, what are the terms employed, by him,
in speaking of the _sight_, he pretended to have had of Jesus? exactly
the same, as those employed by him, when speaking of the evidence,
vouchsafed to the Apostles.


SECTION 2.

FALSE PROPHECY,--THAT THE WORLD WOULD END IN THE LIFETIME OF
PERSONS THEN LIVING.

The unsatiableness of Paul's ambition meets the eye at every page: the
fertility of his invention is no less conspicuous. So long as, between
this and the other world, the grave stood interposed,--the strongest
impression capable of being made by pictures of futurity, even when
drawn by so bold a hand, was not yet sufficient for stocking it with the
power it grasped at. This barrier, at whatever hazard, he accordingly
determined to remove. The future world being thus brought at both ends
into immediate contact with the present,--the obedient, for whom the
joys of heaven were provided, would behold the troubles of _the middle
passage_ saved to them, while the disobedient would see the jaws of hell
opened for their reception, without any such halting-place, as might
otherwise seem to be offered by the grave. In particular, by a nearer as
well as smoother road than that rugged one, he would make his way to
heaven: nor would they, whose obedience gave them a just claim to so
high a favour, be left behind.

His Thessalonians were the disciples, chosen by him for the trial of
this experiment. Addressed to them we have two of his Epistles. In these
curious and instructive documents, the general purport--not only of what
had been said to the persons in question on a former occasion, but
likewise of the observation of which on _their_ part it had been
productive,--is rendered sufficiently manifest, by what we shall find
him saying in the first of them. "Good," said they, "as to _some_ of us,
whoever they may be: but, how is it to be with _the rest_? in
particular, with those who have actually died already: not to speak of
those others who will have been dying off in the meantime: for you do
not go so far as to promise, that we shall, all of us, be so sure of
escaping death as you yourself are." "Make yourselves easy," we shall
find him saying to them: "sooner or later, take my word for it, we
shall, all of us, mount up together in a body: those who are dead, those
who are to die, and those who are not to die--all of us at once, and by
the same conveyance: up, in the air, and through the clouds, we shall
go. The Lord will come down and meet us, and show us the way:--music,
vocal and instrumental, will come with him, and a rare noise altogether
there will be! Those who died first will have risen first; what little
differences there may be are not worth thinking about. Comfort
yourselves," concludes he, "with these words." Assuredly not easily
could more comfortable ones have been found:--always supposing them
followed by belief, as it appears they were. But it is time we should
see more particularly what they were.

1 Thess. 4:10 to 18.--"And indeed ye do it," viz. love one another, ver.
9, "toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech
you, brethren, that ye increase more and more;--And that ye study to be
_quiet_, and to do _your own business, and to work with your own hands,
as we commanded you_;--That ye may walk honestly toward them that are
without, and that ye may have lack of nothing.--But I would not have you
to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are _asleep_, that ye
sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.--For if we believe that
Jesus died and rose again, even so _them also which sleep in Jesus will
God bring with him_.--For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord,
that _we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall
not prevent them which are asleep_.--For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
trump of God: and _the dead in Christ shall rise first.--Then we which
are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds_, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the
Lord.--Wherefore comfort one another with these words." Hereupon,
without any intervening matter, follows that of the next chapter. The
division into chapters,--though, for the purpose of reference, not
merely a useful, but an altogether necessary one,--is universally
acknowledged to have been a comparatively modern one.

1 Thess. 5:1-11. "But _of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have
no need that I write unto you_.--For yourselves know perfectly, that
_the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night_.--For when they
shall say, Peace and safety, then _sudden destruction cometh upon them_,
as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.--_But ye,
brethren, are not in darkness_, that that day should overtake you as a
thief.--Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day:
we are not of the night, nor of darkness.--Therefore _let us not sleep,
as do others; but let us watch and be sober_.--For they that sleep,
sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the
night.--But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the
breastplate of _faith_ and love; and for an helmet, the hope of
salvation.--For _God hath not appointed us to wrath_, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.--Who died for us, that, whether we
wake or sleep, we should live together with him.--Wherefore _comfort
yourselves_ together, and edify one another, even as also ye do."

An ingenious game was the one thus played by Paul, if ever there was
one. Of this prophecy,[65] what when once mentioned, is plainly enough
visible, is--this is of the number of those predictions, by which profit
is put in for, and no loss risked: for such is the shape given to it. So
long as the predictor lived, it would remain good and undisfulfilled:
at the end of a certain time--namely, at the end of the life of the
longest liver of the aggregate number of individuals in existence at
that time,--the disfulfillment would indeed take place. But if, by that
time, the predictor had made his exit,--as, in this case, being already
of a certain age, it is tolerably certain he would,--the reproach of
false prophecy would not have reached him: and, even, supposing it to
have reached him, as it would do if he survived the last of them, still
the speculation would not be a very bad one. His _prophecy_, his
_purposes_ would have been fulfilled.

Not altogether without claim to observation, is the manner, in which, by
the adroitness of the soothsayer, the anxiety of questioners is evaded.
That he himself does not know, nor ever expects to know,--that is what
his prudence forbids his telling them. "The day of the Lord so cometh as
a thief in the night:" this is what, in answer to former importunities,
he had at _that_ time told them. "For you yourselves," says he, "know
this perfectly;" that is, in so far as they could know from _his
telling_: this being, in this instance, the only source,--of that
_delusion_, to which he gave the name of _knowledge_. This he had told
them _then_: and more, he takes care not to tell them _now_. "Of the
times and seasons, brethren," says he, "ye have no need that I write
unto you." Meantime, their hopes and fears, and therewith their
dependence upon his good pleasure, are kept still alive: in the first
place, the hope--that, knowing already more than he as yet desires to
disclose, he may by ulterior obsequiousness be prevailed upon to
disclose it: in the next place, the hope--that, though not as yet
possessed of the information, he may at some future period be able to
obtain it, and in that case give them the benefit of it.

To a speculation of this sort,--in how particular a degree favourable
the mode of communication by letter was, is sufficiently visible.
Writing, was an operation not quite so prompt, in those days as in
these. Between Thessalonica and Athens,--from whence, as they tell us,
these Epistles were written,--there was not, it may be affirmed without
much danger of error, any established letter-post: and, even if there
was,--to this or that question, which a man sees in a letter, he makes
or does not make answer, as he finds convenient. Not exactly so, when
the questioner is at his elbow.


SECTION 3.

DISORDER AND MISCHIEF PRODUCED BY THIS PREDICTION.

We have seen the prophecy: let us now see the effects of it. They were
such as might have been expected. They were such as had been expected:
expected, as may have been observed, at a very early period. But there
was rather _more_ in them than had been expected.

Of the confusion, which, by an expectation of this sort, in a state of
society, so much inferior, in the scale of moral conduct, to any, of
which in this our age and country we have experience, was capable of
being produced,--it can scarcely, at this time of day, be in any man's
power, to frame to himself anything approaching to an adequate
conception. So far as regards peaceable idleness, of the general nature
of it, some faint conception may under modern manners be formed, from
the accounts of the effects produced by a similar prediction, delivered
first in France, then in England, about the time of Queen Anne:--so far
as regards a mixture of idleness and positive mischief in a time of
terror, under ancient manners,--from the accounts, given by Thucydides,
of the effects produced at Athens, by the near approach of death, on the
occasion of the plague;--and, from that given by Josephus, of the
effects produced by the like cause, on the occasion of the siege, which,
under his eye, terminated in the final destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans.

According to each man's cast of mind, and the colour of the expectations
that had been imbibed by it,--terror and self-mortification, or
confidence and mischievous self-indulgence, would be the natural result:
terror and self-mortification, if apprehensions grounded on the
retrospect of past misconduct predominated--mischievous indulgence, if,
by the alleged or supposed all-sufficiency of faith,--of faith, of which
the preacher was the object--the importance of morality had, even in the
imagination of the disciple, been thrown into the back-ground:
confabulation without end, in the case of terror; cessation from work,
in both cases.

Had he been somewhat less positive on the head of _time_,--the purposes
of those announcements of his might have been completely, and without
any deduction, fulfilled. The terror he infused could not be
unfavourable to those purposes, so long as it made no deduction, from
the value of the produce of their industry! It was his interest, that
they should "_walk honestly_," lest they should be punished for walking
otherwise:--punished, capitally or not capitally--and, in either case,
bring his teaching into disgrace. It was his interest, that they should
_work_, in such sort, as to earn each of them the expense of his
maintenance; lest, by abstaining from work, they should, any one of
them, impose a burthen upon the charity of the others, or be seen to
walk dishonestly, to the prejudice of the common cause, as above. It was
his interest, that they should, each of them, gain as much as could be
gained without reproach or danger; because, the greater the surplus
produced by each disciple, the greater the tribute, that could be paid
to the spiritual master, under whose command they had put themselves.
Thus far his interest and theirs were in agreement. But, it was his
interest, that, while working to these ends, their minds, at the expense
of whatever torment to themselves, should be kept in a state of constant
ferment, between the passions of hope and fear; because, the stronger
the influence of the two allied passions in their breasts, the more
abundant would be the contributions, of which, to the extent of each
man's ability, they might reasonably be expected to be productive. Here
it was, that his interest acted in a direction opposite to theirs: and
it was by too ardent a pursuit of this his separate interest, that so
much injury, as we shall see, was done to all those other interests.

Of the disease which we shall see described, the description, such as it
is, is presented, by the matter furnished by the practitioner himself,
by whose prescription the disease was produced. This matter we must be
content to take, in that state of disorder, which constitutes one of the
most striking features of the issue of his brain. In speaking of the
symptoms,--addressed as his discourse is to nobody but the patients
themselves by whom these symptoms had been experienced,--only in the way
of allusion, and thence in very general terms, could they naturally have
been, as they will actually be seen to be, presented to view. As to
details,--from them to him, not from him to them, was, it will readily
be acknowledged, the only natural course.

In the same Epistle,--namely in the second, which is the last, but, in a
passage which does not come till after the announcement, which, as will
be seen under the next head, was to operate as a remedy,--stands the
principal part of the matter from whence we have been enabled to collect
the nature of the disease. The chapter is the third and concluding
one:--the words that add nothing to the information, are here and there
omitted.

1. "Finally, brethren, pray for us ...--that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men; for all men have not faith.--And we have
confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do the
things which we _command_ you.--And the Lord direct your hearts ... into
the _patient waiting for Christ_.--Now we _command_ you, brethren ...
that ye _withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh
disorderly_, and not after the tradition which he received of us.--For
yourselves know how ye ought to follow _us_: for we _behaved not
ourselves disorderly among you:--Neither did we eat any man's bread for
nought_: but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you.--_Not because we have not power_,
but to make ourselves an example unto you to follow us.--for _even when
we were with you_, this we _commanded_ you, that _if any would not work,
neither should he eat_.--For we hear that _there are some which walk
among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies_.--Now them
that are such, _we command_ and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, _that
with quietness they work, and eat their own bread_.--But ye brethren,
_be not weary in well-doing_.--And if any man obey not our word by this
Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed."

By anything we have as yet seen, the symptoms of the disease, it may be
thought, are not painted in any very strong colours. But, of the
virulence of it there is no want of evidence. It may be seen, in the
drastic nature of the remedy:--a remedy, for the invention of which, we
shall, in the next section, see the ingenuity of the practitioner put to
so extraordinary a stretch.


SECTION 4.

PAUL'S REMEDY FOR THE DISORDER, AND SALVO FOR HIMSELF.--ANTICHRIST
MUST FIRST COME.

We have seen the disorder: we had before that seen the causes of it. We
now come to the remedy--the remedy provided by the practitioner for a
disease of his own creating. Of the shape given to this remedy, the
ingenuity will be seen to be truly worthy of the author of the disease.
It consists in the announcement made, of an intermediate state of
things, of the commencement of which, any more than of the termination,
nothing is said: except that it was to take place, antecedently to that
originally announced state of things, by the expectation of which the
disorder had been produced. Of the _time_ of its commencement, no:
except as above, on that point no information is given. But of its
_duration_, though no determinate information, yet such a description is
given, as suffices for giving his disciples to understand, that in the
nature of things, it could not be a short one: and that thus, before the
_principal_ state of things took place, there would be a proportionate
quantity of time for _preparation_. Satisfied of this, they would see
the necessity of conforming themselves to those reiterated "_commands_,"
with which his prediction had from the first been accomplished; and to
which he had so erroneously trusted, when he regarded them as composing
a sufficient antidote to the poison he had infused. That the warning
thus provided for them would be a very short one, he left them, it will
be seen, no great reason to apprehend. A sort of spiritual monster,--a
sort of an ape of _Satan_, a rival to the Almighty,--and _that_ by no
means a contemptible one--was to enter upon the stage.

What with force and what with fraud, such would be his power,--that the
fate of the Almighty would have appeared too precarious, had not the
spirits of his partisans been kept up, by the assurance, that when all
was over, the Almighty would remain master of the field.

The time, originally fixed, by him for the aerial voyage, was too
_near_. By the hourly expectation of it, had been produced all those
disastrous effects which had ensued. After what had been said, an
_adjournment_ presented the only possible remedy. But this adjournment,
after what had been said, by what imaginable means could it be produced?
One only means was left by the nature of the case.

     2 Thess. 2:1-12. "Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of
     our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto
     him,--That ye _be not_ soon shaken in mind, or be _troubled_,
     neither by spirit, nor by word, nor _by letter as from us,[66] as
     that the day of Christ is at hand_.--Let no man deceive you by any
     means; for _that day shall not come, except_[67] there come a
     falling away first, and _that man of sin be revealed_, the son of
     perdition;--_Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is
     called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the
     temple of God, showing himself that he is God_[68]--Remember ye
     not, that when I was yet with you, I told you _these
     things_[69]--And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be
     revealed in his time.--For the mystery of iniquity doth already
     work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of
     the way.--And _then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord_
     shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and _shall destroy with
     the brightness of his coming_.[70]--Even _him, whose coming is
     after the working of Satan,[71] with all power and signs and lying
     wonders_[72]--And with all _deceivableness of unrighteousness_ in
     them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth,
     that they might be saved.--And for this cause God shall send them
     strong delusion, that they should believe a lie:[73]--That they all
     might be _damned, who believed not the truth_,[74] but had pleasure
     in unrighteousness."

To this rival of his God--God and rival--both of them of his own
creation, the creator has not, we see, given any name. By this omission,
he has, perhaps, as perhaps he thought to do, rendered the bugbear but
the more terrible. The deficiency, such as it is, the Church of England
translators of the English official translation of the Bible, have
filled up: they have taken it in hand--this bantling of Paul's--and
christened it _Antichrist_. "He," Paul, "showeth," say they, "a
discovery of _Antichrist_, before the day of the Lord come." Such is the
discovery, communicated in the _heading_, prefixed to the second chapter
of the second of the two Epistles: and, of the readers of this so
abundantly and gratuitously distributed Bible, how few are there, by
whom any such distinction as that between the headings and the text is
borne in mind! The right reverend divines in question,--were they the
first authors of this discovery, or was it ready-made to their
hands?--made by that church, from the errors of which their own has been
so felicitously purified? To this question, let those look out for, and
find, the answer,--in whose eyes the profit is worth the trouble.

Not a few are the divines, who have discovered Antichrist sitting in St.
Peter's chair, with a triple crown on his head. In the chair of Luther,
or in that of Calvin, would the triple monarch be disposed to discover
the hobgoblin, if he thought it worth while to look for him. Has he
ever, or has he not, made this discovery already?

"Oh, but," says somebody, "_we_ does not here mean _we_ only who are
alive at this present writing; it means, _we_ Christians of all
ages:--any number of ages _after_ this, as well as this, included. In
the designation thus given, neither the individuals he was addressing,
nor he himself, were necessarily comprehended." This accordingly, if
anything, must be said, or the title of the self-constituted Apostle, to
the appellation of _false prophet_, must be admitted. Oh, yes! this may
be said, and must be said: but what will it avail him? In no such
comprehensive sense did _he_ use it; for, in that sense, it would not
have answered his purposes: not even his spiritual and declared
purposes, much less his temporal, selfish, and concealed purposes. Why
was it that these disciples of his, as well as he, were to be so
incessantly upon the watch! I Thess. 5:6, 7, 8. Why, but because "you
yourselves," says he, ver. 2, "know perfectly, that the day of the Lord
cometh like a thief in the night." Who, on that occasion, could be meant
by _we_, but himself and them? In no such comprehensive sense was it
understood by _them_: if it had been, no such consequences as we have
seen following, could have followed. After the experience he and they
had had, of the mischief produced by the narrow sense put upon the
all-important pronoun, would he have continued thus to use it in that
same narrow sense, if it had not been his wish that in that same sense
it should continue to be understood? Would he have been at all this
pains in creating the spiritual monster, for the declared purpose of
putting off their expectation of the great day, if, but for this
put-off, it would not have come on?[75] In what part of all his
preachings can any distinct ground be seen for any such supposition, as
that any portion of the field of _time_, beyond that by which his own
life was bounded, was ever present to his view? In the field of _place_,
yes: in that field his views were of no small amplitude: for in that
field it was by his ambition that they were marked out: but in the field
of _time_, no symptoms of any the smallest degree of enlargement will
anywhere be found. But, on this occasion, suppose other ages, and those
others to any extent, included in his views: from their including such
future ages, would it follow that they had no application to the age
then present?--But, supposing them understood to apply to that age,
thereupon in comes the mischief in full force.

Any man that has been reading these Epistles,--let him suppose, in his
own breast, any the most anxious desire to raise an expectation, such as
that in question: and then let him ask himself, whether it be in the
power of that desire to suggest language, that would afford any
considerably better promise of giving effect to it.

Of the _nature_ of the _disorder_, as well as of the cause of it,--the
persons, to whom the world is indebted for the preservation of these
remains of the self-constituted Apostle,--have given us, as above, some
conception. Of the _effect_ of the _remedy_, it would have been amusing
to be informed: unfortunately, this portion of his history is not
comprised in the labours of his historiographer.[76]

FOOTNOTES:

[63] The account given by Luke of the resurrection and ascension of
Jesus is contained in the last chapter, chap. 24:53. According to this
account, by no men was Jesus seen in the interval between those two
events, besides the eleven Apostles and a few others, all together not
more than enough, to sit down together at meat, in one of the houses of
a village. Luke 25:9, 28, 29, 30. Number of the occasions on which Jesus
was seen by the Apostles, two: the company the same without addition,
and both occasions having place within twenty-four hours. Between these
two occasions it is that Paul sticks in the one of his own invention, in
which Jesus was seen by above five hundred brethren at once.

Point-blank on this head is the contradiction given to this story of
Paul's, by his own attendant and historiographer: namely, in the account
put into the mouth of Peter, speaking to Centurion Cornelius, Acts 10:39
to 42. Expressly is it there said, ver. 40, "Him" (Jesus) "God raised up
the third day, and showed him openly;--Not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God even to us, who did eat and drink with
him after he rose from the dead." When in the year 62, or some posterior
year, the author of the Acts was writing his history, nothing, it will
be inferred, did he know of the contradictory account given by his hero,
in writing in a letter written in the year 57.

[64] Follows a sample of Paul's logic wrapped up as usual in a cloud of
tautologies and paralogisms, the substance of which amounts to
this:--Jesus resurrects; therefore all men will do the same. Admitting
the legitimacy of this induction, what will be the thing proved? That
every man, a few days after his death, will come to life again, and eat,
drink, and walk in company with his friends.

[65] By the word _prophecy_ the idea meant to be conveyed in Jewish
language seems to be very generally misconceived. It is regarded as
exactly synonymous to _prediction_. Nothing can be more erroneous. In
New Testament language in particular, it is no less applicable to past
events than to future. Witness, "Prophecy who is it that smote thee."
Luke 17:64. In the Greek, the word is occasion, it meant evidently
neither more nor less than _speak out_. Hence it came to signify
speaking in public: hence again, speaking as a statesman: hence again,
writing as a statesman, as well as speaking. Not that a statesman could
ever or can ever be a statesman, and in the above sense, _a prophet_,
without being a _predictor_ likewise: as often as any proposed measure
is on the carpet, such he must be, or what he says must be nothing to
the purpose. Merely by uttering a prediction concerning future events,
Paul would not have included, in his prophecy, any such pretension, as
that of a supernatural communication received from the Almighty: but,
the one here in question was one which, supposing it true, could not
have come from any other source.

[66] Here we have a sort of retractation. This shows how he was
frightened.

[67] Here he gives the intermediate warning; thence the respite.

[68] Here we see the rival of Paul's god: and we see how dangerous an
one.

[69] Like enough; but in the same unintelligible style, in which he
tells all men all things.

[70] All's well that ends well: the friends of the Almighty may now
dismiss their fears.

[71] Here we see the rival of the Almighty sunk into the ape of Satan.
What if he and Satan had made an alliance? Happily they could not agree,
or time was wanting for settling the conditions.

[72] All power, with _lying_ to boot. But for the above-mentioned
assurance, who would not have trembled for Paul's God?

[73] This was fighting the ape of Satan with his own weapons. But--this
God of Paul's creation--in what, except an ultimate superiority of
power, is he distinguishable from Satan and his ape? Those, who have
been so quicksighted of late in the discovery of blasphemy, and so bent
on punishing it,--have they ever found so clear a case as this which is
before us? Would not they have begun at the more proper end, had they
begun with the editors of these Epistles?

[74] For this damnation,--on the present as on so many other occasions,
those who are so eager to believe, that all who differ from them on a
question of evidence, will be consigned to everlasting torments, are
indebted to the right reverend translators: the original says
_condemned_. This may be understood to mean--_damned_ in the ordinary
sense of the word _damned_, or whatever less unpleasant result may be
more agreeable.

[75] Of this child of the self-appointed Apostle's brain, it seems not
altogether improbable, that, in case of need, some further use was in
contemplation to be made: with the skin of this bugbear, might, upon
occasion, be invested, any person, to whom, either in the character of a
declared _adversary_, or in that of a _rival_, it might happen, to have
become in a certain degree troublesome: a _declared adversary_,--that
is, either a Gentile or an unbelieving Jew: _a rival_,--that is, one
who, believing in the religion of Jesus, adhered to that edition of it,
which had the Apostles of Jesus for its publishers, or followed any
other edition which was not _his_: one of those, for example, upon whom
we have seen him making such bitter war in his Epistle to his Galatians.
Of the two, the believing rival would of course be much more
troublesome, than the non-believing adversary, from whom, if let alone,
he would not experience an annoyance. Of this rival class were they
whose "_unrighteousness_," 2 Thess. 2:10, had recourse to
"_deceivableness_:" for as to non-believers, no need could they have of
_deceivableness_; to foil him, they had but to turn aside from him, and
stand as they were. Those men, whose unrighteousness had recourse to
deceivableness, who could they be, but the men of the same description
in this respect as those, whom in chapter third of his Epistle to his
Galatians, he complains of as having "bewitched" them; and _that_ in
such sort, as to have made him so far lose his temper as to call them
"_foolish_:" and that _they_ were rivals, is a matter altogether out of
doubt. In a word, rivals were the only troublesome sort of men, who, at
the writing of this Epistle, could, with the nameless monster since
named _Antichrist_, be yet to come.

[76] As for that "_helmet of faith_," which, in the passage first
quoted, he has been seen commanding his disciples to put on--of that
faith, which is the everlasting object of his so indefatigably repeated
"_command_," and which is always faith in _Paul_,--for of Jesus scarcely
is so much as a word, except the name, to be found in any of his
Epistles,--as to this helmet, it is the sort of cap, which a man learned
how to put on, when he had made himself perfect, in what may be called
the _self-deceptive exercise_, or in a word _the exercise of faith_. It
is composed of two very simple operations: at the word of command, the
recruit turns its face _to_ the arguments on one side; at the word of
command, it turns its back to those on the other side. The test of
perfection is--its being able to hold in its embrace, for any length of
time, both parts together of a self-contradictory proposition; such as,
that three _man's-persons_,--to use the German word, or if any _other
sorts of persons_ there are three others,--are but one. When the helmet
sits close enough on his head to enable him to do this, there is no fear
of its falling off. Holding fast to improbabilities, how absurd and
extravagant soever, is thenceforward but child's play to him:--for
example, belief in the future existence of Paul's Antichrist: including,
the coming on of those scenes, in which that _raw-head and bloody bones_
is to be the principal performer.

To this, as to anything else, the mind of man is capable of being
brought, by assurances of infinite enjoyment, in case of his having made
himself perfect in this exercise, or of infinite torment in case of his
neglecting it: of course, still more effectually, by both assurances put
together; and, considering the facility of both operations, easier terms
could not very easily be imagined. A capital convenience is--that, for
producing faith in this way, not a particle of anything in the shape of
evidence is necessary: the place of evidence is supplied by
assurance:--by the intensity, real or apparent, of the persuasion, to
which expression has been given, by what the preacher has said or done.
The more intense the apparent assurance on the one part, the greater the
apparent _safety_, obtained by yielding to it, on the other: and thus it
is, that no absurdity can be so flagrant, that the side on which it is
found may not be embraced, under the notion of its being the _safe_
side. When Paul, with his accustomed vehemence, was preaching the
world's end, so many of his Thessalonians as believed in it, believed,
that believing in it was being on the safe side. On the part of the
preacher, the more vehement and impudent the assurance, the greater on
the part of the disciple, the apparent _danger_ on the disbelieving, the
apparent _safety_ on the believing side.

By this means are produced the signs and wonders we read of in the
Epistles of our modern missionaries; for, how conclusive soever the
evidence may be, which the assertions they employ might call in for
their support,--conclusive to every reasonable mind by which it was
received,--assuredly it is not by the evidence, but by the unsupported
assertion, that, on the occasion of those exploits of theirs,--whatever
credence has place, is produced.




