CHAPTER XVI.

     _Paul's Doctrines Anti-apostolic_.--_Was he not Anti-Christ?_


SECTION 1.

PAUL'S DOCTRINE WAS AT VARIANCE WITH THAT OF THE APOSTLES.

If Paul's pretensions to a supernatural intercourse with the Almighty
were no better than a pretence;--his visit to Jerusalem, from first to
last, an object of abhorrence to the Apostles and all their disciples;
in a word, to all, who in the birthplace of Christianity, bore the name
of Christian, and were regarded as belonging to the religion of
Jesus;--if, not only to _their_ knowledge, but to that of the whole
population of Jerusalem, he was a depraved character, marked by the
stain,--not merely of habitual insincerity, but of perjury in its most
aggravated form;--if it was no otherwise than by his having declared
himself a Roman citizen, that he escaped from the punishment--apparently
a capital one--attached by the law of the land to the crimes of which he
had been guilty; if, in a word, it was only in places, in which
Jesus--his doctrines, and his Apostles--were alike unknown, that this
self-declared Apostle of Jesus was received as such;--if all, or though
it were but some, of these points may be regarded as established,--any
further proof, in support of the position, that no doctrine of his,
which is not contained in some one or other of the four Gospels, has any
pretension to be regarded as part and parcel of the religion of Jesus,
might well, in any ordinary case, be regarded as superfluous: and, of
the several charges here brought to view, whether there be any one, of
the truth of which the demonstration is not complete, the reader has all
along been invited to consider with himself, and judge. If thereupon the
judgment be condemnatory, the result is--that whatever is in Paul, and
is not to be found in any one of the four Gospels, is not Christianity,
but Paulism.

In any case of ordinary complexion, sufficient then, it is presumed, to
every judicious eye, would be what the reader has seen already: but the
present case is no ordinary case. An error, if such it be, which
notwithstanding all the sources of correction, which in the course of
the work have at length been laid open and brought to view, has now, for
upwards of seventeen centuries past, maintained its ground throughout
the Christian world, cannot, without the utmost reluctance, be parted
with: for dissolving the association so unhappily formed, scarcely,
therefore, can any argument which reason offers be deemed superfluous.

For this purpose, one such argument, though on a preceding occasion
already touched upon, remains to be brought to view. It consists of his
own confession. Confession? say rather avowal: for--such is the temper
of the man--in the way of boasting it is, not in the way of concession
and self-humiliation that he comes out with it. Be this as it may--when,
speaking of the undoubted Apostles, he himself declares, that he has
received nothing from them, and that he has doctrines which are not
theirs, shall he not obtain credence? Yes: for this once, it should
seem, he may, without much danger of error, be taken at his word.

To see this--if he can endure the sight--will not cost the reader much
trouble, Table II. _Paul disbelieved Table_, lies before him. Under the
head of _Independence declared_, in Paul's Epistle to his Galatians,
chapter 1, verses 11, 12, he will find these words. "But I certify you,
brethren, that the Gospel which was _preached of me is not after man_:
for _I neither received it of man_, neither was _I taught, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ_." Thus far Paul. If then it was not received
by him by the revelation of Jesus Christ--this Gospel of his; nor yet,
as he assures us, "_of man_,"--the consequence is a necessary one--it
was made by him, out of his own head.


SECTION 2.

OF CONFORMITY, USE MADE OF THE NAME OF JESUS NO PROOF.

Of the name of Jesus, whatever use he may have made--made (as it was
seen) without authority--can any use, made in contradiction to this his
own confession, afford any the slightest ground for regarding _his_
Gospel, whatever it be,--his Gospel, or any part of it,--as belonging to
the religion of Jesus? If so, then are all impostors the persons they
falsely pretend to be--all counterfeit productions of any kind, genuine
ones.

While preaching to Gentiles at a distance from Jerusalem, from any use
he could have the assurance to make of so revered a name, it is almost
superfluous to observe, how much he had to gain, and how little to lose.
In a case of this sort, how much soever there may be that is offensive
in the demeanour of the pretended agent eulogizing, no part of it is
ascribed to the pretended principal eulogized: and, in such his eulogy,
the pretended agent is not hampered by any of those considerations, by
which he would stand precluded from all prospect of advantage, had he
the effrontery to lay it in equally strong colours on himself. Thus, in
the case of Paul, from putting in the foreground where he did, the name
of Jesus, there was this great advantage to gain: and, the pretended
principal being never present to disavow him, the consequence was--that,
so long as no accredited and credited agents, of that same principal,
were at hand to contradict his pretensions,--the mere name of this
principal would be no obstacle, to the preaching of doctrines, ever so
decidedly at variance with his.

If, on the other hand,--in a company, in which he was preaching
doctrines of his own, which were not Jesus's,--men should happen to be
present, to whom, by reason of their personal acquaintance with Jesus,
or with any immediate disciples of Jesus, these same doctrines of Paul's
should be perceived and declared not to be Jesus's, here would be an
inconvenience: and, on this account,--wherever, without using the name
of Jesus, or any other name than his own, he could be sufficiently
assured, of obtaining a degree of confidence sufficient for his
purpose,--this course, supposing it successful, would, on several
accounts, be more advantageous.

Here then, on each occasion, or at any rate on some occasions, would be
an option for him to make: namely, either to preach in the name of
Jesus, or else to set up for himself:--to set up for himself, and, on
the strength of a pretended revelation from the Almighty, without the
intervention of Jesus, preach in no other human name than his own.

From a passage, in the first of his two Epistles to his Corinthian
disciples, it looks as if an experiment of this kind--an experiment for
adding nominal independence to real--had actually been tried: but that,
the success of it was not such as to be followed by continuance. For
this suspicion--for it is but a suspicion,--any reader who thinks it
worth his while may see the grounds in the subjoined note.[83]


SECTION 3.

PAUL, WAS HE NOT ANTICHRIST?

A child, of Paul's ready and fruitful brain--a bugbear, which the
officious hands of the English official translators of his Epistles,
have in their way christened, so to speak, by the name of
_Antichrist_,--has been already brought to view. See Chap. XII. §. 4. If
there be any persons, to whose religion,--in addition to a devil, with
or without horns and tail,--with or without other spirits, in no less
carnal howsoever unrepulsive forms,--an Antichrist is necessary for the
completion of the polytheistical official establishment; and if, in
place of an ideal, they can put up with a real Antichrist,--an
Antichrist of flesh and blood,--they need not go far to look for one. Of
Saul, alias Paul, the existence is not fabulous. If, in his time, a
being there was, in whom, with the exception of some two or three
attendants of his own, every person, that bore the name of Christian,
beheld, and felt an opponent, and that opponent an indefatigable
adversary, it was this same Paul: Yes, such he was, if, in this
particular, one may venture to give credence, to what has been seen so
continually testified,--testified, not by any enemy of his, but by his
own dependent,--his own historiographer,--his own panegyrist,--his own
steady friend. Here then, for anybody that wants an Antichrist, here is
an Antichrist, and he an undeniable one.

Antichrist, as everybody sees, Antichrist means neither more nor less
than that which is opposed to Christ. To Christ himself, the bugbear,
christened by the English bishops _Antichrist_, was not, by its creator,
spoken of as opposing itself. To Christ himself, Paul himself could not,
at that time, be an opponent: the Jesus, whom he called Christ, was no
longer in the flesh. But of all that, in the customary figurative
sense--of all that, in any intelligible sense, could on this occasion be
called _Christ_--namely, the real Apostles of Jesus, and their disciples
and followers,--Paul, if he himself is to be believed, was an opponent,
if ever there was one.

Paul preached the resurrection of the dead. Agreed. But did not all
Pharisees do so, too? And was not Paul a Pharisee? And Jesus--had he not
in all Pharisees so many opponents? And the real Christians, had they
anywhere in his lifetime, any other opponent so acrid or so persevering
as this same Paul?

Paul preached the resurrection of the dead. Agreed. But _that_
resurrection of the dead which he preached, was it not a resurrection,
that was to take place in the lifetime of himself and other persons then
living? And--any such resurrection, did it accordingly take place?[84]

FOOTNOTES:

[83] "Were ye baptized," says he, speaking to his Corinthians, 2 Cor.
ii. 13. "Were ye baptized in the name of Paul?--I thank God," continues
he, "that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius,--Lest any man
should say that I had baptized in mine own name.--And I baptized also
the household of Stephanas; besides, I know not whether I baptized any
other." For an experiment of this kind, it should seem from that
Epistle, that motives were by no means wanting. For, among these same
disciples, in the preaching of his doctrines, he had found himself
annoyed by divers names more or less formidable: there was the name,
though probably never the person--of _Cephas_, the real Hebrew name, of
which, in the four Gospels, written as they are in Greek, _Peter_ is the
translation: there was the name, and not improbably the person--of
_Apollos_, whom, about three years before, Acts 18:18-26, two female
disciples of Paul's, Aquila and Priscilla, had at Ephesus enlisted under
his banners: there was, according to him, _the name of Christ_, though
assuredly, never the person of _Jesus_.

"For it hath been declared unto me of you, brethren," says he, 1 Cor. i.
11, "that there are contentions among you,--Now this I say, that every
one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I
of Christ." Thereupon follows immediately a short flourish of Paulian
eloquence:--"Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul?" and so forth, as above.

"Division," says he, "among you:" in this phrase may be seen the style
of modern royalty. Towards a will so intimately connected with the
divine as the royal, no such temper of mind, so intolerable as
opposition, is ever to be supposed: were it on all occasions equally
known--known to all, and alike interpreted by all, no division could
have place: but, some put one interpretation upon it, some another: in
some eyes, this course is regarded as best adapted to the giving effect
to it; in others, that: hence that division, to which, on every
occasion, it is the duty of all to put the speediest end. Now then as to
Paul. This same assumed fatherly affection, under the name of
elder-brotherly--this desire of seeing concord among brethren--what was
it in plain truth? Answer, love of power. Would you have proof? Take in
hand this same Epistle of his to his Corinthians, or, if at verse the
tenth, it will be to this purpose early enough, and read on, till you
come to chapter iv. verses 15, 16. "Now I beseech you, brethren, by the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.--For it hath been
declared unto me," and so forth, as above. Read on, and at length you
will come to the essence of all this good advice, 1 Cor. 4:15. "For,
though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ," says he, "yet have
ye not many fathers; for, in Christ Jesus, _I have begotten you_,
through the Gospel.--Wherefore, I beseech you, _be ye followers of me_."

At this time, it should seem that, on the occasion of this his courtship
of the Jews of Corinth, not only was the name of Peter an object of his
declared rivalry, but the name and person of his own sub-disciple
Apollos, an object of his jealousy. "For, while one saith," 1 Cor. iii.
4, "I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are ye not," says he,
"carnal?--Who then," continues he, "is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?--I
have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.--Now he that
planteth and he that watereth are one; and every man shall receive his
own reward according to his own labour." Fifteen verses after comes a
flourish, in which Apollos is spoken of for the last time. "Whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours;--23. And ye are Christ's, and
Christ is God's." At the word _Cephas_ ends, it may have been observed,
common sense: what follows being dust for the eyes: dust, composed of
the flowers of Saulo-Paulian eloquence.

As to Apollos, if so it was, that, at one time, in the mind of our
spiritual monarch, any such sentiment as jealousy, in regard to this
sub-minister had place, it seems to have been afterwards, in some way or
other, removed: for, in his Epistle to Titus, bearing date about seven
years after, namely A.D. 64, the devotion of the subject seems to have
been entire. Speaking to Titus, Tit. 3:13, "Bring with you," says Paul,
"Zenas the lawyer, and Apollos, on their journey diligently, that
nothing be wanting to them."

[84] Paul must have thought that he had the Church at Corinth under
complete control of his hypnotic suggestion or otherwise so much under
his control as to assume the exalted office of Clairvoyant Oracle
without question. He says, 2 Cor. 1-7, "I must needs glory, though it is
not expedient; but I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord, I
know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body I know
not; or whether out of the body, I know not, God knoweth). Such a one
caught up even to the third heaven. And I know such a man (whether in
the body, or apart from the body, I know not, God knoweth); how that he
was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for a man to utter. On behalf of such a one will I glory: but
on mine own behalf I will not glory, save in my weakness. For if I
should desire to glory, I shall not be foolish; for I shall speak the
truth: but I forbear, lest any man should account of me above that which
he seeth me to be, or heareth from me.

"And by reason of the exceeding greatness of the revelations--wherefore,
that I should not be exalted overmuch, there was given to me _a thorn in
the flesh_, a messenger of Satan to buffet me, that I should not be
exalted overmuch. Concerning this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me.

"And he has said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee."

It would require a Swift, Dryden, Pope, Milton or Knowles to stage the
above so as make appreciable objective quantities out of the above
verbal terms. They might create characters and give them the plumage of
angels, nymphs, spirits, heathen gods, etc., and so feast the
imagination into paranoia.

"Thorn in the flesh." This phrase has baffled the Ecclesiastics. The
earlier Commentators interpreted it to mean Paul's great disappointment
in all his schemes to subordinate the Apostles of Christ to his
personal dominion of which so much has been disparaged by the author.




END.




INDEX TO CONTENTS.


  TABLE I-XXII


  CHAPTER I.

  Paul's Conversion. Improbability and Discordancy of the
  Accounts of it                                                     1

  1. List of these Accounts, with preliminary Observations.
     Table in which they are confronted                              1

  2. Vision I. Dialogue on the road: Paul hears a voice,
     sees nothing                                                    8

  3. Vision II. Ananias's                                       21, 34

  4. Ananias: his Visit to Paul at Damascus                     26, 57

  5. Vision III. Paul's anterior Vision, as reported by the
     Lord to Ananias. _Acts_ ix. 12                                 62

  6. Visions, why two or three, instead of one?                     64

  7. Commission to Paul by Jerusalem Rulers--Commission
     to bring in Bonds Damascus Christians--Paul's Contempt
     put upon it                                                    69

  8. Companions--had Paul any upon the road?                        72

  9. In Paul's Epistle to his Galatians,--by his silence, Acts
     Accounts of his Conversion are virtually contradicted          77


  TABLE II

  CHAPTER II.

  Outward Conversion--how produced--how planned                     89

  1. Motive, Temporal Advantage--Plan                               93

  2. At Damascus, no such Ananias probably                          97

  3. On Damascus journey--Companions none                          100

  4. Flight from Damascus: Causes--false--true                     101

  5. Arabia Visit--mentioned by Paul, not _Acts_              108, 113

  6. Gamaliel--had he part in Paul's plan?                         125


  CHAPTER III.

  _Paul disbelieved_.--Neither his divine Commission nor his
  inward Conversion ever credited by the Apostles or their
  Jerusalem Disciples.--Source of Proof stated                     135

  1. To Paul's Conversion Vision, sole original Witness
  himself                                                          135

  2. Counter-Witnesses, the Apostles: by them, the Story
     probably not heard--certainly not credited                    136

  3. In proof, so much of the _Acts_ history must here be
     anticipated                                                   138

  4. Topics under his several Jerusalem Visits: _viz_.
     I. Reconciliation Visit                                  139, 143

  5. Topics under Visit II.--Money-bringing Visit                  153

  6. Remarks on Visit III.--Deputation Visit                       154

  7. Topics under Visit IV.--Invasion Visit                        156

  8. Self-written Biography--its superior Value and Claim
     to Credence                                                   159


  CHAPTER IV.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued. _First_ of his four Visits
  to Jerusalem after his Conversion--say _Jerusalem Visit
  I_. or _Reconciliation Visit_.--Barnabas introducing him
  from Antioch to the Apostles                                     160

  1. Paul's Proceedings between his Conversion and this
     Visit.--Contradiction. Per Paul, it was not till after
     three Years spent in Arabia; per _Acts_, immediately          164

  2. Grounds of Paul's Prospect of Reconciliation on this
     Occasion with the Apostles and their Disciples                171

  3. Occasion of this Visit, as per _Paul's_ own Account           177

  4. Occasion, as per _Acts_ Account compared with Paul's          180

  5. Cause of the Discordance between the two Accounts             188

  6. Length of this Visit                                          192

  7. Mode and Cause of its Termination                             197


  CHAPTER V.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued. _Jerusalem Visit II._
  _Money-bringing Visit._--Barnabas accompanying him
  from Antioch                                                     203

  1. At Antioch, Agabus having predicted a Dearth, Money
     is collected for the Jerusalem Saints                         203


  2. Barnabas and Paul dispatched with the Money to Jerusalem      208


  CHAPTER VI.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued.--_Jerusalem Visit III._
  _Deputation Visit._--_Paul_ and _Barnabas_ delegated by
  _Antioch_ Saints, to confer on the Necessity of Jewish Rites
  to Heathen Converts to the Religion of Jesus                     211

  1. Occasion of this Visit                                        211

  2. The Delegates how received.--Council of Apostles and
     Elders                                                        215

  3. Debates--Course carried by _James_ against _Peter_            220

  4. Result, supposed Apostolic Decree and Letter to
     _Antioch_, which, per _Acts_, Paul circulates                 224


  CHAPTER VII.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued. After his third Jerusalem
  Visit, Contest between him and _Peter_ at Antioch.
  _Partition Treaty_: _Paul_ for himself: _Peter_, _James_
  and _John_ for the Apostles                                      228

  1. _Contest_ and _Partition-Treaty_, as per _Acts_ and
     _Paul's Epistles_                                             228

  2. Partition-Treaty--_Probability_, given by the _financial
     Stipulation_, to Paul's Account of it                         238

  3. _Time_ of the Partition-Treaty, most probably that of
     _Visit I_                                                     242


  CHAPTER VIII.

  _Interview the Fourth._--_Peter_ at _Antioch_.--Deputies to
  Antioch from Jerusalem, _Judas_ and _Silas_.--Paul disagrees
  with _Peter_ and _Barnabas_, quits Antioch, and on a
  Missionary Excursion takes with him _Silas_. What concerns
  the Partition Treaty, down to this Period, reviewed.--Peter
  and the Apostles justified                                       249

  1. _Paul's_ Account of this Interview quoted.--_Acts_
     Account of what followed upon it                              249

  2. Paul disagrees with _Peter_ and _Barnabas_; quits
     Antioch, taking _Silas_ from the Apostles                     252

  3. The _Partition Treaty_, and the proceedings in relation
     to it, down to this Period, _reviewed_                        255

  4. Peter and the Apostles justified, as to the _financial
     Stipulation_ in the Treaty, and the succeeding Missionary
     Labours of _Peter_ among the _Gentiles_                       258


  CHAPTER IX.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued.--_Jerusalem Visit IV._ and
  last _Invasion Visit_. The Purpose concealed: Opposition
  universal; among his own Disciples, and among those of the
  Apostles                                                         266

  1. Motives to this Visit                                         266

  2. The Visit _announced_ by Paul and _deferred_                  267

  3. The design indefensible                                       272

  4. Opposition made to it by his own _attendants_ and other
     _adherents_                                                   275

  5. Opposition made to it by the _Apostles_ and their
     disciples                                                     277

  6. Plan of the _Apostles_ for _ridding themselves_ of Paul       282


  CHAPTER X.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued.--_Jerusalem Visit IV._
  continued. His Arrival and Reception. Accused by all the
  Disciples of the Apostles, he commences an _exculpatory
  Oath_ in the Temple. Dragged out by them--rescued by a
  Roman Commander--sent in Custody to Rome                         288

  1. At Jerusalem, Paul is received by the _Elders_ and
     _James_; but by _no other Apostle_                            288

  2. Low Tone assumed by him on this Occasion                      291

  3. Posterior to all his supposed Miracles, his Silence
     proves them unreal                                            295

  4. Accused by the Disciples, he commences, at the
     Recommendation of the Apostles, an _exculpatory
     Oath_ in the Temple                                           298

  5. The Design of this Recommendation justified                   308

  6. Dragged out of the Temple by _Jews_ or _Christians_,
     he is saved by a Roman Commander                              309


  CHAPTER XI.

  _Paul disbelieved_ continued.--Paul's _fourth Jerusalem
  Visit_ continued. _Perjurious_ was the Purpose of the
  exculpatory Ceremony commenced in the Temple                     310

  1. General Proof of the Perjury from the Acts                    310

  2. Proof from the Epistles                                       327


  CHAPTER XII.

  More Falsehoods.--Resurrection-Witnesses multiplied.--World's
  End predicted.--To save credit, Antichrist invented              333

  1. Resurrection-Witnesses multiplied                             333

  2. False Prophecy, that the World would end in the Lifetime
     of Persons then living                                        338

  3. Disorder and Mischief produced by this Prediction             343

  4. Paul's Remedy for the Disorder, and Salvo for himself.
     _Antichrist_ must first come                                  347


  CHAPTER XIII.

  Paul's supposable _Miracles_ explained                           354

  1. Objections, applying to them in the Aggregate                 354

  2. Supposable Miracle I. Elymas the Sorcerer blinded.--_Acts_
     xiii. 6-12                                                    358

  3. Supposable Miracle II.--At Lystra, Cripple cured.--_Acts_
     xiv. 8-11                                                     361

  4. Supposable Miracle III.--Divineress silenced.--_Acts_
     xvi 16-18                                                     362

  5. Supposable Miracle IV.--At Philippi, an Earthquake:
     Paul and Silas freed from Prison, A.D. 53                     365

  6. Supposable Miracle V.--At Corinth, Paul comforted by
     the Lord in an _unseen_ Vision, A.D. 54--_Acts_
     xviii. 7-11                                                   369

  7. Supposable Miracle VI.--At Ephesus, Diseases and
     Devils expelled by foul Handkerchiefs.--_Acts_
     xix. 1-12                                                     372

  8. Supposable Miracle VII.--At Ephesus, Exorcist Scevas
     bedeviled.--_Acts_ xix. 13-20                                 373

  9. Supposable Miracle VIII.--Magical Books burnt by the
     Owners.--_Acts_ xix. 19, 20                                   380

 10. Supposable Miracle IX.--At Troas, Eutychus found
     not to be dead.--_Acts_ xx. 7-12                              382

 11. Supposable Miracle X.--On Shipboard, Paul comforted
     by an Angel.--_Acts_ xxvii. 20-25                             385

 12. Supposable Miracle XI.--At Malta, a Reptile shaken off
     by Paul without hurt.--_Acts_ xxviii. 1-6                     386

 13. Supposable Miracle XII.--At Malta, Deputy Publius's
     Father cured.--_Acts_ xxviii. 7, 8                            389

 14. Conclusion: the Supposable Miracles classed and
     summed up                                                     393


  CHAPTER XIV.

  Acts, Part false, Part true: Author not Saint Luke               397

  1. By the false Parts, the Gospel not affected: most Parts
     true                                                          397

  2. Time between Resurrection and Ascension--Acts contradicts
     Luke                                                          398

  3. As to Ascension, Acts inconsistent with Luke                  403


  CHAPTER XV.

  Law Report.--Jews _versus_ Paul: Trials five, with
  Observations                                                     406

  1. Introduction                                                  406

  2. Trial I. Place, Jerusalem-Temple.--Judicatory, the mixed
     Multitude.--_Acts_ xxii. 1-21                                 407

  3. Trial II. Judicatory, Jerusalem Council-Board.--_Acts_
     xxiii. 1-10                                                   409

  4. Trial III. Place, Cæsarea.--_Acts_ xxiv. 1-23                413

  5. Trial IV. Place, again, Cæsarea.--_Acts_ xxv. 1-12           417

  6. Trial V. and last.--Place, still Cæsarea                     420


  CHAPTER XVI.

  Paul's Doctrines Anti-Apostolic.--Was he not Antichrist?         426

  1. Paul's Doctrine was at variance with that of the
     Apostles                                                      426

  2. Of Conformity, use made of the Name of Jesus no Proof         428

  3. Paul, was he not Antichrist?                                  432


       *       *       *       *       *

TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:
Punctuation corrected without comment. Original spelling retained with
the exception of the following apparent typesetting errors:

Pg iv "D'unning's" changed to "Dunning's"--"Dunning's clearness"

Pg xxiv "Stright" changed to "Straight"--"street which is called
Straight,"

Pg 13 "read" changed to "road"--"in the road leading"; "was" changed
to "what"--"But what is"

Pg 14 "superservicable" changed to "superserviceable"--"such a
superserviceable witness"

Pg 75 "proveable" changed to "provable"--"real and provable facts."

Pg 79 "he" changed to "the"--"uprightly according to the truth of the
gospel"

Pg 81 "Casearea" changed to "Caesarea"--"down to Caesarea"

Pg 82 "Cladius" changed to "Claudius"--"in the days of Claudius"

Pg 83 "Gentile" changed to "Gentiles"--"among the Gentiles"; missing
word "brethren" added "unto the brethren"

Pg 84 "the" changed to "they"--"when they were dismissed"; "Casearea"
changed to "Caesarea"--"landed at Caesarea"

Pg 119 "pourtrayed" changed to "portrayed"--"is not ill portrayed"

Pg 120 "woud" changed to "would"--"Ephesus would not"; "coud" changed
to "could"--"could not have endured"

Pg 142 and 226 "Galacia" changed to "Galatia"--"Galatia stands fifth,"
and "over [all] Galatia"

Pg 178 numbering corrected. Original had two 1's.

Pg 179 "narative" changed to "narrative"--"in such case, the narrative"

Pg 222 "cosideration" changed to "consideration"--"is the consideration,
upon"

Pg 251 "saled" changed to "sailed"--"Mark and sailed unto"

Pg 261 "has" changed to "his"--"Had his mind been"

Pg 262 "unsatifactory" changed to "unsatisfactory"--"not altogether
unsatisfactory"

Pg 273 "probably" changed to "probable"--"so much as probable.";
"ligitimate" changed to "legitimate"--"the only legitimate government:"

Pg 275 "attedant" changed to "attendant"--"of his attendant"

Pg 280 "distiguished" changed to "distinguished"--"distinguished by
the name"; "dissuation" changed to "dissuasion"--"was a dissuasion to
the"

Pg 292 "and" changed to "an"--"an old disciple"

Pg 296 "irrestible" changed to "irresistible"--"so perfectly
irresistible."

Pg 318 "previoulsy" changed to "previously"--"it was previously
requisite"

Pg 319 "chcarge" changed to "charge"--"took charge of her."

Pg 337 "be to" changed to "to be"--"not to be forgotten."

Pg 363 "in" changed to "on"--"on their way"

Pg 365 "absurb" changed to "absurd"--"too absurd and flagrantly"

Pg 366 "succussful" changed to "successful"--"instance been successful"

Pg 376 "epirits" changed to "spirits"--"masters over evil spirits"

Pg 386 missing word "be" added--"purpose was to be answered"; "their"
changed to "theirs"--"conceptions of theirs reported,"

Pg 415 numbering corrected, II changed to III; 13 changed to 10.

Pg 438 "Galations" changed to "Galatians"--"In Paul's Epistle to
his Galatians"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Not Paul, But Jesus, by Jeremy Bentham

