CHAPTER XV.

     _Law Report.--Jews versus Paul: Trials five, with Observations._


SECTION 1.

INTRODUCTION.

On the occasion of what passed at the Temple, the report of a great
law-case,--to speak in modern and English language,--the case of _The
Jews against Paul_, was begun. The judicatory before which he underwent
that trial,--partly before the Jewish multitude, partly before the Roman
chief by whom he was rescued,--was a sort of mixed and extempore
judicatory, something betwixt a legal and an illegal one: for, as has
been seen in the case of Saint Stephen, and as may be seen in the case
of the woman taken in adultery, and moreover, in the body of the law
itself, a sort of mob-law might, not altogether without ground, be
stated as forming part and parcel of the law of Moses. To this sort of
irregular trial, succeeded, before the definite judgment was pronounced,
no fewer than four others, each of them before a tribunal, as regular as
any the most zealous supporter of what is called legitimacy could
desire. In execution of this definitive judgment it was, that Paul was
sent, on that half-forced, half-voluntary expedition of his, to Rome: at
which place, on his arrival at that capital, the Acts history closes. Of
the reports of these several trials, as given in the Acts,--follows a
summary view, accompanied with a few remarks for elucidation.


SECTION 2.

TRIAL I. PLACE, JERUSALEM TEMPLE.--JUDICATORY, THE MIXED
MULTITUDE.--_Acts_ 22:1 to 21.

Scene, the Temple. Judges, prosecutors, and--stated as intended
executioners, a Jerusalem multitude. Sole class, by whom any declared or
special cause of irritation had been received, the Christianized Jews,
provoked by Paul's preachings against the law of the land, to which they
as yet maintained their adherence; by his intrusion upon their society,
by which, were it only for his former persecution, he could not but be
abhorred; and by the notorious perjury he was at that moment committing,
having chosen to commit it, rather than cease to obtrude upon them the
object of their abhorrence.

Of the particulars of the accusation nothing is said: but, the above
circumstances, and the subsequent charges made upon him the next day by
the constituted authorities,--who immediately took up the matter, and
carried on a regular prosecution against him,--sufficiently show, what,
if expressed, would have been the purport of them. By the preparations
made for execution, we shall see broken off the defence, before it had
come, if ever it was designed to come, to the substance of the alleged
offence.

Points touched upon in it are these:--

1. Defendant's birthplace, Tarsus; parentage, Jewish; religious
persuasion, Pharasaical; education, under Gamaliel, verse 3.

2. Part, borne by him, in the persecution of the Christians, when
Stephen was stoned: his commission for that purpose stated, and the High
Priest and Elders called to witness, verses 4 and 5.

     N.B. Time of _that_ same commission, according to the received
     chronology, not less than 26 years before this.

3. Story, of that first vision, of which so much has been seen: namely,
that from whence his conversion was dated: occasion, his journey to
Damascus, for the execution of that same commission, verses 6 to 16.

4. Story of his trance: for this see Chapter IV. §. 7. In this state,
"the Lord" seen by him.--_Lord to Defendant._ "Get thee quickly out of
Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me."
_Defendant, to Lord._ Informing or reminding said Lord of the details of
the part borne by said defendant in the persecution of Saint
Stephen.--_Lord to Defendant._ "Depart, for I will send thee far hence
unto the Gentiles." Note, Defendant cut short: Lord's patience no match
for defendant's eloquence.

_Judges and executioners._--At the word _Gentiles_, exclamation:--"Away
with him ... he is not fit to live":--clothes cast off, as in Stephen's
case, as if to prepare for stoning him.[81] "Dust thrown into the air."
Present, chief captain Claudius Lysias, who commands him to be "brought
into the castle," and "examined by scourging." While, for this purpose,
they are binding him, on Defendant crying out, "_I am a Roman citizen_,"
the binding ceases, no scourging commences: the next day he is released,
and the "chief priests and all their council" are "sent for," and
Defendant is "set before them."


SECTION 3.

TRIAL II. JUDICATORY, JERUSALEM COUNCIL-BOARD.--_Acts_ 23:1 to 10.

Judges, chief priests in council assembled: present, the high priests.
Prosecutors, the said judge: other prosecutors, as far as appears, none.
In modern Rome-bred law, this mode of procedure, in which the parts of
judge and prosecutor are performed by the same person, is styled the
_inquisitorial_: in contradistinction to this, that in which the part of
prosecutor is borne by a different person, is stiled the _accusatorial_.

Charges or questions put, not stated.

_Defendant._ "I am a Pharisee ... the son of a Pharisee. Of the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am called in question."

Thereupon, ver. 9, "great cry" ...--"Great dissention." "Chief captain,
fearing lest," Defendant, "Paul should have been pulled in pieces of
them," inuendo the said judges, "commands soldiers," who take him back
into the castle.

"Cry? dissention?"--whence all this? Acts has not here been explicit
enough to inform us. As to Defendant's plea, that it was for believing
in the resurrection that he was prosecuted,--what could not but be
perfectly known to him was,--that it neither was true, nor by
possibility could be so. Among said Judges, parties two--Pharisees and
Sadducees: Pharisees the predominant. "The Sadducees," on this occasion,
says ver. 8, "say there is no resurrection, neither angel nor spirit;
but the Pharisees confess both." Prosecuting a Pharisee for preaching
the resurrection, meaning always the general resurrection, would have
been as if a Church-of-Englandist Priest were indicted in the King's
Bench, for reading the Athanasian creed. Accordingly--it was a stratagem
of the Defendant's--this same misstatement: such it is expressly stated
to be:--when defendant "_perceived_," ver. 6, "that the one part were
Sadducees, and the other Pharisees,"--then it was that he came out with
it: and, already it has been seen, how effectually it answered its
purpose.

Enter once more the history of the _trance_. Note here the sudden
termination of Defendant's first Jerusalem visit, alias his
_Reconciliation Visit_, and turn back to Chapter IV. §. 7, Cause of
it,--historian speaking in his own person--"Grecians," Acts 9:29, "went
about to slay him," for disputing with them:--historian, speaking, to
wit, here, in defendant's person, Christianized Jews' disbelief of his
conversion, and of that vision story of his, that he produced in
evidence of it. It is on the occasion of the just-mentioned Temple
trial, that Defendant is made to come out with it. On that occasion, as
hath been seen, it was of no use: but, in this second trial, it will be
seen to be of prime use. That it was told over again at this trial is
not indeed expressly said: but, that it was so is sufficiently manifest.
This and no other is the handle which his supporters in the council lay
hold of: and this they could not have done, had he not, as will be seen
presently, put it into their hands. "The Scribes," says ver. 9, "that
were of the Pharisees' part, arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil
in this man; but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not
fight against God." Well then--this spirit, or this angel, who was he?
Who but that spirit, whom defendant had so manifestly told them of, and
who was no other than that "_Lord_" of his, whom he had seen in the
trance: in the trance, which, while the multitude were beating him,
invention had furnished him with for the purpose.

Mark now, how apposite a weapon the Pharisees found, in this same
trance, in their war against the Sadducees. As to Jesus,--though from
first to last, so far from being recognized by their sect, he had been
the object of that enmity of theirs under which he sunk,--yet, so far
as, in general terms, he preached the _general_ resurrection,--his
doctrine not only agreed with theirs, but was of no small use to them:
it was of use to them, against those political rivals, whose opposition
to their sect was the sole cause of everything that was troublesome to
it. As to Paul,--had he confined himself, to the speaking of Jesus's
_particular_ resurrection,--this indeed was what no Pharisee could be
disposed to admit: but if, by Paul or anyone else, Jesus, or any other
person, was at any time seen in an incorporeal state,--here was a piece
of evidence on their side. With relation to any interview of the
_Apostles_ with Jesus after his resurrection, nothing that Paul had to
say--to say with truth or colour of truth--was anything more than
_hearsay_ evidence: but, as to that, which on this occasion, he had been
relating about the Lord, whom he had seen in his trance,--this, how
false soever, was not only _direct_, but _immediate_ evidence: evidence,
in the delivery of which, the _relating_ witness stated himself to have
been, with relation to the alleged fact in question, a _percipient_
witness.

That, on this occasion, Paul dwelt, with any particularity, on the
appearance of Jesus in the flesh after his resurrection, is not said:
and, as it would not have contributed anything to the purpose, the less
particular the safer and the better. _Lord_ or not _Lord_, that which
appeared was at any rate a _spirit_: and for the war against the
Sadducees, a spirit was all that was wanted: no matter of what sort.


SECTION 4.

TRIAL III. PLACE, CÆSAREA.--_Acts_ 24:1-23.

SCENE, "Governor" Felix's judicatory. Judge, said Governor. Prosecutor,
Orator Tertullus: Present, his clients,--the "High Priest" and "the
Elders." Procedure, accusatorial. Time, "twelve days," ver. 11, "after
Trial 1; eleven, after Trial 2."

I. Counsel's Speech--Points touched upon in it, these:--verses 1-4.

1. Opening compliment to Governor Judge.--His "providence" and
"clemency."

II. 1. Vituperative surplusage, of course, as if in B. R.: though not
paid for, in fees and taxes, by the sheet.--Defendant, "a pestilent
fellow."

Charges three. To make the matter more intelligible, had the proceeding
been by writing in the first instance, they might have been styled
counts.

2. Charge 1. Defendant "a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the world."

3. Charge 2. Said Defendant "a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes."

4. Charge 3. Defendant "gone about to profane the temple."

5. Statement made of Trial 2, and the termination given to it by Roman
chief captain Lysias, taking said Defendant out of their hands, and
commanding accusers' appearance in this court: verses 7, 8.

6. _Viva voce_ evidence accordant: witnesses, neither quality nor number
stated. "And _the Jews_ also assented, saying that these things were
so." ver. 9.

III. Defendant's defence: verses 10-21.

Points touched upon in it, these:--

1. Defendant's confidence in this his judge.

2. At Jerusalem "to worship" was his errand. The ostensible one, yes: of
the real one,--supplanting the Apostles,--of course nothing said.

3. In the temple, defendant was not "found by _them_," by whom?
"disputing with any man." Disputing? No. It was to take the oath--the
seven-days-long false oath,--that he went there:--this, and nothing
else. The priests, in whose keeping he was, and on whose acceptance the
validity and efficacy of the ceremony depended, were not men to be
disputed with.

4. Defendant not found by them "raising up the people, neither in the
synagogues, nor in the city." ver. 12. No: neither was any such raising
charged upon him: nor would it have suited his purpose. Seditious _acts_
are one thing; seditious _discourses_, another. From seditious acts he
had nothing to gain; from seditious discourses everything: to wit, in so
far as the effect of it was to weaken men's attachment to the law of the
land, and engage them to transfer it to the schism he had raised in the
religion of Jesus.

5. General denial: but not amounting to _Not Guilty_. "Neither _can they
prove_ the things whereof they now accuse me." ver. 13.

6. In verses 14, 15, 16, matter nothing to the purpose. Orthodox his
belief: among the objects of it, the resurrection: void of offence
towards God and man, his conscience.

7. False pretence--object of this his visit to Jerusalem--of this his
_Invasion Visit_--falsely stated. "Now after many years I came to bring
alms to my nation, and offerings." ver. 17.

8. When Defendant was "found purified in the temple," it was "neither
with multitude, nor with tumult." True: but nothing to the purpose: the
priests, in whose boarding-house he was, while the _purifying_, that is
to say, the eating and paying, process was carrying on, were not a
_multitude_: nor would _tumult_ have been either profitable or
practicable.

9. The men, who so found Defendant there, were "certain Jews from Asia,"
and, if they were accusers or witnesses, ought to have appeared in that
character on the present occasion. "Who ought," says ver. 19, "to have
been here before thee, and object, if they had aught against me." Ought?
why ought they? Defendant called no witnesses: by non-appearance of
witnesses, if against him, so far from being injured, he was benefited.
The proceeding, too, was _inquisitorial_, not _accusatorial_: it
required no accusers. Jews of Asia indeed? as if there were any Jews of
Asia, to whom any more natural or legitimate cause of indignation could
have been given by his misdeeds, than had been given by them to all the
Jews in Jerusalem, not to speak of the rest of the world, or the
Christianized Jews.

10. By Defendant's saying to the judges in Trial 2, that it was for
preaching the resurrection that he stood accused by and before them--by
this, without anything else, the indignation thereupon expressed by them
against him had been excited. "Or else," say verses 20, 21, "let these
same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me, while I stood
before the council, Except it be for this one voice, that I cried,
standing among them, Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called
in question by you this day."

Follows the judge's decision, "When Felix," says ver. 22, "heard these
things, having more perfect knowledge of that way, he deferred them, and
said, When Lysias the chief captain shall come down, I will know the
uttermost of your matter." Such is stated to have been the decision of
the judge: and, so far as regarded what passed on Defendant's trial
before Jerusalem council, it was clearly the only proper one: a more
impartial, as well as, in every point of view, suitable witness, the
case could hardly have afforded: and, as to the main question, nothing
could be more natural, than that what it had fallen in Lysias's way on
that occasion to observe, might afford instructive light.

Interlocutory order. Defendant recommitted: but access to him free for
everybody. "And he commanded a centurion," says ver. 23, "to keep Paul,
and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his
acquaintance to minister, or come unto him."

In this state continues Paul for "two years": at which time, says ver.
27, "Porcius Festus came into Felix's room: and Felix, willing to show
the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound."

In verses 24, 25, 26, this interval of delay is filled up with an
account, such as it is, of certain intrigues, of which the Defendant was
the subject. The Roman has a Jewess for his wife. The prisoner is sent
for, and wife shares with husband the benefit of his eloquence.
Self-constituted Apostle preaches: heathen trembles: trembling, however,
prevents not his "hoping" to get money out of the prisoner, if this part
of the history is to be believed. "And after certain days," says ver.
24, "when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a Jewess, he
sent for Paul, and heard him concerning," what is here called, "the
faith in Christ." Faith _in Christ_ indeed? After the word _faith_, the
word _Christ_ costs no more to write than the word _Paul_: but in
whatever was said about faith by Paul, which would be the most prominent
figure,--Christ or Paul--may by this time be imagined. As for any faith
which it was in the nature of the case, that the Roman heathen should
derive from the Greek Jew's eloquence, it must have been faith in Paul,
and Paul only. Paul he had seen and heard, Christ he had neither seen
nor heard; nor, for aught that appears, anything concerning him, till
that very time.

"And as he reasoned," says ver. 25, "of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this
time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee. He hoped,"
continues ver. 26, "that money should have been given him of Paul, that
he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed
with him."


SECTION 5.

TRIAL IV. PLACE AGAIN, CÆSAREA.--_Acts_ 25:1-12.

SCENE, Cæsarea judicatory.--Judge, new Roman governor, Festus.
Accusers, "Jews," not named, sent by the high priest and his colleagues
from Jerusalem to Cæsarea for the purpose. Defendant still in the
prison at Cæsarea: Roman judge, at Jerusalem. Prosecutors, the council
there--petition to have Defendant brought thither. Judge chooses rather
to go to him at Cæsarea, than thus send for him to Jerusalem.

According to the _historian_, it was for the purpose of causing
Defendant to be murdered, in the way to the judicatory, that the
prosecutors were so earnest as they were to obtain the _habeas corpus_:
according to _probability_, it was for any purpose, rather than that of
committing any such outrage upon the authority of their constituted
superior, with an army at his command. Be this as it may, instead of
sending for Defendant to Jerusalem, the judge returned himself to
Cæsarea.

"Now," says ver. 1, "when Festus was come into the province, after three
days he ascended from Cæsarea to Jerusalem.--Then the high priest and
the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him.--And
desired favour against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem,
laying wait in the way to kill him.--But Festus answered, that Paul
should be kept at Cæsarea, and that he himself would depart shortly
thither.--Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down
with me, and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him.--And
when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went down unto
Cæsarea; and the next day sitting on the judgment-seat commanded Paul
to be brought."

Charges, not particularized: said of them, not so much as that they were
the same as before. "Many and grievous complaints against Paul, which
they could not prove": ver. 7--such is the only account given of them.

Defence--points contained in it. As before, no offence, says ver. 8,
against the law--no offence against "the temple." One point added, "Nor
yet against Caesar." Good. But how comes this here? Here we have a
defence, against what, it is plain, was never charged.

_Festus_--judge, to Defendant, ver. 9: "Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem,
and there be judged of these things _before me_?"

Defendant to judge, ver. 10: "I stand at Caesar's judgment-seat, where I
ought to be judged": meaning, as appears from the direct words of appeal
in the next verse,--by a Roman, not by a Jewish judicatory, ought I to
be tried. Against the being judged at Cæsarea, instead of Jerusalem, he
could not naturally have meant to object: at least, if the historian
speaks true, in what he says about the plot for murdering the prisoner
on the road.

2. "To the Jews," says ver. 10, "have I done no wrong." Thus far nothing
more is said than _Not Guilty_. But now follows another trait of that
effrontery, which was so leading a feature in Paul's eloquence, "as,"
continues he, "thou very well knowest." Now what anybody may see
is,--that Festus neither did know, nor could know, any such thing.
Witness the historiographer himself, who, but eight verses after, (18,
19, 20,) makes Festus himself, in discourse with King Agrippa, declare
as much. But the more audacious, the more in Defendant's character; and
the greater the probability, that, in the conflict between the
Law-Report and the narrative, truth is on the side of the Report.

3. Conclusion: ver. 11, defendant gives judge to understand, that if he,
the Defendant, has done any of the things he has been charged with, he
has no objection to be put to death: but in the same breath ends with
saying, "I appeal to Caesar!" submitting thus to Festus's judgment,
whatever it may be, and at the same time appealing from it.

Festus judge: ver. 12, "when he had conferred with _the council_,"
whoever they were,--"Hast thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar thou
shalt go." Here ends Trial IV.


SECTION 6.

TRIAL V. AND LAST.--PLACE, STILL CÆSAREA.

This requires some previous explanation.

A few days after the last preceding trial, came to Cæsarea, says verse
13, _Agrippa and Bernice_: Festus being still there: Agrippa, sub-king
of the Jews under the Romans: Bernice, it may be presumed, his queen:
saluting this their superior, their only business mentioned. Follows
thereupon a conversation, of which Defendant is the subject, and which
continues the length of fourteen verses. Defendant having appealed to
Caesar, judge has determined to send him to Caesar accordingly. But,
considering that, by the emperor, on the arrival of a man sent to him in
the character of a prisoner, some assigned cause, for his having been
put into that condition, will naturally be looked for; and, as the only
offences, the Jew stands charged with, are of a sort, which, while to
the heathen emperor they would not be intelligible, would to a Jew
sub-king, if to any one, be sufficiently so;--thereupon it is, that he
desires his sub-majesty to join with him in the hearing of the cause,
and by that means put him in a way to report upon it.

Speaking of the accusers, "they brought," says Festus to Agrippa in
verse 18, "none accusation of such things as I supposed.--But had
certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one
Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.--And because I
doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him whether he would go to
Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters.--But Paul...had
appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus..." Such, as
above noticed, is the declaration which the historian puts into the
mouth of Festus: and this, after having so recently made Paul tell
Festus, that his, Paul's, having done no wrong to the Jews, was to him,
Festus, matter of such perfect knowledge.[82]

Now then comes the trial, Acts 26:1. Scene, at Cæsarea, the Emperor's
Bench. Lord chief justice, Roman governor Festus; Puisne judge, Jew
sub-king Agrippa. Present, "Bernice...chief captains and principal men
of the city." Special accusers, none. Sole speaker, whose speech is
reported, the Defendant.

Points in Defendant's speech, these:

1. Verses 2 and 3. Patient hearing requested, acknowledgment of
Agrippa's special confidence.

2. Verses 4 and 5. Protestation of Phariseeism.

3. Verses 6, 7, 8. Same false insinuation as before,--Phariseeism the
sole crime imputed to him.

4. Verses 9, 10, 11. Confession or avowal, whichever it is to be called,
of his proceedings six-and-twenty years before, against the
Christianized Jews, shutting them up in prison, in pursuance of
authority from "the chief priests," down to the time of his
conversion-vision. See Table I. Conversion Table.

5. Verses 12 to 20. Account of this same vision. See that same Table.

6. Declaration. "For _these_ causes the Jews caught me in the temple,
and went about to kill me."--For these causes? For what causes? If for
being a Pharisee, or preaching the general resurrection, or even the
particular one,--assuredly no. But, if for the breach of trust, in
joining with the state offenders, the Christianized Jews, whom he was
commissioned to apprehend;--joining with those state offenders, and then
bringing out the vision-story for an excuse;--if telling everybody that
would hear him, that the law of the land was a dead letter;--and, if the
denying he had ever done so; and, for giving himself the benefit of such
mendacious denial, rendering the temple an instrument of notorious
perjury;--if it was for all this, that they "went about" indeed "to kill
him,"--but to kill him no otherwise than in the manner prescribed by
that same law,--Jewishly speaking, they were not to blame in what they
did,--humanly speaking, nothing can be seen that is not altogether
natural in it.

7. Conclusion: namely, if not of what he would have said,--at any rate,
of what, according to the reporter, he was permitted to say:--it is
formed by a passage, in which, in continuance of his plan for keeping up
his interest with the Pharisee part of the council, his ingenuity
employs itself in strengthening the connection between the particular
resurrection of Jesus, and the general resurrection maintained by the
Pharisees.

"Having therefore," says verse 22, "obtained help of God, I continue
unto this day, _witnessing_ both to small and great, saying none other
things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should
come:--That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people, and to
the Gentiles."--Lord Chief Justice Festus, "with a loud voice, as he,"
the Defendant, "thus spake for himself--Paul, thou art beside thyself;
much learning hath made thee mad." In the mouth of a Roman, and that
Roman so high in rank, the notion thus expressed had nothing in it but
what was natural enough. As to the _general_ resurrection, _that_ was
one of the above-mentioned "questions about their own superstition,"
which he therefore left to the Jewish judges: as to the _particular_
resurrection, of this he had heard no better evidence than the
defendant's: and what, in discriminating eyes, _that_ was likely to be
worth, the reader has by this time judged.

8. Defendant in reply, ver. 25: Not mad, but sober:--for confirmation,
appeal to the Jewish sub-monarch, then and there present. "I am not mad,
most noble Festus; but speak for the words of truth and soberness.--For
the King knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely; for I
am persuaded, that none of these things are hidden from him; for this
was not done in a corner." Here would have been a place for the five
hundred, by whom, after his resurrection, Jesus was seen at once--see
above chapter--but, upon the present occasion, the general expression,
here employed, was deemed preferable. "King Agrippa," continues verse
27, "believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest."

King Agrippa to Paul, ver. 28. "Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian."

Paul to Agrippa: "I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that
hear me this day were both almost and altogether such as I am, _except
these bonds_." No bad trait of polite oratory this exception.

Assembly breaks up.--"And when he had thus spoken, the King rose up, and
the governor and Bernice, and they that sat with them. And when they
were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth
nothing worthy of death or of bonds. Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This
man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Caesar."
Observation. In this observation, something of the obscure seems to
present itself. For, Paul himself being the appellant, and _that_ for no
other purpose than the saving himself from death or bonds, he had but to
withdraw the appeal, and, supposing a judgment pronounced to the effect
thus mentioned, this was everything he could have wished from it. But,
Paul having already, to judge from his Epistle to the Romans, laid the
foundation of a spiritual kingdom in the metropolis of the civilized
world,--it looks as if he had no objection to figure there, as we shall
find him figuring accordingly, in the character of a state-prisoner, for
the purpose of displaying, and in the eye of the Caesar of that day, a
sample of his eloquence, in a cause so much greater than any in which
that of the first Caesar could ever have displayed itself. Reason is not
wanting for the supposition, that it was by what passed at the council,
that the idea was first suggested to him: for "the night following, the
Lord," says 23:11, "stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul; for
as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome." The Lord has commanded me so and so, is the sort of
language in which he would naturally make communication of this idea to
his attendants.

The circumstantiated and dramatic style of this part of the narrative,
seems to add to the probability, that, on this occasion, the historian
himself was present. On this supposition, though in the Greek as well as
in the English, they are represented as if they had quitted the
justice-room,--any conversation, that took place among them immediately
after, in the street, might not unnaturally have been overheard by him.
In chapter 24, ver. 23, stands Felix's order of admittance, as above,
for Paul's acquaintance, to minister or come to him. One other attendant
has appeared, in the character of his sister's son, Acts 23:16; by whom
information was given to Felix, that the men there spoken of were lying
in wait for him to kill him. On the occasion of this invasion of his, it
would have been interesting enough to have had a complete list of his
staff.

Here ends trial fifth and last: and in the next verse it is, that,
together with other prisoners, and the historian at least for his free
attendant, he is dispatched on his voyage. Acts 27:1. "And when it was
determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul and
certain other prisoners unto one named Julius, a centurion of Augustus'
band.--And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, _we_ launched..."

FOOTNOTES:

[81] If in any former part of this work, in speaking of this scene, the
persons in question have been spoken of as having actually proceeded to
acts of manual violence, it was an oversight.

As to the examination by scourging,--singular enough will naturally
appear this mode of collecting evidence: declared purpose of it, "that
he," the captain, "might know wherefore _they_," the Jews, "cried out
against him," meaning the defendant. A simpler way would have been to
have asked _them_; and, as to the scourge, what use it could have been
of is not altogether obvious. To begin with torturing a man, and proceed
by questioning him, was, however, among the Romans a well-known mode of
obtaining evidence. But, then and there, as now and everywhere, unless
the United States form an exception, "whatever is--is right," provided
always that it is by power that it is done.

[82] Acts 25:12-27.

"Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, Hast
thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shalt thou go.--And after certain
days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cæsarea to salute Festus.--And
when they had been there many days, Festus declared Paul's cause unto
the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix:--About
whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the
Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him.--To whom I
answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die,
before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against
him.--Therefore, when they were come hither, without any delay on the
morrow I sat on the judgment-seat, and commanded the man to be brought
forth:--Against whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought none
accusation of such things as I supposed:--But had certain questions
against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead,
whom Paul affirmed to be alive.--And because I doubted of such manner of
questions, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be
judged of these matters.--But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto
the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I might send
him to Caesar.--Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man
myself. To-morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.--And on the morrow,
when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and was entered
into the place of hearing, with the chief captains and principal men of
the city, at Festus' commandment Paul was brought forth.--And Festus
said, King Agrippa, and all men which are present with us, ye see this
man about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at
Jerusalem and also here, crying that he ought not to live any
longer.--But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death,
and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send
him.--Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord, wherefore I
have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O, King
Agrippa, that after examination had, I might have somewhat to
write.--For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not
withal to signify the crimes laid against him."




