CHAPTER II.

     _Outward Conversion--how produced--how planned._


SECTION 1.

MOTIVE, TEMPORAL ADVANTAGE--PLAN.

How flourishing the state of the church had at this period become, will
be seen more fully in another place. Long before this period,--numbers
of converts, in Jerusalem alone, above three thousand. The aggregate, of
the property belonging to the individuals, had been formed into one
common fund: the management--too great a burden for the united labours
of the eleven Apostles, with their new associate Mathias--had, under the
name so inappositely represented at present by the English word
_deacon_, been committed to seven trustees; one of whom, Stephen, had,
at the instance of Paul, been made to pay, with his life, for the
imprudence, with which he had, in the most public manner, indulged
himself, in blaspheming the idol of the Jews--their temple.[13]


Of that flourishing condition, Paul, under his original name of Saul,
had all along been a witness. While carrying on against it that
persecution, in which, if not the original instigator, he had been a
most active instrument, persecuting, if he himself, in what he is made
to say, in Acts xxii. 4, is to be believed,--"persecuting unto the
death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women;"--while
thus occupied, he could not in the course of such his disastrous
employment, have failed to obtain a considerable insight into the state
of their worldly affairs.

Samaria--the field of the exploits and renown of the great sorcerer
Simon, distinguished in those times by the name of _Magus_--Samaria, the
near neighbour and constant rival, not to say enemy, of Jerusalem;--is
not more than about five and forty miles distant from it. To Paul's
alert and busy mind,--the offer, made by the sorcerer, to purchase of
the Apostles a share in the government of the church, could not have
been a secret.

At the hands of those rulers of the Christian Church, this offer had not
found acceptance. Shares in the direction of their affairs were not,
like those in the government of the British Empire in these our days,
objects of sale. The nine rulers would not come into any such bargain;
their disciples were not as cattle in their eyes: by those disciples
themselves no such bargain would have been endured; they were not as
cattle in their own eyes.

But, though the bargain proposed by the sorcerer did not take place,
this evidence, which the offer of it so clearly affords,--this evidence,
of the value of a situation of that sort in a commercial point of view,
could not naturally either have remained a secret to Paul, or failed to
engage his attention, and present to his avidity and ambition a ground
of speculation--an inviting field of enterprise.

From the time when he took that leading part, in the condemnation and
execution, of the too flamingly zealous manager, of the temporal
concerns of the associated disciples of that disastrous orator, by whom
the preaching and spiritual functions might, with so much happier an
issue, have been left in the hands of the Apostles--from that time, down
to that in which we find him, with letters in his pocket, from the
rulers of the Jews in their own country, to the rulers of the same
nation under the government of the neighbouring state of Damascus, he
continued, according to the Acts ix. 1; "yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord."

Of these letters, the object was--the employing the influence of the
authorities from which they came, viz. the High Priest and the Elders,
to the purpose of engaging those to whom they were addressed, to enable
him to bring in bonds, to Jerusalem from Damascus, all such converts to
the religion of Jesus, as should have been found in the place last
mentioned.

In his own person the author of the Acts informs us--that, by Saul,
letters to this effect were _desired_[14]. In a subsequent chapter, in
the person of Paul, viz. in the speech, to the multitude by whom he had
been dragged out of the Temple, in the design of putting him to death,
he informs us they were actually _obtained_[15].

It was in the course of this his journey, and with these letters in his
pocket, that, in and by the vision seen by him while on the road--at
that time and not earlier--his conversion was, according to his own
account of the matter, effected.

That which is thought to have been already proved, let it, at least for
argument's sake, be affirmed. Let us say accordingly--this vision-story
was a mere fable. On this supposition, then, what will be to be said of
those same letters?--of the views in which they were obtained?--of the
use which was eventually made of them?--of the purpose to which they
were applied? For all these questions one solution may serve. From what
is known beyond dispute--on the one hand, of his former way of life and
connections--on the other hand, of his subsequent proceeding--an answer,
of the satisfactoriness of which the reader will have to judge, may,
without much expense of thought, be collected.

If, in reality, no such vision was perceived by him, no circumstance
remains manifest whereby the change which so manifestly and notoriously
took place in his plan of life, came to be referred to _that_ point in
the field of time--in preference to any antecedent one.

Supposing, then, the time of the change to have been antecedent to the
commencement of that journey of his to Damascus--antecedent to the time
of the application, in compliance with which his letter from the ruling
powers at Jerusalem the object of which was to place at his disposal the
lot of the Christians at Damascus, was obtained;--this supposed, what,
in the endeavour to obtain this letter, was his object? Manifestly to
place in his power these same Christians: to place them in his power,
and thereby to obtain from them whatsoever assistance was regarded by
him as necessary for the ulterior prosecution of his schemes, as above
indicated.

On this supposition, in the event of their giving him that assistance,
which, in the shape of money and other necessary shapes, he
required--on this supposition, he made known to them his determination,
not only to spare their persons, but to join with them in their
religion; and, by taking the lead in it among the heathen, to whom he
was, in several respects, so much better qualified for communicating it
than any of the Apostles or their adherents, to promote it to the utmost
of his power. An offer of this nature--was it in the nature of things
that it should be refused? Whatsoever was most dear to them--their own
personal security, and the sacred interests of the new religion, the
zeal of which was yet flaming in their bosoms, concurred in pressing it
upon their acceptance.

With the assistance thus obtained, the plan was--to become a declared
convert to the religion of Jesus, for the purpose of setting himself at
the head of it; and, by means of the expertness he had acquired in the
use of the Greek language, to preach, in the name of Jesus, that sort of
religion, by the preaching of which, an empire over the minds of his
converts, and, by that means, the power and opulence to which he
aspired, might, with the fairest prospect of success, be aimed at.

But, towards the accomplishment of this design, what presented itself as
a necessary step, was--the entering into a sort of _treaty_, and forming
at least in appearance, a sort of junction, with the leaders of the new
religion and their adherents--the Apostles and the rest of the
disciples. As for _them_, in acceding to this proposal, on the
supposition of anything like sincerity and consistency on his part,
_they_ would naturally see much to gain and nothing to lose: much indeed
to gain; no less than peace and security, instead of that persecution,
by which, with the exception of the Apostles themselves, to all of whom
experience seems, without exception, to have imparted the gift of
prudence, the whole fraternity had so lately been driven from their
homes, and scattered abroad in various directions.

With the Christians at Damascus, that projected junction was actually
effected by him: but, in this state of things, to return to Jerusalem
was not, at that time, to be thought of. In the eyes of the ruling
powers, he would have been a trust-breaker--a traitor to their cause: in
the eyes of the Christians, he would have been a murderer, with the
blood of the innocent still reeking on his hands: no one would he have
found so much as to lend an ear to his story, much less to endure it. In
Damascus, after making his agreement with his new brethren, there
remained little for him to do. Much had he to inform himself of
concerning Jesus. Damascus--where Jesus had already so many
followers--Damascus was a place for him to _learn_ in: not to _teach_
in:--at any rate, at that time.

Arabia, a promising field of enterprise--Arabia, a virgin soil, opened
to his view. There he would find none to abhor his person--none to
contradict his assertions: there his eloquence--and, under the direction
of his judgment, his invention--would find free scope: in that country
the reproach of inconsistency could not attach upon him: in that foreign
land he beheld his place of quarantine--his school of probation--the
scene of his novitiate. By a few years employed in the exercise of his
new calling--with that spirit and activity which would accompany him of
course in every occupation to which he could betake himself--he would
initiate himself in, and familiarize himself with, the connected
exercises of preaching and spiritual rule. At the end of that period,
whatsoever might be his success in that country, such a portion of
time, passed in innocence, would at any rate allay enmity: such a
portion of time, manifestly passed, in the endeavour at any rate to
render service to the common cause, might even establish confidence.

At the end of that time, he might, nor altogether without hope of
success, present himself to the rulers of the church, in the metropolis
of their spiritual empire: "Behold, he might say, in me no longer a
persecutor, but a friend. The persecutor has long vanished: he has given
place to the friend. Too true it is, that I was so once your persecutor.
Years spent in unison with you--years spent in the service of the common
cause--have proved me. You see before you, a tried man--an ally of tried
fidelity: present me as such to your disciples: take me into your
councils: all my talent, all my faculties, shall be yours. The land of
Israel will continue, as it has been, the field of _your_ holy labours;
the land of the Gentiles shall be mine: we will carry on our operations
in concert; innumerable are the ways in which each of us will derive
from the other--information, assistance, and support."

To Arabia he accordingly repaired: so, in his Epistle to the Galatians,
Gal. i. 17, he himself informs us: in that little-known country, he
continued three whole years--so also, in the same place, he informs us.
There it was, that he experienced that success, whatever it was, that
went to constitute the ground, of the recommendation given of him by
Barnabas to the Apostles. From thence he returned to Damascus: and, in
that city, presenting himself in his regenerated character, and having
realized by his subsequent conduct the expectations raised by his
promises at the outset of his career[16]; he planned, and as will be
seen, executed his expedition to Jerusalem: the expedition, the object
of which has just been brought to view. "Then," says Paul himself, "I
went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days."
Gal. 1:18. There, says the author of the Acts, Acts 9:27, 28, "Barnabas
took him and brought him to the Apostles ... and he was with them coming
in and going out of Jerusalem."


SECTION 2.

AT DAMASCUS, NO SUCH ANANIAS PROBABLY.

This same Ananias--of whom so much has been seen in the last
chapter--Paul's own imagination excepted, had he anywhere any existence?
The probability seems to be on the negative side: and, in the next
section, as to whether Paul's companions on the road are not in a
similar predicament, the reader will have to judge. But let us begin
with Ananias.

At Damascus, at any rate--with such power in his hands, for securing
obsequiousness at the hands of those to whom he was addressing
himself--with such power in his hands, Paul could not have had much need
of anything in the shape of a vision:--he could not have had any need of
any such person as the seer of the correspondent vision--Ananias.

For the purpose of aiding the operation of those considerations of
worldly prudence, which these powers of his enabled him to present, to
those whom it concerned,--there might be some perhaps, who, for yielding
to those considerations, and thus putting themselves under the command
of this formidable potentate, might look for an authority from the Lord
Jesus. But, forasmuch as, in this very case, even at this time of day,
visions, _two_ in name, but, in respect of probative force, reducible to
_one_--are so generally received as conclusive evidence,--no wonder if,
at that time of day, by persons so circumstanced, that _one_ vision
should be received in that same character. At Damascus, therefore, on
his first arrival, there could not be any occasion for any such
corroborating story as the story of the vision of Ananias. At
Damascus--unless he had already obtained, and instructed as his
confederate, a man of that name--no such story could, with any prospect
of success, have been circulated: for the purpose of learning the
particulars of an occurrence of such high importance, the residence of
this Ananias would have been inquired after: and, by supposition, no
satisfactory answer being capable of being given to any such
inquiries,--no such story could be ventured to be told.

Such was the case, at that place and at that time. As to any such
evidence, as that afforded by the _principal_ vision, viz. Paul's
own,--perhaps no such evidence was found necessary: but, if it _was_
found necessary, nothing could be easier than the furnishing it. As to
the _secondary_ vision, viz. that ascribed afterwards to a man of the
name of Ananias,--at that time scarcely could there have been any need
of it--any demand for it; and, had there been any such demand, scarcely,
unless previously provided, could any such correspondent supply have
been afforded.

In other places and posterior times alone, could this supplemental
vision, therefore, have been put into circulation: accordingly, not till
a great many years after, was mention made of it by the author of the
Acts:--mention made by him, either in his own person, or as having been
related, or alluded to, by Paul himself. Even the author of the
Acts,--though in this same chapter he has been relating the story of
Ananias's vision,--yet, when he comes to speak, of the way, in which,
according to him, Paul, by means of his protector and benefactor
Barnabas, obtained an introduction to the Apostles, viz. all the
Apostles, in which, however, he is so pointedly contradicted by Paul
himself,--yet speaks not of Barnabas, as including, in the
recommendatory account he gave them, of Paul--his vision, and his
merits--any mention of this supplemental vision:--any mention of any
Ananias. Acts 9:27.

At Damascus, howsoever it might be in regard to the Christians--neither
to Jews, nor to Gentiles, could the production, of any such letters as
those in question, have availed him anything. Such as had embraced
Christianity excepted, neither over Gentiles nor over Jews did those
letters give him any power: and, as to Jews, the character in
which--after any declaration made of his conversion--he would have
presented himself, would have been no better than that of an apostate,
and betrayer of a highly important public trust. To men of both these
descriptions, a plea of some sort or other, such as, if believed, would
be capable of accounting for so extraordinary a step, as that he should
change, from the condition of a most cruel and inveterate persecutor of
the new religion, to that of a most zealous supporter and leader,--could
not, therefore, but be altogether necessary. No sooner was he arrived at
Damascus, than, if the author of the Acts is to be believed, he began
pleading, with all his energy, the cause of that religion, which, almost
to that moment, he had with so much cruelty opposed. As to the story of
his vision,--what is certain is--that, sooner or later, for the purpose
of rendering to men of all descriptions a reason for a change so
preëminently extraordinary, he employed this story. But, forasmuch as of
no other account of it, as given by him, is any trace to be found;--nor
can any reason be found, why that which was certainly employed
afterwards might not as well be employed at and from the first;--hence
comes the probability, that from the first it accordingly was employed.


SECTION 3.

ON DAMASCUS JOURNEY--COMPANIONS NONE.

In the preceding chapter, a question was started, but no determinate
answer as yet found for it: this is--what became of the men,
who--according to all the accounts given by Paul, or from him, of his
conversion vision--were his _companions_ in the journey? At Damascus, if
any such men there were, they would in course arrive as well as he, and
at the same time with him. This circumstance considered, if any such men
there were,--and they were not in confederacy with him,--the imposition
must have been put upon _them_: and, for that purpose, he must, in their
presence, have uttered the sort of discourse, and exhibited the sort of
deportment, mentioned in the above accounts.

To this difficulty, however, a very simple solution presents itself. _He
had no such companions._ Neither by name, nor so much as by any the most
general description,--either of the persons, or of the total number,--is
any designation to be found anywhere:--not in the account given in the
Acts; not in any account, given by himself, in any Epistle of his; or,
as from himself, in any part of the Acts. In the company of divers
others, a man was struck down, he says, or it is said of him, by a
supernatural light: and, at the instant, and on the spot, has a
conversation with somebody. Instead of saying who these _other_ men are,
the credit of the whole story is left to rest on the credit of this
_one_ man:--the credit, of a story, the natural improbability of which,
stood so much need of collateral evidence, to render it credible.

Not till many years had elapsed, after this journey of his were these
accounts, any one of them, made public: and, in relation to these
pretended companions--supposing him interrogated at any time posterior
to the publication of the account in the Acts,--after the lapse of such
a number of years, he could, without much difficulty, especially his
situation and personal character considered, hold himself at full
liberty, to remember or to forget, as much or as little, as on each
occasion he should find convenient.


SECTION 4.

FLIGHT FROM DAMASCUS: CAUSES--FALSE--TRUE.

ACTS ix. 19-25.

    And when he had received meat he was strengthened. Then was Saul
    certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus.--And
    straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son
    of God.--But all that heard him were amazed, and said: Is not this
    he that destroyeth them which called on his name in Jerusalem; and
    came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the
    chief priests?--But Saul increased the more in strength, and
    confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is
    very Christ.--And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took
    counsel to kill him.--But their laying await was known of Saul. And
    they watched the gates day and night to kill him.--Then the
    disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a
    basket.

The conception, which it was the evident design of this passage to
impress upon the mind of the reader, is--that, as soon almost as he was
arrived at Damascus, Paul not only went about preaching Jesus, but
preaching to that effect openly, and without reserve, in all the
synagogues: and that it was for this preaching, and nothing else, that
"the Jews," thus undiscriminating is the appellation, purposely it should
seem, employed, "went about to kill him:" that thereupon it was, that he
made his escape over the wall, and having so done, repaired immediately
to Jerusalem.

In this conception, there seems to be evidently a mixture of truth and
falsehood.

That he addressed himself, in a greater or less number, to the
disciples,--must assuredly have been true: to the accomplishment of his
designs, as above explained, intercourse with them could not but be
altogether necessary.

That, when any probable hope of favourable attention and secrecy were
pointed out to him--that, in here and there an instance, he ventured so
far as to address himself to this or that individual, who was not as yet
enlisted in the number of disciples,--may also have been true: and, for
this purpose, he might have ventured perhaps to show himself in some
comparatively obscure synagogue or synagogues.

But, as to his venturing himself so far as to preach in all synagogues
without distinction,--or in any synagogue frequented by any of the
constituted authorities,--this seems altogether incredible.

To engage them to seek his life; to lie in wait to kill him; in other
words, to apprehend him for the purpose of trying him, and probably at
the upshot killing him,--this is no more than, considering what, in
their eyes, he had been guilty of, was a thing of course: a measure,
called for--not, for preaching the religion of Jesus; not, for any
boldness in any other way displayed; but, for the betraying of the
trust, reposed in him by the constituted authorities at Jerusalem: thus
protecting and cherishing those malefactors, for such they had been
pronounced by authority, for the apprehending and punishing of whom, he
had solicited the commission he thereupon betrayed. Independently of all
other offence, given by preaching or anything else,--in this there was
that, which, under any government whatever, would have amply
sufficed--would even more than sufficed--to draw down, upon the head of
the offender, a most exemplary punishment.

In this view, note well the description, given in the Acts, of the
persons, by whose enmity he was driven out of Damascus; compare with it
what, in relation to this same point, is declared--most explicitly
declared--by Paul himself.

By the account in the Acts, they were the persons to whom he had been
preaching Jesus; and who, by that preaching, had been confounded and
provoked. Among those persons, a conspiracy was formed for murdering
him; and it was to save him from this conspiracy that the disciples let
him down the wall in a basket.

Such is the colour, put upon the matter by the author of the Acts. Now,
what is the truth--the manifest and necessary truth, as
related--explicitly related--by Paul himself? related, in the second of
his letters to his Corinthians, on an occasion when the truth would be
more to his purpose than the false gloss put upon it by his adherents as
above? The peril, by which he was driven thus to make his escape,
was--not a murderous conspiracy, formed against him by a set of
individuals provoked by his preaching;--it was the intention, formed by
the governor of the city. Intention? to do what? to put him to death
against law? No; but to "_apprehend_" him. To apprehend him? for what?
Evidently for the purpose of bringing him to justice in the regular
way--whatsoever was the regular way--for the offence he had so recently
committed: committed, by betraying his trust, and entering into a
confederacy with the offenders, whom he had been commissioned, and had
engaged, to occupy himself, in concert with the constituted authorities
of the place, in bringing to justice.

"In Damascus," says he, 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33, "the governor under Aretas
the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to
apprehend me. And through a window in a basket was I let down by the
wall, and escaped his hands."

And on what _occasion_ is it, that this account of the matter is given
by him? It is at the close of a declamation, which occupies ten
verses--a declamation, the object of which is--to impress upon the minds
of his adherents the idea of his merits: viz. those which consisted in
labour, suffering, and perils: merits, on which he places his title to
the preference he claims above the competitors to whom he
alludes:--alludes, though without naming them: they being, as he
acknowledges therein, ministers of Christ, and probably enough, if not
any of them Apostles, persons commissioned by the Apostles. Greater, it
is evident, must have been the danger from the ruling powers of the
place, than from a set of individual intended murderers:--from the power
of the rulers there could not be so much as a hope of salvation, except
by escape: from the individuals there would be a naturally sufficient
means of salvation; the power of the rulers presenting a means of
salvation, and that naturally a sufficient one.

Note here, by the by, one of the many exemplifications, of that
confusion which reigns throughout in Paul's discourses: the result, of
that mixture, which, in unascertainable proportions, seems to have had
place--that mixture of nature and artifice. It is at the end of a long
list of labours, sufferings, and perils, that this anecdote presents
itself. Was it accordingly at the end of them that the fact itself had
taken place?--No: it was _at_ the very commencement: or rather, so far
as concerned preaching, _before_ the commencement. Only in the way of
allusion--allusion in general terms--in terms of merely general
description, without mention of _time_ or _place_, or persons
concerned,--are any of the other sufferings or perils mentioned: in this
instance alone, is any mention made under any one of those heads: and
here we see it under two of them, viz. _place_ and _person_: and
moreover, by other circumstances, the _time_, viz. the _relative_ time,
is pretty effectually fixed.

Immediately afterwards, this same indisputably false colouring will be
seen laid on, when the account comes to be given, of his departure for
Jerusalem: always for preaching Jesus is he sought after, never for
anything else.

According to this representation, here are two governments--two
municipal governments--one of them, at the solicitation of a functionary
of its own, giving him a commission to negotiate with another, for the
purpose of obtaining, at his hands, an authority, for apprehending a set
of men, who, in the eyes of both, were guilty of an offence against
both. Instead of pursuing his commission, and using his endeavours to
obtain the desired cooperation, he betrays the trust reposed in him:--he
not only suffers the alleged malefactors to remain unapprehended and
untouched, but enters into a confederacy with them. To both governments,
this conduct of his is, according to him, matter of such entire
indifference, that he might have presented himself everywhere, as if
nothing had happened, had it not been for his preaching:--had it not
been for his standing forth _openly_, to preach to all that would hear
him, the very religion which he had been commissioned to extinguish.

In such a state of things, is there anything that can, by any
supposition, be reconciled to the nature of man, in any situation,--or
to any form of government?

Three years having been passed by him in that to him strange country,
what, during all that time, were his means of subsistence? To this
question an unquestionable answer will be afforded by the known nature
of his situation. He was bred to a trade, indeed a handicraft
trade--tent-making: an art, in which the operations of the architect
and the upholsterer are combined. But, it was not to practise either
that, or any other manual operation, that he paid his visit to that
country. When he really did practise it, he took care that this
condescension of his should not remain a secret: from that, as from
everything else he ever did or suffered, or pretended to have done or
suffered, he failed not to extract the matter of glory for himself, as
well as edification for his readers. In Arabia, his means of subsistence
were not then derived from his trade: if they had been, we should have
known it:--from what source then were they derived?[17] By the very
nature of his situation, this question has been already answered:--from
the purses of those, whom, having had it in his power, and even in his
commission, to destroy, he had saved.

And now, as to all those things, which, from the relinquishment of his
labours in the field of persecution to the first of his four recorded
visits to Jerusalem, he is known to have done, answers have been
furnished:--answers, to the several questions _why_ and by what _means_,
such as, upon the supposition that the supernatural mode of his
conversion was but a fable, it will not, it is hoped, be easy to find
cause for objecting to as insufficient.


SECTION 5.

ARABIA-VISIT--MENTIONED BY PAUL, NOT ACTS.

Not altogether without special reason, seems the veil of obscurity to
have been cast over this long interval. In design, rather than accident,
or heedlessness, or want of information,--may be found, it should seem,
the cause, of a silence so pregnant with misrepresentation. In addition
to a length of time, more or less considerable, spent in Damascus, a
city in close communication with Jerusalem, in giving proofs of his
conversion,--three years spent in some part or other of the contiguous
indeed, but wide-extending, country of Arabia--(spent, if Paul is to be
believed, in preaching the religion of Jesus, and at any rate in a state
of peace and innoxiousness with relation to it)--afforded such proof of
a change of plan and sentiment, as, in the case of many a man, might,
without miracle or wonder, have sufficed to form a basis for the
projected alliance:--this proof, even of itself; much more, when
corroborated, by the sort of certificate, given to the Church by its
preeminent benefactor Barnabas, who, in introducing the new convert, to
the leaders among the Apostles, for the special purpose of proposing the
alliance,--took upon himself the personal responsibility, so inseparably
involved in such a mark of confidence.

In this state of things then, which is expressly asserted by Paul to
have been, and appears indubitably to have been, a real
one,--considerations of an ordinary nature being sufficient--to
produce--not only the effect actually produced--but, in the case of many
a man, much more than the effect actually produced,--there was no
demand, at that time, for a miracle: no demand for a miracle, for any
such purpose, as that of working, upon the minds of the Apostles, to any
such effect as that of their maintaining, towards the new convert, a
conduct free from hostility, accompanied with a countenance of outward
amity. But, for other purposes, and in the course of his intercourse
with persons of other descriptions, it became necessary for him to have
had these visions: it became necessary--not only for the purpose of
proving connection on his part with the departed Jesus, to the
satisfaction of all those by whom such proof would be looked for,--but,
for the further purpose, of ascribing to Jesus, whatsoever doctrines the
prosecution of his design might from time to time call upon him to
promulgate;--those doctrines, in a word, which, (as will be seen), being
his and not Jesus's--not reported by anyone else as being Jesus's--we
shall find him, notwithstanding, preaching, and delivering,--so much at
his ease, and with unhesitating assurance.

A miracle having therefore been deemed necessary (the miracle of the
conversion-vision), and reported accordingly,--thus it is, that, by the
appearance of suddenness, given to the sort and degree of confidence
thereupon reported as having been bestowed upon him by the Apostles, a
sort of confirmation is, in the Acts account, given to the report of the
miracle: according to this account, it was not by the three or four
years passed by him in the prosecution of their designs, or at least
without obstruction given to them;--it was not by any such proof of
amity, that the intercourse, such as it was, had been effected:--no: it
was by the report of the vision--that report which, in the first
instance, was made to them by their generous benefactor and powerful
supporter, Barnabas; confirmed, as, to every candid eye it could not
fail to be, by whatever accounts were, on the occasion of the personal
intercourse, delivered from his own lips. "But Barnabas (says the
author) took him and brought him to the Apostles, and declared unto them
how he had _seen_ the Lord by the way, and that he had spoken to him,
and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus." Acts
9:27.

When in the year 57, Paul,[18] to so many other boastings, was added the
sufferings he would have us think were courted and endured by him, while
preaching in the name of Jesus, that gospel, which he proclaims to have
been his own, and not that of the Apostles, little assuredly did he
think, that five years after, or thereabout, from the hand of one of his
own attendants, a narrative was to appear, in which, of these same
sufferings a so much shorter list would be given; or that, by an odd
enough coincidence, more than seventeen centuries after, by a namesake
of his honored patron, Doctor Gamaliel, the contradiction thus given to
him, would be held up to view.

In the second of his epistles to his Corinthians, dated A.D. 57,--the
following is the summary he gives of those same sufferings. Speaking of
certain unnamed persons, styled by him false Apostles, but whom reasons
are not wanting for believing to have been among the disciples of the
real ones,--"Are they," says he, 2 Cor. xi. 23, "ministers of Christ? I
speak as one beside himself, I am more: in labours more abundant: in
_stripes_ above measure: in prisons more frequent: in deaths, oft.--Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes, save one.--Thrice was I
beaten with rods; once was I stoned: thrice I suffered shipwreck: a
night and a day have I been in the deep." Thus far as per _Paul_.

Add from his former Epistle to the same in the same year, battle with
beasts, one. "If, after the manner of men, I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me," continues he, 1 Cor. XV. 32, "if the
dead rise not, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."

Let us now see how the account stands, as per _Acts_. On the part of
this his panegyrist, whether any such habit had place as that of cutting
down below their real amount, either the sufferings or the actings of
his hero, the reader will have judged. Of both together, let it not be
forgotten, the Acts' account comes some five years lower, than the date
of the above tragical list: in it are included those sufferings and
perils which we have seen, namely, those produced by the voyage to Rome,
and which, at the time of Paul's list, had not taken their commencement.
Now then for the Acts' list. Stripes, nine-and-thirty in a parcel, none:
difference five. Beatings with rods, saving one possible one, of which
presently, none; difference, three. Stoning, one[19]. Shipwreck, as yet
none: the accident at Malta being three years subsequent. "Night and day
in the deep,"--according as it was _on_ or _in_ the deep--either nothing
at all, or an adventure considerably too singular to have been passed
over. _Diving-bells_ are not commonly supposed to have been, at that
time of day, in use; but whoever has a taste for predictions, may, if it
be agreeable to him, see those same scientific instruments or the
equivalent in this Gospel of Paul's predicted.

As to the parcels of stripes, the self-constituted Apostle takes credit
for, they would have been,--supposing them administered,--administered,
all of them, according to law, meaning always the law of _Moses_: for,
it is in that law, (namely in Deuteronomy XXV. 3) that the clause,
limiting to nine-and-thirty, the number to be given at a time, is to be
found. Of these statements of Paul's, let it not pass unnoticed, the
place is--a formal and studied Epistle, not an extempore speech: so that
the falsehood in them, if any, was not less deliberate than the Temple
perjury.

Of all these same boasted bodily sufferings, eight in the whole, when
put together,--one was, at the outset, reserved for consideration: let
us see what light, if any, is cast upon it by the Acts. One beating, the
Acts informs us of: and it was a beating by order of magistrates: and
accordingly, a beating according to law. But the law, according to which
it was given, was not Jewish law: the magistrates, by whose order it was
given, were not Jewish magistrates. The magistrates were heathens: and
it was for being Jews, and preaching in the Jewish style, that Paul, and
his companion Silas, were thus visited. It was at Philippi that the
affair happened: it was immediately preceded by their adventure with the
divineress, as per Acts 16:16; 34, Chap. 13: and brought about by the
resentment of her masters, to whose established business, the
innovation, introduced by these interlopers, had given disturbance: it
was followed--immediately followed--by the earthquake, which was so
dexterous in taking irons off. Whether therefore this beating was in
Paul's account comprised in the eight stripings and beatings, seems not
possible, humanly speaking, to know: not possible, unless so it be, that
Paul, being the wandering Jew, we have sometimes heard of, is still
alive,--still upon the look-out, for that aërial voyage, which, with or
without the expectation of an aërostatic vehicle, we have seen him so
confident in the assurance of.

Remains the battle with the beasts. What these same beasts were, how
many there were of them,--how many legs they respectively had--for
example, two or four--in what way he was introduced into their
company,--whence his difference with them took its rise,--whether it was
of his own seeking, or by invitation that he entered the lists with
these his antagonists,--how it fared with _them_ when the affair was
over,--(for as to the hero himself, it does not appear that he was much
the worse for it);--these, amongst other questions, might be worth
answering, upon the supposition, that these antagonists of his were real
beings and real beasts, and not of the same class as the arch-beast of
his own begetting--Antichrist. But, the plain truth seems to be, that if
ever he fought with beasts, it was in one of his visions: in which case,
for proof of the occurrence, no visible mark of laceration could
reasonably be demanded. Meantime, to prove the negative, as far as, in a
case such as this, it is in the nature of a negative to be proved,--we
may, without much fear of the result, venture to call his ever-devoted
scribe. To this same Ephesus,--not more than a twelvemonth or
thereabouts, before the date of the Epistle--he brings his
patron,--finds appropriate employment for him,--and, off and on, keeps
him there for no inconsiderable length of time. There it is, that we
have seen, Chap. 13, §. 7., his handkerchiefs driving out devils as well
as diseases: there it is, and for no other reason than that _he_ is
there--there it is, that we have seen so many thousand pounds worth of
magical books burnt--and by their owners: there it is, that with a
single handkerchief of his,--which so it were but used, was an overmatch
for we know not how many devils,--we saw a single devil, with no other
hands than those of the man he lodged in, wounding and stripping to the
skin no fewer than seven men at the same time. If, then, with or without
a whole skin at the conclusion of it, he had really had any such
rencounter, with one knows not how many beasts, is it in the nature of
the case, that this same historiographer of his, should have kept us
ignorant of it? To be shut up with wild beasts, until torn to pieces by
them, was indeed one of the punishments, for which men were indebted to
the ingenuity of the Roman lawyers: but, if any such sentence was really
executed upon our self-constituted Apostle, his surviving it was a
miracle too brilliant not to have been placed at the head of all his
other miracles: at any rate, too extraordinary to have been passed by
altogether without notice. The biographer of Daniel was not thus
negligent.

After all, was it really matter of pure invention--this same battle? or
may it not, like so many of the quasi-miracles in the Acts, have had a
more or less substantial foundation in fact? The case may it not have
been--that, while he was at Ephesus, somebody or other set a dog at him,
as men will sometimes do at a troublesome beggar? or that, whether with
hand or tongue, some person, male or female, set upon him with a degree
of vivacity, which, according to Paul's zoology, elucidated by Paul's
eloquence, entitled him or her to a place in the order of beasts?--Where
darkness is thus visible, no light can be so faint, as not to bring with
it some title to indulgence.

Of the accounts, given us by the historiographer, of the exploits and
experiences of his hero while at Ephesus, one article more will complete
the list. When any such opportunity offered, as that of presenting him
to view, in his here assumed character, of a candidate for the honours
of martyrdom,--was it or was it not in the character of the
historiographer to let it pass unimproved? To our judgment on this
question, some further maturity may be given, by one more law-case, now
to be brought to view. Under some such name as that of the _Ephesian
Diana_, not unfrequent are the allusions to it. _Church of Diana
silversmiths versus Paul and Co._ is a name, by which, in an English law
report, it might with more strict propriety be designated. Plaintiffs,
silversmiths' company just named: Defendants, Paul and Co.; to wit, said
Paul, Alexander, Aristarchus, Alexander and others. Acts, 22:41. Action
on the case for words:--the words, in tenor not reported: purport,
importing injury in the way of trade. Out of the principal cause, we
shall see growing a sort of cross cause: a case of assault, in which
three of the defendants were, or might have been, plaintiffs: cause of
action, assault, terminating in false imprisonment. In this
exercetitious cause, defendants not individually specified: for, in
those early days, note-taking had not arrived at the pitch of
perfection, at which we see it at present. That which,--with reference
to the question--as to the truth of the beast-fighting story,--is more
particularly material in the two cases taken together,--is this: in the
situation, in which these junior partners of Paul found themselves,
there was some difficulty, not to say some danger. Pressed, as he
himself was afterwards, in his invasion of Jerusalem,--pressed in more
senses than one, _they_ found themselves by an accusing multitude. What
on this occasion does Paul? He slips his neck out of the collar. So far
from lending them a hand for their support, he will not so much as lend
them a syllable of his eloquence. Why? because forsooth, says his
historiographer, Acts xix. 30, 31, "the disciples suffered him not:"
_item_, v. 30, "certain" others of "his friends." When, as we have seen
him, spite of everything that could be said to him, he repaired to
Jerusalem on his _Invasion Visit_,--he was not quite so perfectly under
the government of his friends. On the present occasion, we shall find
him sufficiently tractable. Was this a man to be an antagonist and
overmatch for wild beasts?

Now as to the above-mentioned principal case. Plaintiffs, dealers in
silver goods: Defendants, dealers in words. To be rivals in trade, it is
not necessary that men should deal exactly in the same articles:--the
sale of the words injured the sale of the goods: so at least the
plaintiffs took upon them to aver: for, in such a case, suspicion is not
apt to lie asleep. The church of Diana was the Established Church, of
that place and time. To the honour, the plaintiffs added the profit, of
being silversmiths to that same Excellent Church. To the value of that
sort of evidence, which it is the province of silversmiths to furnish,
no established church was ever insensible. The evidence, furnished by
the church silversmiths of these days, is composed of _chalices_: under
the Pagan dispensation, the evidence furnished by the church
silversmiths of the church of the Ephesian Diana, was composed of
_shrines_. When, with that resurrection of his own, and that Gospel of
his own, of which so copious a sample remains to us in his
Epistles,--Paul, with or without the name of Jesus in his mouth, made
his appearance in the market, Plaintiffs, as we have seen, took the
alarm. They proceeded, as the pious sons of an established church could
not fail to proceed. Before action commenced, to prepare the way for a
suitable judgment,--they set to work, and set on fire the inflammable
part of the public mind. The church was declared to be in danger, ver.
27: the church of Diana, just as the church of England and Ireland would
be, should any such sacrilegious proposition be seriously made, as that
of tearing out of her bosom any of those precious sinecures, of which
her vitals are composed. In Ephesus, it is not stated, that, at that
time, any society bearing the name of the _Vice Society_, or the
_Constitutional Association_, was on foot. But, of those pious
institutions the equivalent could not be wanting. Accordingly, the
charge of _blasphemy_, it may be seen, ver. 37, was not left unemployed.
So the defence shows: the defence, to wit, made by the probity and
wisdom of the judge: for, by the violence of the church mob,--who, but
for him, were prepared to have given a precedent, to that which set
Birmingham in flames,--the defendants were placed in the condition of
prisoners: and the judge, seeing the violence, of the prejudice they had
to encounter, felt the necessity, of adding to the function of judge,
that of counsel for the prisoners.

But it is time to turn to the text: not a particle of it can be spared.

ACTS xix. 22-41.

     22. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him,
     Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a
     season.--And the same time, there arose no small stir about that
     way;--For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made
     silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the
     craftsmen;--Whom he called together with the workmen of like
     occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our
     wealth.--Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but
     almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned
     away much people, saying, that they be no gods, which are made
     with hands:--So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set
     at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana
     should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom
     all Asia and the world worshippeth.--And when they heard these
     sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is
     Diana of the Ephesians.--And the whole city was filled with
     confusion: and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of
     Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with one accord
     into the theatre.--And when Paul would have entered in, unto the
     people, the disciples suffered him not.--And certain of the chief
     of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that
     he would not adventure himself into the theatre.--Some, therefore,
     cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was confused;
     and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.--And
     they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him
     forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made
     his defence unto the people;--But when they knew he was a Jew, all
     with one voice, about the space of two hours, cried out, Great is
     Diana of the Ephesians.--And when the town clerk had appeased the
     people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth
     not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great
     goddess Diana, and of the image which fell down from
     Jupiter?--Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against,
     ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.--For ye have
     brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches,
     nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.--Wherefore, if Demetrius, and
     the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man,
     the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one
     another.--But if ye inquire anything concerning other matters, it
     shall be determined in a lawful assembly.--For we are in danger to
     be called in question for this day's uproar, there being no cause
     whereby we may give an account of this concourse.--And when he had
     thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.

The _Judge_ by whom the principal cause was tried, and the plaintiffs
non-suited, is styled, we see "_the Town Clerk_:" the more appropriate
and respected title would not on this occasion have been ill-applied to
him. Except what we have here been seeing, we know nothing of him that
is _positive_: but, seeing thus much of him, we see that he was an
honest man: and an honest man is not ill portrayed by negatives. He had
no coronet playing before his eyes: no overpaid places and sinecures for
relatives. He had not been made judge, for publishing a liturgy of the
church of Diana, with an embroidery composed of his own comments,--or
for circulating, with anonymous delicacy, a pious warning, never to be
absent from the shrine of Diana, when the sacred cup was, proffered by
the hands of holy priests. Accordingly, when the charge of _blasphemy_
was brought before him,--being a heathen, he found no difficulty in
treating it, in that gentle and soothing mode, in which, when, from the
bosom of an established church it enters into a man, the spirit, which
calls itself the spirit of Christianity, renders him so averse to the
treating it. If, when his robes were off, he spoke of Diana what we now
think of her,--he did not, when they were on, foam or rave,
declare--that all, who would not swear to their belief in her, were not
fit to be believed, or so much as fit to live.

By him, one man was not robbed of his rights, because another man, when
called upon as a witness, refused to perjure himself. By him, a man was
not refused to be heard as a witness, nor refused protection for the
fruits of his industry, nor deprived of the guardianship of his
children, because he waited to see Diana, before he declared himself a
believer in her existence. In the open theatre was pronounced the
judgment we have seen. He did not, by secret sittings, deprive men of
the protection of the public eye. He did not, we may stand assured--for
we see how far the people of Ephesus were from being tame enough to
endure it--he did not keep men's property in his hands, to be plundered
by himself, his children, or his creatures, till the property was
absorbed, and the proprietors sent broken-hearted to their graves. He
did not--for the people of Ephesus would not have endured it--wring out
of distress a princely income, on pretence of giving decisions,
declaring all the while his matchless incapacity for everything but
prating or raising doubts. He did not display,--he could not have
displayed--the people of Ephesus could not have endured it--any such
effrontery, as, when a judicatory was to sit upon his conduct, to set
himself down in it, and assume and carry on the management of it. He
would not have sought impunity--for if he had sought it in Ephesus, he
would not have found it there--he would not have sought impunity, in
eyes lifted up to heaven, or streaming with crocodile tears.

Thus much as to his negative merits. But, we have seen enough of him, to
see one great positive one. When, from the inexhaustible source of
inflammation, a flame was kindled,--he did not fan the flame,--he
quenched it.

The religion of Diana having thus come upon the carpet, a reflection
which could not be put by, is--spite of all efforts of the church
silversmiths, in how many essential points, negative as they are, the
religion of Diana had, on the ground of usefulness, the advantage of
that, which _is_ the religion of Paul, and _is called_ the religion of
Jesus. Diana drove no men out of their senses, by pictures or
preachments of never-ending torments. On pretence of saving men from
future sufferings, no men were consigned by it to present ones. No
mischievous, no pain-producing, no real vice, was promoted by it. It
compelled no perjury, no hypocrisy: it rewarded none. It committed, it
supported, it blessed, it lauded, no depredation, no oppression in any
shape: it plundered no man of the fruits of his industry, under the name
of _tithes_. For the enrichment of the sacred shrines,--money, in any
quantity, we may venture to say, received: received, yes: but in no
quantity extorted. One temple was sufficient for _that_ goddess.
Believing, or not believing in her divinity,--no men were compelled to
pay money, for more temples, more priests, or more shrines.

_As to the religion of Jesus, true it is, that so long as it continued
the religion of Jesus, all was good government, all was equality, all
was harmony: free church, the whole; established church, none: monarchy,
none; constitution, democratical. Constitutive authority, the whole
community: legislative, the Apostles of Jesus_; executive, the
Commissioners of the Treasury: not Lords Commissioners, appointed by a
King Herod, but trustees or _stewards_; for such should have been the
word, and not _deacons_,--_agents elected by universal suffrage_. In
this felicitous state, how long it continued--we know not. What we do
know, is--that, _in the fourth century_, _despotism_ took possession of
it, and made an instrument of it. Becoming _established_, it became
noxious,--preponderantly noxious. For, where _established_ is the
adjunct to it, what does _religion_ mean? what but _depredation_,
corruption, oppression, hypocrisy? _depredation_, _corruption_,
_oppression_, _hypocrisy_--these four: with delusion, in all its forms
and trappings, for support.

So pregnant is this same boasting passage--1 Cor. xv. 32, the labour it
has thrown upon us, is not altogether at an end. By what it says of the
resurrection, the memory has been led back, to what we have seen on the
same subject, in one of Paul's Epistles to his Thessalonians: brought
together, the two doctrines present a contrast too curious to be left
unnoticed. Of the apparatus employed by him in his trade of
_disciple-catcher_, his talk about the resurrection, was, it may well be
imagined, a capital article. Being, according to his own motto, _all
things to all men_, 1 Cor. ix. 22, whatever it happened to him to say on
the subject, was dished up, of course, according to the taste of those
he had to deal with. To some it was a _prediction_: for such, we have
seen, was the form it assumed when the people to be wrought upon were
the Thessalonians. To others, when occasion called, it was a statement
concerning something _past_, or supposed to be past. On an occasion of
this sort it was, that the name of Jesus, another article of that same
apparatus, was of so much use to him. True it is, that to the doctrine
of the _general_ resurrection in time future, he had, it must be
remembered, no need of declaring himself beholden to Jesus: at least, if
on this point, the Acts' history is to be believed: for, of the
Pharisees,--the sect to which Paul belonged--of the Pharisees, as
compared with the other sect the Sadducees, it was the distinctive
tenet. But, of the then future, the then past, as exemplified in the
_particular_ case of Jesus, could not but afford very impressive
circumstantial evidence. Of this momentous occurrence, there were the
real Apostles, ready to give their accounts,--conformable, it may be
presumed, to those we see given, as from them, by the four Evangelists.
These accounts, however, would not suit the purpose of the
self-constituted Apostle: in the first place, because they came from
the real Apostles, with whom, as we have so often seen, it was a
declared principle with him not to have had anything to do: in the next
place, because the Apostles were too scrupulous: they would not have
furnished him with witnesses enough. His own inexhaustible fund--his own
invention,--was therefore the fund, on this occasion, drawn upon: and,
accordingly, instead of the number of witnesses,--say _a score_ or two
at the utmost--he could have got from the Apostles,--it supplied him
with _five hundred_: five hundred, _all at once_: to which, if pressed,
he could have added any other number of percipient witnesses whatsoever,
provided only that it was at _different_ times they had been such.

So much for explanation: now for the announced contrast. Whoever the
people were, whom he had to address himself to,--they had contracted, he
found, a bad habit: it was that of _eating and drinking_. Reason is but
too apt to be seduced by, and enlisted in the service of her most
dangerous enemy--_Appetite_. Not only did they eat and drink; but they
had found, as it seemed to them, _reason_ for so doing. They ate and
drank--why? because they were to die after it. "Let us eat and drink,"
said the language we have seen him reproaching them with, 1 Cor. xv. 32.
"Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."

The case is--that, in pleasure, in whatever shape they see her,--all
men, to whose ambition supernatural terrors supply an instrument of
dominion, behold their most formidable rival. Against such a rival,
wonderful indeed it would be, if their hostility were not
proportionable. No morality accordingly do they acknowledge, that does
not include, with or without other things, hatred,--with or without
contempt, of pleasure. Such, too, as is their morality, such is their
law. Death is scarce severe enough, for a pleasure, which they either
have, or would be thought to have, no relish for. So at least says what
they teach: but, teaching how to act is one thing; acting accordingly,
another. Thus we all see it is, in so many instances: and thus, without
much danger of injustice, we may venture to suppose it may have been, in
that of the self-constituted Apostle.

Not so Jesus: no harm did he see in eating and drinking, unless with the
pleasure it produced greater pain. With this reserve, no harm,--for
anything that appears in any one of the four histories we have of
him,--no harm did he see in anything that gives pleasure. What every man
knows--and what Jesus knew as well as any man--for neither in words nor
in acts did he deny it--is,--that happiness, at what time soever
experienced,--happiness, to be anything, must be composed of pleasures:
and, be the man who he may, of what it is that gives pleasure to him, he
alone can be judge.

But, to return to eating and drinking. Eating and drinking--he gives his
men to understand--even he, holy as he is, should not have had any
objection to, had it not been for this same resurrection of his, which
he was telling them of: eating and drinking--a practice, to which,
notwithstanding this resurrection of his, and so much as he had told
them of it, he had the mortification to find them so much addicted. So
much for his _Corinthians_. It was, as we see, _for want_ of their
paying, to what he was thus telling them about the resurrection, that
attention, to which it was so well entitled,--that _they_ still kept on
in that bad habit. But his _Thessalonians_--they too, as we have seen,
had got the same bad habit. Well: and what was it that gave it them?
What but their paying too much attention to this same resurrection of
his, dished up in the same or another manner, by the same inventive and
experienced hand. In conclusion, on laying the two cases together, what
seems evident enough is--that, in whatever manner served up to them, his
resurrection, whatever it was, was considerably more effectual in making
people eat and drink, than in weaning them from it.


SECTION 6.

GAMALIEL--HAD HE PART IN PAUL'S PLAN?

Gamaliel--in the working of this conversion, may it not be that
Gamaliel--a person whose reality seems little exposed to doubt--had
rather a more considerable share, than the above-mentioned unknown and
unknowable Ananias?

Gamaliel was "a doctor of law" Acts 5:34--a person of sufficient note,
to have been a member of the council, in which the chief priests, under
the presidency of the High Priest, Acts 5:24, took cognizance of the
offence with which Peter and his associates had a little before this
been charged, on the occasion of their preaching Jesus. Under this
Gamaliel, had Paul, he so at least is made to tell us, studied, Acts
22:3. Between Paul and this Gamaliel, here then is a connection: a
connection--of that sort, which, in all places, at all times, has
existence,--and of which the nature is everywhere and at all times so
well understood--the connection between _protegé_ and protector. It was
by authority from the governing body, that Paul was, at this time,
lavishing his exertions in the persecution of the Apostles and their
adherents:--who then so likely, as this same Gamaliel, to have been the
patron, at whose recommendation the commission was obtained? Of the
cognizance which this Gamaliel took, of the conduct and mode of life of
the religionists in question,--the result was favourable. "Let them
alone," were his words. Acts v. 38. The maintenance, derived by the
_protegé_, on that same occasion, from the persecution of these
innoxious men--this maintenance being at once odious, dangerous, and
precarious,--while the maintenance, derivable from the taking a part in
the direction of their affairs, presented to view a promise of being at
once respectable, lucrative, and permanent;--what more natural then,
that this change, from left to right, had for its origin the advice of
this same patron?--advice, to which, all things considered, the epithet
_good_ could not very easily be refused.


FALSE PRETENCES EMPLOYED.

To the self-constituted Apostle, false pretences were familiar. They
were not--they could not have been--without an object. One object was
power: this object, when pursued, is of itself abundantly sufficient to
call forth such means. But, another object with Paul was money: of its
being so, the passages referred to as above, will afford abundant
proofs. A man, in whose composition the appetite for money, and the
habit of using false pretences are conjoined, will be still more likely
to apply them to that productive purpose, than to any barren one. In the
character of a general argument, the observations thus submitted, are
not, it should seem, much exposed to controversy.

But, of a particular instance, of money obtained by him on a false
pretence,--namely, by the pretence of its being for the use of others,
when his intention was to convert it to his own use,--a mass of evidence
we have, which presents itself as being in no slight degree probative.
It is composed of two several declarations of his own,--with, as above
referred to, the explanation of it, afforded by a body of circumstantial
evidence, which has already been under review: and as, in the nature of
the case, from an evil-doer of this sort, evidence to a fact of this
sort, cannot reasonably be expected to be frequently observable,--the
labour, employed in bringing it here to view, will not, it is presumed,
be chargeable, with being employed altogether without fruit.

First, let us see a passage, in the first of his Epistles to his
_Corinthians_, date of it, A.D. 57. In this, we shall see a regularly
formed system of money-gathering: an extensive application of it to
various and mutually distant countries, with indication given of
particular times and places, in which it was his intention to pursue it:
also, intimation, of a special charitable purpose, to which it was his
professed intention to make application of the produce of it, at a place
specified: namely, Jerusalem.

First then comes, 1 Cor. 16:1-8. A.D. 57.

"Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to
the churches of _Galatia_, even so do _ye_.--Upon the _first day of the
week_, let every one of you _lay by him in store_, as God hath prospered
him, that there be no gatherings when I come.--And when I come,
whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters, them will I send to bring
your liberality unto _Jerusalem_.--And if it be meet that I go also,
they shall go with me.--Now I will come unto you when I shall pass
through Macedonia; for I do pass through _Macedonia_.--And it may be
that I will abide, yea and winter with you, that ye may bring me on my
journey whithersoever I go.--For I will not see you now by the way: but
I trust to tarry a while with _you_ if the Lord permit.--But I will
tarry at _Ephesus_ until Pentecost." At Ephesus, where he becomes an
object of jealousy, as we have seen, to the church-silversmiths; and,
from his declared business at those _other_ places, some evidence surely
is afforded of what was his probable business in _that_ place.

Next let us see a passage in his Epistle to his _Romans_: date of it,
A.D. 58. Here, in two instances, we shall see the success, with which
this system was pursued by him: as also a maxim, laid down by him--a
maxim, in which the existence of this same system, on his part, is
acknowledged: a maxim, in which his hopes of success in the pursuit of
it, are declaredly founded.

Rom. 15:24-28. A.D. 58.

"Whensoever I take my journey into _Spain_, I will come to you; for I
trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward
by you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company.--But now I go
unto _Jerusalem, to minister unto the Saints_.--For it hath pleased them
of _Macedonia_ and _Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor
saints which are at Jerusalem_.--It hath pleased them verily: and their
debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made _partakers of their
spiritual things_, their _duty_ is also _to minister unto them in carnal
things_.--When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them
this fruit, I will come _by you_ into _Spain_."

In the instance in question, money (we see)--of the quantity of course
nothing said--is mentioned by him, as being actually in his hands: the
purpose, for which it was there,--and to which he would of course be
understood to intend applying it,--being also mentioned by
him:--applying it, at Jerusalem, to the use of the poor saints. So much
for _professed_ intentions. Now then for _real_ ones. Answer, in his own
words: that those Gentiles, who by him had been made partakers of his
spiritual things, might, as in "_duty_" bound, "minister" to him, so
much the more effectively "in carnal things:" that he, who preached,
what he called the Gospel, might, as he had been preaching to his
Corinthians also (1 Cor. ix. 14) be enabled so much the more comfortably
to "live by" it.

"The poor saints which are at Jerusalem:"--_the_ poor saints--to wit,
not here and there a saint or two, but the whole Christian population
living together on a common stock--if now, A.D. 58, they were living, as
A.D. 53 they were (Acts ii. 44; vi. 1) and, in this particular, from the
beginning to the end of the history, no change is mentioned--in
Jerusalem--was it in the nature of man, in that state of men and
things,--was it in the nature of men and things, that any man, who had
any knowledge of their situation, and of the terms on which Paul, from
first to last, had been with them, could for a moment have thought of
lodging, for _their_ use, any the smallest sum of money in _his_ hands?
as well might it be said, at this moment--a man, whose wish it was to
convey money to Spain, for the use of the Cortes, would choose the hand
of the Duc d'Angouleme to send it by. All this time, _there_ were the
Apostles of Jesus--patrons of those same saints: and, anywhere more
easily than _there_, could he be. That, with this money in his hands,
among his objects was--the employing more or less of it in the endeavour
to form a party there, may not unreasonably be supposed, from what we
have seen of that _Invasion Visit_, by which his designs upon Jerusalem
were endeavoured to be carried into effect. For, according to Acts
19:21, already when he was at Ephesus, as above, was it his known
design, to try his fortune once more in Jerusalem, and after that in
Rome. This may have been among his designs, or not. Be this as it may,
this would have been no more than a particular way, of converting the
money to his own use.

Not that, if at this time, and for _this purpose_ from even the quarters
in question, money had come, as he says it had, there was anything very
wonderful in its so doing. As to _us_ indeed _we_ know pretty well what
sort of terms he was on, from first to last, with the community in
question: _we_ know this, because his historiographer has made us know
it. But, as to the people of those same countries respectively,--at
their distance from Jerusalem, what, in their situation, might easily
enough happen was,--not to have, as to this point, any adequate
information till it was too late to profit by it: and, that such would
be their ignorance, is a matter, of which he might not less easily have
that which, to a man of his daring and sanguine temper, would be a
sufficient assurance.

One thing there is, which, on the occasion of any view they took of this
subject, may perhaps have contributed to blind their eyes. This is--the
fact, of his having actually been concerned, in bringing money to
Jerusalem, for a similar purpose, though it must be confessed, not less
than fourteen years before this: to wit, from Antioch, as stated in
