CHAPTER III.

     _Paul disbelieved.--Neither his divine Commission nor his inward
     Conversion ever credited by the Apostles or their Jerusalem
     Disciples.--Source of Proof stated._


SECTION 1.

TO PAUL'S CONVERSION VISION, SOLE ORIGINAL WITNESS HIMSELF.

Void, as we have seen, of all title to credence, is the story of Paul's
commission from Jesus:--void may it be seen to be, even if taken by
itself, and without need of resort to any counter-evidence. Who could
have expected to have found it, moreover, disproved by the most
irresistible counter-evidence--by the evidence of the Apostles
themselves? Yes: of the Apostles themselves, of whom it will plainly
enough be seen, that by not so much as one of them was it ever believed:
no, not to even the very latest period, of which any account has reached
us: namely that, at which the history of the Acts of the Apostles
closes, or that of the date of the last-written of Paul's Epistles,
whichsoever of the two may be the latest.

In regard to the story of his conversion, its cause, and manner,--it has
been seen, that it is either from himself directly, or from an adherent
of his, the author of the Acts,--who had it from himself, unless Ananias
was a person known to the author of the Acts, and heard by him,--it is
from Paul, and Paul alone, that all the evidence, which the case has
happened to supply, has been derived.

In regard to the degree of credence given, to his pretence to the having
received a commission from Jesus, still the same remark applies: still,
either from himself, or from the same partial, and, as will be seen, not
altogether trustworthy, narrator, comes the whole of the evidence, with
which the case happens to have furnished us.


SECTION 2.

COUNTER-WITNESSES, THE APOSTLES. BY THEM, THE STORY WAS PROBABLY
NOT HEARD--CERTAINLY NOT CREDITED.

Jerusalem, according to the Acts, was the headquarters of the noble army
of the Apostles: the ordinary residence of that goodly fellowship:--a
station, which they none of them ever quitted, for any considerable
length of time.

In the course of the interval, between the date assigned by Paul to his
conversion, and that of the last particulars we have of his
history,--mention, more or less particular, may be found of four visits
of his--distinctly four related visits, and no more than four,--to that
metropolis of the new Church. On no one of these occasions, could he
have avoided using his endeavours, towards procuring admittance, to the
fellowship of the distinguished persons, so universally known in the
character of the select companions and most confidential servants of
Jesus: of that Jesus, whom, in the flesh at any rate, he never so much
as pretended to have ever seen: _from whom_ he had consequently, if they
thought proper to impart it, so much to learn, or at least to wish to
learn: while _to_ them he had nothing to impart, except that which, if
anything, it was only in the way of _vision_, if in any way, that he had
learned from Jesus.

That on three at least of these four occasions, viz. the 1st, 3d, and
4th, he accordingly did use his endeavours to confer with them, will be
put out of dispute by direct evidence; and that, in the remaining one,
namely that which in the order of time stands second,--successfully or
not, his endeavours were directed to the same purpose,--will, it will be
seen, be reasonably to be inferred from circumstantial evidence. In the
character of an additional occasion of intercourse, between him and one
of the Apostles, namely, Peter, the chief of them,--will be to be added,
that which will be seen taking place at Antioch; immediately upon the
back, and in consequence, of the third of these same visits of his to
Jerusalem.

As to the mode of his conversion as above stated,--the _time_, for him
to have stated it to them, was manifestly that of the first of these
four visits;--say his _reconciliation-visit_: and that, of that first
visit, to see them, or at any rate the chief of them, namely, Peter, was
the object,--is what, in his Epistle to the Galatians, we shall see him
declaring in express terms.

After all--that story of his, in which the supposed manner of his
conversion is related, as above,--did he so much as venture to submit it
to them? The more closely it is examined, the less probable surely will
be seen to be--his having ventured, to submit any such narrative, to a
scrutiny so jealous, as theirs, under these circumstances, could not
fail to be.

One of two things at any rate will, it is believed, be seen to a
certainty: namely, Either no such story as that which we see, nor
anything like it, was ever told to them by him; or, if yes, it obtained
no credit at their hands.


SECTION 3.

IN PROOF OF THIS, SO MUCH OF THE ACTS HISTORY MUST HERE BE
ANTICIPATED.

For proof, of the disbelief, which his story will, it is believed, be
found to have experienced, at the hands of those supremely competent
judges,--the time is now come, for collecting together, and submitting
in a confronted state to the reader, all the several particulars that
have reached us, in relation to these four important visits.

Between the first-recorded and the last-recorded of the four, the length
of the interval being so considerable as it will be seen to be, namely,
upwards of 17 years at the least,--and, in the course of the interval,
so numerous and various a series of incidents being to be seen
comprised,--the consequence is--that this one topic will unavoidably
spread itself to such an extent, as to cover the whole of the
chronological field of the history of the Church in those eventful
times. A sort of necessity has thus been found, of taking a view of the
principal part of all those several incidents, in a sort of historical
order, in a succeeding part of this work: hence, of that which, for the
proof of what has just been advanced, will here be necessary to be
brought to view,--no inconsiderable portion will be an anticipation, of
that which belongs properly to the historical sketch, and, but for this
necessity, would have been reserved for it.


SECTION 4.

TOPICS UNDER HIS SEVERAL JERUSALEM-VISITS.

Thick clouds, and those covering no small portion of its extent, will,
after everything that can be done to dispel them, be found still hanging
over the field of this inquiry. But, if to the purpose of the present
question, sufficient light be elicited; in whatever darkness any
collateral points may remain still involved, the conclusion will not be
affected by it.

As to the credibility of Paul's story,--taken in itself, and viewed from
the only position, from which we, at this time of day, can view it,--the
question has just been discussed.

That which remains for discussion is--whether, from the Church, which
Paul found in existence--the Church composed of the Apostles of Jesus,
and his and their disciples--it ever obtained credence.

On this occasion, to the Apostles more particularly must the attention
be directed: and this--not only because by their opinion, that of the
great body of those disciples would, of course, on a point of such vital
importance, be governed; but, because, in the case of these confidential
servants and habitual attendants of Jesus, the individuals, of whom the
body is composed, and who are designated by one and the same
denomination, are always determinable: determinable, in such sort, that,
at all times, wheresoever they are represented as being, the eye can
follow them.

To judge with what aspect Paul with his pretensions was viewed by them,
always with a view to the main question--whether, in any particular, the
alleged supernatural cause of his outward conversion, and thence of his
presumable inward conversion, ever obtained credence from them;--one
primary object, which requires to be attended to, is--personal
intercourse; viz. the sort of personal intercourse, which between him on
the one part, and them, or some of them, on the other part, appears to
have had place.

Of this intercourse, the several _interviews_, which appear to have
had place, will form the links. Correspondent to those _interviews_
will be found to be so many _visits_: all of them, except one,
visits made by him to the great original metropolis of the Christian
world--Jerusalem:--the scene of the acts and sufferings of the departed
Jesus:--the ordinary abode of these his chosen disciples and successors.
If, to these visits of Paul's is to be added any other interview,--it
will be in another city, to wit, Antioch: and, in this instance, between
Paul, and not, as in the case of the other visits might naturally be
expected, the Apostles in a body; but one, or some other small number of
members, by whom a visit to that place was made, in consequence of their
having been selected for that purpose, and deputed by the rest.

Of the interviews corresponding with these visits, the real number,--and
not only the real number, but the number upon record,--is unhappily, in
no inconsiderable degree, exposed to doubt; for, considering the terms
they were upon, as we shall see, at the interviews produced by Paul's
first Jerusalem visit, it does not by any means follow, that, between
the persons in question, because there were two more such visits, there
was, on each occasion, an interview.

Two of them, however, at any rate, if any degree of credence whatever be
given to the documents, remain altogether clear of doubt: and whatever
uncertainty may be found to attach upon any of the others, may be
regarded as so many fixed points: fixed points, forming so many
standards of reference, to which the others may in speaking of them be
referred, and by reference to which the reality and time of those
others, will be endeavoured to be ascertained.

For the designation of the visits which produced these two
unquestionable interviews, the terms _Reconciliation Visit_, and
_Invasion Visit_, will here be employed: the former being that which
gave rise to the first-mentioned of the two interviews, which, after the
conversion, appear for certain to have had place between the rival and
contending powers; the other, to the last.

1. By the _Reconciliation Visit_ is here meant--that visit--by which was
produced the _first_ interview, which, after the conversion of Paul, had
place between him and any of the Apostles. Its title to this appellation
is altogether unquestionable. After these proceedings of Paul's, by
which the destruction of so many of the Christians had already been
effected, and that of all the rest was threatened,--it was not
possible, that, without a reconciliation,--if not an inward at any
rate an outward one,--any interview, on both sides voluntary, should
have taken place. Of the Apostles, Peter was the acknowledged chief:
that it was for the purpose of seeing Peter, that a visit of Paul's to
Jerusalem--the first of those mentioned by him--was made,--is
acknowledged by himself: acknowledged, in that Epistle of his, to his
Galatian disciples, of which so much will have to be said, Gal. i. and
ii.[20] Without the assistance of some mediator, scarcely was it in the
nature of the case, that, in any way, any such reconciliation could have
been effected. In the person of Barnabas,--a most munificent patron, as
will be seen, of the infant church,--this indispensable friend was
found.

According to the received chronology, the time of this visit was A.D.
38. In the account, given in the Acts, Acts 16:6, of the conjunct
missionary excursion made from Antioch by Paul and Barnabas--an
excursion, the commencement of which is, by that same chronology, placed
in the year 53,--Galatia stands fifth, in the number of the places,
which they are spoken of as visiting. Of any visit, made in that
country, either before this or after it, no mention is to be found in
the Acts, except in Acts 18:23: on which occasion, he is spoken of as
revisiting Galatia, "strengthening the churches."[21]

Of what passed on the occasion of this visit, the account, given as
above by Paul, will be seen receiving explanation, from what is said of
this same visit in the Acts.

ACTS ix. 26 to 30.

     26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself
     to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not
     that he was a disciple.--But Barnabas took him, and brought _him_
     to the Apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in
     the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached
     boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.--And he was with them
     coming in and going out at Jerusalem.--And he spake boldly in the
     name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they
     went about to slay him.--Which when the brethren knew, they brought
     him down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.

2. By the _Invasion Visit_ is here meant--that visit of Paul to
Jerusalem, by which his arrestation, and consequent visit to Rome in a
state of confinement, were produced. _Invasion_ it may well be termed:
the object of it having manifestly been--the making, in that original
metropolis of the Christian world, spiritual conquests, at the expense
of the gentle sway of the Apostles: spiritual acquisitions--not to speak
of their natural consequences, temporal ones. It was undertaken, as will
be seen, in spite of the most strenuous exertions, made for the
prevention of it: made, not only by those, whose dominions he was so
needlessly invading, but by the unanimous remonstrances and entreaties
of his own adherents.

The date--assigned to the commencement of this visit, is A.D. 60.
Interval, between this his last recorded visit and his first, according
to the received chronology, 22 years.

Neither of the occasion of it, nor of any individual occurrence which
took place in the course of it, have we any account--from any other
source than the history of the Acts. Paul's account is all in generals.


3. Paul's Jerusalem Visit the Second.--According to the Acts, Acts
11:30, "which also they did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul," between these two indisputable interviews of Paul's
with the Apostles occurs another visit, herein designated by the name of
the _Money-bringing Visit_. Under the apprehension of a predicted
dearth, money is sent from the Antioch to the Jerusalem saints.
Barnabas, and with him Paul, are employed in the conveyance of it. Time,
assigned to this Visit, A.D. 43. Of this visit, not any the least trace
is to be found in any Epistle of Paul's. Yet, in this Epistle of his to
his Galatians, he will be seen undertaking in a manner, to give an
account, of every visit of his to Jerusalem, in which, with reference to
spiritual dominion, between himself and the Apostles, anything material
had ever passed.

By this silence of Paul's, no counter-evidence is opposed, to the
account given of this visit in the Acts. What may very well be is,--that
he went along with the money, and departed, without having had any
personal communication with any Apostle, or even with any one of their
disciples.

4. _Deputation Visit._ Paul's Jerusalem Visit the Third--say his
Deputation Visit. According to the Acts,[22] Paul being at the Syrian
Antioch, certain men came thither from Judea, teaching, that Mosaic
circumcision is necessary to Christian salvation. Dissension being thus
produced, Paul, and Barnabas as usual with him, are dispatched to confer
on this subject with the Apostles and the Elders--Time, assigned to this
visit, A.D. 52. Interval between the first and this third visit--years
15.

In addition to the first Jerusalem Visit, mentioned as above by Paul, to
wit, in the first chapter of his Epistle to his Galatians,--in the
second, mention is made of another.

Of the incidents mentioned by Paul, as belonging to this other visit,
scarcely can any one, unless it be that of his having Barnabas for a
companion, be found, that presents itself as being the same with any
incident mentioned in the Acts, in the account given of the above named
Deputation Visit. But, between the two accounts, neither does any
repugnance manifest itself: and, forasmuch as, in a statement, the
purpose of which required that no interview, in which anything material
passed between him and the Apostles, should pass unnoticed,--he mentions
no more than one visit besides the first,--it seems reasonable to
conclude, that it was but one and the same visit, that, in the penning
of both these accounts, was in view.

As far as appears, it is from the account thus given by Paul of the
second, of the two visits mentioned by him as made to Jerusalem, that
the received chronology has deduced the year, which it assigns to the
Deputation Visit, as recorded in the Acts.

In Paul's account alone--in Paul's, and not in that in the Acts--is the
distance given in a determinate number of years. According to one of two
interpretations, 17--the number above mentioned as adopted in the
current chronology--is the number of years mentioned by Paul as
intervening between those two visits. But even in this place, a
circumstance that must not pass altogether unnoticed is,--that,
according to another interpretation, to which the text presents itself
as almost equally open, the length of the interval would be considerably
greater. Galatians i. 17: "Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which
were Apostles before me: but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto
Damascus. Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter,
and abode with him fifteen days." After what period?--after that of his
conversion? or after the expiration of this his second visit to
Damascus? Reckoning from this latter period, the interval may be ever so
much greater than that of the three years: for, to the three years may
be added an indefinite length of time for the second, and even for the
first, of his abodes at Damascus. But, as we advance, reason will appear
for concluding, that, being in the eyes of the Damascus rulers, as well
as the Jerusalem rulers, a traitor--in the highest degree a traitor--his
abode at Damascus could not, at either of these times, have been other
than short as well as secret.

Gal. ii. 1: "Then, fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem
with Barnabas, and took Titus also." This being supposed to be the
Deputation Visit, these fourteen added to the former three, make the
seventeen.

5. _Peter's Antioch Visit._--In Paul's Epistle, addressed to his
Galatians, as above,--immediately after the mention of his own second
Jerusalem Visit as above, comes the mention of an interview, which he
says he has at Antioch with Peter: "Peter being come," he says, "to that
place." Gal. ii. 11. In the Acts, 15:22, immediately upon the back of
the accounts of the Deputation Visit, as above,--comes an account of
what may be called a _counter Deputation Visit_. Of the former
Deputation Visit, according to the Acts, the result is--from the
Apostles, the Elders, and the whole Church, a _letter_, concluding with
a _decree_: and "by men chosen of their own company," this letter is
stated as having been carried to Antioch: and, with these men, so
chosen, Paul and Barnabas are stated as returning to Antioch, from which
city, as above, they had been deputed. As and for the names of "chosen
men," those of Judas, surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, are mentioned:
"chief men among the brethren" is another title by which they are, both
of them, distinguished. To these, no other names are added: in
particular, not that of Peter. Thus far the Acts.

As to Paul, in the account _he_ gives, of the discussion, to which,
after--and apparently, as above, in consequence of--his _secondly
mentioned_ interview with Peter at Jerusalem,--no mention is made either
of Judas Barsabas, or of Silas: of Peter--and him alone--it is, that, on
this occasion, any mention is made. Peter comes, as it should seem, to
Antioch from Jerusalem; which last city seems to have been his ordinary
abode. But, on this occasion likewise, in addition to this visitor,
mention is again made of Barnabas, of whom, as far as appears, from the
time of the Reconciliation Visit down to this time, Antioch was the
ordinary abode. In relation to each of these several Visits, a brief
preparatory indication of the topic or topics, which will be brought to
view, when an account comes to be given of it, may in this place have
its use.

I. _Reconciliation Visit._--On this occasion, a difficulty that
naturally presents itself--is--if the relation is in substance true, and
the occasion is the same--how it can have happened, that if Peter was at
Antioch--Peter, the universally acknowledged chief of the Apostles--no
mention should be to be found of him in the Acts: instead of him, two
men as yet unknown--this _Judas Barsabas_, and this _Silas_--neither of
them of the number belonging to the goodly fellowship of the
Apostles,--being the only persons mentioned.

But, for this difficulty, conjecture presents a solution, in which there
is nothing either in itself improbable, or inconsistent with either of
the two accounts--that of Paul as above, and that in the Acts. This
is--that those two were the men, and the only men, deputed in the first
instance: but, that after them, at no long interval, came thither to
their assistance that chief of the Apostles. Whether the importance of
the question be considered--to wit, whether, upon being received as
Christians, Gentiles should be obliged to submit to Mosaic
circumcision--whether the importance of the question, or the
strenuousness of the debates to which it is spoken of as having given
rise, Acts 15:2, be considered--the visit of the chief of the Apostles
at Jerusalem, to the scene of controversy at Antioch, presents not any
supposition, to which any imputation of improbability seems to attach.

ACTS xv. 1 to 34.

     1. And certain men which came down from Judea taught the brethren
     and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
     cannot be saved.--When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small
     dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and
     Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto
     the Apostles and Elders about this question.--And being brought on
     their way by the Church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria,
     declaring the conversion of the Gentiles, and they caused great joy
     unto all the brethren.--And when they were come to Jerusalem, they
     were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and
     they declared all things that God had done with them.--But there
     rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed,
     saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them
     to keep the law of Moses.--And the Apostles and Elders came
     together for to consider of this matter.--And when there had been
     much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and
     brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among
     us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the
     Gospel, and believe.--And God which knoweth the hearts, bare them
     witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us:--And
     put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by
     faith.--Now therefore why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the necks
     of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to
     bear?--But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
     Christ, we shall be saved even as they.--Then all the multitude
     kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring
     what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by
     them.--And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying,
     Men and brethren, hearken unto me.--Simeon hath declared how God at
     the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for
     his name.--And to this agree the words of the Prophets; as it is
     written,--After this I will return, and will build again the
     tabernacle of David which is fallen down; and I will build again
     the ruins thereof, and I will set it up:--That the residue of men
     might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name
     is called, saith the Lord who doeth all these things.--Known unto
     God are all his works from the beginning of the world.--Wherefore
     my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the
     Gentiles are turned to God:--But that we write unto them, that they
     abstain from pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from
     things strangled, and from blood.--For Moses of old time hath in
     every city, them that preach him, being read in the synagogues
     every sabbath-day.--Then pleased it the Apostles and Elders, with
     the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
     Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; _namely_, Judas surnamed Barsabas,
     and Silas, chief men among the brethren.--And they wrote letters by
     them after this manner; The apostles and elders and brethren send
     greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and
     Syria and Cilicia.--Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which
     went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your
     souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised; and keep the law; to whom we
     gave no such commandment:--It seemed good unto us, being assembled
     with one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved
     Barnabas and Paul;--Men that have hazarded their lives for the name
     of our Lord Jesus Christ.--We have therefore sent Judas and Silas,
     who shall also tell you the same things by mouth.--For it seemed
     good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater
     burden than these necessary things;--That ye abstain from meats
     offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and
     from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do
     well. Fare ye well.--So when they were dismissed, they came to
     Antioch: and when they had gathered the multitude together, they
     delivered the Epistle.--Which when they had read, they rejoiced for
     the consolation.--And Judas and Silas, being prophets also
     themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed
     them.--And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go
     in peace from the brethren unto the Apostles.--34. Notwithstanding
     it pleased Silas to abide there still.

GALATIANS ii. 1 to the end.

     1. Then fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with
     Barnabas, and took Titus with me also.--And I went up by
     revelation, and communicated unto them that Gospel which I preach
     among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation,
     lest by any means I should run, or had run in vain.--But neither
     Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
     circumcised.--And that because of false brethren unawares brought
     in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in
     Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.--To whom we
     gave place by subjection, no not for an hour; that the truth of the
     Gospel might continue with you.--But of those, who seemed to be
     somewhat (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me; God
     accepteth no man's person) for they who seemed _to be somewhat_, in
     conference added nothing to me.--But contrariwise, when they saw
     that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the
     Gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter:--For he that wrought
     effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision, the
     same was mighty in me towards the Gentiles.--And when James,
     Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace
     that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right
     hands of fellowship, that we should go unto the heathen, and they
     unto the circumcision.--Only _they would_ that we should remember
     the poor; the same which I also was forward to do.--But when Peter
     was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to
     be blamed.--For before that certain came from James, he did eat
     with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew, and
     separated himself, fearing them _which were_ of the
     circumcision.--And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him,
     insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away by their
     dissimulation.--But when I saw that they walked not uprightly,
     according to the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them
     all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and
     not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do
     the Jews?--We _who are_ Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
     Gentiles,--Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
     law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
     Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith of Christ and
     not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no
     flesh be justified.--But if while we seek to be justified by Christ
     we ourselves also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the
     minister of sin? God forbid.--For if I build again the things which
     I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor.--For I through the law
     am dead to the law, that I might live unto God.--I am crucified
     with Christ. Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in
     me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
     of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.--21. I do
     not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness _come_ by the
     law, then Christ is dead in vain.

Of the falsity of his story concerning the manner of his
conversion,--one proof, that has been given, has been deduced from the
inconsistency, of the several accounts which we have of it--all of them
originally from himself--as compared with one another.

Of the erroneousness of the notion of his having ever been in the eyes
of the Apostles what he professed himself to be--of this, and at the
same time of the want of correctness, and trustworthiness, in every
account, which, by him, or from him, is to be seen rendered, of his
proceedings, adventures, and dangers--proof will, on the ensuing
occasions, be afforded, by evidence of this same kind: by similar
instances of inconsistency, which will be all along brought to view.

On the occasion of his _first_ visit to Jerusalem--to the metropolis of
Christendom--will be to be noted--1. The cause and manner of his
arrival. 2. The circumstances of his abode--its duration, and business.
3. The cause and circumstances of his departure. 4. The general result
of this his expedition.

1. Of the cause of his visit, and manner of his arrival, we shall see
two different accounts: namely, one, given by himself directly, in an
epistle of his to his disciples in Galatia; the other, by a man, who
afterwards became his adherent and travelling companion--namely the
author of the Acts.

2. Of the duration and business of his abode, we shall see, in like
manner, two different accounts, delivered respectively by those same
pens.

3. So, of the cause of his departure;--from the same two sources.

4. So, of the circumstances of it.

5. Of the general result of this same expedition of his, we have no
fewer than three different accounts: namely, the same two as above; with
the addition of a third, as reported, in the Acts, to have been given by
Paul himself, in the course of the speech he made, at the time of his
fourth visit, to an assembled multitude, headed by the constituted
authorities among the Jews:--when, after having been dragged by force
out of the Temple, he would--had he not been saved by a commander of the
Roman guard--have been torn to pieces.

On this occasion, we shall find, that, by his own confession, made for a
particular purpose--for the purpose of saving his life--under an
exigency which allowed no time for the study of consistency, and
recorded by the blindness and inconsiderateness of his biographer;--we
shall find, that the account, whatever it was, which, on the occasion of
this his first visit, he gave of himself to the Apostles, failed
altogether in its endeavours to obtain credence.


SECTION 5.

TOPICS UNDER VISIT II.--MONEY-BRINGING VISIT.

Of the occasion and particulars of the second of these four visits, we
have but one account: viz. that which is to be seen in the Acts.

Compared with what belongs to the other visits, that which belongs to
this is but of small importance. The information, to be collected from
it, will, however, be seen to be this: namely, that this was the second,
of the attempts he made to join himself to the Apostles: and that it
succeeded no better than the first. It did not even succeed so well:
for, notwithstanding the claims which the business of it gave him to
their regard--it was to bring them a sum of money, the fruit of the
liberality of the Church at Antioch--he could not so much as obtain
admittance into the presence of any one of them. Without much
hesitation, this may be affirmed. If he had, he would have made mention
of it: for, it will be seen, that, whatsoever apparent countenance he
ever succeeded in obtaining from them, it was his care to make the most
of it.


SECTION 6.

REMARKS ON VISIT III.--DEPUTATION VISIT.

Of the occasion, and particulars, and termination, of the _third_ of
these four visits, we have two, and but two, accounts: one--that given
in the Acts; the other--that given by Paul himself, as above, in his
letter to his Galatians: that in the Acts, the only one which goes into
particulars; and which must accordingly be taken for the basis of the
narrative, and in that character be brought to view in the first
instance: that given by Paul himself confining itself to generals; but,
as far as it goes, much more to be depended upon, and affording much
more instruction, than that given in the Acts.

Among its immediate consequences, this third visit appears to have had
some sort of intercourse between Paul and Saint Peter at Antioch--the
next most considerable seat of the new religion after Jerusalem; at
Antioch, to which city, Paul,--who, with Barnabas, had been settled
there,--was on his return: Peter being then on a temporary visit, made
to that place, for the final settlement of the business, by which the
last preceding visit of Paul to Jerusalem had been occasioned.

At the time of this visit, the residence of Paul was at this same
Antioch. The occasion of it was--the dissemination there, of a doctrine,
which, by certain persons not named, had been imported thither from
Jerusalem: a doctrine, according to which it was taught to the
brethren--"Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot
be saved." For the settlement of this important matter,--Barnabas, with
Paul for his companion, besides other companions not named, was, by the
brethren at Antioch, now, for the second time, sent, as a delegate, to
the brethren at Jerusalem.

On every one of these three visits, it was under the protection of this
Barnabas (it will be seen) that Paul had presented himself:--on the
first of them, for the purpose of making known his conversion, and, if
possible, forming a connection with the brethren there;--the second, for
the purpose of bringing them money, the fruits of the respect and
affection of the brethren at Antioch;--the third time, for the
settlement of this important point of doctrine. As for Barnabas, he was
a _Cypriot_, who, as will be seen, had an establishment at Jerusalem:
and who, by his indefatigable zeal, added to his unrivalled munificence,
appears to have obtained an influence not exceeded by any but that of
the Apostles.

Of this same Deputation Visit, being the third of the recorded visits of
Paul to Jerusalem,--followed by, and coupled with, one of Peter to
Antioch--Gal. ii. 11, the place of Paul's residence,--two most important
results, or alleged results, are mentioned: the first, mentioned by the
author of the Acts alone, the decree, of a council, composed of the
Apostles and certain other persons, by the name of Elders, at
Jerusalem;--which decree, together with a letter, was from thence sent
by the hands of Judas Barsabas and Silas, to the brethren at Antioch;
Paul and Barnabas being of the party, on their return to that same
place: the other result, mentioned by Paul alone, a sort of _partition
treaty_, by which the field of doctrinal labour, and thence of spiritual
dominion was divided between him, (Paul), on the one part, and the
Apostles on the other. The _Jewish world_, for a less ambiguous
designation would hardly find a sufficient warrant, to remain with the
Apostles; the _Gentile world_, to be left free to the exertions of the
declared convert and self-constituted Apostle. As to the _decree and
letter_, reasons for questioning the authenticity of these documents
will be hereinafter brought to view, Ch. 6. Of the _partition treaty_,
the reality presents itself as altogether natural and probable--and, by
circumstantial as well as direct evidence, sufficiently established: by
direct evidence supported, by circumstantial evidence confirmed.


SECTION 7.

TOPICS UNDER VISIT IV.--INVASION VISIT.

Of the occasion of the fourth and last of these four visits--call it
_Paul's Invasion Visit_--we have, though but from one immediate source,
what may, to some purposes, be called two distinct and different
accounts, included one within another: to wit, that which the historian
gives as from himself, and that which he puts into the mouth of his
hero, whose adventures he is relating. On this subject, from the mouth
of the hero, the historian has not given us, and probably could not give
us, anything but mystery. From the circumstances, it will be seen,
whether the appellation _Invasion Visit_, by which this last of his
recorded visits to Jerusalem is here distinguished, is not fully
justified.

Neither, of the occurrences which took place during the course of it,
nor of the mode in which it terminated, have we any more than one
account; viz. the account which, speaking in his own person, is given of
it by the author of the Acts.[23]

But, upon one part of this account--and that a part in itself in no
small degree obscure--light, and that such as, it is believed, will be
found to dispel the darkness, will be seen thrown, by an article of the
Mosaic law: upon which article, light will be seen reciprocally
reflected, by the application here recorded as having been made of it.
This regards the _Temple scene_:--an expensive ceremony spun out for
days together only to produce the effect of an _Oath_.

On the occasion of this visit, in spite of a universal opposition on the
part of all concerned--his own adherents and dependents, as well as his
adversaries of all classes included,--Paul, for reasons by himself
studiously concealed,--and, if brought to light at all, brought to light
no otherways than by inference,--will be seen making his entry into
Jerusalem, as it were by force. In the hope of freeing themselves, as it
should seem, of this annoyance, it is,--that the rulers of the Christian
church, insist upon his clearing himself from certain suspicions, in the
harbouring of which the whole church had concurred.[24]


SECTION 8.

SELF-WRITTEN BIOGRAPHY--ITS SUPERIOR VALUE AND CLAIM TO CREDENCE.

On the occasion of this portion of history, it seems particularly
material, to bring to view an observation, which, on the occasion of
every portion of history, it will, it is believed, be of no small use to
have in remembrance.

In comparison of self-written biography, scarcely does any other
biography deserve the name.

Faint, indeterminate, uninstructive, deceptive, is the information
furnished by any other hand, of whatsoever concerns the state of the
mental frame, in comparison of what is furnished by a man's own. Even of
those particulars which make against himself,--even of those motives and
intentions which he would most anxiously conceal,--more clear and
correct, as far as it goes, if not more complete--is the information
given by him, than any which is commonly afforded, even by an impartial
hand. By a man's own hand, not unfrequently is information afforded, of
a sort which makes against himself, and which would not, because it
could not, have been afforded by any other hand, though ever so hostile.
He states the self-condemnatory mental facts, the blindness of
self-partiality concealing from his eyes the condemnatory inference: or,
even with his eyes open, he lays himself under the imputation: bartering
merit in this or that inferior shape, for the merit of candour, or for
the hope of augmenting the probative force of his own self-serving
evidence, in favour of every other merit for which it is his ambition to
gain credence.

FOOTNOTES:

[20] Gal. i. 18. "Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see
Peter, and abode with him fifteen days."

[21] Of any mention made of Galatia, in any of the Books of the New
Testament, the following are, according to Cruden's Concordance, the
only instances: 1 Cor. xvi. 1. "... have given order to the churches at
Galatia." Times, assigned to these Epistles, A.D. 59. 2 Tim. iv. 10:
"Crescens is departed to Galatia." A.D. 66. 1 Pet. i. 1: "to the
strangers scattered in Galatia." Date A.D. 60.

[22] Acts xv. 1-4. 1. "And certain men which came down from Judea taught
the brethren and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved.--When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no
small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul
and Barnabas and certain other of them should go up to Jerusalem unto
the Apostles and Elders about this question.--And being brought on their
way by the church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring
the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the
brethren.--And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders, and they declared all things
that God had done with them."

[23] Be this as it may, that he must have been in the way to hear, from
various persons present, accounts, such as they were, of what was said
by Paul,--seems to follow almost of course. This seems applicable even
to the _latest_ of the two occasions; for, though the place, Cæsarea,
was some distance from Jerusalem, 56 miles,--yet the distance was not so
great, but that the persons, who were attached to him, might, for the
most part, be naturally supposed to have followed him: and in particular
the historian, who, according to his history, continued in Paul's suite
till, at the conclusion of this his forced excursion, he arrived at
Rome.

But, on the subject of _possible materials_, one concluding query here
presents itself. On a _subject_ such as that in question, on an
_occasion_, such as that in question, for a _purpose_ such as that in
question, a _speech_ such as either of those in question, might it not,
by a person in the historian's situation--not to speak of other
situations--be just as easily made without any special materials, as
with any the most correct and complete stock of materials?

[24] Between Paul's third visit, and that which is here reckoned as his
fourth, another is, by some, supposed[I.] to, have been taken place; on
which supposition, this concluding one, which is here styled the fourth,
ought to be reckoned the fifth.

But, for the support of this supposition, the grounds referred to for
this purpose do not seem sufficient:--not that, if the supposition were
true, any consequence material to the present purpose would follow.

For this supposition, what ground there is, consists in a passage in the
Acts:--Acts 18:20, 21, 22.

20. When they, the Jews at Ephesus, desired [him] to tarry longer time
with them, he consented not;

But bade them farewell, saying, I _must_ by all means _keep this feast
that cometh in Jerusalem_; but I will return again unto you, if God
will. And he sailed from Ephesus.

And when he had _landed_ at Cæsarea, and _gone up_, and saluted the
_church_, he _went down_ to Antioch.

There we have the grounds of the supposition. But, what is the support
they give to it?--declaration, affirming the existence of an intention,
is one thing; actually existing intention is another. Even supposing the
existence of the intention in question,--intention is one thing;
corresponding action, another. Jerusalem is not mentioned. Cæsarea
being on the sea-coast, Jerusalem is indeed in the interior: and
therefore, it may be said, is a place, to which, if a man went from
Cæsarea, he would "_go up_:" but, from Cæsarea, it being on the coast,
a man could not go to any place in Judaea not on the coast, without
_going up_.

So much for _place_:--and now as to _time_. The time mentioned as the
object of the _intention_, is the _passover_; but, that the time, at
which, being _gone up_, Paul "_saluted the church_"--this being all
which, upon this _going up_, he is here stated as doing--that this time
was the passover, is not stated.

As to the _salute_ here stated as given to the _church_,--at the
conclusion, and as a material part of the result, of this inquiry, it
will appear plain beyond all doubt, that, if by "_the church_" be
understood any member of it at Jerusalem, besides two, or at most three,
of the Apostles,--according to this interpretation, from the time of his
Conversion Visit to Damascus antecedently to his first visit to
Jerusalem, down to the last visit here reckoned as his fourth--there
never was a day on which the _church_ would have received his salute.

What will also be rendered manifest is--that it was an object with the
author of the Acts, to induce a belief, that Paul, before the conclusion
of his first visit, was upon good terms with the church, and so
continued to the last: and that, to this end, a purposed
misrepresentation was employed by the historian.

Not that, in regard to the visit here in question, to the purpose of the
argument--it makes any sort of difference, whether it had place or had
not. If it had place, neither the conclusion, nor any part of the
argument, will be seen to require any variation in consequence.

     [I.] Wells's _Historical Geography of the Old and New Testament_,
     ii. 271. Ch. 5. Of Saint Paul's Travels and Voyages into Asia.
     "St. Paul" (says Wells very composedly) "_having kept_ the passover
     at Jerusalem, went thence down, &c."--And for this the Acts are
     quoted as above: but the Acts, it will here be seen, say no such
     thing.




