CHAPTER IV.

     Paul disbelieved _continued_.--_First of his four Visits to
     Jerusalem after his Conversion_; _say_ Jerusalem Visit I. _or_
     Reconciliation Visit.--_Barnabas introducing him from Antioch to
     the Apostles._


SECTION 1.

PAUL'S PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN HIS CONVERSION AND THIS
VISIT.--CONTRADICTION. PER PAUL, IT WAS NOT TILL AFTER THREE YEARS
SPENT IN ARABIA; PER ACTS, IMMEDIATELY.

Already on another occasion, and for a different purpose, have the two
accounts, between which this self-contradiction manifests itself, been
brought to view: viz. on the occasion of the accounts, given or
supposed to be given, by Paul, of the cause and manner of his
conversion:--accounts given in the first place, in writing, and
consequently, with all requisite time for deliberation, in his Epistle
to the Galatians:--given, or supposed to be given, in the next place, by
a speech spoken, namely, that which, in the Acts is reported as spoken
by him, on the occasion of his trial, to Festus and Agrippa:--Festus,
the Roman Proconsul, Agrippa, the Jewish King.

In the whole account of this matter, as given by Paul in his Epistle to
the Galatians, how much of truth there probably was, and how much of
falsehood or misrepresentation,--has been seen already in some measure,
ch. II. i. 5, and will be seen more fully as we advance.

As to his motive for this visit, he has endeavoured to keep it to
himself: but, by the result, according to the account he himself gives
of it, it is betrayed. It was--to effect the so much needed
_reconciliation_:--his reconciliation with the Apostles:--the Apostles,
in relation to whom his disregard is professed, the need he had of them,
no otherwise than virtually, nor yet the less effectually confessed.
Without an interval of considerable length between his conversion and
this visit, all such reconciliation would have been plainly hopeless.
From this circumstance, the length, as alleged by him, of his abode in
Arabia, receives obvious and highly probative confirmation. The
confirmation is, indeed, reciprocal. The nature of his situation, proves
the need he had, of an interval of considerable length, before any hope
of reconciliation could be fulfilled, or, naturally speaking, so much
as conceived: by this circumstance, his abode in some other country is
rendered probable to us: and this other country may, for aught we know,
as well have been the country mentioned by him--to wit, _Arabia_,
as any other: and, thus it is, that this assertion, of his having
been three years in Arabia, between the time of his departure from
Jerusalem to Damascus, and his return to Jerusalem to see Peter, is
confirmed:--confirmed, by the natural length, of the interval, requisite
to the affording any, the least chance, that Peter could be induced to
meet upon terms of amity and intercourse a man, in whom he beheld the
murderer of a countless multitude of human beings, linked to him by the
closest bonds of self-regarding interest, as well as sympathy and
brotherly love.

As to contradiction, contradiction cannot easily be much more pointed,
than it will be seen to be, between the account in respect of time, as
given in this instance by Paul, and the account given of it by his
historiographer in the Acts. On a double ground, it is Paul's account
that claims the precedence. Of _his_ account, such as it is, the rank,
in the scale of trustworthiness, is that of _immediate_ evidence; that
of his historiographer, no higher than that of _unimmediate_
evidence:--evidence once removed; having, for its most probable and
least untrustworthy source, that same _immediate_ evidence. Paul's
evidence is, at the same time, not only more circumstantiated, but
supported by the reasons which he has combined with it. Not till three
years after his alleged miraculous conversion, did he go near to any of
the Apostles.--Why?--Because, though, _at_ that time, for reasons which
he has left us to guess, he had regarded himself as having considerable
need of them,--_till_ that time he did not regard himself as having any
need of them. And, why was it, that, for so great a length of time, he
did not regard himself as having any need of them?--The answer he
himself gives us, Gal. i. 10: ... "do I seek to please men?--I certify
to you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after
man.--For I received it not of man, nor was I taught it but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.--When it pleased God, who called me by his
grace,--to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
heathen, _immediately_ I conferred not with flesh and blood:--Neither
went I up to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me; but I went
into Arabia, and returned _again_ unto Damascus.--Then after three years
I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen
days.--But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's
brother."

Thus far Paul himself. Let us now see, what is said in regard to the
time, by his subsequent attendant and historiographer. Acts ix ... "as
he (Saul) journeyed, he came near Damascus, and, suddenly there shined
round him a light," &c.--ver. 8. "And Saul arose from the earth, and ...
they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.--And he was
three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.--And there was
a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord
in a vision...--...go into the street called _Straight_, and inquire
in the house of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus...--17. And Ananias
... entered into the house, and ... said, Brother Saul, the Lord ...
hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight ...--And ... he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.--And when he had
received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the
disciples which were at Damascus.--And straightway he preached Christ
in the synagogues,...--22. ... and confounded the Jews which dwelt at
Damascus,...--And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took
counsel to kill him.--... and they watched the gates day and night to
kill him.--Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the
wall in a basket.--And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to
join himself to the disciples: but they were _all_ afraid of him, and
_believed not that he was a disciple_.--But Barnabas took him, and
brought him to the _Apostles_, and declared unto them how he had seen
the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had
preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus."

With what the historiographer says in his own person, agrees, as to the
particular point now in question, what, in the studied oration, he puts
into Paul's mouth. In that account likewise, immediately after the
mention of what Paul did at Damascus,--follows, the mention of what he
did at Jerusalem: and, as to everything done by him among the Gentiles,
not only does the mention of it come after the mention of what was done
by him at Jerusalem, but, between the two, comes the mention, of
whatever was done by him, in any of the coasts of Judea. Acts 26:19.
"Whereupon, O, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly
vision:--but showed, first unto them of Damascus, and of Jerusalem, and
throughout all the coasts of Judea; and then to the Gentiles, that they
should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance."

Here then, according to Paul's own account, after his visit to Damascus
from Jerusalem, he visited Arabia, and moreover Damascus a second time,
before he made his visit to Jerusalem to see Peter: before this visit
did he make both those other visits; and, in making them, pass three
years, with or without the addition, of the time, occupied by his first
visit to Damascus,--and the time, occupied by his abode in Arabia.
According to Paul's own account then, between his second departure from,
and his arrival at, Jerusalem from thence, there was an interval either
of three years, or of so much more than three years. On the contrary,
according to both the accounts given of the matter by his
historiographer in the Acts, there was not between the two events in
question, any interval other than such as the journey from the one to
the other--about 130 British miles as the crow flies, say about 160,
allowance made for turnings and windings,--would require.

Now, as between Jews and Gentiles, _alias_ heathens:--to which of these
two descriptions of persons, were his preachings addressed in the first
instance?

According to his Epistle to his Galatians, preaching to the heathen
being his peculiar destination, this accordingly is the vocation upon
which he proceeded in the first place: and we have seen how probable it
is, not to say certain, that, in this particular, what he asserted was
true. His appointment being to "the heathen," he conferred not with
flesh and blood: _i.e._ with the Apostles, their immediate disciples, or
other flesh and blood of the Christian persuasion: for, of any such
conference--of any assistance or support from any such quarter, he has,
in this same Epistle, been declaring and protesting--most vehemently
protesting--that he had no need. Neither then for the purpose of
conference with "those who were Apostles," as he says, "before him," nor
for any other purpose, went he up to Jerusalem: no, not till either
three years after his conversion, or three years, with the addition of
another term of unmeasurable length.

Now then, how stands this matter according to the Acts--according to the
speech put into Paul's mouth by the author of the Acts? Instead of the
Gentiles being the description of persons, to whom, in the first
instance, he applies his labours,--it is the Jews. What he _shows_ is
"_shown_," in the first place, to those "of Damascus;" then "at
Jerusalem;" then "throughout all the coasts of Judea;" and, not till
_then_--to the Gentiles: of his abode in Arabia--of any visit of his to
Arabia--not any of the slightest mention, or so much as allusion to it.
But, all this while, for anything that appears to the contrary, Arabia
was completely open to him: whereas, after the offence he had committed
against the authority of the ruling powers at Judea, it was not, morally
speaking, in the nature of things that he could have continued in any
place coming within that description--have continued, long enough to
make any sensible impression: and, in Jerusalem in particular, in this
same Epistle to the Galatians, from which the above particulars are
taken,--it was, as he himself declares, only in secrecy, that, even
fourteen years after this, he ventured to disseminate those doctrines,
whatever they were, that were peculiar to himself, 2nd Gal.: 1, 2.
"Then, fourteen years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas,
and took Titus with me. And I went up by revelation, and communicated
unto them that Gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but _privately_
to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had
run, in vain."

Thus stands the contrariety:--the contrariety, between Paul's own
account of his own proceedings, and the account, which, by the author of
the Acts, he is represented as giving of them, on another occasion.
Says Paul _himself_, in his own Epistle to his Galatians--After my
conversion, it was to the Gentiles that I applied myself first: to the
Jews, not till afterwards; nor then, to any considerable extent. Says
the author of the _Acts_, in a speech, which he puts into the mouth of
Paul--It was to the Jews that he applied himself first, and _that_ to a
great extent: to the Gentiles, not till afterwards.

Thus stands the contrariety, taken in itself. As to the _cause_, it will
neither be far to seek, nor dubious. In the differences of situations,
occasions, and purposes in view--in the differences, that had place in
respect of all those particulars--it will be found.

On the occasion, on which Paul himself speaks, what was the persuasion
which it was his endeavour to produce? It was--that, for a number of
years, commencing from the moment of his conversion,--with no persons,
who, to this purpose, could be called _Jews_, had he, to any such
purpose as this, had any intercourse: for, this being admitted, it
followed, of course, that, if, on the subject of the religion of Jesus,
he had really received the information he declared himself to have
received, it was _not_ from the Apostles, that he had had it, or any
part of it. "On them (says he) I am perfectly independent: to them I am
even superior. With Jesus _they_ had no communication but in a natural
way; with the same Jesus _I_ have had communication in a supernatural
way:--in the way of '_revelation_.' My communication with him is,
moreover, of a date posterior to theirs--to any that they can pretend
to: in so far as there is any contrariety between that I teach and what
they teach, it is for theirs, on both these accounts--it is for theirs,
to yield to mine. From God is my doctrine: in opposition to it, if
either they, or any other men presume to preserve, let the curse of God
be on their heads. ver. 8. Accordingly, at the time of my first visit to
Jerusalem after my conversion, no communication had I with them, for, no
such communication, teaching as I did from revelation, could I stand in
need of, I had already passed three years at least in Arabia, teaching
to the Gentiles there my peculiar doctrine. This peculiar doctrine, as I
made no scruple of teaching it to those Gentiles, as little, on the
occasion of that visit of mine to Jerusalem, did I make any scruple of
teaching it to Jews as well as Gentiles. True it is, I did not then
teach it publicly:--I did not teach my peculiar doctrine, so publicly as
they did theirs. But, as to this comparative secrecy, it had for its
cause the advantage of being free from opposition; for, had the fact of
my teaching this doctrine so different from theirs--been known to
them,--they might have opposed it, and thus my labours might have been
lost."

Whether, in the representation here given of what he says to his
Galatians, there be any misrepresentation, the reader may judge.

On the occasion, on which _his historian_ represents him as speaking,
what now, as to this same matter, was the persuasion, which the nature
of his situation required him to endeavour to produce? It was, that Jews
were the sort of persons, with whom, during the period in question, he
had, to the purpose in question, been holding intercourse: Jews, even in
preference to--not to say to the exclusion of--Gentiles: so far is he
from being _now_ represented, as stating himself to have held converse
with Gentiles, to the exclusion of Jews; which is, that of which he
_himself_ has been seen taking so much pains to persuade his Galatian
disciples. Yes: as far as competition could have place, Jews, on this
occasion, in _preference_, at least, to Gentiles: for, on this occasion,
what he was labouring at was--to recommend himself to the favour of his
Jewish Judge, King Agrippa, Acts 26:8-21, by magnifying the services he
had been rendering to the Jews, his very accusers not excepted:
services, to the rendering of which, close and continued intercourse,
during that same period, could not but have been necessary.

On this occasion, being accused of--his historian does not choose to say
what,--his defence was--that, of the persecution he was suffering, his
preaching the _resurrection_ was the only real cause: that, having been
born and bred a Pharisee,--in preaching that doctrine, so far from
opposing, he had been supporting, with all his might, the principles
maintained by the constituted authorities: adducing, in proof of the
general proposition, the evidence furnished by a particular fact, the
resurrection, that had place in the case of Jesus, Acts 25:19: that
when, in his conversion vision, Jesus gave him his commission, the
principal object of that commission was--the instruction of the
Gentiles: to wit, by informing them--that, to such of them as would
believe in the resurrection, and repent of their sins, and do works
accordingly,--the benefit of it would be extended: that to this mandate,
it was true, he did not ultimately fail to pay substantial obedience:
yet, such was his affection for his brethren the Jews,--that it was not
till, for a considerable time, he had been conferring on _them_ the
benefit of his labours, that he betook himself to the Gentiles. Acts
26:19. "I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision:--But showed
first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the
coasts of Judea; and _then_ to the Gentiles, that they should repent,
&c.--For these causes the Jews caught me in the Temple, and went about
to kill me."

The repugnancy (says somebody), the repugnancy, is--not between Paul and
Paul--but between Paul and the author of the Acts; and, since the facts
in question are occurrences in which Paul himself was either agent or
patient, to the author of the Acts, and not to Paul, is the
incorrectness, wherever it be, to be imputed. Be it so: for the purpose
of the argument at least, be it so: but, if so it be, what are we to
think of the author of the Acts? Take away the author of the Acts, what
becomes of Paul? Take away the authority of the Acts in the character of
an inspired writer--writing from supernatural inspiration, after an
immediate and continued intercourse, in some unexplained and
inexplicable manner, with the Almighty,--what remains, then, of the
evidence, on the ground of which the mighty fabric of Paul and his
doctrine has been erected?

A man, who is thus continually in contradiction--sometimes with himself,
at other times with the most unimpeachable authorities--what credence
can, with reason and propriety, be given to his evidence, in relation to
any important matter of fact? at any rate, when any purpose, which he
himself has at heart, is to be served by it? Of such a man, the
testimony--the uncross-examined and uncross-examinable testimony--would
it, of itself, be sufficient to warrant a verdict, on a question of the
most inconsiderable pecuniary import? how much less then, on questions,
in comparison of which those of the greatest importance which the
affairs of this life admit of, shrink into insignificance? Even, suppose
veracity, and every other branch of probity, unimpeached and
unimpeachable,--if such confusion of mind, such want of memory, such
negligence, in relation to incidents and particulars, of too immensely
momentous a nature, to escape, at any interval of time, from the most
ordinary mind;--if such want of attention, such deficiency, in respect
of the most ordinary intellectual faculties and attainments, are
discernible in his narrative,--what solid, what substantial ground of
dependence can it furnish, or even leave in existence?

Of this sort are the questions for which already no inconsiderable
warrant has, it is believed, been found; nor, if so, throughout the
whole remaining course of this inquiry, should they ever be out of mind.


SECTION 2.

GROUNDS OF PAUL'S PROSPECT OF RECONCILIATION ON THIS OCCASION WITH
THE APOSTLES AND THEIR DISCIPLES.

On this head, in addition to, and in explanation of, the sort of
narrative given in the Acts,--information, of the most instructive and
impressive stamp, may be seen furnished by himself: at the head of it,
may be placed that, which may be seen in his Epistle to his Galatian
converts.

At Jerusalem was the board-room in which sat the Council of the
Apostles: of those men, to whom their bitterest enemies would not, any
more than their disciples and adherents, have refused the appellation of
constant companions and selected disciples of the departed Jesus. To
them was known, everything that, in relation to Jesus, was known to any
one else: and moreover, in unlimited abundance, particulars not capable
of being known by any one else.

As to Paul, let us suppose him now a believer in Jesus; and, on this
supposition, note what could not but have been the state of his mind,
with relation to those select servants of Jesus.

In them he beheld the witnesses--not only of the most material and
characteristic acts and sayings of their Master, but of his death, and
its supernatural consequences--the _resurrection_ and _ascension_, with
which it had been followed.

In them he beheld--not only the witnesses of his _miracles_, but a set
of pupils, to whom such powers of working the like miracles--such
miraculous powers, in a word, as it had pleased him to impart,--had been
imparted.

In their labours, he beheld the causes of whatsoever prosperity, he
found the society, established by them, in possession of.

In himself, he beheld the man, who, with such distinguished acrimony and
perseverance, had done his utmost, for the destruction of that society,
into which, for the purposes, indication of which has been so clearly
given by his own pen, he was preparing to intrude himself.

To form an ostensible cause for his intrusion,--in addition to such
information, as, by means of his persecution, it had happened to him to
extract from those whom he had been persecuting, what, on his part, had
he?--He had his own learning, his own talents, his own restless and
audacious temper, and the vision he had got up:--the baseless fabric of
that vision, a view of which has just been given.

Of the representation thus given of the matter,--whether we take his own
account of it, or that of the Acts,--suppose the truth to rest upon no
other ground than this vision, with or without that other vision, which
has been seen so slenderly tacked to it, and so strangely inserted into
it,--thus slender is the ground, on which we shall find him embarking
upon his enterprize,--assuming to himself, without modification or
apology, the name of _an Apostle_,--thrusting himself into the society,
and putting himself altogether upon an equality, not to say more than an
equality, with the whole company of the men, whose title to that
appellation was above dispute:--those of them who, among the chosen, had
been the most favoured, not excepted.


GALATIANS i. 11-23.

     11. But I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached
     of me is not after man.--For I neither received it of man, neither
     was I taught _it_, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.--For ye
     have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion,
     how that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and wasted
     it:--And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in
     mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions
     of my fathers.--But when it pleased God, who separated me from my
     mother's womb, and called _me_ by his grace,--To reveal his Son in
     me, that I might preach him among the heathen; immediately I
     conferred not with flesh and blood,--Neither went I up to Jerusalem
     to them which were Apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and
     returned again unto Damascus.--Then after three years I went up to
     Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.--But other
     of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother.--Now the
     things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie
     not.--Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia;--And
     was unknown by face unto the Churches of Judea which were in
     Christ.--But they had heard only, that he which persecuted us in
     times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.

Thus, however indistinctly and incoherently stated, stands the matter,
on the surface of both these accounts. On the surface. But, by a little
reflection on the nature of the case--the obvious and indisputable
nature of the case--as collected from all accounts, as already brought
to view in a preceding chapter II, we shall be led to another
conception, and the only tenable one.

The plan of worldly ambition--that plan by which we have already seen
his outward conversion produced--had been not only formed, but acted
upon:--acted upon, during a course of at least three years: of three
years, employed at Damascus in preparation,--in Arabia in probation.
What remained, and was now become necessary, was--some sort of
countenance from the Apostles: from the Apostles, and thence, if
possible, from the rest of the then existing Church. Necessary
altogether was this countenance for his support: for, to this plan the
_name_ of Jesus was essential. It was in that _name_, that all his
operations were to be carried on:--in that name, from the use of which
it was to be universally understood, that it was according to
directions, and with support, from the departed Jesus, that by this, his
newly-enlisted servant, everything was said and done.

In Damascus--yes:--in Damascus, where were the only persons, with whom,
for the purpose of his dominion, he could with safety communicate: that
is to say, persons, whom his commission from the Jerusalem authorities
had placed under his power. In Arabia--yes: where, though he had made no
progress of which he saw any advantage in giving any account--he at any
rate had not experienced any opposition, of such a sort as to engage him
to drop his scheme. In those comparatively distant countries--yes. But,
in Jerusalem--the birthplace of Jesus and his religion,--in that
metropolis, within which, or the near neighbourhood of it, all the
witnesses of its rise and progress--all the proselytes, that had been
made to it, were collected,--and from whence, and to which, the votaries
of that religion, out of which it had sprung, would be continually
flocking from all quarters;--in this place, for a man, known so
notoriously to them all as a persecutor, in whose scheme of persecution
they had all of them been involved,--for such a man to have, all on a
sudden, begun preaching and acting, in the name of that Jesus, whom, to
use his own language, he had persecuted--such an enterprise as this,
which, even with the utmost support which it was in their power to give,
would have been audacity, would, without some sort of countenance from
them,--have been downright madness.

To perfect success it was necessary, that not only these shepherds of
the Church pasture, but, through them the whole flock, should thus be
brought under management. So far as regarded those same _rulers_, we
shall find him, in a certain degree,--and even, with reference to his
purpose, in a sufficient degree,--successful. But, with reference to the
Disciples in general, and to all those rulers but three,--it will be
seen to have completely failed.

Circumstanced as he was, to those rulers alone, was it possible for him
to have addressed himself, with any the smallest hope. To any assembly
of the faithful at large, to have repaired with no better recommendation
than his vision story,--even with Barnabas, ready, as we shall see, to
take him by the hand,--would have been plainly hopeless. Not less so
would it have been--to present himself to the Apostles,--if, in support
of such proposition as he had to make,--nothing more apposite, nothing
to them in their situation more credible, than this same vision
story,--had been capable of being produced. On them, therefore, the case
seems already pretty well ripe for the conclusion, that, no such story
was ever attempted to be passed. But, setting aside that aërial
argument,--inducements of a more substantial nature, such as we shall
find brought to view by Paul himself, were neither on this occasion
wanting,--nor could, at any time, have been out of the view of that same
Barnabas, whom we shall see appearing so often, in the character of his
generous patron and steady friend. "On this plan, might Barnabas say to
them,--On this plan, which he has chalked out for himself, he will be
acting--not only not in opposition to, but even in furtherance of, your
wishes and endeavors. Grecian as he is,--skilled in that language, and
that learning, which serves a man as a passport through the whole of the
Gentile world,--it is to that world that his labours will confine
themselves; a field surely ample enough for the most comprehensive
views. To you he will leave,--and leave certainly without privation, and
therefore naturally without regret,--that field, of which you are
already in possession,--and, by the boundaries of which, your means of
convenient culture are circumscribed."

"On this plan,--not only will your exertions remain unimpeded, but the
influence of the name of Jesus--that name, on the influence of which
those same exertions are so materially dependent for their
success,--will, in proportion to Paul's success, be extended."

In a discourse, to this effect, from the generous and enlightened
mediator,--may be seen the natural origin of that agreement, which,
further on in its place, under the name of the _partition treaty_, there
will be occasion to bring, in a more particular manner, under review.

But, what is little less evident, than the propriety and prudence of
this plan, viewed at least in the point of view in which it might not
unnaturally be viewed by Barnabas, is--the impossibility, of coming
forward, with any tolerable prospect of success, with any such plan in
hand, in presence of a vast and promiscuous assemblage. To engage, on
the part of any such assemblage, not to say any steady confidence, but
any the slightest hope,--that, from an enemy even to death, the same man
would become a partner and assistant,--would require a most particular
and protracted exposition, of all those facts and arguments, which the
requisite confidence would require for its support:--a detail, which no
such assembly would so much as find time to listen to, were it possible
for it to find patience.

Even in the case of the Apostles themselves,--taking the whole council
of them together, the nature of the plan, it will be seen, admitted not
of any successful negotiation. Accordingly, to the chief of them alone,
to wit, to Peter, was it so much as the intention of Paul to make any
communication of it in the first instance: and, in the whole length of
the intercourse, such as it was, that he kept up with, them--in all the
four visits, in the course of which that intercourse was kept up--being
a period of not less than twenty-five years, to wit, from the year 35 to
the year 60,--with no more than three of the eleven, will he be seen so
much as pretending to have had any personal interview: _they_ not seeing
him, except when they could not avoid it; and _the others_ never seeing
him at all.


SECTION 3.

OCCASION OF THIS VISIT, AS PER PAUL'S OWN ACCOUNT.

After his conversion--after the time at which, if he is to be believed,
he saw that first-mentioned of his visions--that vision, by which the
most strenuous opponent of the new religion was changed into one who, in
profession, was the most active of its supporters,--what was the course
he took? Did he repair immediately to Jerusalem from whence he came? Did
he present himself to the eleven Apostles--to the confidential
companions of the departed Jesus, to lay before them his credentials? to
report to those by whom everything about Jesus that was to be known to
man was known--what had been experienced by him?--by him, Paul, by whom,
till the moment of that experience, nothing of it whatever had been
known? Not he, indeed. Behold what he says himself.

Instead of so doing, off he goes, in the first instance to Arabia; from
whence, at the end of a length of time not specified, he returns to
Damascus. At length, however, to Jerusalem he does repair: at length,
into the presence of those against whose lives he had so long
conspired,--he now uses his endeavours to intrude himself.

At length? at the end then of what length of time? At the end of three
years? Yes: but from what point of time computed? From the time of his
conversion on the road,--or from the last day of his stay at Damascus,
upon his return thither from Arabia? By that man, let an answer to these
questions be given--by that man who can find grounds for it.

Thus much, however, may, at any rate, be said:--of the length of this
interval three years is the minimum.

In what view did it occur to him to seek this conference? in what view
to make the attempt? and in what view delay it?

1. As to his view in seeking it,--it must be left to inference:--to
conjecture, grounded on circumstances.

2. Being engaged, as he was, in the plan of making converts to a
religion, called by him the religion of Jesus,--and this among the
nations at large--among others besides those in the bosom of whose
religion the founder of the new religion had been born;--feeling, as it
seemed to him, the need, of information in various shapes--concerning
the acts and sayings of Jesus;--not having, for the purpose, had, as
yet, access, to any of the persons, to whom the benefit, of an interview
with Jesus, upon terms of peculiar confidence, had been imparted;--he
was desirous, of taking this--his only course--for rectifying the
misconception, under which, to no small extent, he must probably have
been labouring,--and filling up the deficiencies, under which he could
not but be labouring.

3. Obvious is the need he had, of countenance from these universally
acknowledged chiefs, of the religion professed to be taught by him.

Good, says some one: but, having, from the first, been thus long
labouring, under the need of information,--how happened it, that he so
long delayed, the exertions he made at length, for the obtaining of it?

The answer is surely not unobvious.

Had the time, of his presenting-himself, been when the memory of his
conversion was fresh,--when the memory, of the vision, by which it was
to be stated as having been effected, would, supposing it really
experienced, have been fresh also,--in such case, the narrative, true or
untrue, would have found, opposed to its reception, all imaginable
repugnance, in so many ulcerated minds: and, on the supposition of its
being untrue, he--the supposed percipient and actually narrating
witness--he, who knew nothing about the subject of his testimony, would
have had to submit himself to the severest imaginable cross-examination,
at the hands of those, to whom everything about Jesus was matter of
perfect knowledge.

Thus the matter would have stood, in the first instance. On the other
hand, as time ran on, several results, favourable to his design, would
naturally have taken place.

1. The exasperation, produced by the experience of the persecution
suffered at his hands, would have been diminished.

2. His own recollection, of the particulars, might be supposed less
vivid.

3. The curiosity, respecting them, would have become less eager.

4. Time might have given admission to behaviour on his part, of a sort,
by which distrust might be lessened, confidence strengthened.

Well; now we have him at Jerusalem,--and for the first time after his
conversion. When thus, at Jerusalem,--of those whom he went to see, whom
did he actually see? Answer, Peter for one; James, whom he styles the
Lord's brother, and who, according to him, though not literally a
brother, was, however, a kinsman of Jesus:--these two, according to his
own shewing; these two, and no more. "Then after three years I went up
to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days. But of the
other Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's brother." Gal. 1:18,
19.


SECTION 4.

OCCASION, AS PER ACTS ACCOUNT COMPARED WITH PAUL'S.

Such as hath been seen is Paul's account of the matter:--Paul's own
account, of the interval that elapsed, between his conversion, and the
first of his subsequent visits to Jerusalem:--to the residence of the
Christians, whom he had been persecuting, and of the rulers, under and
by the authority of whom, the persecution had been carried on. Such,
loose as it is, is his account, of the interval between these two
events: and of the place, in which, either almost the whole, or at any
rate the greatest part of it, was passed.

Such was Paul's own account of his own proceedings,--at the distance of
twenty-five years and more. Compare with it, now, the account, given by
his historiographer--given, of the interval, that, according to him, had
place, between these same two events. Acts 9:19-29.

Here, no three years' sojournment in Arabia: no visit to that country:
no notice, of any place, other than Damascus, as being a place, in which
the whole, or any part, of the time in question, was passed. In a
position, with respect to each other, scarcely different from that of
contiguity,--are the two events brought together. The blood of their
disciples scarce washed from off his hands, when, with Barnabas for his
introducer, he presents himself to the Apostles!

At the very time, when the Jerusalem rulers, would have been expecting
to receive from him, the proofs of his punctuality, in the execution of
the important plan, of official oppression, of which, at his own
instance, he had been solemnly constituted and appointed the
instrument; when, after going over to and forming a league with the
criminals, for such they must have been called, whom he had been
commissioned by these rulers to bring to justice;--at this very time it
is, that he returns to the seat of their dominion:--to the place in
which, at that very time, his return to them, with the intended victims
in captivity, could not but be the subject of universal expectation!

Let any one now judge, whether, in any state of things, natural or
supernatural, the sort of conduct thus supposed is credible.

At Damascus, instead of presenting himself to the Damascus rulers, to
whom the commission of which he was the bearer was addressed,--the first
persons, whom, according to this account, Acts 9:19, he sees, are "the
disciples," _i.e._, the persons whom, by that commission, he was to
arrest: and, with them, instead of arresting them, he passes "certain
days."

These certain days ended,--does he thereupon, with or without an
apology, present himself to these same rulers? Not he, indeed. Not
presenting himself to them, does he, by flight or otherwise, take any
measures, for securing himself, against their legitimate and necessarily
intended vengeance? No such thing:--instead of doing so, he runs in the
very face of it. He shows himself in the Jewish synagogues, in the
public places of worship: and there, instead of preaching Moses and his
law, he preaches Christ,--that Christ, whose disciples he was
commissioned to extirpate.

This breach of trust--this transgression, which, however commendable in
itself, could not but,--in the eyes of all those by whom, or for whom,
he was in trust,--be a most flagitious and justly punishable act of
treachery,--could it even from the first, for so much as two days,
together, remain unknown? Not it, indeed: if, in this particular, to
this same conversion story, as related by this same author, any credit
is due. For, according to this same account,--in this same journey, and
at the very time of his conversion vision, was he alone? No; he had
companions: companions, who, whatsoever became of him, would, at the
very time of his entrance, unless any cause can be shown to the
contrary, have entered thither in due course. Well, then--ask the men in
authority,--"This Paul, in whose train you came,--where is he, what has
become of him?" Such would of course have been the questions put to
these, his companions, even on the supposition, that by these same
companions, no visit had, of their own accord, been paid to these same
rulers, under whose authority they went to place themselves.

At length,--and the days which by this time had elapsed were
"_many_,"--he finds it expedient to quit Damascus. He is driven from
thence: but by what force? By the exercise of the legal authority of the
offended rulers? in a word, by public vengeance? No: but by a private
conspiracy--nothing more: for, to these rulers,--so different are they
from all other rulers,--whether their authority is obeyed or contemned,
has, all the while, been matter of indifference.


ACTS ix. 19-30.

     19. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was
     Saul _certain days_ with the _disciples_ which were at
     Damascus.--And straightway he preached _Christ_ in the synagogues,
     that he is the Son of God.--But all that heard him were amazed, and
     said, Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name
     in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring
     them bound unto the chief priests?--But Saul increased the more in
     strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving
     that this is very Christ.--And after that _many days_ were
     fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him:--But their laying
     await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night
     to kill him.--Then the disciples took him by night, and let him
     down by the wall in a _basket_.--And when Saul was come to
     Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the disciples: but they
     were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
     disciple.--But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles,
     and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and
     that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at
     Damascus in the name of Jesus.--And he was with them coming in and
     going out at Jerusalem.--And he spake boldly in the name of the
     Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they went about
     to slay him.--30. Which, when the brethren knew, they brought him
     down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.

In the above account--a remarkable incident is presented, by the
occasion and manner of his escape from Damascus. In part, it has for its
support an assertion made by Paul himself; but, as usual, as to part it
is scarcely reconcileable with the account he gives of it. In respect of
the adventure of the _basket_, the two accounts agree: and thus the
occasion is identified and fixed. It is in respect of the description of
the persons, by whom the attack upon him was made or meditated, that the
accounts differ. According to the Acts, the hostile hands are those of
the Jews, who are spoken of as so many unauthorized and criminal
conspirators: but, according to Paul, they are those of the constituted
authorities--a governor acting under a king.

     31. "In Damascus"--says he, in 2 Cor. 11:32-33--"In Damascus, the
     governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with
     a garrison, desirous to apprehend me. And through a window in a
     basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands."

Now, supposing the adverse force to have been that of a band of
conspirators, it was natural for them to watch the "city gates": a more
promising resource they could scarcely have had at their command. But,
suppose it to have been that of the governor,--what need had he to watch
the gates? he might have searched houses. By the reference made, to a
matter of fact, which, supposing it real, must in its nature have been
notorious--to wit, the existence of a king, of the name in question, in
the country in question, at the time in question--a comparative degree
of probability seems to be given to Paul's account. A curious
circumstance is--that, in this Epistle of Paul's, this anecdote of the
Basket stands completely insulated; it has not any the slightest
connection with anything that precedes or follows it.

In the Acts' account, as already observed, Chap. 4, it looks as if it
was immediately after the adventure of the basket, that he went on this
his first visit to the Apostles at Jerusalem: for, as we see, it is
immediately thereupon that his arrival at that city is mentioned. If so,
the abode he had _then_ been making at Damascus, was probably _after_
his return from Arabia: that return from Arabia, which we have seen him
speaking of in his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. i. 15. "When it
pleased God ... to reveal his son to me, that I might preach him to the
heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood; Neither went
I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me; but I went
into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. _Then after_ three years,
I went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter." &c.

"After three years?"--three years, reckoning from what _time_? Here we
see the ambiguity, and along with it the difficulty. If reckoning from
his conversion,--then we have the three years, to be spent--partly in
Damascus, partly in Arabia: in Damascus, in obtaining, perhaps, from the
Christianized Jews--in return for the impunity given to them by the
breach of the trust committed to him by the Jerusalem rulers--money, for
defraying his expenses while in Arabia. If, reckoning from his escape
from Damascus in a basket, then we have three years, during which not so
much as any the faintest trace of him is perceptible. All, therefore,
that is clear is--that according to his account of the matter, there was
an interval of at least three years between his conversion, and this
first of his subsequent Jerusalem visits--this visit of his to
Jerusalem, to see the Apostles.

Between the two interpretations,--in respect of length of time, observe
here the difference. According to one of them, between the conversion
and the first Jerusalem visit, we have an interval of three years, and
no more: and, in this interval, three lengths of time--one passed in
Damascus, another in Arabia, a third, terminated by the basket
adventure, passed also in Damascus, are all included: the entire
interval determinate: but its parts, all of them, indeterminate.
According to the other interpretation, we have also three lengths of
time: the first, indeterminate, passed in Damascus; the second, as
indeterminate, passed in Arabia; the third, passed in Damascus, and this
a determinate one--namely, the three years. Thus, upon the first
supposition, the interval consists of three years, and no more: upon the
second supposition, it consists of three years, preceded by two lengths
of time, which are both indeterminate, but one of which--that passed in
Arabia--may have been to any amount protracted.

Upon either supposition,--it seems not unlikely, that it was immediately
after his escape from Damascus, that this first visit of his to
Jerusalem took place. And, the greater the preceding interval of time,
whether passed in Arabia or Damascus, the less unpromising his prospect,
that the resentments, produced by the provocations given by him to the
Christians, by his persecution of them,--and to the Jewish rulers, by
his treachery towards them,--should, both, have to such a degree
subsided, as to render even so short a stay, as that of fifteen days
which he mentions, consistent with personal safety. Yet, as we see in
the Acts, are these two events spoken of as if they had been contiguous:
at any rate, it is in contiguity that they are spoken of.

Uncertainties crowd upon uncertainties. At the time of Paul's
conversion,--had Damascus already this same king, named Aretas, with a
governor under him? If so, how happens it, that, of this state of the
government, no intimation is perceptible, in the account given of that
conversion in the Acts? Was it--that, at that time, there existed not
any such monarchical personage? but that, before the adventure of the
basket, some revolution had placed him there?

According to Paul's account,--the state of things, produced in Damascus
by his exertions, was somewhat curious. On the face of this account, in
ordinary there was no _garrison_ in Damascus: it was only by special
order from the monarch, and for no other purpose than the bringing to
justice--or what was called justice--the person of the self-constituted
Apostle,--that a garrison was put into the town, with a governor for the
command of it.

What a foundation all this for credence! and, with it, for a system of
religious doctrine to build itself upon!--religious doctrine--with the
difference between eternal happiness and eternal misery depending upon
it!


SECTION 5.

CAUSE OF THE DISCORDANCE BETWEEN THE TWO ACCOUNTS.

Between these two accounts, such being the discordance--where shall we
find the _cause_ of it? Answer: in the different views, in which, at the
time of writing, the two accounts were penned: in the different objects,
to the accomplishment of which, at the time of penning their respective
accounts, the endeavours of the two writers were directed.

The author of the Acts--what, then, was _his_ object? To obtain for his
patron--his chief hero--alive or dead--a recognition, as universal as
possible, in his assumed character of an Apostle. The more complete the
recognition, bestowed upon him by those most competent of all
judges,--the more extensive the recognition he might look for, at the
hands of all other their fellow-believers.

Sufficient was this--sufficient for the general purposes of the
party--in the eyes of a person other than Paul, even though that other
person was a protegé, a retainer, a satellite.

Sufficient this was not, however, to the arrogance of the head of the
party--Paul himself: at least, at the time of his writing this his
letter to his Galatian converts.

Think you, says he, that any relation, I have ever borne to any of those
who were Apostles before me, had, on my part, anything in it of
dependence? Think you, that I ever stood in need of anything at their
hands? Think you, that I had ever any more need of them, than they of
me? Not I, indeed. The Gospel, which I have always preached--neither
from them did I receive it, nor from them, in preaching it, did I ever
seek or receive any assistance. Gal. i. 11, 12. Think you, that I stood
in any need, or ever supposed myself to stand in any need, of any
acceptance or acknowledgement at their hands? Not I, indeed. When my
revelation had been received by me, did I present myself to them, for
any such purpose as that of remuneration and acceptance? Not I, indeed.
I went not to them: I went not so much as to Jerusalem, where they then
were: I conferred not with flesh and blood:--off I went to Arabia; and
when my business in Arabia was at an end, even then, did I repair to
Jerusalem? Not I, indeed. I returned again to Damascus. True it is, to
Jerusalem I did go at last.--But when?--Not till three years
afterwards. Well--and, when I was at Jerusalem, how many, and which of
them, think you that I saw? Think you, that I put myself to any such
trouble, as that of seeing them all together? the whole herd of them?
No. Peter was naturally a chief among them: with him I had accordingly
some business to settle:--him, accordingly, I saw, as also James, whom,
as being a brother, or other near kinsman, of Jesus, I had a curiosity
to see.

Paul himself wrote at one time; this his disciple at another: each of
them pursued the purpose of the time. Not on this occasion, at any
rate,--perhaps not on any other, was there anything, that either wrote,
concerted between them.[25] Of this want of concert, what has just been
seen is one of the consequences.

Reserved as we have seen him, in regard to time and other
circumstances,--one circumstance more there is, for which our curiosity
is to no small amount, debtor, to the author of the Acts. This
is--information, of the means--of the channel, through which Paul
obtained the introduction, which, without mention made of the object, we
have seen him acknowledging that, so far as concerned Peter, he was
desirous of: and _that_ to such a degree, as to undertake a journey from
Damascus to Jerusalem, some 120 or 130 miles, for the purpose.

Repugnancy, so natural, and naturally so vehement--even at the end of
three years, or the still greater number of years--by what means could
he remove it, or so much as flatter himself with a prospect of being
able to remove it? To this question, it is to the author of the Acts
that we are indebted for an answer: and that answer a satisfactory
one:--it was by the assistance of Barnabas, that the object, so far as
it was accomplished, was accomplished.

To the religion of Jesus, after as well as before this,--to the Apostles
in particular before this,--Barnabas was a supporter of no small
importance.

At the time when the financial arrangements were for the second time
settled;[26]--when, from the substance of the opulent among the
faithful, enough was collected for the support of all the
indigent;--among those, by whom, on this second occasion, lands and
houses, were for this purpose sold, particular persons are, on this
second occasion, for the first time mentioned. The first place is
occupied by this Barnabas: and not till after him come Ananias and
Sapphira--the unfortunate pair, of whose fate mention will have to be
made in another place.

Joses was, it seems, the original name--the proper name of this
beneficent protector: Barnabas, the _Son of consolation_, Acts 4:36, was
no more than a title of honour,--a token of gratitude. A title of
honour? and by whom conferred? Even by the Apostles. By Barnabas,
therefore, whatsoever thereafter comes to be reported as done,--it is by
_the Son of consolation_ that we are to understand it to have been, and
to be, done.

As to the arguments, by which this son of consolation succeeded,--in
prevailing, upon two, and, if we are to believe Paul, no more than two,
of these so lately persecuted or threatened servants of Jesus,--to be,
for a few days, upon speaking terms, with him, who so lately had been
their deadly, as well as open enemy,--it is from imagination, with
judgment for her guide, that they must, if at all, be deduced from the
surrounding circumstances of the case.

As to these arguments, however,--whatever were the rest of them, of two
of them a hint is given by the author of the Acts: these are,--the
story of the conversion,--and the boldness of the preaching, which at
Damascus was among the first-fruits of it. Those which, under the
guidance of judgment, imagination would not find much difficulty in
adding, are,--the evil--that might result from his enmity, in case the
advances then made by him were rejected,--and the useful service, which,
by the blessing of God, might be hoped for at his hands, if admitted in
the character of an ally and cooperator: at any rate, so long as the
whole field of his exertions, and in particular the geographical part of
it, continued different from theirs.

With Peter, on whatever account, it was Paul's own desire to hold a
conference:--so we have seen him declaring to the Galatians. To this
Peter, whom he was desirous of seeing, and whom at length he succeeded
in seeing,--to this Peter did he then himself tell the story of his
vision, of his conversion, and the mode of it? If at any time he
did,--at any rate, if the author of the Acts is to be believed,--it was
not till Barnabas, the son of consolation, had told it for him. Had it
been by himself that his story had been to be told in the first
instance,--he would thereby have stood exposed to cross-examination:
and, among those things, which Barnabas might in his situation say for
him,--were many things, which, if at all, he could not, with anything
like an equal prospect of good effect, have said for himself. To any
asseveration of his own,--in any promises of future amity, it was not in
the nature of the case, that from his own mouth they should give
credence. But, when by Barnabas, of whose zeal in their cause they had
received such substantial proofs--when from this son of consolation they
received assurance, that Paul had actually engaged himself in that line
of service, which he professed himself desirous to embrace;--that he had
engaged so far, that no prospect of safe retreat could reasonably be in
his view;--then it was, that, without imprudence, they might, venture to
hold at least a conference with him, and hear and see what he had to say
for himself.

As to the account, given on this occasion by Barnabas, of the famous
vision,--had it been but preserved, it would probably have been no less
curious than those which we have been already seeing. Though we cannot
be precisely assured in what way,--we may be pretty well assured, that,
in some way or other, additions would have been to be seen made in it,
to the list of _variations_.

But, the great advantage,--producible, and probably produced, by
the opening of the matter, as performed by Barnabas,--was this:
in company with those arguments, by which the sincerity of Paul was
to be demonstrated,--would naturally come those, by which intimation
would be given, of the advantage there might be, in forbearing to
apply too strict a scrutiny, to this important statement. The
interests, which, in the character of motives, pleaded for the
acceptance, of the advance made towards reconciliation and mutually
advantageous cooperation,--would, in this manner, prepare the way,
for receiving, without any troublesome counter-interrogation, the
important narrative: or, perhaps, for considering the matter, as
already sufficiently explained, by the son of consolation,--in such
sort that, to the new Apostle, the trouble of repeating a narrative,
which he must already have so frequently found himself under the
necessity of repeating, might be spared.

The greater was the importance, of the service thus rendered to Paul by
the son of consolation,--the more studiously, in giving the account, as
above, of the intercourse with the Apostles at Jerusalem,--the more
studiously, would he avoid all mention of it.[27]


SECTION 6.

LENGTH OF THIS VISIT--PAUL'S EMPLOYMENT DURING IT.

Fifteen days, if Paul is to be believed--fifteen days, and no more,--was
the length of time, during which his intercourse with Peter continued:
Gal. i. 18, that same length of time, and no greater, it may without
much rashness be inferred, was his stay at Jerusalem.

These fifteen days,--or whatever, if anything longer, was the duration
of his stay in that seat of their common religion,--in what occupations
were they employed? It is in the Acts, if anywhere, that this question
will receive its answer. It was in "disputing against the Grecians."
Acts 9:29.

That such should have been his occupation, is in his situation
altogether natural.

Of a sort of _partition treaty_, as having, at one time, been entered
into between himself and Peter,--Paul, in his so-often mentioned
letters to the Galatians, informs us in express terms. As to the time,
which, on that occasion, he has in view,--it was, according to
appearance, not the time of _this_ his first visit, but of the third. At
that third visit, the treaty was, at any rate, either entered into for
the first time, or confirmed: receiving, at the same time, what was on
both sides agreed upon, as an amendment requisite to add to it, in
respect of clearness, correctness, or completeness.

But, at this visit, it seems altogether natural, that, with more or less
of these same qualities, a treaty of this sort took place. By the sort
of relation, produced between them, by the state of interests,--the
existence of an agreement of this sort seems sufficiently probabilized:
and, from the few words, in which, by the author of the Acts, mention is
made of the Grecians, and of Paul's disputes with them,--the inference
receives the confirmation afforded by _direct_ evidence.

With the Grecians then it was, that these disputations of Paul were
held. Why with the Grecians, and no other? The reason is no mystery.
Greek was the language of Paul: Greek, for anything that appears, was
not the language of Peter, or of any other of the Apostles. Applying
himself to the Grecians, and to them alone,--Paul might, to any amount,
have given additional extent to his own dominion, without subtracting
anything from theirs.

Not productive, it should seem, of much fruit,--was this portion, of the
new Apostle's labours. No sooner are we informed, of the boon thus
offered to these Grecian Gentiles, than comes, moreover, the further
information, that some there were, that "went about to slay him. Which
when the brethren knew, they brought him," it is added, "to Cæsarea,
and sent him forth to Tarsus." Acts 9:29.

Meantime, those men, who went about to slay him,--who were they?
Possibly they were Grecians, if by the disputation in question, the
annoyance produced was so intolerable to them, as to be productive of a
wish and enterprise thus flagitious: and, if the evidence afforded by
the rules of grammar be in this case regarded as conclusive,--the
pronoun _they_ having for its last possible antecedent the substantive
_Grecians_--these, and no other, must have been the intended murderers.
On the other hand, among the heathen--the philosophical disputants of
this nation,--disputations, having any such abstractions for their
subject, were not wont to be productive, of any such practical and
flagitious consequences. Among the heathens, moreover, it appears not,
that, antecedently to his conversion, the zeal of Paul had led him to
put any to death: on the other hand among the Christianized Jews, his
fellow-religionists, the number of persons, of whom he had put to death
some, and in other ways plagued others, was unhappily but too great. By
the religion _into_ which they had been converted,--revenge, it is true,
was not (as in that which they were converted _from_) magnified, but
prohibited: but, the influence of it has never been equally efficient
upon all minds.

Be this as it may,--upon his leaving Jerusalem, it was to the region of
Syria and Cilicia, that, at this time, he betook himself. So, in his
letter to his Galatians, he himself says, Gal. 1:21; and, by what is
said in the Acts, he is not contradicted, but confirmed. By himself what
is mentioned is--the _region_, viz. Syria and Cilicia: by the Acts what
is mentioned is--the _cities_, viz. Cæsarea and Tarsus.
Cæsarea,--whether at that time it was in Syria or not,--was, at any
rate, little, if anything, out of the way, from Jerusalem to Tarsus.
Cæsarea was a town upon the coast:--one among those maritime towns,
which, whether parts or not of Syria, are in the way between the inland
city, of Jerusalem, and the coast of Cilicia: with which coast, by a
river,--Tarsus, marked in the map with the mark of a capital town,
appears to communicate.

In speaking of this change of place, the terms employed by Paul, are
general terms,--"_I came._" By what _means_ he came, he does not
mention: nor does there appear any particular reason why he should have
mentioned them.

In the Acts, the account is more particular:--he was, in a manner,
forced from the one place to the other:--he was, at any rate,
_escorted_: it was by "_the brethren_," he was so dealt with. "Which
when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Cæsarea, and sent him
forth to Tarsus." Acts 9:30.

By the brethren?--Yes.--But by what brethren? By the general body of the
Christians, or any that belonged to it? No:--for, it was from their
wrath, that he was making his escape. No:--not by the justly exasperated
many; but by such few adherents as, under such prodigious disadvantage,
his indefatigable artifice and energy had found means to conciliate.


SECTION 7.

MODE AND CAUSE OF ITS TERMINATION.

In relation to this subject, we have two, and no more than two,
accounts,--both from the same pen,--that of the historiographer in the
Acts; and these two accounts, as usual, contradictory of each other.
The first, in the order of the history, is that given by him in his own
person: Acts 9:27, 28, 29. The other, is that given by him in the person
of Paul: namely, in the course of his supposed first-made and
unpremeditated speech,--when, on the occasion of his last visit to
Jerusalem--his Invasion Visit, he was pleading for his life before the
angry multitude. Acts 22:17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Now then, let us compare the two accounts.

Speaking in his own person,--it is to the fear of certain Grecians, that
the historiographer ascribes Paul's departure for Jerusalem. In
disputing with them, he had been speaking "boldly in the name of the
Lord Jesus": and _thereupon_,--and as we are desired to believe,
_therefore_,--came certain designs and endeavours to slay him. Designs?
on the part of whom? Answer:--on the part of those same Grecians: cause
of these designs and endeavours, irritation, so it is intended we should
suppose,--irritation, produced in the breasts of those same
Grecians;--and produced by the dispute.

Now, as to the words of the historiographer, speaking in his own person.
It is immediately after the mention of Paul's transactions with the
Apostles and the other disciples, that after saying, Acts 9:28, that
"... he was with them coming in and going out of Jerusalem," the
narrative continues thus: ver. 29; "And he spake boldly in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians, but _they_ went about
to slay him: ver. 30; Which when _the brethren_ knew, they brought him
down to Cæsarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus."

Such is the account given, of the departure of Paul from Jerusalem, on
the occasion in question--given by the historiographer, speaking in his
own person, of the manner of the departure, and at the same time of the
cause of it. Behold now how different is the account given, of the same
matter, by the same historiographer, in the same work, when speaking in
the person of his hero. Nothing now as to any disputes with Grecians:
nothing now of these, or any other human beings, in the character of
beings who were angry with him, and _that_ to such a degree, that, to
save his life, it was deemed necessary by his adherents,--styled on this
occasion "_the_ brethren," to take charge of him, as we have seen, and
convey him from Jerusalem to Cæsarea and elsewhere.

The case seems to be--that, between the time of writing the account
which has just been seen, and the time for giving an account of the same
transaction in the person of the hero, as above,--a certain difficulty
presented itself to the mind of the historiographer: and, that it is for
the solution of this difficulty, that he has recourse, to one of his
sovereign solvents--_a trance_. The difficulty seems to have been this:
The class of persons, whom, on that first visit of his he had
exasperated, were--not "_Grecians_," or any other Gentiles, but
Christians: Christians, the whole body of them--Apostles and Disciples
together: the same class of persons, to which belonged those who, on the
occasion of this his last visit--the _Invasion Visit_--were to such a
degree exasperated, by this fourth intrusion of his, as to be attempting
his life. How hopeless any attempt would have been, to make them
believe, that it was not by themselves, but by a set of Heathens, that
his life was threatened on that former occasion, is sufficiently
manifest. Here then comes a demand, for a substitute, to that cause,
which, distant as the time was, could not, however, be altogether absent
from their memory: and which, so far as it was present, could not but
heighten their exasperation:--this substitute was _the trance_.

The cause of the departure is now--not the fear of any human being, but
the express command of "_the Lord_":--a command delivered in the course,
and by means, of this same _trance_. Moreover, as if, from such a
quarter, _commands_ were not sufficient of themselves; on the present
occasion, it will be seen, they came backed by _reasons_. Was it that,
as the historiographer has been telling us in his own person, certain
Grecians were exasperated? No: but that the persons, to whom, with
Barnabas for his supporting witness, Acts 9:27, he had been telling his
story, gave no credit to it: so that, by a man with his reputation in
this state, nothing in the way of his business was to be done.

But now let us see the text. It comes immediately after that passage, in
which Paul is made to speak of Ananias, as giving orders to him, in the
name of the Lord: orders, concluding in these words: Acts 22:16: ...
"arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of
the Lord." This said,--his story, as told to the multitude, continues
thus: "And it came to pass that, when I was come again to Jerusalem,
even while I prayed in the temple, I was in _a trance_: And saw him
saying unto me, Make _haste_, and get thee _quickly_ out of Jerusalem:
_for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me_. And I said,
Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those that
believed on thee: And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I
also was standing by, and consenting to his death, and kept the raiment
of them that slew him. And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee
far hence unto the Gentiles. And they gave him audience unto this word,
and then lifted up their voices and said, Away with such a fellow from
the earth; for it is not fit that he should live."

It may now be seen, how useful and convenient an implement this same
trance was: how well adapted, to the occasion on which it was employed.
Taken by itself, this story about the enraged Grecians might serve to
impose upon readers in general: but, to the knowledge of the really
enraged Christians, whose wrath he was endeavouring to assuage,--it was
not only too palpably false to be related to them, but too much so, to
be even for a moment supposed to be related to them: hence came the
demand for the supernatural cause. Nothing, it is evident, could be
better suited to the purpose. The assertion was of the sort of those,
which, how palpably soever untrue, are not exposed to contradiction by
direct evidence: and which, supposing them believed, ensure universal
respect, and put all gainsayers to silence.

An incident not unworthy here of notice, is--the sort of acknowledgment
contained in the words--"for they will not receive thy testimony
concerning me." In this may be seen--a confirmation of the important
fact, so fully proved on the occasion of the first or _Reconciliation
Visit_: and we see--with what consistency and propriety, the mention of
it comes in, on the present occasion: namely, in a speech, made to a
multitude, of which, many of those,--by whom he had been disbelieved and
rejected on that former occasion,--must of course have formed a part.

Such is the fact, which, after having communicated to us, in his own
person, Acts 9:26, "they were all afraid of him, and believed not that
he was a disciple," the historiographer is frank enough to communicate
to us a second time, through the mouths of Paul and "the Lord," the one
within the other. _True_ enough this information: and, moreover, at
Jerusalem, as well when the historiographer was writing, as when Paul
was speaking, _notorious_ enough: or we should hardly have had it _here_
and _now_. But, what a truth to put into the mouth of Paul, whose title
to credence for his claim, is so effectually destroyed by it!

To return to what, on the occasion of the first visit, is said by the
historiographer, in his own person, about the Grecians. That it was
false, as to the main point,--namely, that it was by the fear of those
same Gentiles that he was driven out of Jerusalem,--is now, it is hoped,
sufficiently evident. But, as to his having held disputation with
them,--in this there seems not to be anything inconsistent or
improbable: and this part, supposing it true, might, in so far as known,
help to gain credence for that which was false.

A circumstance--not altogether clear, nor worth taking much trouble in
the endeavour to render it so, is--on the occasion of this dialogue, the
change made, of the supernatural vehicle, from a _vision_ into a
"_trance_." Whatsoever, if any, is the difference,--they agree in the
one essential point: namely, that it is in the power, of any man, at any
time, to have had as many of them as he pleases: hearing and seeing,
moreover, in every one of them, whatsoever things it suits his
convenience to have heard or seen.--"I saw a vision:" or, "I was in a
trance": either postulate granted, everything whatsoever follows.

This _trance_, it may be observed, is of a much more substantial nature
than any of the _visions_. By Paul in his _road vision_,--vision as it
was,--neither _person_ nor _thing_, with the exception of a quantity of
light, was seen: only a voice, _said to be the Lord's_, heard. In this
trance, the Lord is not only heard, but seen. In those visions, that
which is said to have been heard, amounts to nothing: on the present
occasion, what is said to have been heard, is material to the purpose,
and perfectly intelligible. Not that there could be any use in Paul's
_actually_ hearing of it: for what it informed him of, was nothing more
than that which, at the very time, he was in full experience of. But, in
a situation such as his, it was really of use to him, to be _thought_ to
have heard it: and therefore it is, that, in the speech ascribed to him,
he is represented as _saying_ that he heard it.

FOOTNOTES:

[25] In the current chronology, this Epistle to the Galatians is placed
in the year 58; on the part of the author of the Acts, the first mention
of his being in the company of Paul is placed in the year next
following, to wit, 59. Note, that at the end of the Epistle to the
Galatians, it is stated to be written from Rome: yet, according to the
current chronology, his arrival at Rome, in custody, from Jerusalem,--at
which time unquestionably he had never as yet visited Rome,--did not
take place till the year 62.

[26] First time, Acts ii. 45. Second time, Acts iv. 34.

[27] "I conferred not with flesh and blood." (Gal. ii. 16.) "Of those
who seemed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to
me." Not till "after three years" did I go "up to Jerusalem to see
Peter." With language in this strain, it would have harmonized but
indifferently, to have added, "nor should I have seen him then, had it
not been for Barnabas."




