CHAPTER X.

     _Paul disbelieved continued.--His Fourth Jerusalem Visit continued.
     His Arrival and Reception. Accused by all the Disciples of the
     Apostles, he commences an exculpatory Oath in the Temple. Dragged
     out by them--rescued by a Roman Commander--sent in Custody to
     Rome._


SECTION 1.

AT JERUSALEM, PAUL IS RECEIVED BY THE ELDERS AND JAMES, BUT BY NO OTHER
APOSTLE.

Spite of the opposing Holy Ghost,--spite of the Apostles, and their
prophet,--there he is at Jerusalem. Now comes an incident--or say,
rather, a relation--which is altogether curious.

At "Jerusalem," says the history, "the brethren received us gladly,"
Acts 21:17. The brethren? what brethren? the brethren, by whom Agabus,
with his stage-trick, had been sent some sixty or seventy miles'
journey, in the endeavour to keep him at a distance? the thousands of
Jews thereupon immediately mentioned? those Jews, who, though believers
in Jesus, are not the "less zealous of the law," and enraged at Saul
for those breaches of it, with which he is charged?

That, by such of them, if any, by whom--by the appearance he made, with
his suite, it had happened to be more or less overawed,--that by these,
an appearance of gladness was assumed, seems credible enough: look for
those, by whom he could have been received with real gladness--they will
not, it should seem, be very easy to be found.

Not, till the next day after his arrival, do Paul and his suite present
themselves to any in authority in this spiritual commonwealth. The first
person, to whom, on this occasion, he presents himself, is James: that
one of the Apostles, who, with the exception of Peter, is the person,
and the only person, with whom Paul has, on the occasion of any of his
visits, been represented as holding converse. Not with this James--not
with any settled inhabitants of Jerusalem--has he had his lodging: only
with Mnason,[53] a man of Cyprus, whom, lest lodging should be wholly
wanting, they had brought with them from Cæsarea. Of this so
extensively apprehended arrival, there had been full time for ample
notice: among the rulers, those, who, as well as James, chose to see
him, were all present. Who were they? the elders--"all the elders." Of
the Apostles, not so much as one, besides James. Let it not be said,
that, under the word _elders_, the Apostles were meant to be included:
on other occasions, on which elders are mentioned, Acts 15:4; 6:23, the
Apostles are mentioned, as forming a body, distinct, as they naturally
would be,--distinct from these same elders.

Salutations performed, he addresses the assembly in that strain,
which was so familiar to him: boasting upon boasting, and, above
all things, boasting that he does not boast: "declaring," says his
historian;--declaring? what? declaring what was his business at
Jerusalem? declaring what service, in his eyes the cause stood in need
of, at his hands? Not he, indeed: to any such effect, declaration might
not have been altogether so easy. What he declared, and that
"_particularly_," was--what "things God had wrought among the Gentiles
by his ministry." Exactly on this, as on his last preceding visit,--when
all, but himself, were speaking to the question before him--Peter on one
side; after him, James on the other side--nothing, is either he, or his
companion Barnabas, represented as saying, that belongs to the question;
nothing, but "declaring what miracles and wonders, God had wrought among
the Gentiles by them." Between what is represented, as having been said
on the two occasions,--one difference, and no more than one, is visible.
On the former occasion, "miracles and wonders"; on this latter occasion,
no miracles no wonders:--nothing more than _things_. Supposing any of
them particularized--neither miracles nor wonders had, it should seem,
been fortunate enough to obtain credence: for that reason, it should
seem, that, on this occasion, all mention of them is dropped.

Hearing of these _things_, what did these elders? Being things that
"God," as they were informed, "had wrought," they could do no less than
glorify "the Lord." Acts 21:19-20. As in Paul's Epistles, so here, in
the Acts,--by _the Lord_, it is Jesus, who, as far as it appears, is the
person, all along meant to be designated. Here, _God_, it may be
observed, is the person, by whom everything good, that is done, is done:
Jesus--the Lord Jesus--the person, who is _glorified_ for it.

To make his boasts, was _his_ business with _them_: but, to subscribe to
those same boasts, was not _their_ business with _him_.

Their business was--to inform him, of the storm of unpopularity, which
by his audacity he had brought upon himself: to inform him of the storm,
and to point out the only course, which, in their view of the matter,
presented a chance for his escape from it. "Thou seest,"--say
they,--"thou seest how many thousands of Jews there are which believe;
and they are all zealous of the law. And they are informed of thee, that
thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake
Moses; saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither
to walk after their customs," Acts 21:20. "What is it, therefore?" add
they, "the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that
thou art come."


SECTION 2.

LOW TONE ASSUMED BY HIM ON THIS OCCASION.

On more accounts than one, remarkable,--and not a little instructive, is
the account we have of this last recorded visit: and, in particular, as
to what concerns the reception he experienced from the ruling powers of
the Church.

It is, in some particulars, more especially to be depended
upon,--inasmuch as, at this important meeting, the author of the
Acts--if he is to be believed--was himself present.

The first remarkable circumstance is--that, on this occasion, Paul, the
self-elected Apostle--instead of taking the lead, and introducing his
companions--keeps behind, and is introduced _by them_: such was the
pliancy, with which--even on this expedition, of invasion and projected
conquest,--an expedition,--undertaken, in spite of everything that could
be done, both on the part of the intended objects of the conquest, and
on the part of his own adherents--such was the pliancy, with which this
man, among whose boasts was that of being all things to all men, could
bend himself to circumstances.

Acts 21:15-18. "And after those days, we took up our carriages, and went
to Jerusalem. There went with us, also, certain of the disciples of
Cæsarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple,
with whom we should lodge." At Jerusalem, not so much as a house, to
harbour them, could they have been assured of, but for this old
disciple--fellow countryman, of Paul's old patron, the Son of
Consolation, Barnabas. Not even with him could they have been assured of
this token of friendship, had he not either been already of their party,
or detached himself to meet them, and afford them the assurance:
although, at Cæsarea,--from some cause, of which, while the effect is
brought to view, no intimation is given,--they were fortunate enough to
obtain a hospitable reception, Acts 21:8, at the house of Philip. This,
however, be it observed, was not Philip, the Apostle, whether it may
have been Philip, styled here the Evangelist:--one of the seven
trustees, or directors, Acts 6:5, to whom, with his six colleagues,
under the name, so inexpressively rendered, in the English, by the word
_Deacons_,--the management of the common fund had, by the suffrages of
the disciples, been committed, must be left to conjecture.

17. "And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren," Acts 21:17,
"received _us_ gladly." What _brethren_? The Apostles, or any one of
them? no: The elders? no. Who then?--Who, but such of the members of the
Church, as, notwithstanding the general repugnancy,--as testified at
Tyre, and afterwards, by prophet Agabus, at Cæsarea,--could, by the
influence of the Cypriot Mnason, or otherwise, be prevailed upon to see
them.

And, _to_ whom was it, that this sort of reception, whatsoever it was,
was afforded? Was it to Paul? No: it was to _those_, who, on other
occasions, were with _him_; but, with _whom_, on this occasion, his
prudence forced his pride to submit to be.

Witness the next verse, Acts 21:18; "And the day following," not till
the day following, "Paul went in with us unto James." _With them_--with
these his attendants--did Paul, then and there, go in:--not _they with
him_.

At the house of James--mark well, now--who were the persons present?
Answer--"all the elders." But, forasmuch as these elders were, _all_ of
them, present,--notice, within the compass of the two fragments of two
days,--notice, to and by all of them must have been given and received:
for it has just been seen, whether, between any of them, on the one
hand,--and Paul, or, so much as any one of his attendants, on the
other,--there could have been any such sort of good understanding, as to
have produced any the least personal intercourse, but at, and on, the
occasion of the general and formal meeting:--a meeting, which--as will
be seen presently--had, for its sole object, the imposing upon him, in
the event of his continuance at Jerusalem, an obligation: an
obligation--to a man in his circumstances--it has been seen, of how
perilous and repulsive a nature.

Such, then, was the notice, as to have brought to the place, all the
Elders--All the Elders?--good. But, these _Elders_--Elders among the
_disciples in ordinary_,--on an occasion such as this, what were _they_
in comparison of the Apostles--the only known chosen servants, and
constant companions of Jesus? Well, then, while--at this meeting--this
formally convened meeting--those Elders were, every one of them,
present--what was the number of _Apostles_ present? Answer--Besides
James, not one.

And--why James?--manifestly, because it was at _his_ house, that the
meeting was held.

And--why at _his_ house? Because, on the occasion, and for the purpose,
of the _partition treaty_,--that treaty, so necessary to the peace of
the Church,--on the one hand; and, to the carrying on of Paul's scheme
of dominion, on the other hand;--James was one, of the only three, who
could ever endure the sight of the self-declared Apostle: Peter and
John, as hath been seen, being the two others:--and, because, when, for
the purpose of investing the meeting, in the eyes of the disciples at
large, with the character of a meeting of the ruling administrative
body--the Apostles,--less than that one, if there were any, there could
not be. This one, James--under the pressure of the present
emergency--prevailed upon himself to be: and, to be so irksome an
intercourse--notwithstanding the obviousness of the demand for as great
a number, as could be collected, of that primarily influential body--of
no other of the Apostles, could the attendance be obtained: not even of
Peter, who, on a former occasion, had brought himself to endure the
hateful presence.


SECTION 3.

POSTERIOR TO ALL HIS SUPPOSED MIRACLES, HIS SILENCE PROVES THEM UNREAL.

Now, then, as to _miracles_. Had Paul, really and truly, ever received
from Jesus, any such preeminent and characteristic appendage and mark of
Apostleship,--here, of all others, was an occasion, on which it
concerned him to make proof of it. Here was an occasion, on which, with
the design, and for the purpose--the palpable, and almost universally
and so strenuously opposed design and purpose--of constituting himself
the superior of the Apostles, he was presenting himself--though in
circumstances of such humiliation--in the character of an equal, with
whom they had treated on equal terms. Here--in order to impose silence
on all gainsayers--here was the occasion, for his bringing to public
view, this most important of all items in the list of his credentials.
The Apostles, to whom--without any exception, by Jesus, if the
Evangelist, Mark 16:15-18, is to be believed--this power had, previously
to his ascension, been imparted,--these, if any, were the men--not to
say the only men--qualified to form a judgment on the question--whether,
by any other individual, and, more especially, by the individual before
them, namely, by this their self-declared colleague, any such
extraordinary power had, on any, and what, occasion, been exercised or
possessed. Of all imaginable occasions, this was the one, on which he
had most at stake, in the being able to make proof of so matchless an
endowment:--of an endowment, which in the character of a proof, in
support of all his claims, would, in the very nature of it, have been so
perfectly irresistible.

Well, then: this proof of his title--did he use every endeavour, or make
any offer, to produce it? No: not so much did he venture upon, as, in
any the most general terms, to assert, or, so much as insinuate, the
existence of it. According to his own statement, what was the general
description of the tokens brought forward by him, for the purpose of
obtaining acceptance? Were they _signs and wonders_? Oh, no! His
historiographer, indeed--in that, or any other such indeterminate, and
conveniently ambiguous phrase--his historiographer, at some twenty or
seven-and-twenty years' distance, might venture, Acts 14:3, to speak of
his exploits--of the effects produced by his exertions: in the like
terms, in writing to his Corinthian disciples, he might, even himself,
venture, for once, to speak of his own exploits.[54] But, before an
assembly, so composed, was this boast, loose, and conveniently
ambiguous, as it was,--in his eyes, too much to venture. Acts
21:19--Behold here the passage: "And when he had saluted them, he
declared particularly"--what? what--signs and wonders? No: but
simply--"what _things_ God had wrought among the Gentiles by his
ministry."

Had he hazarded so much as the general expression of signs and
wonders--well, and what were these signs and wonders? give us, at any
rate, something by way of a sample of them? In any one of them, was
there anything supernatural? anything--beyond the success, the
extraordinary success--we are to understand, your exertions were
attended with? Questions, to some such effect as this, which, in an
assembly, so composed, had he ventured upon any such expressions, he
could not but have expected to be annoyed with.

The occurrences which, in the course of it, in the character of
_miracles_, he has ventured to present to view, will have been seen in
their place and order. Yet,--notwithstanding the mention there
respectively and severally made of them--no mention of them does he, in
the account given by him of the meeting, venture to put in his leader's
mouth. Why? because--forasmuch as, by Paul himself, no such pretence was
ventured to be made--the meeting was too important, and too notorious,
to render it safe to advance any such matter of fact; the face being
false; or, that any such pretensions were really made.

But, hereupon come two questions.

1. Had any such miracles been really wrought--was it in the nature of
things, that, on this occasion, Paul should have omitted all mention of
them? even so much as the most distant allusion to them?

2. If any such intimation had really been given, by the historian
himself, is it in the nature of the case, that, on this occasion,--he
having been one of the witnesses, in whose presence they had been
performed,--all mention of such intimation should have been omitted?

Well, then--suppose that to both these questions, let it but be a
negative answer or the true one, the consequence is plain--no such
miracles were wrought. Yet, in his narrative, has this man--exhibiting
himself, at the same time, in the character of a _percipient_ witness,
in relation to them--ventured to assert the existence, one after
another, of the whole list of these particularized miracles, not to
speak of the cluster of unparticularized ones.


SECTION 4.

ACCUSED BY THE DISCIPLES, HE COMMENCES, AT THE RECOMMENDATION OF
THE APOSTLES, AN EXCULPATORY OATH IN THE TEMPLE.

Such being in their eyes the danger; now comes their expedient for the
arresting of it. It is an altogether curious one: and among those
persons styled _elders_--all the elders--to every sincere and pious
Christian it will naturally be matter of no small satisfaction that no
one of the whole fellowship of the Apostles is to be found.

According to the description here given of it, the expedient is of such
a sort, that--but for the occasion on which it is represented as being
proposed,--scarcely would it be possible to divine what is meant; what
it was that was proposed to be done; or, whatever it was, what could be
the use or effect of it?

"Do therefore this," Acts 21:23, continues the speech attributed to
these elders, "do therefore this that we say to thee: we have four men
which have a vow on them:--Them take, and purify thyself with them, and
be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may
know that those things, whereof they were informed, are nothing; but
that thou thyself also walkest orderly and keepest the law.--As touching
the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded that they
observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from things
offered to idols, and from blood and from fornication.--Then Paul," it
is added, "took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them
entered into the temple to signify the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of
them."

In the terms of the historian, the matter of the accusation in question
is this: namely, "that thou," speaking to Paul, "teachest all the Jews
which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses": it then divides itself
into two branches: one is--that "they ought not to circumcise their
children"; the other is--that "they ought not to walk after the
customs":--_i. e._, conform to any part of the habitual
observances--acts and forbearances together--prescribed by the Mosaic
law.

Such is the accusation: such the act charged upon him, in the character
of an offence:--the teaching of the doctrine in question.

In regard to the question--whether the doctrine he is thus said to have
taught, had really ever been taught by him,--much will depend upon the
difference between simple _permission_ and _prohibition_: in English,
upon the difference between _need not_ and _ought not_. If,--in the
doctrine, the teaching of which is thus charged upon him as a
crime,--simple _permission_ was included--if, in speaking of the
converts in question, the saying was--that they _need_ not circumcise
their children--that they _need_ not walk after these customs--this and
no more;--in this case, that the charge, such as it is, was true, is
altogether out of doubt:--if, on the other hand, the act he was charged
with, went so far as to the teaching that they _ought_ not to circumcise
any of their children, or that they _ought_ not to walk after the
customs prescribed in the Mosaic law--on this supposition, the truth of
the charge will at any rate not be quite so clear as in the other case.

According to the English translation, that which is charged as an
offence, was not committed, unless, in the doctrine taught, a direct
_prohibition_ was contained: to a doctrine importing nothing more than a
simple _permission_ to abstain from the acts and forbearances in
question, the charge would not have any application. Not thus
unambiguous, however, is the Greek original; either by prohibition, or
by ample permission, might the doctrine charged as criminal have been
taught.

Such is the description of the obnoxious practice, with which Paul is
here stated as having been charged: the practice by which the odium is
stated as having been incurred.

But this imaginary guilt, in what view do they mention it as imputed to
him? In this view evidently, viz., that at their recommendation he may
take that course, by which, in their view, he will escape from the wrath
of which he had become the object. The effect thus aimed at is,--that
the indignation of which he is the object, may be made to cease. How
made to cease? in one or other of two ways: for the nature of the case
admits not of any other: either by proving that _that_ which he had
been supposed to have taught, had not in truth ever been taught by him,
and thus, that no such offence as he was charged with, had, in fact,
ever been committed by him; or that, if any such offence had been
committed, the practice recommended might be accepted as an _atonement_:
or rather as an assurance, that whatever in his past conduct had given
them offence, would not be repeated by him in future.

When the supposed remedial practice has been explained,--then
immediately after comes, we see, a more particular indication of the
good effects, for the production of which it is recommended. These
are--in the first place, that, whatsoever were the doctrines he was
charged with having taught it, it will be generally known that no such
doctrines were ever taught by him: in the next place, that it will in
like manner be known, that by himself no such habitual offence as that
of an habitual violation of the law in question was committed.

Such are the effects, stated as resulting from his performing the
ceremony, the performance of which was thus recommended to him.

This ceremony we see: and what we see at the same time is--that it could
not be, in the nature of it, productive of any such effects.

Here is a certain doctrine, which he had been charged with having
taught. If the case was, that he had taught it; let him have purified
himself ever so purely, whatsoever was meant by purification,--let him
have purified himself ever so completely, let him have paid ever so much
money, let him have shaved his head ever so close,--by any, or all of
all these supposed meritorious acts, how could that be caused, not to
have happened, which in fact had happened? by what means could they
afford proof of his performance of any ceremony, other than those very
same purification ceremonies themselves?

As to the purpose of furthering the temporal interest of the individual
in question; namely, by removing the load of odium, with which at that
time it seems he was burdened,--how far, in relation to this object, the
expedient promised to be an effectual cure, is more than at this time we
can find any ground for saying: as to any good purposes of any other
kind, that it was not in the nature of it to be productive of any, may
be pronounced without much danger of error.

Here at any rate was a ceremony--a ceremony the object of which was--to
apply, to the purpose of ensuring obsequiousness, the power of the
religious sanction.

The object, to which it was meant to apply that form, comes, it may be
seen, under the general denomination of an _oath_. An oath is either
assertory or promissory: if it be an oath of the promissory kind, it is
called a _vow_. An oath which is not a vow cannot respect anything but
what is past: upon that which is past, no human act can any longer
exercise any influence. A _vow_ has respect to something future--to the
future conduct of him by whom the vow is taken: and to this conduct a
man, in and by the taking of the vow, engages to give the form therein
mentioned.

Whatsoever, therefore, these ceremonies were in themselves,--thus much
seems plain enough, respecting the immediate effect they were designed
to answer: namely, either the delivery of a certain species of
_evidence_, or the entering into an _engagement_ to a certain effect:
the evidence being a denial of the act charged: the engagement, a
promise not to practice any acts of the sort in question in future.

Whatsoever was the effect looked for, and intended, by the
ceremony,--thus much we know, if the historian is here to be believed:
namely, that, in conformity to the advice, Paul betook himself to the
performance of it.

But, in so doing, thus much also we know: namely, that he consented to,
and betook himself to one of two things: an act of perjury, if the
effect of the ceremony was to convey an assertion, that he had never
taught, that a Jew, on being converted to the religion of Jesus, _need_
not circumcise his children, or walk after the Mosaic customs: an act of
apostasy, if the effect of it was an engagement never to teach this same
doctrine in future: an act of apostasy--and for what? only to save
himself from the displeasure entertained towards him on unjust grounds
by a set of ill-advised and inconsistent disciples.

Under the general head of _Paul's Doctrines_, particular title _Faith
and Works_, it will be seen what pains he had taken, on so many
occasions, to weed out of men's breasts, Gentiles and Jews together, all
regard for the Mosaic law--to cause them, in the words of the charge,
_to forsake Moses_. "By the works of the law," says he in his letter to
the Galatians, Gal. 2:16, "by the works of the law shall no flesh be
justified."

In this same letter, and in the same paragraph,--he speaks, of a speech
which he had made, of a reproof which, at Antioch, he had given to
Peter:--given to him, at a point of time long before the time here in
question, namely, that of his last preceding visit--his third visit to
Jerusalem,--this being the fourth. Let us see, once more, on what
occasion, and for what cause, this reproof: we shall thereby be the
better enabled to judge--how far, supposing the ceremony to have the
effect of an assertory oath,--how far that oath can have been
conformable to the truth.

Speaking of Peter, "Time was," he says, "when he did eat with the
Gentiles: but at Antioch, as above, certain persons came from James":
Gal. 2:12, 13, and then it was that "he, Peter, withdrew and separated
himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision.--And the Jews,"
continues he, "dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also
was carried away with their dissimulation." Of his return to Judaism, or
at any rate of the dissimulation which accompanied it, what is the
judgment which, if he is to be believed, he pronounced? Answer, That in
so doing "they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the
Gospel." Thereupon it is, that he charged Peter with inconsistency, and
reproved him for it: "Because," says he, "he was to be blamed." Gal.
2:14. "When I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the
Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest
after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest
thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?"

Before me lies a book by Thomas Lewis, M. A., in four 8vo volumes,
entitled _Origines Hebraicae_. In this book, under titles _Vow_ and
_Purification_, my expectation was, to find some explanation of this
matter: as also of the other _vow_ taken by Paul at Cenchrea, Acts
17:18, in the interval between his third visit to Jerusalem, and this
fourth: but no mention is made of either: nor does anything appear, by
which any light can be reflected upon either.

On the four men, whom, in pursuance of the recommendation in question,
Paul is said to have taken, that he might "purify himself along with
them," the intended effect of the ceremony in question is said to
be--the making or performance of a _vow_. But, from the circumstance of
its being a vow in their case, it follows not absolutely that it may not
have been an oath--an assertory oath, in his case.

At Jerusalem, for the taking or performance of a vow, a man was received
into the temple:--a district more extensive by far, it appears, than the
district called _Rules of the King's Bench_ at London: from the account
given by Lewis, as well as by this,--it appears that, on every such
occasion, fees were taken by the priests. As to the four men here in
question--having already, as it is stated, a vow on them, but nothing as
yet done in consequence,--it looks as if it had been by poverty that
they had hitherto been kept from the accomplishment of their purpose: on
which supposition, Paul being the head of a considerable party, and as
such having a command of money,--part of the recommendation seems to
have been--that, to acquire the reputation of liberality, he should open
his purse to these his proposed companions, and pay their fees.

On the occasion here in question, whatsoever was the purpose and
intended effect of the ceremony, what appears from verse 27, Acts 27,
is--that seven days were regarded as necessary for the accomplishment of
it: no mention of this in Lewis.

On this occasion, by the author of the Acts, once more is mentioned the
conciliatory decree of the Apostles and Elders. Still, not a syllable
about it is to be found in any Epistle of Saint Paul, or in any other
of the Apostolical Epistles that have come down to us.

Humanly speaking,--in what motives, in what circumstances, in what
considerations, shall we say, that the causes, final and efficient, of
this temperament--this _mezzo termino_--this middle course--are to be
found? The answer that presents itself is as follows:

Two stumbling-blocks were to be steered clear of:--the scruples of the
Jewish converts, and the refractoriness of the Gentiles. So far as
regarded abstinence from idolatrous feasts, and from meat with the whole
blood in it, killed and dressed in a manner other than that in practice
among the Jews,--conformity, it was judged, need not be dispensed of, at
the hands of the Gentiles: and, so long as they would be content with
meat killed and dressed after the Jewish mode,--the Jewish teachers
might, without giving offence to their Jewish converts, have the
convenience of partaking of the tables of the Gentile converts. As to
the rest--the endless train of habitual observances, by which so large a
portion of a man's life was occupied and tormented, neither these
permanent plagues, nor the initiatory plague of circumcision, though the
affair of a minute, and performed once for all, were found endurable:
neither upon himself nor upon his children would a man submit to have it
practiced.

After all, if the author of the Acts is to be believed,--it was by the
Jews of Asia, and not by those of Jerusalem, that, at Jerusalem, the
tumult was raised, by which this purification of Paul's was rendered
incomplete, and his stay at Jerusalem cut short: he being removed for
trial to Rome; at which place the history leaves him and concludes.

Of the behaviour observed by the Jerusalem Christians, on that
occasion--Apostles, Elders, Deacons and ordinary brethren all
together--nothing is said. Yet, of these there were many thousands on
the spot, Acts 21:20: all of them of course informed of the place--the
holy place,--in which, at the recommendation of the Elders, Paul had
stationed himself. By the Jews of Asia were "all the people on this
occasion stirred up," Acts 21:27: yet, among so many thousands, no
protection, nor any endeavour to afford him protection, for aught that
appears, did he experience. Yet Asia it was, that had been, to the
exclusion of Judaea, the theatre of his labours: from Asia it was, that
the train of attendants he brought with him, were come--were come with
him to these brethren--"the brethren,"--as if it had been said, _all_
the brethren,--by whom, according to the author of the Acts, they were
"received so gladly."

At this period ends all that, on the present occasion, it will be
necessary to say, of this last recorded visit to Jerusalem. Of the two
inconsistent accounts said to have been given by him of his
conversion--one to the Jerusalem mob, the other to King Agrippa--full
notice has been taken under the head of his conversion: of the miracles
ascribed to him at Malta, mention is here made, in the chapter allotted
to the history of his supposed miracles. Of any other subsequent acts or
sayings of his, no notice will require to be taken in this place. The
matter here in question has been--the sort of relation, stated as having
had place, between this self-constituted Apostle, and those who beyond
controversy were constituted such by, and lived as such with, Jesus
himself: and to this have incidentally been added the causes, which have
continually been presenting themselves, for suspicion, in respect of the
verity and authenticity, or both, of the history, which, under the name
of the Acts of the Apostles, has come down to us, connected by the
operations of the bookbinder, in the same volume with the several
histories of the four Evangelists, and the Epistles--not only of Paul
himself but of others among the Apostles; and with the work styled, as
if in derision, "_The Revelations_."


SECTION 5.

THE DESIGN OF THIS RECOMMENDATION JUSTIFIED.

But the Apostles--says somebody--what are we to think of the Apostles?
If by Paul a _perjury_ was thus committed, were they not--all of them
who joined in this recommendation--so many _suborners_ of this same
perjury?

The answer will, it is hoped, by most readers at least, have been
anticipated.--Yes or no, if so it be, that it was their expectation that
he would commit it: no, assuredly; if it were their expectation--their
assured expectation--that he would _not_ commit it: that, even in his
person, even after all they had witnessed in him, the union of
profligacy and rashness would never soar to so high a pitch. The
necessity they were under, of ridding themselves of his presence was
extreme:--of ridding _themselves_--and, what was so much more, their
_cause_. Stay in the same town, and in the same company with them, he
could not,--without being either their known _adversary_, or their known
_associate_. Their known _adversary_ he could not be, without either
continuing himself to be an object of universal horror, or else
rendering _them_ objects of horror, to the whole body of their
disciples. Their _associate_ he could not be, without involving _them_
in that odium, with which he himself was, by the confession of his own
adherent and historiographer, covered. Under these circumstances, not to
speak of the cause of mankind, for saving _themselves_ and _their_ cause
from destruction,--what course could they take, so gentle, and at the
same time, to all appearance, so surely effectual, as the proposing to
him this test?--a test, which no man could rationally expect, that any
man in his circumstances would take.


SECTION 6.

DRAGGED OUT OF THE TEMPLE BY JEWS OR CHRISTIANS, HE IS SAVED BY A
GENTILE, NAMELY, A ROMAN COMMANDER.

With this occurrence concludes so much of Paul's history, as,--for the
purpose of perfecting the demonstration given, of the disbelief
manifested towards his pretensions to a supernatural intercourse with
the Almighty,--it was found necessary here to anticipate.

In the matter of the chapter--the 13th--in which Paul's supposed
miracles are brought to view,--his history is, as to all those
particulars which seemed necessary to be brought to view for the purpose
of the present inquiry,--deduced to very near the time, at which the
historian of the Acts, having conducted him to Rome, leaves him there:
leaves him there, and with no other notice, than that of his having, at
the time, at which the history closes, passed two years at that capital,
in a sort of ambiguous state between freedom and confinement: waiting to
receive, at the hands of the constituted authorities, the final
determination of his fate.

Meantime, lest anything should be wanting, that could have contributed
to the elucidation on a point of such supreme importance, follows in the
next chapter a concluding and more particular view of the grounds, on
which, on the occasion of his visit to the temple, the intention of
deliberate perjury was found necessary to be imputed to him.

FOOTNOTES:

[53] Acts 21:16. "There went with us also _certain_ of the disciples of
Cæsarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple,
with whom we should lodge."

[54] 2 Cor. 12:12. "Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you
in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds." Not that, by
the words assigns and wonders, when used by Paul, anything more was
meant, than what, but a few years after, was, according to him, doing,
or about to be done, by Antichrist. 2 Thess. 2:9. "Even him, whose
coming is, after the manner of Satan, with all powers, and signs, and
lying wonders." _Lying_ is, indeed, the adjunct prefixed, in this
instance; but, lying or not lying, if Paul be believed, they failed not
to produce the effect intended by them. Signs and wonders being such
equivocal thing, no great wonder if--writing at Corinth to nobody knows
what disciples of his at Rome, A.D. 58, Rom. 15:18, 19,--he could
venture, if this was venturing, to speak of what he had been doing in
Jerusalem and Illyricum, in the same terms. "For I will not dare to
speak, says he, of any of those things which Christ has not wrought by
me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed.--Through mighty
signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from
Jerusalem, and round about, unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the
Gospel of Christ."




