The Project Gutenberg eBook of The New Physics and Its Evolution
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The New Physics and Its Evolution

Author: Lucien Poincaré


        
Release date: February 28, 2005 [eBook #15207]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/15207

Credits: E-text prepared by Jeff Spirko, Juliet Sutherland, Jim Land, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team




E-text prepared by Jeff Spirko, Juliet Sutherland, Jim Land, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



The International Scientific Series

THE NEW PHYSICS AND ITS EVOLUTION

by

LUCIEN POINCARE
Inspecteur-General de l'Instruction Publique

Being the Authorized Translation of _LA PHYSIQUE MODERNE, SON EVOLUTION_

New York
D. Appleton and Company

1909







Prefatory Note

M. Lucien Poincare is one of the distinguished family of
mathematicians which has during the last few years given a
Minister of Finance to the Republic and a President to the
Academie des Sciences. He is also one of the nineteen
Inspectors-General of Public Instruction who are charged with the
duty of visiting the different universities and _lycees_ in
France and of reporting upon the state of the studies there
pursued. Hence he is in an excellent position to appreciate at
its proper value the extraordinary change which has lately
revolutionized physical science, while his official position has
kept him aloof from the controversies aroused by the discovery of
radium and by recent speculations on the constitution of matter.

M. Poincare's object and method in writing the book are
sufficiently explained in the preface which follows; but it may
be remarked that the best of methods has its defects, and the
excessive condensation which has alone made it possible to
include the last decade's discoveries in physical science within
a compass of some 300 pages has, perhaps, made the facts here
noted assimilable with difficulty by the untrained reader. To
remedy this as far as possible, I have prefixed to the present
translation a table of contents so extended as to form a fairly
complete digest of the book, while full indexes of authors and
subjects have also been added. The few notes necessary either for
better elucidation of the terms employed, or for giving account
of discoveries made while these pages were passing through the
press, may be distinguished from the author's own by the
signature "ED."

THE EDITOR.

ROYAL INSTITUTION OF GREAT BRITAIN,
April 1907.




Author's Preface

During the last ten years so many works have accumulated in the
domain of Physics, and so many new theories have been propounded,
that those who follow with interest the progress of science, and
even some professed scholars, absorbed as they are in their own
special studies, find themselves at sea in a confusion more
apparent than real.

It has therefore occurred to me that it might be useful to write
a book which, while avoiding too great insistence on purely
technical details, should try to make known the general results
at which physicists have lately arrived, and to indicate the
direction and import which should be ascribed to those
speculations on the constitution of matter, and the discussions
on the nature of first principles, to which it has become, so to
speak, the fashion of the present day to devote oneself.

I have endeavoured throughout to rely only on the experiments in
which we can place the most confidence, and, above all, to show
how the ideas prevailing at the present day have been formed, by
tracing their evolution, and rapidly examining the successive
transformations which have brought them to their present
condition.

In order to understand the text, the reader will have no need to
consult any treatise on physics, for I have throughout given the
necessary definitions and set forth the fundamental facts.
Moreover, while strictly employing exact expressions, I have
avoided the use of mathematical language. Algebra is an admirable
tongue, but there are many occasions where it can only be used
with much discretion.

Nothing would be easier than to point out many great omissions
from this little volume; but some, at all events, are not
involuntary.

Certain questions which are still too confused have been put on
one side, as have a few others which form an important collection
for a special study to be possibly made later. Thus, as regards
electrical phenomena, the relations between electricity and
optics, as also the theories of ionization, the electronic
hypothesis, etc., have been treated at some length; but it has
not been thought necessary to dilate upon the modes of production
and utilization of the current, upon the phenomena of magnetism,
or upon all the applications which belong to the domain of
Electrotechnics.

L. POINCARE.





Contents


EDITOR'S PREFATORY NOTE

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

THE EVOLUTION OF PHYSICS

Revolutionary change in modern Physics only apparent:
evolution not revolution the rule in Physical Theory--
Revival of metaphysical speculation and influence of
Descartes: all phenomena reduced to matter and movement--
Modern physicists challenge this: physical, unlike
mechanical, phenomena seldom reversible--Two schools,
one considering experimental laws imperative, the other
merely studying relations of magnitudes: both teach
something of truth--Third or eclectic school--
Is mechanics a branch of electrical science?


