CHAPTER V

SOLUTIONS AND ELECTROLYTIC DISSOCIATION

Sec. 1. Solution: Kirchhoff's, Gibb's, Duhem's and Van
t'Hoff's researches.

Sec. 2. Osmosis: History of phenomenon--Traube and
biologists establish existence of semi-permeable
walls--Villard's experiments with gases--Pfeffer
shows osmotic pressure proportional to concentration--
Disagreement as to cause of phenomenon.

Sec. 3. Osmosis applied to Solution: Van t'Hoff's
discoveries--Analogy between dissolved body and
perfect gas--Faults in analogy.

Sec. 4. Electrolytic Dissociation: Van t'Hoff's and
Arrhenius' researches--Ionic hypothesis of--Fierce
opposition to at first--Arrhenius' ideas now triumphant
--Advantages of Arrhenius' hypothesis--"The ions
which react"--Ostwald's conclusions from this--Nernst's
theory of Electrolysis--Electrolysis of gases makes
electronic theory probable--Faraday's two laws--Valency--
Helmholtz's consequences from Faraday's laws.


CHAPTER VI

THE ETHER

Sec. 1. The Luminiferous Ether: First idea of Ether due
to Descartes--Ether must be imponderable--Fresnel shows
light vibrations to be transverse--Transverse vibrations
cannot exist in fluid--Ether must be discontinuous.

Sec. 2. Radiations: Wave-lengths and their
measurements--Rubens' and Lenard's researches--
Stationary waves and colour-photography--Fresnel's
hypothesis opposed by Neumann--Wiener's and Cotton's
experiments.

Sec. 3. The Electromagnetic Ether: Ampere's advocacy
of mathematical expression--Faraday first shows
influence of medium in electricity--Maxwell's proof
that light-waves electromagnetic--His
unintelligibility--Required confirmation of theory by Hertz.

Sec. 4. Electrical Oscillations: Hertz's experiments--
Blondlot proves electromagnetic disturbance propagated
with speed of light--Discovery of ether waves
intermediate between Hertzian and visible ones--Rubens'
and Nichols' experiments--Hertzian and light rays
contrasted--Pressure of light.

Sec. 5. The X-Rays: Roentgen's discovery--Properties
of X-rays--Not homogeneous--Rutherford and M'Clung's
experiments on energy corresponding to--Barkla's
experiments on polarisation of--Their speed that of
light--Are they merely ultra-violet?--Stokes and
Wiechert's theory of independent pulsations generally
preferred--J.J. Thomson's idea of their formation--
Sutherland's and Le Bon's theories--The N-Rays--
Blondlot's discovery--Experiments cannot be repeated
outside France--Gutton and Mascart's confirmation--
Negative experiments prove nothing--Supposed
wave-length of N-rays.

Sec. 6. The Ether and Gravitation: Descartes'
and Newton's ideas on gravitation--Its speed and
other extraordinary characteristics--Lesage's
hypothesis--Cremieux' experiments with drops of
liquids--Hypothesis of ether insufficient.


CHAPTER VII

WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY

Sec. 1. Histories of wireless telegraphy already written,
and difficulties of the subject.

Sec. 2. Two systems: that which uses the material media (earth,
air, or water), and that which employs ether only.

Sec. 3. Use of earth as return wire by Steinheil
--Morse's experiments with water of canal--Seine used as
return wire during siege of Paris--Johnson and Melhuish's
Indian experiments--Preece's telegraph over Bristol
Channel--He welcomes Marconi.

Sec. 4. Early attempts at transmission of messages through
ether--Experiments of Rathenau and others.

Sec. 5. Forerunners of ether telegraphy: Clerk Maxwell
and Hertz--Dolbear, Hughes, and Graham Bell.

Sec. 6. Telegraphy by Hertzian waves first suggested
by Threlfall--Crookes', Tesla's, Lodge's,
Rutherford's, and Popoff's contributions--Marconi
first makes it practicable.

Sec. 7. The receiver in wireless telegraphy--Varley's,
Calzecchi--Onesti's, and Branly's researches--
Explanation of coherer still obscure.

Sec. 8. Wireless telegraphy enters the commercial stage--
Defect of Marconi's system--Braun's, Armstrong's, Lee de
Forest's, and Fessenden's systems make use of earth--
Hertz and Marconi entitled to foremost place among
discoverers.


