CHAPTER XXX

Central Park is a tract of land situate in the middle of residential New
York. It is oblong in shape, being two miles in length, half a mile in
width and covering an area of about eight hundred and sixty acres. The
ground has been artificially changed from a wild waste to one of the
most beautiful spots to be found anywhere. It is coursed by a net-work
of splendid drive-ways, equestrian roads and foot-paths running in all
directions among the many little rocky hills and miniature lakes. Trees,
flower-beds and shrubbery of various kinds have been cleverly arranged
by skilled artists to form a delightfully picturesque effect. Chirping
birds of many colors and tame squirrels in multitudinous numbers find
this park a heavenly abiding place where the danger of annihilation is
minimized. Playgrounds for the children are laid out in different parts
of the domain while a zoological garden where animals are kept
imprisoned in small cages for the term of their natural lives, is put
forth as one of its many features.

As one passes through the entrance gate at Seventy-eighth street and
Central Park West, and turns first to the right, then to the left, and
finally to the right again, following a foot-path similar in its
windings to a letter S, and crossing two small bridges, he will come to
an abrupt ending of a narrow path running into an immense projecting
rock. Here is located a canopied seat just large enough for two people.
Facing this shelter is a small lake, on the edge of which overhanging
trees afford delightful shade during the hot months. That was the place
selected by Arletta for our meeting ground. It was an out-of-the-way,
quiet and romantic spot where we spent many pleasant afternoons and
evenings enjoying each other's company. Whenever Arletta wanted to see
me she sent a note which never failed to bring me there. In fact, such a
feeling of enchantment did the place hold for me, that many times I
wandered out there and sat alone for hours, musing.

But notwithstanding that our many meetings had the effect of
strengthening our mutual admiration and love for each other, and that I
was beginning to fairly idolize this beautiful young woman, still
certain things came to pass that I could not understand, and which
caused me to feel that Arletta's actions were very mysterious, and that
there was something about her life she was trying to withhold from me.

In the first place she would never meet me anywhere else except in that
obscure nook in the park, and in departing would not permit me to escort
her beyond the Seventy-eighth street entrance, where she would abruptly
bid me a hasty adieu, with instructions that I must take another route.

That, in itself, appeared to be a strange proceeding, but one evening as
I entered a fashionable Fifth avenue restaurant on one of my tours of
inspection of plutocratic conditions, I was amazed to see her seated at
one of the tables, drinking wine with a male companion. Her face was
flushed from the effects of the beverage, and she was acting a trifle
hilarious, and displaying traits of frivolity such as I had never
observed in her before. As I caught her eye she gave a quick start, and
then deliberately turned her head in another direction, and pretended
not to have seen me. At this act I rushed out into the street, and it
was with great difficulty that I was able to control my feelings.

The next evening I met her in the park, and was further surprised when
she not only failed to mention the incident, but intimated that she had
spent the evening at an entirely different place. She appeared so
innocent, however, and was so charming in her manner that I almost
immediately forgot the affair, and said nothing about it. A few nights
later, though, as I was walking down Broadway, near Twenty-seventh
street, I noticed a large crowd of men and women gathered, and
questioning a bystander as to the reason thereof, I was informed that a
stylishly dressed lady was "too drunk to navigate" and was in the hands
of a policeman. As I craned my neck to get a glimpse of the unfortunate
woman, I was shocked beyond expression to find that it was none other
than Arletta who had created the commotion. Horrified, I rushed through
the crowd, pushing men right and left, until I had reached the
policeman, who was holding her up by the arm and trying to ascertain her
name and address. She could hardly stand, and seemed dazed to the point
of falling, but as I spoke her name, her memory revived somewhat, and,
fixing her half-closed eyes upon me, she said: "Why, hello Jack" And
then, turning to the officer, remarked: "This is my friend Jack; he will
take me home." I could not understand the reason she called me Jack. She
had never addressed me in that way before. But without delay I informed
the policeman that I would take charge of her, and requested him to call
a cab. When the vehicle arrived it became necessary for me to lift her
bodily into it, and then I was at a loss to know just where to take her.
In order to get away from the crowd, however, I told the driver to go on
and I would give him the address later.

"Tell him to take us to the Seraglio Apartments," she mumbled.

"Do you know where the Seraglio Apartments are?" I inquired of the
driver.

"Yes, sir, in Central Park West," replied he, as he whipped up his horse
and started in that direction.

Arletta said no more, but remained silent, as if stupefied from the
effects of the intoxicating drink she had taken.

"What a pity," thought I, as we sped along, "that this young woman, with
all of her beauty, grace and charm, and with all of her splendid traits
of character, should fall a victim to the awful curse of drink! Could
this condition have been brought about because she had no work to
perform and too much time and money to squander recklessly? What a pity
that there are human beings who make and sell poisonous stuff for money
which not only robs those who use it of their reasoning power, but which
undermines the very foundation of the human race! Those people who make
and sell liquor, knowing that it will ultimately destroy the lives of
thousands of human beings, are just as much murderous poisoners as would
be the chemist who would knowingly give a deadly drug to an intended
suicide."

When we arrived at the apartment house, which was one of the most
magnificent in New York, it was with some difficulty that I was able to
arouse her sufficiently so that she could walk with my assistance.
Entering the vestibule, I asked her if she could get along without
further help, but she insisted that I should go to her rooms, so getting
into the elevator we were taken up to the eighth floor. As though he was
accustomed to this sort of an affair, the elevator attendant went ahead
and opened one of the doors on the right of the hallway, and after
turning on the electric light, and we had entered, he withdrew at once,
quietly closing the door after him. I then found myself within one of
the most elegantly furnished drawing rooms imaginable. At one end of the
apartment was an archway gorgeously draped with costly tapestries which
partially screened another room beyond, which served as a bed-chamber.
Arletta staggered forward, half pulling me along with her into this
other room, and throwing herself upon the bed, ordered me, in a dazed
sort of a way, to remove her clothing. I was dumbfounded at this
extraordinary command and felt that I was placed in an extremely awkward
position. I did not like the idea of allowing the poor girl to remain
over night, in the uncomfortable position she had taken, bound as she
was by tightly fitting garments, and still I realized that it was a very
delicate undertaking to follow out her instructions, knowing full well
that if she were in her right senses she would be horrified at the
thought of such a thing. But as I stood looking at her for several
moments in a state of perplexed indecision, and wondering what course to
pursue, she began to moan as if in agony, and without further hesitation
I decided to go ahead and do my best to make her position more
comfortable. So I began by taking off her shoes.

"What a superb foot!" mused I enthusiastically, as I unlaced and removed
her pretty little shoes. "Was there ever another quite so shapely or
entrancing? And the ankle! How daintily its joints showed beneath
embroidered hose of exquisite material." Hardly had I begun this task
before I realized that a strange magnetic force was stealing upon me.
With such a feast for my eyes to contend with, it seemed as if my senses
were being gradually overcome by the intoxicating clutch of voluptuous
dreams.

The shoes off, I turned my attention to the collar which apparently
caused her much uneasiness. The collar, as I discovered, was a part of
the bodice and could not be taken off without removing the whole
garment, which task required considerable time, patience, and careful
maneuvering to perform. This I finally accomplished, however, with the
aid of Arletta, who revived occasionally from her comatose state long
enough to give a few indistinct directions, and then as my eyes rested
upon her lovely arms, neck and shoulders, I was plunged into ecstatic
emotion such as words have not the power to express. At last I succeeded
in loosening the stays and different cords and ribbons usually worn by
women, which alleviated her distress considerably, and after throwing a
light robe over her form was about to, arrange her position so that she
might rest comfortably, when to my utter astonishment she threw her arms
around my neck, kissed me several times, and whispered in my ear, "You
won't leave me alone tonight, will you, darling?"

This seemed to be almost too much for me to bear; the cravings of my
sensual nature began a desperate struggle with my better self. My blood
started to tingle with the heat of passion. Evil thoughts crowded
themselves into my brain. The more of these evil thoughts I allowed to
enter my head the less power of resistance I held against their subtle
ravages. I was losing self-control. I felt powerless to battle
successfully against the temptation. Stealthily walking over to the
door, I softly bolted it and then stood still for some time and
listened. It was past midnight and everything was quiet. I turned out
the light and started to go over to Arletta. As I did so, something
within me seemed to cry out with shame against such cowardice. As I
paused for a moment, the voice from within became stronger in its
disapproval of my intentions. Apparently I became divided into two
parts, and each was struggling for the mastery of me. One side was
trying with all its might to push me forward, while the other was
attempting to hold me back with reproachful warnings. These two parts
were my material and spiritual selves, contending for supremacy. I
wavered back and forth, from one to the other, and it seemed that the
material side was about to conquer and carry me down to disgrace, when
suddenly there passed through my mind like a great wave of strength the
Sagewoman's wonderful precept:

"Always consult your soul for advice.

"Do no act your conscience will not sanction."

And recognizing the full meaning of these words, I immediately turned
about, unbolted the door, and quietly left the apartment, feeling that
the soul was still master of my actions.

