CHAPTER XXIII

FIRST VOICE: "This is a most peculiar case of enteric fever, in which
the patient baffles all medical aid towards a cure. The fellow has been
out of his head ever since he was brought here, two months ago, and
fancies that he has been in a trance since the time of Noah and the Ark.
He has a strange hallucination that he can be awakened from his
protracted nap by a kiss from a certain female, whom he describes as
Arletta the Beautiful. Although he is as crazy as a loon, yet some of
his utterances are really remarkable for the depth of logic they
contain. The case has its amusing side also, for every woman by the name
of Arletta who visits this hospital cannot resist the temptation of
kissing the man, in order to ascertain whether they possess the secret
charm to restore his right senses. But so far the osculatory experiment
has proved a dire failure. He bears evidence of being a handsome and
distinguished person, notwithstanding he is a charity patient, and
without friends. His identification is unknown, he having been picked up
on the street in his present condition by the police, who had him sent
here. I fully believe-but Miss, you are crying. Evidently your nature is
too emotional for the sick room, so come, we will pass along."

SECOND VOICE: "No, wait a moment, Doctor. I--I think--I am positive that
I know this man. In fact, I was very well acquainted with him a few
years ago. It all seems so strange, but-well-you see-he often told me
that he loved me. Yes, my name is Arletta, but I did not love him, nor
even like him. My father and mother hated him, and we all had to
secretly leave home and travel abroad in order for me to avoid his
undesirable attentions. But notwithstanding that, my heart now bleeds
for him in his terrible plight, and I want to do something for him. My
conscience would not allow me to pass along without trying to aid him.
You say that in his ravings he claims that a kiss from Arletta would
save him. I have never done such a thing before in my life, but now an
irresistible force from within has taken possession of me and I feel
that it is my duty to try the experiment myself, and see if it will have
the effect of restoring his normal condition. Therefore, Doctor, whether
this strange method proves efficacious or not, I shall rely upon your
honor to keep the secret, and never mention the incident to him. If he
knew of it I should die of shame. My parents would disown me for such an
act."

As though awakening from a long and profound sleep the aforesaid
colloquy seemed to have been impressed upon my mind, and then I opened
my eyes and looked about in astonishment. The strangeness of my position
and surroundings surprised me beyond expression. I was lying upon my
back in a small narrow bed stationed within a large oblong room about
one hundred by fifty feet in dimensions. Long rows of little white beds
extended from one end of the apartment to the other, each containing the
form of a human being. Most of these forms appeared to be soundly
sleeping, some lay awake silently meditating, while others tossed about
nervously from one position to another as if in terrible agony. An
occasional howl of torture rent the air. Moving hither and thither among
the different beds were women attired in white dresses and wearing
little white caps on their heads. They carried in their hands, spoons,
tumblers, trays, and various instruments and vessels of peculiar design.

At the front of my bed stood a man of medium height and build, with a
heavy reddish mustache and pointed beard. At one side, half way between
the head and foot of my bed, was the figure of a woman, apparently about
twenty-one years of age. She was tall, slender, graceful, and
magnificently gowned in street clothes. Her head was shapely and covered
with an abundance of dark brown hair. Her physiognomy was intellectually
strong, and the whole cast of her features showed extraordinary beauty.
Her eyes were clear and bright, and expressed a tender and sympathetic
nature. She was looking straight at me in a half-startled sort of a
manner, and appeared to be backing away from the bed upon which I lay.
As my eyes met her steady gaze I involuntarily exclaimed, "Arletta!"
Then instantly my memory returned, and I remembered all that had taken
place, as explained in the preceding chapters.

Notwithstanding, however, that my mind became clear and well-balanced, I
became extremely puzzled as I looked at this beautiful woman, to note
that she bore a striking resemblance to the sublime being, who had just
passed away among the remnants of Sageland, and I became still further
confounded when she timidly approached me and softly said: "You are John
Convert, are you not?"

"Yes," answered I, "that is my name."

"And do you recognize me?" inquired she.

"I recognize in you a living demonstration and positive realization of
the principle of re-incarnation, as embodied in the Sageman's theory of
Natural Law," answered I, slowly and deliberately. "I recognize in you
the soul of Arletta, of Sageland, my eternal companion, and a fulfilment
of her prophecy that she would be born again. But while I make this
declaration with the utmost positiveness, still I am at a loss to
understand how such a thing could be, as the soul of that lovely being,
having but just left its material body, should according to Natural Law,
have attached itself to an embryo form, while you are a full-grown
woman." At these words she appeared considerably amazed for a moment,
but quickly recovering herself, she said with much sympathy and
tenderness of feeling: "Come, now, Mr. Convert, try and think clearly
and talk sensibly. Don't you recollect how, three years ago, we became
acquainted in Paris; how persistently you followed me all over Europe,
then crossed the Atlantic aboard the same steamer, and finally journeyed
out West to my home? Don't you remember how angry Papa became, and how
he threatened you with dire punishment if you did not stop annoying us?"

"No," said I emphatically, "there must be some mistake, for I have never
visited Paris and I distinctly recollect having been in Japan three
years ago, as I celebrated my nineteenth birthday in Tokio."

"Now that is absurd," said she, with a mingled look of pity and
suppressed amusement. "Three years ago you told me that you were forty
years old. Don't you recollect how you once cautioned me not to consider
you an old man simply because your hair was white, and how angry you
became because I called you Grandpa? Come now, think real hard."

At these words I began to seriously doubt my own identity, but after a
moment of calm deliberation I replied, "No, I do not recollect any such
happenings, and moreover, I am not forty years of age, but twenty-two,
and neither is my hair white but black as you can plainly see. Will you
please tell me where I am? My mind is a trifle confused at the strange
surroundings."

"You are in the Ruff Hospital, New York," answered she. "I, myself, have
been spending some time in this city, and, strangely enough, took a
notion that I should like to see the different hospitals. It was purely
accidental that I ran across you. The doctor says you have typhoid
fever, but," she added, in an encouraging manner, "you will soon be
well. So cheer up, and try to concentrate your mind, so that you can
think properly."

"Ruff Hospital, New York!" ejaculated I, in astonishment. "How the deuce
did I get away over here? Oh, I understand; I fell among the rocks and
was hurt; then the sailors came and rescued me, and I was brought here.
That seems like a few moments ago, but I presume at least a month must
have elapsed since or the ship could not have reached this port. What
month is this, January?"

"No, this is the month of March," replied she.

"March!" exclaimed I. "Great heavens, how the time has flown! Why, that
is about three months that I have known absolutely nothing. Let's see,
it was December 5th that I was thrown overboard, and it must have been
December 7th that Arletta died. That's right, December 7, 1881-I shall
always remember that date and keep it holy. It must be now March, 1882."

"Why, Mr. Convert, you are certainly dreaming," responded she, "this the
year 1903, not 1882. But how strange that you should get so mixed in the
dates-December 7, 1881, was the day I was born. That was over twenty-one
years ago, instead of three months, as you fancy."

At this juncture the red-whiskered individual came forward and said: "It
seems to be a hopeless case, Miss. He has talked in that same strain
ever since he came here. Perhaps after his fever abates somewhat he may
regain his equanimity, but to me it looks as if his mind will always be
unbalanced. He has a nasty scar right over the temporal region, which
portends ill for his future reason. Perhaps it would be better not to
talk to him any further at present. He is awfully weak, and appears more
excited than usual. You have evidently made some impression upon him,
however, and if you would visit him every few days he might eventually
be able to recognize you, which would have a strong tendency to set him
mentally straight again."

"Very well," said she, hesitatingly, as if not anxious to go. "May I
call and see him tomorrow, Doctor?"

"There are only three visiting days here each week, Miss; Sundays,
Wednesdays and Fridays, between the hours of three and four P. M. But
any time you call, if you will ask at the office for Doctor Savage, that
is my name, I shall consider it a pleasant duty to render you any
service within my power," replied he, looking at her with unsuppressed
admiration, of which she apparently took no notice. Then continuing, he
said, "Would you kindly give me your card that I may know your full name
in case you call at other times than the regular visiting hours?"

She opened her pocket book as if to take out a card, stopped and
reflected a moment, and then said, "Well, never mind my last name; just
remember me as Arletta," and before I could collect my wits sufficiently
to voice my agitated thoughts they passed from the room together.

