CHAPTER XXI

"But what about yourself?" inquired I of Arletta, as I met her
sympathetic gaze with a look of adoration. "If you would visit the
different countries of the world you could revolutionize things in a
very short time, I am sure. You could explain the principles of Natural
Law to the people, and teach them methods of which I know nothing. The
wise and learned men of the present time would understand your
explanation much better, and would give the subject far more serious
consideration than if I, a poor ignorant fellow with neither education
nor standing, undertook to instruct them. The whole world would stop and
listen to you. The inhabitants would set you up as a goddess, and rally
to your standard as mistress of the earth. Besides, the power your
apparently unlimited intelligence would create, your wonderful beauty
would immediately charm every mortal who once set eyes on you. Kings,
emperors and potentates of all kinds would fall madly in love with you
at first sight, and you would have but to command to bring them to your
feet as slaves ready to do your slightest bidding. To further your own
purposes you could"-but here I stopped short in my recital, shocked by a
thousand little demons of jealousy entering my brain as it occurred to
me that perhaps Arletta would forget me entirely if all the great
persons of the earth showered honors and favors upon her. I felt
intensely miserable at the very idea of such a thing.

"Do not allow silly thoughts to enter your head," said she
compassionately, "I shall never leave this place. This room has been the
scene of the happiest hours of my life in which my coeternal companion,
incased in the flesh of a real man, plighted his everlasting love and
devotion to me. And by a simple and intelligent law of nature I have
been held a captive in this room through countless generations to
witness the transformation and return of that faithful comrade to
release my soul from captivity. And now this room shall be my mortal
sepulcher.

"Although I should like, ever so much, to go forth and devote many years
to teaching the Apeman the glorious principles of Natural Law as
prescribed by my beloved countrymen, yet it is not within my power to do
so.

"Owing to the constant change in the chemical composition of the
atmosphere, and the vast difference in its present arrangement and that
of four thousand two hundred years ago, it would be impossible for me to
live five minutes outside of this chamber. In fact I have noticed that
the supply of air, which must have been hermetically sealed within this
vault at the time of the catastrophe, has been gradually escaping by way
of the hole through which you forced a passageway. Hence within a very
short time my life will have oozed away for the want of proper stimulus.
Then again, the period in which the particles of this human frame should
naturally cling together has long since expired, and should I but expose
myself to the elements now existing on the exterior of this place, I
should no doubt, crumble into dust and be blown away with the winds.
Notwithstanding nature compels the mutability of all things, its laws
however remain unchangeable, and as the time has passed and the
conditions altered since I should have lived my natural life, this
material of which I am now composed must soon collapse, its parts
disintegrate and return to the elements from whence they came.

"But my soul shall continue to live, and the same law which brought you
back here to me will also bring our souls together many times and in
different forms during eternity. And as you now possess the strength,
intelligence and opportunity, it is your sacred duty to go forth and
teach Apemen to love one another and practice kindness toward all living
things, for you know not in what shape I may return. As you would be
kind to me now, so must you treat all of nature's creatures. And
remember, that the soul you so ardently worship now and so reverently
loved over four thousand years ago, cannot return in a perfect form if
there are none such forms to inhabit, or in a good and pure being if
there are no such beings extant. But, on the contrary, if in the future
none but good and beautiful lives exist on earth, my soul cannot
possibly occupy anything else. Thus, Natural Law plainly teaches that,
as you prepare earthly conditions in one form of life, so must you
tolerate them in the next. In fact, our own future safety and happiness
depend upon all living things reaching a high state of perfection and
equality. And now," said Arletta, arising and exhibiting considerable
emotion, "having briefly instructed you in Natural Law as deeply as your
limited mental capacity will permit, the time has arrived that we must
part, for I feel that I am growing weak and cannot live much longer. In
fact, it has been through the power of my will alone that I have been
kept alive until now. So prepare yourself to go."

"Go!" ejaculated I, jumping to my feet with an awful feeling of anguish
as I realized the full meaning of her words. "Me, go? Never! I shall
remain here and we shall die together. I could never live without you.
There would be left no object in life worth living for." And then,
advancing forward, I took her shapely hand in mine, and, looking
directly into her lovely eyes with much earnestness, said: "I fully
understand that in comparison to the Sage-man, I am a hideous and
degraded creature. And I also know that the love that filled the heal is
of your contemporaries for one another was sublime, having for a few
moments during that musical spell been moved by the same emotions that
once impelled the exalted being of which I am the re-incarnation, but
believe me when I say that my love for you now is ten thousand times
stronger than it was then. I worship you. I shall die for and with you.
Aye, even nature itself cannot keep me alive after you have gone. I may
not be the equal of the Sageman in other ways, but I shall prove that my
love for you is equally as great."

During this outburst of my thoughts, Arletta stood in a motionless
attitude, holding my outstretched hand and returning my excited gaze
with a look of mingled pity and sorrow. "Is it possible," said she,
"that there is not one Apeman in the world today with sufficient
strength of character to relinquish his own selfish desires for the good
of his species? Can it be that not one Apeman exists whom nature can
rely upon for the great work of uplifting humanity, who is brave enough
to resist the temporary fascination of a lovable woman? And have I lived
to see the reincarnated soul of the bravest and noblest man that ever
breathed, bound within the flesh of a wretched coward incapable of
living for any greater purpose than his own self-gratification? Am I to
understand that one who is controlled by the spirit of my everlasting
associate, intends betraying nature's trust by shirking the
responsibilities of manhood, because he lacks the courage to live? Will
there be promulgated among the records of time an account of my immortal
partner having deserted his post of duty by sneaking out of the world
before his allotted time? Would this being, who is blessed with physical
strength and a well-balanced brain, allow himself to sink to the level
of a craven suicide, because he cannot secure something beyond his
reach? Does he think that nature brought him into existence for no other
purpose than to feed his own petty desires? Would he deliberately die
like a useless poltroon, and leave the world in its present state of
savagery and wretchedness, without even attempting to be of service to
humanity in the very work it requires the most?"

"Stop! Enough!" cried I. "You have wounded my feelings to the very core.
I'll admit that I am weak in this instance. Very weak indeed. But this
is the first time that my courage has ever been assailed by anyone, and
to have you above all persons, openly insinuate that I am a coward is
far worse than having inflicted upon me the cruelest tortures of the
Ape-man's prospective hell. I am only an Apeman, but as I said before, I
love you beyond all power of expression. You no doubt, cannot understand
my puny feelings any more than I can fully comprehend your lofty ideals
or the full meaning of your higher knowledge of things. The very
greatest hardship for me to undergo would be to live after you have
passed away. But, if by the promise of so doing I can gain your respect
and one encouraging look or word of approval, I will not only rescind
the text of my previous statement and live, but I swear to you in the
name of the Creator of the law which governs all things, that I shall
strictly follow to the letter any instructions you may wish to offer
concerning my future movements, no matter what they might be. So make my
task a hard one, for the courage you so unfeelingly attacked must be
tested to its full limits. I am ready to obey your commands."

Having thus addressed Arletta, I straightened myself up to my full
height with as much dignity as I could assume, folded my arms across my
chest and awaited her orders.

"The Sagemen never urged their desires by a command," replied Arletta,
"they simply requested that which they would like to have done. The
request I shall make concerning your future duty can be incorporated in
a very few words, but it will require a lifetime and great strength of
character to execute. But as you have promised like a man to follow my
instructions, I shall die with implicit confidence in your determination
to do so. So consider well the following mandate, for it contains the
essence which will stimulate you to heroic deeds:

"Always consult your soul for advice,

"Do no act your conscience will not sanction."

Three times Arletta slowly repeated this precept, and then placing her
hands upon my shoulders, she continued: "The first time you act contrary
to the admonition of your soul, then you will have broken your promise
to me. Now go," said she, turning me about until I faced the doorway, "I
must request your immediate departure. Go, and try to be a man. We shall
meet many times in the future, so while you have the chance try and make
better the conditions of life, that we may eventually meet on the same
plane of equality without the shadow of strife or animosity to mar our
happiness. Good-bye."

With the meaning of these words ringing in my head, I fully understood
that my audience with Arletta was at an end, and overcome with grief and
gloom I weakly responded, "good-bye," and then added, "I shall never
break my promise." Then with a heavy tread I walked to the opening
through which I had entered, turned half around and took one long, last,
loving look at Arletta and passed into the corridor beyond. At the same
time I fancied I heard her gently sobbing.

