CHAPTER XVI

"Now we shall enjoy a little music," said Arletta, as she turned her
attention to the pictorial orchestra.

"Music," repeated I, "then it was real music I heard a short time ago
and not a mere fancy of my own."

"I was not aware that you heard it at all," replied she. "Yes,"
responded I, "when first coming into this room, the men in the picture
appeared to me to be alive, and wishing to attract their attention I
touched the shoulder of the leader, and then it was that I thought I
heard the sweetest and grandest music it has ever been my good fortune
to listen to."

"In that case," said Arletta, "your ears did not deceive you, for you
certainly heard real music. You see in this picture, an exact portrayal
of that which existed over four thousand years ago. This delineation is
an almost perfect representation of one of our national bands as they
once appeared in life ready to play. The music, of course, is reproduced
mechanically, the mechanism being concealed from view behind the
scenery. When you placed your hand upon the shoulder of the leader you
unconsciously pressed the spring which set the machinery in motion,
causing a reproduction of the same strains once rendered by these men."

"But this being a painting, I cannot understand how the figures moved as
if playing upon their instruments," said I.

"They did not move at all," answered Arletta, "it was your soul that
brought to your senses the movements that once took place among these
men in real life. Music is inspired by the soul, and likewise has a
direct influence upon it. No Sageman was considered an eminent composer
if his work lacked the force to convey the soul of the listener to the
actual scene from whence the inspiration was derived. No doubt your
inferior brain was incapable of grasping the magnificent conception of
the author, but the selection being so enrapturous your soul awakened
and brought your senses to the point where you could see the movements
of the musicians. Perhaps the next rendition may have a stronger effect
upon your soul which will cause you to get an outline of what was
intended by the composer. The composition which the orchestra will now
reproduce for your benefit was considered by our people to be the
musical masterpiece of all time. It was named 'The Soul's
Retrospection,' and was composed by the leader of this band only a few
years prior to the great catastrophe. Look," said Arletta, with much
feeling as she waved her hand toward the exalted director, "take a good
look at this model of a perfect man and you may be able to realize just
what qualities he had to possess before acquiring the tremendous
intellectual strength necessary to produce the wonderful work that will
shortly be impressed upon you. Note the extraordinary look of kindness,
gentleness and self-denial that is stamped upon his handsome features.
See the expression of thankfulness and intense reverence he maintained
for the many splendid gifts nature bestows upon all mankind capable of
accepting them. Observe the optimistic appearance of one that believed
the earth was real heaven and who strived to make it so. Notice the cast
of superior intellectuality caused by devoting his time and mentality to
natural thoughts, instead of allowing absurd civilized theories to take
root in his expansive brain. Behold the magnificent physique, the result
of the constant care and attention he gave to the machinery nature
provided him with. Ah, me! such a noble being, and to think that there
is not another piece of flesh and blood on earth at the present time to
compare with him seems cruel."

At this point Arletta appeared almost overcome with sadness and emotion
as she buried herself in contemplation of a glorious past and an unknown
future. Great tears rolled from her beautiful eyes, and unconsciously
from my own as well. How utterly helpless I felt at that moment. I knew
of no way to cheer her, although I would have gladly given up my life to
do so. Aye, more than that, my love for her was so strong that in order
to make her happy, I should have welcomed back to life again, if such a
thing were possible, any one of those handsome fellows in the picture.
However, by a superb display of will power, she quickly regained control
of herself, and becoming cheerful once more, bade me recline upon one of
the lounges while she pressed the spring which set the musical apparatus
in motion.

And as I followed her directions, there suddenly burst forth the
voluminous and harmonious sound of a hundred strange instruments,
causing an indescribable thrill of ecstasy to take possession of my
senses, until it seemed that there was nothing left of me but an
invisible spirit. And then, even the music apparently stopped, and a
peculiar feeling overcame me as if my soul had actually left its charge
and was flying about in an effort to find a convenient resting place.
Suddenly, as if half awake and half dreaming, I found myself within a
luxuriously furnished hall, surrounded by a score of richly-clad beings,
who were bowing, kneeling, and cutting up all sorts of silly antics
about me. In a dreamy sort of a way, I looked down at myself and
discovered that I was arrayed in the gorgeous garments of a king, and
weighted down with dazzling jewels from head to foot. Then everything
became clear enough to my memory; I was the king, and these idiotic
creatures fawning and cringing about me were my obedient subjects; my
slaves; the willing tools which kept me in power. A gouty feeling in my
feet, a dyspeptic ache of the stomach and an alcoholic pain in the head,
caused me to be in a very disagreeable mood, and I felt like kicking the
entire gathering out of my presence.

"Sire," squeaked a knock-kneed, sickly looking civilized creature about
five feet high, who wore knee breeches, silk stockings and fancy
ribbons, as he bowed low in addressing me, "those ungrateful subjects of
your majesty, the ignorant common laboring horde whom God in His
infinite wisdom has entrusted to your noble guidance, have become
dissatisfied and turbulent again, and are disturbing the peaceful
prosperity of the domain by clamoring for bread--more bread and less
toil is their beastly cry. A delegation of their representatives
requested me to beg your majesty to grant them an audience that they
might state their imaginary grievances to you in person."

"More bread and less toil," shouted I furiously, "the audacity of the
vermin! By the gods! I shall teach those craven beggars that I am the
master and will tolerate no new-fangled ideas. Give orders to the
generalissimo to have this delegation beheaded at once and to put to the
sword every dissatisfied laborer in the land." As I uttered those words,
intermingled with terrible oaths, and with intense hatred for the
wretches who dared to complain against such conditions a sudden change
affected me and I found myself within a dark, filthy little room, seated
at a bare table, with a feeling of hunger gnawing at my stomach. My
limbs felt tired and sore from a hard day's toil. Beside me sat a thin,
haggard, sorrowful woman and several half-famished children piteously
crying for something to eat. Oh, what a dismal, melancholy feeling.
"What is it," mused I, observing my bony hands, crooked limbs and ragged
clothes, "that causes my inability to earn enough money to supply bread
for myself and family, after working fifteen hours a day, while
thousands of men in this land do not work at all and have luxuries to
waste? What unnatural law governs the world that starves myself and
family who work, and over-feeds the pet dog of the aristocrat, who
loafs? The Church teaches me that God rules the universe, and that in
order to please Him I must be contented with my lot. Can I believe this
unreasonable doctrine of the Church? Can I give thanks to such a god?"

Another change, and behold, I am clad in the garments of a hunter,
seated upon the back of a spirited horse and in mad pursuit of a fleet-
footed antelope. I raise my rifle and blaze away at the frightened
beast. There, I have hit the mark and brought him down at the first
shot, much to my delight. But lo, it is not dead yet; see how it pants
and struggles in desperation, as it tries to regain its feet. Now I am
right upon it, and quickly dismounting, I take hold of its horns, draw a
long keen knife from its sheath, and with a powerful stroke I almost
sever the victim's head from the body. And as the warm blood pours forth
in every direction and the last sign of life departs from its shivering
body, I view the work of destruction with the fiendish glee of a noble
sportsman.

But hold! What causes me to tremble with fear as though some blood-
thirsty monster were pursuing me with the intention of crushing out my
life's blood? Ah, I understand. I am the four-footed beast and am
running, running, running as fast as my weary limbs will carry me. And
such a terrified feeling overcomes me as I look backward and discover I
am pursued by the most dangerous, savage and cruel animal in existence--
man. How relentlessly he dogs my footsteps. On, on, on he comes until he
is right behind me and there is no chance to escape--nor any hope for
quarter. At last being brought to bay I turn about and decide to give
battle to my pursuer. But look! The cowardly savage will not fight after
all. No, he will not advance and fight fair, but at a distance and out
of harm's way, he stops, and pointing a weapon at me, takes deliberate
aim, there is a loud report, a quick flash, and the scene once more
changes.

And thus I transmigrated from one thing into another, in a seemingly
endless procession of lives, experiencing all the peculiar sensations of
the many bodies I temporarily inhabited. In some cases I was the big
strong brute--either physically or mentally--taking advantage of the
puny weakling. In others, I was the miserable weakling, being crushed by
the over-powering strength of the bully. But whether strong or weak,
either physically or mentally, I was always the moral coward and selfish
creature, ready to cater to those who were stronger, and take advantage
of those who were feebler than myself, until finally I emerged into a
most extraordinary being, utterly deficient in all human weaknesses.

Master of a physique absolutely free from all imperfections, and
controlling a mind powerful enough to grasp nature's beautiful ideas
unadulterated, I found myself seated upon a platform in the center of a
mammoth theatre and surrounded by the finest body of musicians the earth
has ever produced--the immortal Sixth National Band of Sageland. Then I
fully realized that as leader of this wonderful group I was about to
render for the first time, my latest musical conception and masterpiece--
"The Soul's Retrospection"--which would prove to humanity beyond a
doubt, the positive truth of one of nature's grandest secrets--the
indestructibility of the soul.

It was generally believed that music was the direct inspiration of the
soul. It was also thought that the soul was one of the unchangeable
forces of nature whose duty it was to operate and purify different
pieces of natural machinery known as animal lives; starting each on its
brief career and remaining a part thereof until the mechanism exhausted
its power and collapsed, after which it attached itself to another bit
of animal matter, remaining therewith until its death, and so on
indefinitely.

And now, after a life of unswerving devotion to this purpose, I was
about to establish the truth of these theories by producing a musical
composition that would cause the listener's soul to leave the body, and
going backward, revisit, as in a dream, the various animal forms it had
previously inhabited. How extremely happy I felt to think what a great
blessing humanity was about to receive direct from nature, through the
instrumentality of myself and the incalculable good that would result
therefrom. Not only would it prove of vast scientific value to my own
countrymen, but also to the millions of ferocious Apemen in all parts of
the world, who could now be made to understand that no soul is immune
from hardship, misery and torture until all living things on earth have
reached the highest stage of perfection.

The news that the first production of "The Soul's Retrospection" was
about to be given had attracted great attention among the Sagemen, and I
observed that the great National Auditorium, which was capable of
seating four hundred thousand persons, was crowded to its very doors, a
proceeding I had never witnessed before, notwithstanding my companions
and I had appeared there many times previously to give musical
performances. I also noticed that the transmitters in all of the domes
of the auditorium were open and ready for use and I knew that my
countrymen in every part of Sageland were at their musical receivers
ready to obtain the instantaneous results of our efforts. All of the
celebrated wise men and great scientists, while openly skeptical
concerning the claims of my composition, showed their interest in the
matter by being present personally and appearing anxious for success to
crown my efforts. As my eyes wandered over the great assemblage
completely filling tiers upon tiers of seats, as far back in every
direction as the natural eye could reach, I felt positive that there was
at least one person present who had no doubts of successful results.
"Ah, where is she?" mused I, looking about for a sign of recognition.
"Here I am," came the quick telepathic response, and immediately my gaze
fell upon the loveliest woman on earth--Arletta--nature's companion to
my soul. I am utterly powerless to describe the feeling of joy
experienced as our eyes met in mutual admiration. Being held momentarily
spellbound by her loving glance, I fully recognized the fact that she
was the acme of purity--the guiding star of my life. And with such a
guide there was no such thing as fail.

All in readiness, I arose to my feet and the entire audience did
likewise, as a token of appreciation for past services rendered.
Acknowledging the honor and waiving them seated, without further ado I
signaled my assistants to begin.

Never did a body of musicians commence a difficult task with more
determination to create, through the medium of their instruments, an
exact interpretation of the author's purpose. In no degree could they
have succeeded more admirably than on this occasion. Never was an entire
audience so completely carried beyond the borders of reality than now.
From the first until the last note not a twitch of a muscle could be
seen in all that mass of humanity, which now resembled a great concourse
of motionless statues. The musicians themselves, with their minds and
souls bent upon giving the fullest expression to their grand work, were
the only evidence that any life at all remained in the large auditorium.
How bravely they stuck to their laborious undertaking; how beautifully
they executed their divine work.

At last the piece was finished, and looking about, I observed that the
great audience jumped to its feet instantly, and every person present
frantically extended both hands above the head--a sign that we had been
successful. Never before did I see my countrymen under such intense
excitement and jubilation as now. Men hugged each other; women cried
with joy. The world is saved, was the general exclamation. Amid the
great confusion that followed, I noticed Arletta with her arms
outstretched toward me--a sign that she was betrothed to me forever. Her
beautiful face was the picture of happiness and love. As I descended
from the platform and started forward to clasp her in my arms the entire
audience seemed to vanish into nothingness, and my head began to whirl.
I turned and looked backward, and to my great astonishment and confusion
beheld myself still seated upon the platform. It seemed to me that I was
divided into two parts. I rubbed my eyes in amazement and looked again.
There was the leader of the band sitting on the platform motionless and
surrounded by his faithful helpmates. I looked in the other direction.
There was Arletta reclining upon the couch with her lustrous eyes fixed
upon me. I glanced down at myself and found that I was the same old John
Convert dressed in sailor's clothes.

For several moments I stood there buried in the depth of serious
meditation. Then slowly walking over near Arletta, I stooped and resting
upon one foot and knee, I tenderly took her hand in mine and bowed my
head in reverence. I understood it all now.

