CHAPTER XXXII

The next impression my memory has any record of was a huge ocean
steamer, floating away upon the deep. Great volumes of smoke were
pouring forth from its smoke-stacks as it majestically glided over the
water. Upon its many decks were hundreds of human beings, scattered
about in little groups, gaily chatting and enjoying to the fullest
extent the delight experienced by an ocean voyage. Among all of the
happy faces, however, there was one that appeared sad and forlorn. It
was the face of a beautiful young woman, standing alone against the
railing of the promenade deck, who was weeping in silence. As she raised
her eyes and looked in my direction, I instantly recognized the girl
Arletta, and realized that she was leaving me forever. And then, like
one in a dream, I held out my hands and mutely implored her to return.
She appeared to be within a short distance and looking straight at me,
but still made no sign of recognition. I could not understand the reason
for such coldness on her part, and in astonishment rubbed my eyes and
looked again, when lo and behold, she had vanished from sight. But far
out into the distance, almost to the horizon, I could plainly see a
large steamer headed toward the vast ocean beyond. I looked around in a
confused sort of a way, and discovered, to my surprise, that I was
standing almost at the water's edge on one of the docks near Battery
Place. It was daylight, and the sun was shining overhead. I then
concluded that I must have been out of my head for some time, and
questioning a stranger, who stood nearby, I learned that just fourteen
hours had elapsed since I had bade Arletta good-bye, and I could form no
recollection of the slightest incident that happened since then.

After watching the steamer until it had disappeared from view, I slowly
walked to a bench in Battery Park and sat down, in the depths of
despair, to reflect upon the strange occurrence. I must have sat there
for about an hour in deep meditation, when my attention was attracted by
a newspaper urchin, shouting at the top of his voice: "Paper! Extra! All
about the great murder." At the same time he rushed up to me, pushed a
paper into my hand, took the penny I offered him mechanically, and
scampered along.

"Another murder," mused I; "what a pity human beings cannot dwell
together without taking each other's lives."

Glancing over the headlines, I learned from the big black type that a
beautiful young woman had been murdered in cold blood. Reading further,
I was horrified to find that the young woman's name was Arletta Fogg,
and that she was murdered in her own rooms, at the Seraglio Apartments,
Central Park West. I could hardly believe my eyes saw the thing aright.
I felt sure that it must be an optical illusion wrought by my constant
thought of Arletta. I looked again and again, yet read ever the same
words, and, laboring under tremendous excitement, I hurriedly perused
the account of the murder. It stated that about eleven o'clock of the
previous night Arletta Fogg had arrived at the apartment house, and had
been taken to her rooms by the elevator attendant. A half hour later a
tall, smooth-faced, white-haired gentleman arrived, and was shown to her
apartments. This man was seen by the watchman to leave the place at
three o'clock in the morning, and the chambermaid discovered her at ten
o'clock in the morning, dead, and covered with blood from several stabs
in the body.

Cold perspiration oozed from every pore of my body as I read and re-read
this article, over and over again. I was puzzled, dumbfounded, horror-
stricken. The description given of the apparent murderer tallied exactly
with myself. Straining every nerve I endeavored to regain some
impression that might lead to a knowledge of my actions from the time
Arletta left me the night before until I had recovered my senses that
day. But try as I might, I could no more recall to memory the slightest
movement on my part during that time than I could recollect any event
which happened during the twenty-one years of which my life had been a
blank.

Like a man under the influence of liquor I arose and staggered hurriedly
forward until I reached the "L" station where I boarded a train and rode
up to Eighty-first street. Here I alighted and walked rapidly over to
the Seraglio Apartments. A vast crowd of curious people was collected
about the place, and as I approached, all eyes were apparently turned
upon me.

Hastening forward I bounded up the entrance steps and almost flew into
the vestibule. There were little knots of people standing about the
hallway, talking in low tones. Even their voices hushed as I hurried
into the elevator and told the attendant to take me up to the eighth
floor. The operator appeared to be almost frightened out of his wits at
the sight of me, but after a momentary pause he ran the elevator to the
eighth floor, peering at me all the time as he might have eyed a wild
beast who was about to devour him. Many people were in the upper hall-
way, but looking neither to the right nor to the left, I went straight
to the door of the room I had entered the night I had taken Arletta
home. Finding it locked, without a moment's hesitation I threw against
it, all of the force my gigantic frame could command which caused it to
give way and fly open before me. I then observed that there were several
men in the room, in different positions and groups, as if making a study
of the surroundings. Lying upon the bed, in the room adjoining, was the
form of a woman partly covered by a spread, and being examined by a man
who might have been the coroner. As I rushed forward like a madman,
every one there became frightened and made way for me to pass.

Approaching the bed I eagerly scanned her features, and being positive
of her identity I took the inanimate form of Arletta in my arms and
kissing her tenderly, was overcome by emotion.

CHAPTER XXXIII

Arrested for the murder of Arletta Fogg, after being positively
identified by the elevator attendant and the night watchman as being the
only person who visited her apartments on the night of the crime, was
the next incident of my strange career. Thrown into prison, and caged
like a savage beast in a little cell hardly large enough to turn around
in, has been my lot ever since that awful tragedy. The case attracted
widespread interest, and the newspapers teemed with sensational accounts
of it. At the trial, all of the evidence pointed directly to me as the
perpetrator of the deed. The elevator operator swore that I was the man
whom he had taken to Arletta's apartments shortly after eleven o'clock
that night. The watchman testified that he saw me leave her room at
three o'clock in the morning. On the stand, I was made to tell, under
oath, that Arletta and I had been lovers; that we had been together that
same night in the park, and had parted at about half past ten o'clock;
that she had informed me of her intention to never see me again. By
these statements the prosecuting attorney showed the motive for the
crime. I could give no account of my time between half past ten that
night and the next day at noon, which was another strong point against
me. I had pleaded not guilty, feeling that as I knew nothing about the
crime I could not very wisely do otherwise, but also, stating that I had
suffered a temporary aberration of the mind during that time, and that
if I really did commit the deed, which I could not believe possible,
then I had done it in an entirely different character or personality
from my normal self.

My attorney endeavored to have me sham insanity during the trial, and he
became irritably insolent in his manner toward me because I positively
refused to do so. He told me that if I stuck to the truth I would surely
be convicted, but if I followed his advice by openly assuming idiotic
tactics in court and making false statements under oath, according to
his directions, he could save me without any trouble. He frequently
growled and cursed at me for the straightforward way that I gave my
testimony, claiming that his professional reputation was being ruined by
my telling the truth. He privately acknowledged that, in his opinion, I
was guilty, but that if he were successful in having me acquitted, he
would achieve great fame thereby, and incidentally be able to increase
the size of his future clients' fees.

It was proved in court-alas, the saddest blow I had yet received, that
Arletta was a frivolous young woman, who practically lived a life of
ease and luxury, by monetary gifts derived from two wealthy men, one a
United States Senator and the other a prominent Wall Street financier,
both being high pillars of the Church, and one of them being old enough
to be her grandfather. That was the most painful testimony of the whole
proceedings. It did not seem possible to me that the dear, sweet,
innocent girl, whom I had loved so much for her gentleness and kindness
of nature, could possibly lead such a dual existence, and I could not
understand why she should have deceived me, with accounts of herself so
at variance with the facts. When I thought of her as she had always
appeared to me, excepting those times when I saw her under the influence
of liquor, she seemed like a good angel, who was far beyond even the
suspicion of reproach; and so when I learned the worst, I pictured her
at her best, and my love remained unshaken. While I realized that it was
the poor girl's weakness that led her into temptation, still it was
plain to discern that the cause of her downfall was money and the
miserable creatures who utilized it to buy her very life's blood and
drag her along the mire of shame. The poor girl is dead, but the great
men, through whose efforts she was disgraced, are still alive, and are
considered eminently respectable by both the Church and the community.
The curse of money could not have been more forcibly demonstrated than
by this incident. The unfortunate young woman craved money, and sold
herself for it. My deepest sympathy goes after her to the grave. The
finger of scorn is now raised against Arletta by the whole world, but if
she could be brought back to life again, I should gladly take her by the
hand and say, that my love for her was as strong as ever, and that I
would defend her against the insults of the depraved society which
reared and educated her in the vices which it now deplores.

It took the jury just forty-five minutes to reach a decision against me.
Ten minutes of this time, as I learned from newspaper accounts, were
devoted to prayer, that the Almighty should point out the right way to
decide the case. Evidently the god, to whom the jury prayed,
demonstrated that it was their duty to convict me. For convict me they
did, by bringing in a verdict of murder in the first degree. My sentence
was that I pay the penalty of the crime with my life by being
electrocuted.

The trial was severe and brutal from beginning to end, from my point of
view. I was bullied by the prosecutor, scathingly censured by the judge,
libeled by the press, cursed by the public, and deserted by my own
attorney. I was treated like a cowardly beast of the most depraved type.
But with all the abuse that was heaped upon me, I endured it without a
murmur, calmly claiming that I was not responsible for the deed, but
perfectly willing to take any punishment the law meted out to me. There
was one thing, however, which stood out prominently amidst the many
shoals of my misfortune, which made me feel that I had not lived in
vain. My faithful little band of followers, whom I had taught the
principles of Natural Law, remained loyal to me until the very end. Not
one member of the society was there who would believe that I was guilty
of such an atrocious crime. They insisted that there was some mistake,
and spent much time and money in trying to ferret out the mystery. They
called upon me as often as the prison regulations would permit, and amid
scenes that were touching, protested their undying fidelity to me and
the cause I espoused. Each individual promised most solemnly to carry on
the work I had begun as long as his life lasted, and I feel sure that,
although the end of my time is drawing near, the work entrusted to me by
the great Sagewoman is born again, and will grow to huge proportions as
time passes on.

And so I have come to the end of my story. Tomorrow I must die. In
writing this book, I have tried to confine myself exclusively to the
truth. I have felt all along, however, my inability to do the subject
justice. There are many things that the great Sagewoman tried to impress
upon me which my little brain was not strong enough to grasp. There are
also many things which are perfectly clear in my mind, that I have been
unable to convey to others, but I have done my best, and that is all
that can be expected of any one. I should like to have given more
attention to the arrangement of this work, but unfortunately the time
allowed me has been very short, and I have had to rush it along in order
to complete it. I have produced this treatise while confined within my
cell in the death-house, and therefore have had many disadvantages to
contend with. I shall give the manuscript to the little body of men and
women who are banded together and known as the Natural Law Society, of
which I had the honor to be the founder, with the understanding that it
will be published and distributed at the earliest possible date. I could
wish that the reader might peruse the contents of this work a second
time, if it is not asking too much; at least that he might go over
carefully and thoughtfully that portion of it which contains the
teachings of the great Sagewoman. While I probably have failed to
present clearly much of the great wisdom directly received from her
magnificent brain, there may arise in the future, wise men, who will be
capable of reading in these lines much more than even I, who write them,
am able to comprehend. It is my one hope that great men will spring up
in the future and take hold of this work--men with minds so strong, so
broad, so courageous, and so unselfish, that they will be willing to
devote their lives to the noble task of trying to put the whole human
race on a footing of equality. There can be no equality so long as those
who are strong want to take more of nature's gifts than those who are
weak, and no man can ever be great who thinks that one human being is
entitled to more than another. That is selfishness. Selfishness and
greatness are the extreme opposites.

This is my last day on earth, to use a common but erroneous expression.
At noon today my soul will be separated from its body by the hand of
man, acting according to a most unnatural, diabolical, and murderous
law. And the poor unfortunate creature, who actually slays me, will do
so, not because he has a thirst for blood, but for money. Money
furnished by the State--a Christian civilization which bred and reared
us both.

I am now forty-four years old, and have just reached the threshold of
mental strength. As I am in perfect condition physically, and have a
splendid constitution as a foundation, there is no good reason why I
could not have lived at least forty years more. Forty years longer could
I have served the world at my very best, but my fellow beings have
decided to kill me, right at a time when I could have been of the most
use to them. I am really sorry that I must die, not because I fear
death, but because my opportunity to do good to others is taken from me.
Twenty-two years ago I was anxious to die, aye even by my own hand. I
thought that there was nothing to live for at that time. But the
beautiful teachings of the great Sagewoman awakened new ideas of
responsibility within me, and now I can see that the grandest thing
within the reach of a human being is to live; live as long as nature
will allow; live for others.

Natural Law teaches that it is idiotic to pray, and I believe that
prayer is a form of insanity, but were I to pray, which I profess I have
no idea of doing, my one request of the Creator would be that I might
live out my life, in order to spread the principles of Natural Law to
the furthermost corners of the earth; or, that I might be born again in
a well-constructed body, with a mind capable of grasping nature's ideas
in their entirety, and interpreting them to my fellow men in a way that
could not be misunderstood. If the Creator would grant me this request,
and I could have the ability and the power to change the conditions of
the earth to those existing in Sageland before the Catastrophe, I would
gladly give in exchange for the privilege, my eternal soul as a
sacrifice, and take upon myself everlastingly, all of the misery,
suffering, and torture now inflicted upon the rest of mankind.

Good-bye, dear reader, and may your soul always guide you.

END OF JOHN CONVERT'S WORK.

Epilogue on following pages.

EPILOGUE

FROM THE NEW YORK DAILY (Special Despatch:)

"SING SING, N. Y., 11 A. M.-Electrocution day here always attracts many
curious people about the prison walls, but the much heralded execution
of John Convert seems to have brought an unusual number of persons to
this neighborhood, and the hill overlooking the prison is almost black
with people, who have come from all parts of the State.

"Viewed from this hill, Sing Sing prison presents the appearance of a
huge, square pen, covering many acres of land, and enclosed by a high,
brick wall on the three land sides, and a tall, iron picket fence on the
side adjoining the Hudson River.

"On the top of these walls, sentinels are stationed at intervals, who
walk back and forth, armed with breech-loading rifles, and under orders
to shoot dead any prisoner attempting to escape.

"Within the enclosure, at the north end, are several red brick
buildings, which are used as workshops for the twelve hundred time
prisoners, now incarcerated here. Running along its eastern border is a
massive stone structure, about seven hundred feet long, fifty feet wide,
and sixty feet high, with windows crated by heavy, iron bars. This is
the main building of the prison, and is used principally as a dormitory
for the inmates and offices for those who have charge of the
institution.

"The extreme south end of the main building is walled off separately,
and occupied exclusively by prisoners whom the State has doomed to
death. This place is called the Death Chamber. Inside of this chamber is
a high steel cage, four tiers high, and divided into several cells,
which are about eight by six feet in dimension. Thick, cement walls,
floor, and ceiling, make each cell separate and distinct from the
others. Heavy doors of barred steel open outward onto the different
platforms, which run all the way around the inside of the cage. Armed
patrolmen, known as death guards, are kept constantly walking around
these platforms. Within this cage is John Convert and many other
notorious murderers, waiting their turns to be put to death as
punishment for their heinous crimes.

"At the south end of the Death Chamber is a solid iron door, which leads
into an adjoining little red brick building, about fifty by twenty feet
in dimension, one story high, and containing two rooms. These rooms are
perfectly bare, excepting that in one of them there is a chair, and in
the other a table. About ten feet from the door leading from the Death
Chamber is the electric chair, by which the State kills its worst
criminals. In appearance it is similar to a plain, old-fashioned garden
arm-chair, with a high back. Connected to this chair are several straps,
by which the condemned man is harnessed in a sitting position, so that
he cannot move. These straps are adjusted across the head, chest,
abdomen, both fore and upper arms and the ankles. They are not bound too
tightly, but left taut in order to allow for the expansion of the body.
The electro connections are at the head and the inside of the right
calf, the trousers being cut from the knee downward, so that a contact
can be made with the bare flesh. Just back of the chair is a large
closet, which conceals all of the electrical apparatus necessary to
throw on or off the current at the will of the Electrician, by whose
hand the condemned man is sent to eternity. Stationed within the closet,
the Electrocutioner can see what is going on outside, but cannot be seen
from without. Just back of the closet is a partition dividing the two
rooms, through which is a door leading into it. In the center of this
other room is a stationary table, upon which the autopsy is performed.

"All of the machinery has been thoroughly tested, and found to be in
good running order, and neither the State's Electrician nor the Warden
expect the slightest hitch in connection with today's proceedings. The
twelve witnesses invited by the Warden, and made necessary by law,
together with the brain experts, have arrived upon the scene, and
everything is in complete readiness for the electrocution of John
Convert."

FROM THE NEW YORK DAILY (Special Despatch:)

"SING SING, N. Y., 1:15 P. M.-One of the strangest and most pathetic
tragedies that has ever happened in the State of New York has just taken
place within the house of electrocution here, the result of which must
cause the whole civilized world to pause and shudder. Your correspondent
earnestly prays that he may never again be called upon to witness
another such horror, the effects of which have completely unnerved him
and beggars even a faint description.

"At precisely twelve o'clock today, with the State Electrician, medical
experts, and witnesses, mutely stationed in their places, the great iron
door leading from the Death Chamber was suddenly swung open, and between
two guards the gigantic form of John Convert walked over to the electric
chair, with a firm and unfaltering step. Immediately, all eyes were
turned upon him, and at the same instant there was a subdued murmur of
surprise by many of those present at the magnificent appearance of the
man.

"Tall and erect, with finely formed limbs, and powerfully built
shoulders, he easily towered above all of the other occupants of the
room. With a clean shaven face, the handsome features of which expressed
extraordinary intelligence, kindness, and gentleness of nature, combined
with wonderful strength of character, and a shapely head, overhung by an
abundance of beautiful snow-white hair, he looked more like an
ambassador from heaven than a convicted murderer. He wore a black Prince
Albert suit of clothes. As he reached the side of the chair he paused,
and calmly looking from one to the other of the assemblage, he began to
address them in a clear and melodious voice. Almost from the first
utterance, his hearers became electrified by his charming manner and
eloquence, and for nearly half an hour were held spellbound, while he
explained the principles of Natural Law, and the vast benefits the human
race could derive by putting them into effect.

"In a convincing way he drew a beautiful picture upon the minds of those
present of a heaven that should be established here on earth by and for
all living things, in which they should work united and harmoniously
together for a common and unselfish cause, instead of each one pulling
in a different direction for his own selfish purposes. He explained that
all living things were composed of the same material, which was
constantly undergoing a change from life to death and from death to life
by being molded and remolded into different forms, which are constructed
according to the intelligence absorbed by the whole. That it is within
the power of the human race, if working together as a unit, to
reconstruct all living matter on earth into more perfect organisms, just
as it is within the power of man to re-mould a pile of dead scrap iron
into new and useful machinery. That these results could only be
accomplished by the eradication of selfishness from the human race, and
that it was impossible to extinguish selfishness as long as the money
system was kept in force, and individuals were recompensed according to
their craftiness to help themselves. He told of the soul being
everlasting, and how a wise law of nature breaks the monotony of its
existence through the process of re-incarnation, and that the soul of
the rich aristocrat of today may be the soul of the suckling pig
tomorrow. He said that it was within the power of every living thing to
do good, if only following the advice of the soul, and that the oftener
this advice was taken the easier it became to do right, but that the
less the soul's warning was heeded, the more hardened and vile became
the nature of the individual. He told of how children inherit the
weaknesses of their parents, and mentioned how much grander it is for
parents to give their children character without gold, than to give them
gold without character.

"So earnestly and pathetically did he present the whole subject, that at
the conclusion of his discourse there was not a dry eye in the room, and
as he calmly took his seat in the electric chair, the whole assemblage,
including the guards, stood motionless for several moments as if in a
hypnotic trance. And then, as the guards reluctantly began to adjust the
straps about his body, three men burst into loud sobs and rushed from
the room, bitterly denouncing the electrocution as savagery, and
refusing to witness the proceedings any further. With the exception of
the condemned man, everybody was completely unstrung. But John Convert,
in the shadow of death, did not lose his wonderful self-control for a
moment, but sat with perfect equipoise in that murderous chair, calmly
watching with apparent interest the work of fastening him in. "'You have
that strap around the abdomen twisted,' he coolly remarked to one of the
excited guards, and then quietly added, 'you are not sufficiently
hardened for this kind of work, my man, but perhaps your children may
be.' And as if stung by remorse at these words, the guard suddenly burst
into a frenzy of grief and cried out in piteous tones: 'No, no! Don't
say that! I love my children. I undertook this objectionable work for
their sakes, that I might be able to give them the same advantages that
other children enjoy. But now that you have spoken, I can see that I am
paying for their advantages at the expense of their moral characters,
and that they too might follow in my miserable footsteps and, eventually
sell themselves for money. But listen, I have but just taken this
position, and now I am getting my first experience at this kind of work,
and I feel as if _I_ were about to commit murder. And now, after hearing
your wonderful words, my conscience is crying out within me to stop, and
so, in the presence of these witnesses, I not only renounce all further
connection with this abominable act, but I most solemnly swear that I
believe in Natural Law, and that I shall henceforth devote my life to
teaching its principles to my own children, and also to those of my
fellow beings. My eyes have suddenly been opened. For the first time in
my life I feel like a man.'

"At this unexpected turn of affairs, the countenance of John Convert
lighted up with a look of divine happiness that was truly glorious to
behold, and, addressing the guard, he said: 'Well spoken, my noble man.
May you accumulate sufficient strength to enable you to faithfully
follow out your splendid resolution; may your future deeds be so
unselfish, heroic, and fruitful, towards uplifting mankind, that the
grandchildren of your enemies may live to praise your name.'

"These words seemed to have a cheering effect upon the guard, who
affectionately shook the hand of Convert, and then left the room.

"During this time, however, the other guard had continued the work of
adjusting the straps, and finally having them properly arranged, stepped
backward a few feet and raised his left arm as a sign to the
Electrocutioner in the closet that everything was in readiness. And
then, just as John Convert uttered the words, 'Always Consult Your Soul
for Advice,' a terrible, dull, buzzing sound took the place of his
voice, his body suddenly expanded, as if about to burst, his limbs were
drawn up and distorted, blue flames shot forth with a weird glow, a
sickening odor of burning flesh saturated the air, and quicker than it
takes to tell, the deadly current had penetrated through every fiber of
his body.

"And then, as all turned away their heads from the awful sight, a loud
crash was heard, and the door leading from the court-yard into the other
room burst open, and in rushed the Warden, yelling like a madman: 'Stop
it! For God's sake, stop it! You are killing the wrong man!' And pulling
open the door of the closet which concealed the Electrician, he threw
off the current with his own hands. At the same time, amidst great
confusion, several of the spectators rushed forward and began
unfastening the straps which bound the unfortunate man to the chair,
after which the body was carried into the other room and laid upon the
table.

"Following in the footsteps of the Warden, was a tall, beautiful, young
woman, hatless, and with hair disheveled and dress disarranged. She was
panting heavily, and a wild, terrified look gleamed in her eyes. She
appeared dazed and almost exhausted. Catching sight of Convert, she
frantically tried to get near him, but was held in check by one of the
doctors, while the other one made a hurried examination of the body. And
then, this doctor, apparently suffering from great mental excitement,
turned toward those present, and, with his eyes full of tears, chokingly
whispered, 'Too late, he is dead.'

"At these terrible words, the young woman uttered a heart-piercing
shriek, and, rushing forward, threw herself upon the corpse, as she
piteously moaned: 'You have murdered him. You have murdered him.'"

FROM THE NEW YORK DAILY.

"The following statement, made by one of Chicago's most beautiful and
brilliant young society women, is the sequel to the most extraordinary
case that ever attracted public attention in this country:

"'My name is Arletta Wright. My father is R. U. Wright, of Chicago,
Ill., the well-known financier and multi-millionaire. A few years ago,
while in Paris, I was introduced to a man by the name of John Convert. I
supposed he was an American, but at that time did not take enough
interest in him to inquire as to who he was or where he came from.
Later, however, I found that he was continually crossing my path, and
appeared anxious to court my attention. He was a tall, well-built,
handsome man, with a clean-shaven face and snow-white hair, apparently
about forty years old. But there was something about his looks and
actions that I did not like, and I tried to avoid him as much as
possible. But he was not to be avoided very easily, and, after
persistently following me all over Europe, he crossed the ocean in the
same steamer, and finally came to my home in Chicago. He got to be such
a nuisance that he was refused admittance to our house, and in order to
get rid of him entirely, I secretly left Chicago and went abroad again.
A few months afterward I returned home, and found that he had left for
parts unknown, and the incident was soon forgotten.

"'During the month of March, 1903, about two and a half years later,
important business called my father to New York for a stay of several
months, and mother and I, accompanying him, we took apartments at the
Opulent Hotel, on Broadway, near Seventy-eighth street.

"'About that time I decided to visit the different institutions of New
York, and one day as I was being shown through a charity ward of the
Ruff Hospital, I was astonished to see John Convert lying sick upon one
of the cots. He had a wild and peculiar stare in his eyes and at first
gave no sign of recognition, but seemed to be undergoing an intense"
mental strain, as if trying to recall to mind some event that had
escaped his memory. The doctor informed me that he was an unidentified
charity patient suffering with typhoid fever and was evidently insane.
He told me that the man imagined he had been in a trance for over four
thousand years, and could only be brought out of it by a kiss from one
he called Arletta. My heart seemed to melt with pity and sorrow, and my
dislike changed into love for the man upon hearing these words, and
without hesitation I kissed him, at the same time hoping most sincerely
that the act would have a salutary effect. Strange as it may seem, the
whole expression of his countenance changed instantly as if by some
magic force; his eyes lighted up radiantly, and looking at me in great
astonishment he uttered my name-Arletta. But while I was quite elated
over my strange success, I was also much surprised and puzzled at his
following utterances, whereby he claimed that I was the re-incarnated
soul of Arletta of Sageland, who, according to his story, had died on
the same day I was born, over twenty-one years before, and from which
time he could form no recollection of events whatever.

"'Subsequently, I was informed by an eminent brain specialist, who
examined him, that he was mentally sound, but that owing to a severe
fracture of the skull received some time previously his brain had become
divided into two distinct parts, causing two personalities to exist and
enabling him to recollect events only as they were separately recorded
on either side of the brain. By this explanation I readily understood
the reason why he did not recognize me and also for the wonderful change
which took place, both in his character and my feelings toward him. On
that day my first and last love for man was born.

"'As time passed by, and he recovered his health and strength, he
appeared to me the most beautiful character I had ever known, and with
each succeeding day my love for him grew stronger. But while love formed
a strong mutual link of attachment between us, another force succeeded
in putting us apart.

"'He believed in Natural Law and unselfishness, with equal rights for
both strong and weak alike. I believed in religion and selfishness, with
the strong enjoying more earthly blessings than the weak.

"'He believed in a Supreme Being, who created immutable laws whereby the
entire machinery of the universe is governed, and that these laws could
no more be changed by the silly prayers of man than by the prayers of a
microbe. I believed in a god to whom I could pray to change earthly
conditions to suit my fancies; a god willing to grant me favors even at
the expense of others.

"'He believed in re-incarnation, and the power of the soul to eventually
master the flesh and create a heaven on earth. I believed in the
transmigration of the soul to some obscure heaven where there would be
nothing farther to do but rest during all eternity.

"'He was broad in his views and never tried to restrain me from thinking
as I liked. I was narrow in mine, and quite unwilling that he should
believe in any theory except my own.

"'These and other differences of opinion caused us to separate.

"'One night last June, the same night that awful murder took place in
the Seraglio Apartments, I met John Convert at our regular meeting place
in Central Park for the last time. It was my habit to meet him in an
out-of-the-way corner of the park, because I did not want my parents or
friends to know of it. For this same reason, I had never told him my
last name or place of residence. At this meeting, I informed him that he
must either give up all further connection with the movement he had
instituted toward the regeneration of mankind, or bid me good-bye
forever. He chose the latter course, although I know that his heart was
fairly bursting with grief when I left him.

"'Now, that it is too late, I can fully appreciate what a grand, noble
fellow he was. I offered him a million dollars to forsake the cause he
had pledged himself to uphold. Think of it, one million dollars! A sum
of money for which most civilized men would gladly sell their eternal
souls. But John Convert, a believer in Natural Law, could not be bought
at any price, and even though I offered him my hand in marriage, an
offering which many Crown Princes of Europe have repeatedly begged for,
still he would not recede from the grand purpose he had undertaken.

"'Well, we parted, and the next morning I boarded a steamer bound for
Europe. But I was wretched and unhappy, and felt that life was a burden
to me. I was unable to drive the image of John Convert out of my mind,
and as I stood upon the deck of the steamer, as it passed along the
river leading to the ocean. I looked back toward New York, and fancied I
could see poor John standing alone, and forlorn, upon one of the docks,
with his arms outstretched, sadly imploring me to return, and with a
feeling of remorse I started for my stateroom to lie down and have a
good cry.

"'As I hurried along the dark passageway leading to my room, I was
almost startled out of my senses by coming face to face with the very
man I thought I had left behind, John Convert. He appeared to be even
more startled than myself, and, stepping backward a few paces, he fairly
trembled, as he hoarsely exclaimed: 'My God, Arletta, is that really
you?' At these words I became frightened, and as the faint rays of light
from a distant port-hole fell squarely upon his face, I observed a wild,
peculiar stare in his eyes, and noticed that his whole countenance was
overcast by a most villainous expression. At that moment, I remembered
the doctor's warning words, that he might change personalities at any
time that he was subjected to severe mental excitement, and I now
recognized in the man standing before me the same character I had met in
Paris. Just as quickly as love had taken possession of my feelings for
John Convert in the hospital, just that suddenly did it depart when I
saw this detestable looking creature in front of me. In an instant he
became loathsome to my sight, and without waiting for another word I
rushed into my state-room and bolted the door.

"'Not once did I leave my room during that trip across the ocean, but
when the steamer arrived at Liverpool, and I started to go ashore, the
very first person my eyes rested upon was John Convert; and from that
time on he incessantly dogged my footsteps all over Europe. The more I
saw of him, the more debased and despicable he appeared to me. The good,
kind, old face, that I had loved so well, had now apparently become
distorted by a murderous expression, and the soulful eyes which had
intoxicated me with ecstasy, now depicted the nature of a degenerate. I
shunned him as I would a leper, and many times I wished that I had left
him to die in the hospital, instead of aiding him to recover. He became
so objectionable to my sight that I threatened to have him arrested if
he did not stop following me about. But this had no effect upon him
whatever, and after three long, weary months of travel on the continent,
in which I attempted to elude him, without success, I finally returned
to England and boarded a steamer at Southampton for New York. I fully
expected to see John Convert make the voyage also, but to my surprise
and great joy I saw him standing on the pier after the steamer had left
her moorings and was steaming away. He stood waving his hand at me, and
I watched him until beyond the range of vision, then went down to my
state-room, with a feeling of relief, as though a great load had been
lifted from my shoulders. One of the first things that attracted my
attention after entering the state-room, was a large, well-filled
envelope, lying upon the bed, and addressed to me. Tearing it open, I
found an assortment of various documents, among which was the following
letter.'"

"'My dear Arletta: At last realizing that you are beyond my reach and
that further efforts to win your love would be useless, and feeling that
after all, my affinity is not really you but she whom I recently killed,
and as my conscience is torturing me until I can find no rest or
contentment in life, I have decided to avenge the many crimes I have
committed during the past by taking my own life, and ere you read these
lines I shall be dead.

"'My life has been a most miserable failure, and were it not for the
fact that during my last hours I feel a strong desire to try and make
amends, through you, to the man I have been impersonating for many
years, I should, quietly pass out of existence without further ado.

"'In the first place my name is not John, but Edward Convert, son of
Henry Convert, and grandson of Peter Convert, who many years ago was a
wealthy banker of London, England.

"'My grandfather had two sons; James, the elder, being my uncle, and
Henry the younger, my father.

"'About the time my father reached maturity, both he and my uncle fell
in love with beautiful twin sisters of a poor family, and in due course
of time each took one as a wife. This was done in direct opposition to
my grandfather's commands, and so incensed did he become over the
affair, that when he died shortly afterward, it was found that he had
cut them both off with a mere pittance, while the bulk of his estate
which was valued at several million pounds, was to be held in trust
until the eldest son of my uncle James had reached maturity, after which
it was to be delivered to him intact.

"'At that time neither my father nor uncle had children, and being of
different temperaments-my uncle a pious clergyman, and my father a
broker with gambling tendencies-they soon parted and lost track of each
other.

"'My parents emigrated to Canada and resided in Toronto for some years,
in which city I was born. When I was about five years of age my mother
died, and a short time later my father moved to Buffalo, N. Y., and
entered into the brokerage business there. As I grew up, I was educated
with the sole idea that the only purpose for which I had been created
was to get money. At home I was taught by my father, in school through
books, and at church by the pastor, that my success in life would be
judged according to the amount of money I could accumulate. Was it any
wonder, then, that I grew up to worship money as the real god, and to
finally sell my soul for it? Oh, the terrible curse of money! And what
an awful crime for parents to teach their children to love it! Had I not
been taught from infancy to crave money, I might have become a useful
member of the human family, and utilized my brain power for some worthy
cause, instead of using it to scheme, cheat, steal, and even murder, in
order that I might obtain it.

"Well, one day when I was about sixteen years old, my father, having
just returned from one of his western trips, informed me that he had
accidentally run across his brother James, the clergyman, in a little
Kansas town named Eden. He said that my uncle told him that his wife had
died sixteen years before, while giving birth to an only son, as they
were crossing the Atlantic Ocean. Subsequently this son, who had been
named John, ran away from home when he was but eleven years old, and had
never been seen or heard of since. My father said that Uncle James had
evidently brooded over the matter so long that he was broken down in
health and could not live much longer. Then he showed me a picture of
John Convert, when he was ten years old, and said that it looked exactly
like me at that age. Finally, he told me that Cousin John was the sole
heir to his grandfather's estate, and intimated that it would be a
splendid stroke of business for me to go to Eden and pretend to be the
long-lost son, and, after reaching the age of twenty-one, claim the
estate as my own. My father told me that as soon as he heard my uncle's
story, his well-trained financial brain had immediately formulated this
excellent plan, and consequently he led my uncle to believe that he had
no children of his own. He also ascertained the names of the different
places where my uncle had lived during the past, and proposed that I
should visit these localities and become acquainted with John's old
playmates, in order to acquire a thorough knowledge of his youthful
characteristics and any other useful information necessary to carry out
the deception successfully.

"'Well, I entered into the plot with enthusiasm, and within six months
presented myself to Uncle James as his son.

"'At first the scheme worked to perfection, and there was great
rejoicing in the little town of Eden, where the Rev. James Convert was
an honored and respected citizen of the community. But as time went by,
my uncle apparently began to doubt my identity, for at times he would
look at me long and searchingly, and then, with a sorrowful shake of the
head, would remark that I lacked the character of the boy he had known
as his son. So, fearing that he might ultimately discover the fraud and
foil our plans, my father and I jointly murdered him by a slow process
of poison. Then, with the necessary papers in my possession, and plenty
of reputable witnesses from Eden to swear that I was the acknowledged
son of the Rev. James Convert, at the age of twenty-one I took
possession of my grandfather's vast estate in England.

"'But the fear of the rightful heir turning up sooner or later to expose
the fraud began to haunt me, and, feeling my insecurity as long as he
was alive, I began a long and tedious search for John Convert, which
extended to all parts of the world, and covered a period of over twenty-
three years, with the sole purpose of killing him if found.

"'In the meantime, fearing that my father might become conscience-
stricken sooner or later, and make a confession of our crime to the
authorities, I killed him also; and of the three murders, of which I am
now responsible, I feel less concern over my father's death than of the
other two; for was it not from him that I inherited the instincts to
lie, cheat, steal, and murder for money, and by his instructions that
these instincts were developed, instead of being discouraged from
infancy?

"'Well, although I searched in nearly every nook and corner of the
globe, I was unable to find even a clue to my missing cousin, but during
that time a most peculiar affair happened, which resulted in my killing
a third victim.

"'As you will remember, I met and became infatuated with you in Paris
over three years ago, and then followed you to Chicago. After learning
that you had secretly departed for Europe again in order to avoid me, I
made up my mind to bother you no further, and taking a trip in the
opposite direction I spent considerable time touring Australia, Africa
and Asia. It was about two years after, while stopping at a fashionable
hotel in Berlin that I discovered a young woman boarding there by the
name of Arletta Fogg. So closely did she resemble you that I supposed it
was you living there under an assumed name. At first when I accused her
of being Arletta Wright, of Chicago, she denied it emphatically. But
later, after learning that I was a millionaire, she pretended that I was
right in my supposition and led me to believe that she had left home for
an indefinite period owing to some family disagreement and was now
traveling incognito. She permitted me to show her many attentions and
gradually we became very good friends. So infatuated with her charms did
I become that I was her abject slave. We went to Italy and Egypt
together and I lavished money upon her without stint. I proposed
honorable marriage to her a hundred times, but she always refused,
saying that she preferred a free and independent life. We went to New
York, and there I discovered that there were other men besides myself
interested in her, and that she had two different places of residence.
Several times I saw her in fashionable restaurants dining with other
men, and following her one night into the Seraglio Apartments, I found
that she occupied a suite of rooms there, of which I had known nothing.
She was somewhat under the influence of liquor that night, and the
information I secured from her was of such a kind that it almost drove
me mad with jealousy, and in a fit of frenzy I stabbed her to death with
her own toy dagger and left her lying on the bed. The next morning I
quietly boarded the steamer for Europe, and keeping out of sight until
away from land, I started to go to the purser's office to pay for my
passage, when the very first person I met was you. You can well imagine
how it startled me to see one whom I thought was dead. But after the
first shock had passed away, and learning from the list that Arletta
Wright was a passenger, I gave the whole matter thoughtful consideration
and finally concluded that Arletta Fogg and Arletta Wright were two
different persons and that the other was merely a beautiful adventuress
and your double.

"'Well, you know the rest. You never would care for me, and as the great
wealth I so wrongfully acquired cannot buy happiness of peace of mind, I
shall ask God to forgive my sins and then blow out the brains that have
become so useless.

"'Somewhere in this world the right John Convert may be earning his
bread by the sweat of his brow, entirely ignorant of the fact that he is
a millionaire by birth, for it was his father's intention never to
disclose this secret to him, preferring that he should spend his time as
a useful laborer, rather than a moneyed loafer, living without work.
Whether he resembles me at this age or not, I cannot say. Perhaps not,
for my hair has become prematurely white from sin and worry. Then again,
he may wear a beard, while my face is clean shaven. But no matter where
he is, what he does, or how he looks, I shall trust in you to do all
within your power to try and locate him, and deliver into his hands the
enclosed papers, which will be the means of restoring his possessions to
him.

"'If you are fortunate enough to find him, beg his forgiveness for me,
and say that the cause of all my wickedness was money, and a father who
taught me to love it. With a prayer to God for mercy, I shall expect to
go to heaven in spite of my sins, as I have faith in Jesus Christ, and,
hoping to meet you there, I bid you good-bye until then.

"'Sincerely yours,

"'EDWARD (JOHN) CONVERT.'"

"'Notwithstanding the dreadful contents of this letter, I felt like
crying with joy after reading it, as my mind once more became occupied
with thoughts of the splendid character whom I had so ardently loved,
but shamefully deserted in New York three months previously. I made up
my mind to return and ask his forgiveness, and then join him in his
praiseworthy labors of uplifting mankind. Oh! what happiness I
experienced during the next few days in anticipation of seeing him again
and hearing his manly voice. But alas, how little we know what sorrows
are in store for us! The steamer arrived at her wharf at ten o'clock
this morning, and a few minutes later. I was seated in a carriage
speeding along in the direction of the Waldoria Hotel. At forty minutes
past ten I inquired of the clerk for John Convert. Then came the
appalling information that he was to be electrocuted at noon for the
murder of Arletta Fogg. The rest seems like an awful nightmare. Getting
a schedule of trains for Sing Sing, I rushed outside the hotel, and,
jumping in the first cab I saw, handed the driver a roll of bills, and
told him they were all his if he could get me to the depot in time to
catch the eleven o'clock train. Through the streets like mad we whirled,
and, reaching the station, I quickly alighted and ran to the ticket
office, and from there to the train, which I boarded just as it started
away. It was an express, which made no stops before reaching Sing Sing,
and was due there at exactly twelve o'clock, the time set for the
electrocution. I told the conductor that I would give him a million
dollars if he would land me in Sing Sing fifteen minutes ahead of time,
but he apparently thought I was insane, and paid no attention to my
frantic entreaties to go faster. To make matters worse, the train
arrived five minutes late, but, hoping against hopes, I got into a
carriage and was driven to the prison.

"Here the attendants thought I was crazy, as I rushed into the reception
room, crying out to stop the electrocution, and they would not permit me
to see the Warden, who was in his private office. Hearing my cries,
however, the Warden came out to see what was the trouble, and as quickly
as possible I explained to him the circumstances surrounding the murder
of Arletta Fogg, and showed him the written confession of Edward
Convert. He read just enough to make sure he was right, and then with an
exclamation of horror he rushed out of the office, followed by me.
Through grated doors, long, dismal corridors, and a court-yard, we ran,
and coming to a little, red brick house, he broke open the frame door
with a crash, and hurried inside, only to find that we were just a
minute too late.'"

"After a fit of sobbing, Arletta Wright quieted herself long enough to
say: 'Telegraph the news to all parts of the civilized world that the
State of New York has just murdered the noblest mortal of which history
has ever made mention. Tell the inhabitants that through his teachings a
new dispensation has sprung into existence, and that Sagemanism is born
again. Publicly announce my firm belief in the beautiful principles of
Natural Law, and say that henceforth I renounce all further allegiance
to a religion which permits the strong to victimize the weak, and
upholds a corrupt and unnatural system, which allows schemers, thieves,
gamblers, sneaks, loafers, spongers, and all other kinds of human
parasites to grow fat off the labors of those who toil. Say that I shall
take up the work where John Convert left off, and devote the remainder
of my life and all of my wealth towards the cause he advocated.'"

(THE END.)

STRAY SHOTS

The foundation of humbug is faith.

The light of the universe is reason.

Better be an unselfish dog than a selfish man.

Advice is cheap, so always give the best.

To exhibit temper is to demonstrate insanity.

The rich of today breed thieves for tomorrow.

Strengthen yourself that you may help those less fortunate.

There is never a pleasure lost that there is not another gained.

True philanthropy does not steal from one to give to another.

Religions burn their bridges in front instead of behind them.

One good man on earth is better than ten thousand in heaven.

Feed the mind with good thoughts and you will always be happy.

Keep the mind and body clean and the soul will take care of itself.

Put your trust in the desires of your conscience.

There are two ways to think--animal and human.

Make your soul the master of your mind and body.

Observe at least one day each week for rest and play.

Man is great among men as the flea is great among fleas.

No drawback should cause man to lose control of himself.

Better be a good man persecuted, than a bad man praised.

You of few weaknesses should not judge harshly of those with many
weaknesses.

Hate not, but pity your enemies, for thereby you demonstrate your own
superiority.

It makes little difference who gets the credit, as long as the world
derives the benefit.

Without Labor, Capital would starve; without Capital, Labor could live
in luxury.

A liar is a moral coward who fears to speak the truth and abide by the
consequences.

Permit your soul to look from the eye and all of nature's objects will
appear beautiful.

Hide not your face behind a fantastic beard, that the world may read
your character.

The expression of the face is caused by the tendency of the thought.

Semi-intelligent beings try to live on the strength of those less
intelligent.

Persecution is a deadly poison which reacts upon those who administer
it.

He with many faults is generally too weak to overlook the faults of
others.

Which is the most beastly, the pig itself, or the man who rears, kills
and eats it?

Behold yourself through the eyes of others and judge your worth
accordingly.

When man dies he leaves his works for the approbation or contempt of
posterity.

As the mother loves her child, so should all living things love each
other.

The sins of the parents are visited upon the children as a natural
result, and not by an act of the Almighty.

There are thoughts in existence today which man will not be able to
grasp for thousands of years to come.

Replace the Church with schools of moral, mental and physical culture
and the world will pro& thereby.

As the swindler first creates a feeling of faith in his intended victim,
so religion demands faith in its followers.

Of what good are you if you gain the produce of the whole world and
breed ten thousand criminal descendants.

There are many men in this world who call it work to figure how they can
secure the results of others' labor.

If you have knowledge, offer it to others; if they do not accept it,
that is their loss.

Do not fill your head so full of other people's ideas that there is no
room left for your own.

Point out the defects of him who is present; praise the good qualities
of him who is absent.

Those who ride upon the backs of others must in turn carry others upon
their own backs.

The Bible not only proves its own absurdities, but any others that the
human mind can conceive.

Parents should mould their children's character before they are born, by
their own thoughts and actions.

Your ancestors are responsible for the weaknesses you inherit, but you
are responsible for non-improvement.

Marrying for money or position without mutual love is but one way to
breed and preserve the germs of prostitution.

It is not only the selfishness of the strong that robs the weak, but
also the selfishness of the weak that keeps them so.

If nature has blessed you with superior ability and you do not use it to
benefit mankind, then you have betrayed nature's trust.

The laborer furnishes the capitalist with money, houses, clothes,
eatables, service and then the weapons and power to keep him enslaved.

If you have not improved your condition physically, mentally and morally
over that of your parents, your life has been a failure.

Religion is a great cudgel held threateningly by the strong over the
heads of the weak to keep them in a state of ignorance and slavery.

If the soul were born with the body, then it must die with it; but if
the soul live afterward, then it must have lived before the body was
born.

The learned man is sometimes wise; the wise man is not always learned.
The wise man produces good thoughts direct from nature; the learned man
acquires them afterward.







