CHAPTER V

After all I had passed through during the preceding twenty-four hours,
then to be suddenly cast from the outer darkness into a hole as light as
if illuminated by the mid-day sun was a revelation that caused me to
seriously doubt my own senses. But having spent a life of travel and
adventure in which I had faced many unexpected dangers and inexplicable
sights, I soon regained my normal presence of mind and began to look
around with considerable interest. I was now fully convinced that the
great pile of stone which I had so strangely reached had at one time
formed a gigantic structure moulded together by human ingenuity.

The enclosure I found myself within might have been a hallway of the
edifice, but it was hard to positively distinguish it as such, for the
building in falling had placed things in an almost unrecognizable
condition. Some of the great stones from above had passed through the
ceiling and floor, while others had become wedged together before
reaching the surface, thus forming a very ragged and peculiar aperture.

In places where there were no obstructions I noticed a beautiful white
marble floor, while here and there a fragment of the walls showed that
the art of decorating had at one time reached a degree of proficiency
quite unapproachable by our modern artists. The space I found myself in
was too irregular in its outlines to form an adequate idea of what it
might have been used for. In some places I had to stoop to pass along,
while in others I was forced to climb over great blocks of stone.

After being in this passage about half an hour making an inspection of
the premises, I discovered a small opening which led into another
apartment. It appeared that a great door had separated the two rooms,
but had apparently become broken with the fall of the building and left
a space barely wide enough for my body to pass through. So in I went. Or
out I went, I was not quite sure which, for after squeezing through the
doorway a scene presented itself to my astonished gaze that I must
confess my inability to properly describe.

The view before me was a mammoth park with its variety of trees, flowers
and shrubbery of every possible description.

Straight ahead in the distance and plainly discernible was a running
brook which flowed along in a devious course and emptied into a lake far
beyond. And there, in all its majesty was the sun just sinking behind
the horizon, its brilliant radiance forming the most beautiful effects
of colorization upon the distant clouds it has ever been my good fortune
to behold.

I stood in motionless reverence for several minutes as my mind expanded
with wonder at the magnificent panorama, while my nostrils inhaled a
most delicious fragrance from the innumerable plants which seemed to put
new life into my enervated body.

What strange phenomena is this, I soliloquized? On the outside of the
earth the sun had gone down and darkness prevailed, while down here, in
under its crust I found it blazing away in all its splendor. In fact it
seemed that an entirely new world had suddenly been thrown in front of
me. Was I really alive or had I passed into some other world, was the
next question to enter my mind. I remembered that I had fallen a
considerable distance into this strange place and was somewhat stunned
in the tumble. Perhaps, thought I, my body is still lying somewhere
among the rocks above while this is only my spirit wandering about in a
fanciful manner. But no, looking downward I plainly saw my massive frame
dressed in sailor's clothes just as I had left the ship and I was
positive of being alive, awake, and in my right senses. And the wonders
multiplied. Looking to the right of the entrance, a short distance away,
I observed a marble platform elevated about two feet from the ground, in
the midst of huge flower-beds and shaded by large trees, upon which sat
a number of men, silent and motionless, with various musical instruments
in their hands as if they had just finished playing and were taking a
short rest. These instruments were of an entirely different pattern from
any I had ever seen. And the men! Oh, if I only had the power to show
them to my fellow beings as I saw them. What an imposing, noble looking
lot they were. They were all about the same size and not one of them
could have been less than eight feet in height. In looking at them
closely, I noticed that they possessed most magnificent physiques. They
were neither fat nor lean and their well-groomed bodies showed plainly
that no horse or piece of machinery ever received better care or
attention. While they appeared to be from thirty to forty years in ages,
not one of them wore a mustache, beard or any other shaggy decoration of
the face. Their foreheads were broad and massive and extended to the
center of their splendidly shaped craniums. Extraordinary intelligence,
kindness and gentleness showed forth from every feature of their
handsome countenances. Judging from their well-proportioned frames, each
one looked powerful enough to battle single handed with an elephant.
Judging from their faces not one of them would have hurt a flea. Each
man appeared to be buried in the depth of thought--serious thought--
notwithstanding every physiognomy plainly showed that the utmost
happiness and contentment existed within each, and good will between all
of them. The skin of their faces, hands and feet was as white as snow,
transparent, and backed by a beautiful pink. At first sight I thought
they were the gods. Uniformly clothed in closely fitting garments from
the ankles to the neck, their superb forms showed complete symmetrical
perfection. The hue of their raiment was indescribable for I had never
seen the like before. In fact the colors actually appeared to change
before my steady gaze. Their feet were bare, very shapely, and the toes
of greater length than ordinarily.

As I stood rooted to the ground and viewed them with intense admiration,
I wondered why they did not speak or take notice of my presence. But
finally in order to attract their attention I shouted, hello. My voice
sounded rather harsh and peculiar on this occasion, and was more like
the bray of an ass than anything else, but they made no motion as if
they heard me, or were aware of my existence. Walking over to the
nearest one, I reached up and touched him on the shoulder. Then I sprang
back in amazement, for instead of giving any sign of recognition he
merely placed his instrument in position, as did all the others, and
with slow, graceful movements began to play. The first strains of music,
although distinct and supernaturally grand, seemed to be miles away but
gradually increased in sound as if coming nearer and nearer. At the same
time I observed that the musicians, who were not only using both hands
in the manipulation of their instruments but with graceful dexterity
their feet as well, were becoming enthusiastic and appeared to throw
their very lives and souls into the work. If at first while inactive
they appeared to be extraordinarily intellectual beings, now in action
they looked divine. Their eyes blazed like miniature suns shooting forth
sparks of a thousand different hues. It seemed as if the very music
itself came from the expression of their faces. And on, on, on, came the
intoxicating strains, increasing in volume and excellence until I
imagined that all heaven had broken loose in one great effort to charm
my feeble senses, and then with a thunderous climax it ceased instantly,
the musicians smiled and bowed pleasantly to one another, and then
resumed their former attitudes.

No mortal's pen could describe my ecstasy while listening to the music
produced by this body of--I must say heavenly creatures. There was
something strange and analogous about it, too, that seemed to recall a
mysterious dream or vision I had once passed through. Whether it was
caused by the music or the kindly expressions of love for one another on
the faces of the players I know not, but nevertheless great tears
spontaneously rolled down my cheeks, the first I ever recollect having
shed, and at the conclusion of the piece I remained transfixed to the
spot for several minutes in deep cogitation.

Once more, however, my inquiring nature aroused me and I walked over
toward the leader. His face was turned slightly in another direction, so
I decided to step up on the platform, get squarely in front of him and
look straight into his eyes. So with a light movement I sprang for the
rostrum. But instead of reaching it my foot and head struck--not the
platform but solid wall, and a second later I found myself in a heap on
the ground. Then I started to think. Next I began to feel and finally a
broad grin overspread my face, for the scene before me was not real
after all, but a wonderful painting on the interior of the building.

