CHAPTER VI

Putting my hand against the surface and walking along I discovered that
this great scene which appeared to stretch away into the distance for
several miles, including the trees, brook, lake, sun, clouds, sky, and
everything else, was painted on the wall, ceiling and floor, of a
circular room. The ceiling was arranged in the shape of a dome, while
the floor made a concave connection with the wall. The whole apartment
could not have been over fifty feet in diameter. The entire room was
covered by one painting, and so well had the work been done that the
only way I could discern the difference between the real and artistic
scene was by extending my hands in front of me and feeling my way along.

But what about the music? Surely I heard it, and without doubt the
skilled musicians had performed their work right before my eyes. And the
sun, the light, and the fragrance from the flowers, what about these?
While in a state of perplexity at not being able to understand these
mysterious things, my eyes fell upon something which I had not noticed
previously, at the same time causing me to give a sudden start as if
pierced by an electric shock.

To the left of the door through which I had entered and lying in a
reclining position upon a bed of flowers, similar in shape to a modern
sofa, was the most beautiful object, I think, ever created--a woman. And
such a woman. Oh, ignorant humanity, why do you not breed all women like
that one? Although nearly twenty-three years have passed since then,
still the vision of her is as fresh upon my mind now as at that moment
when my eyes first beheld her. And as I think of her now I am unable to
repress the tears from filling my eyes, strong man that I am.

Dressed in a tight-fitting costume like those worn by the men, with the
addition of a net-like drapery of light material entwined about her, and
lying in a comfortable position partly on one side, with her lovely head
resting upon one arm, her shapely body and limbs posed gracefully and
her eyes closed in slumber, she impressed me as being the queen of the
universe.

This is the most beautiful part of the whole picture, thought I, taking
a few steps forward. What artist's imagination could ever have created
such a sublime and realistic work? As I stood in reverent contemplation
of her my admiration was unbounded. It seemed as if my feelings would
burst within me. My first love for woman was then and there confirmed
for all time. I decided I would stay and spend the rest of my days right
there, silently attesting my everlasting devotion to that divine
likeness of ideality. Had I not discovered that the whole thing was a
work of art, I should have felt positive that she was really alive and
merely lay there in peaceful repose. Then a sudden thought passed
through my mind which gradually expanded into an irresistible desire; I
would press my lips to hers and thereby seal my love forevermore.

Trembling like a timid school-boy I advanced closer. How lovely she
appeared. How real. Bending forward and putting my head in juxtaposition
to hers it seemed as if I actually heard her heart beat. It may have
been my own. With my face flushed and feeling that perhaps I might be
taking an unfair advantage of one who would not appreciate my caress, I
tenderly touched her lips with mine. For another moment of such
indescribable ecstasy I would gladly pass through all the imaginary
tortures of the infernal regions. But it ended there.

No sooner had our lips come together than I became aware of the fact
that the adorable object before me was real and not artificial as
supposed. As if by magic her mouth twitched slightly and her whole frame
quivered perceptibly; then she opened her eyes and finally with a most
graceful spring she landed squarely upon her feet directly in front of
me. I jumped backward in utter amazement. And there we stood face to
face staring into each other's eyes. I then noticed that she was about
seven feet in height and although not lean still there was not an ounce
of superfluous flesh on her serpent-like figure. Like the men, she too
was bare footed, and her hair, a dark silky texture, was short and very
artistically arranged. Her snow white face, transparent with pink, was
the acme of loveliness, with an expression of gentleness, purity and
modesty plainly stamped upon every feature. Her dazzling eyes sparkled
with the brilliancy of huge diamonds. Evidently she was as much
astonished as myself at the strange course of events. Although she did
not speak still I received an impression from her as if put into so many
words which plainly said: "John, am I dreaming or what awful experiment
have you attempted to transform yourself into such a hideous creature?"
I tried to speak but my first effort nearly choked me. Then in a voice
which seemed to be unusually coarse I finally blurted out: "My dear
lady, will you kindly tell me who or what you are?" These words seemed
to puzzle her more than ever and after hurriedly glancing about the room
she looked me over carefully from head to foot. Speaking once more I
said, "Madame, can you understand my language?" Then I received another
strange but unmistakable impression which replied: "I can understand
your thoughts but not your babble." "Are you able," she continued
telepathically, "to give an explanation of this extraordinary
metamorphosis?" "The only information I can offer," answered I, "will be
cheerfully given. My name is John Convert, late seaman aboard the
schooner Brawl, bound from Sydney to London. Last night I was thrown
overboard by my shipmates and after floating about the deep for several
hours I landed upon this pile of ruins surrounded by the sea. In making
an investigation of the exterior I lost my foothold, fell into a crevice
and breaking through a thin crust I landed in the outer passageway which
finally led me into this room. I must confess that everything here is as
inexplicable to me as I appear to you." As I spoke she seemed to be
laboring under intense mental excitement and tears came to her eyes.

"I understand it all now," she made known to me in her mysterious way,
"the experiment failed."

"What experiment was that?" questioned I in surprise.

Looking me straight in the eye as though trying to impress upon my mind
the importance of her communication, she answered, "the attempt of man
to change the course of the earth in space."

