CHAPTER XIX

"In equal proportion to man's moral and mental strength, so should he be
well-balanced physically," proceeded Arletta. "In fact, he cannot accept
his greatest opportunities unless perfectly sound and healthful. The
mind derives its power of conception from the body, as well as the body
secures its impetus from mind, therefore, the development of the frame
should at least keep pace with that of the intellect, if not exceeding
it. There is nothing more delightful to behold or conceive than a
perfect physical man, whose features manifest strong moral and mental
attributes, as exemplified by the portraits of the Sagemen."

"Excepting a perfect woman as depicted by yourself," thought I, with
uncontrollable rapture, as I feasted my eyes upon her exquisite form and
lovely countenance. Taking notice of my passionate cogitation, she
interjected, "Nature created the male and female, and in order to
perpetuate life itself, the union thereof is necessary; therefore, the
highest aim of each should be to win and hold the love and companionship
of the other. To do this successfully, each must strive to reach the
very highest point of physical, as well as mental and moral excellence.
Our men adored women as the most sacred and beautiful objects of life;
the women revered men as the grandest things extant.

"According to the philosophy of Sage--who, by the way, was the founder
of our government, and the first to expound the principles of Natural
Law--men belonged to the community, and not the community to man. He
contended that it was just as essential to the general welfare of the
public for the individual to build himself up from a healthful
standpoint, and likewise make himself pleasing to the eyes of others, as
it was to construct sanitary and artistic houses.

"Health and beauty are natural; disease and deformity are acquired, and
are therefore crimes against mankind. There are three good reasons why
it is criminal for one to neglect health. First, by going contrary to
Natural Law, he unfits himself to give his best labors toward the
progress of his species. Second, by breeding disease in himself, he
forces it into the community. Third--the most heinous crime of all--he
passes down to his offspring the ghastly inheritances resulting from his
own degraded weaknesses, which, in turn, are handed down from generation
to generation.

"Intemperance, such as over-eating, over-drinking, over-work, over-rest,
and many other forms of over-doing things, together with worry and
uncleanliness, is directly responsible for disease and deformity. All
living things would be healthful, if they contained enough intelligence
to live according to Natural Law.

"Besides using moderation in taking nourishment, work and pleasure, the
Sageman was careful about his exercises, assiduously devoting from two
to three hours each day to physical culture. He practiced all manner of
games and acrobatic performances, in order to bring the body up to its
best possible shape. Suppleness, agility, and gracefulness were desired
in preference to brute strength. Running, jumping, swimming, and flying
were considered a necessary part of every one's daily routine, from
early youth until old age and death."

"Flying," exclaimed I, incredulously, "you surely do not mean to inform
me that the Sagemen could fly?"

"Yes," answered Arletta, "the practice of floating in the air was begun
shortly prior to the great catastrophe and many of our men and women
were becoming adepts at it. You see, after the Sagemen discontinued the
animal method of eating flesh and other solid substances and adopted the
aeriform process of nourishment, he naturally became much lighter in
proportion to his bulk, and gravitation did not hold him so tightly to
the earth as formerly. Of course it took many generations of tendency in
that direction before he could even acquire the rudiments of aerial
propulsion. But after the dread feeling of worry and want was finally
eradicated from his mind by the abolition of the individual accumulative
system, he then began to apply himself carefully to physical
development, and as running, jumping and acrobatic work have the best
symmetrical effects upon the human form, this kind of exercise was
extensively followed, and as each generation succeeded in outdoing the
feats of the preceding one, the entire nation finally evolved into one
of extraordinary springing propensities. What will you think, when I
tell you that any of our men or women could jump over the highest
building there is in the world today, or run faster than any of your
steam locomotives? It seems hard for you to realize such things, but
still these are facts. In these days, the Apeman devotes his time to the
construction of machinery with which to carry around his decaying and
almost useless frame, while the Sageman utilized the power of his own
body to propel himself as nature intended.

"The gradual increase from year to year, and generation to generation,
of the Sageman's ability to make high leaps, and his continual desire to
remain in the air as long as possible, eventually bore evolutionary
results by man learning to fly. And like swimming, so with flying, the
mind plays the biggest part towards its accomplishment.

"As you appear incredulous regarding my statements, I will just give you
a little illustration," said Arletta, and before I was aware of her
intentions she arose, and with an almost imperceptible spring went
straight up to the ceiling, and then with a graceful movement somewhat
similar to a fish swimming in the water, she went half way across the
room and slowly descended to the floor again. "There is no good reason
why a man should not fly as well as swim," said Arletta, being seated
once more. "Time and inclination work wonders, and the human race has no
limit to its achievements if it only takes the right course.

"In order to obtain the best results physically, the individual must
live according to the simple laws of nature. Plenty of good healthful
exercise must be taken regularly and without strain. The intelligent
direction of the mind must also be brought into action with all muscular
efforts. Man's daily employment should be a mixture of both mental and
physical labor, for all brain work strains the mind and weakens the
flesh, while all bodily exertion over-taxes the frame and retards the
growth of intellect. Deep breathing, an abundance of pure fresh air and
plenty of sunlight are indispensable to perfect health. Daily baths are
essential to keep the exterior of the body clean, while the interior
must be kept in good order with a moderate supply of simple, wholesome
and unadulterated foods. Nature's plain beverage, water, is all that man
should imbibe. No evil thoughts must be allowed to enter the mind.
Cheerfulness, self-control, kindliness and optimism are great aids in
promoting health. Pessimism, worry, anger, fear and violent emotions are
poison to the system. There should be nothing in life to fear. The
unselfish know no fear. Those who teach it, or cause others to fear are
common enemies to health and progress.

"The beastly custom of drinking intoxicating liquors, now prevalent
throughout the world, is one of the very worst forms of robbing the
individual of his physical strength and vitality, as well as his reason
and moral character.

"The tobacco habit also; that idiotic and ridiculous performance of
filling the mouth with smoke merely to blow it out again, is another
dangerous obstacle thrown in the path of good health. It seems strange
that the Apeman cannot open his eyes wide enough to see the danger as
well as the absurdity of these silly customs which sap his strength and
leave him in a state of abject weakness. What a pity he cannot exert
enough will power to overcome these stupid and harmful practices.

"If you want to use your faculties when you are old, exercise them
properly when you are young. Improve yourself and you make better the
world."

