CHAPTER X.

MASTERS AND MEN.

Want of sympathy--Masters and servants--Christian
sympathy--Competition--What capital represents--Workmen and
employers--The Ashworths--New Eagley Mills--Improved workpeople--Public
spirit of manufacturers--Mr. Lister of Bradford--Mr. Foster's
speech--Great men wise savers--Sir Titus Salt--Saltaire--Its
institutions--Music and sobriety--Mr. Akroyd, Halifax--Yorkshire penny
bank--Origin of the bank--How to help the poor--Saving helps
sobriety--Drunkenness put down--"Childish work"--Penny banks. Pages
179--204


CHAPTER XI.

THE CROSSLEYS--MASTERS AND MEN (CONTINUED).

John Crossley--Martha Crossley--A courtship begun--A courtship
concluded--John Crossley begins business--Dean Clough Mill--The Crossley
family--Sir Francis Crossley--Martha Crossley's vow--Halifax People's
Park--Martha's vow fulfilled--Co-operation of colliers--Partnership of
industry--Other co-operative schemes--Jeremiah Head--Newport rolling
mills--Bonuses to workmen--Mr. Carlyle's letter--A contrast--A hundred
years ago--Popular amusements--Improvement of manners--English mechanics
and workmen--English engineers and miners--Swiftness of
machinery--Foreign workmen--Provident habits of foreigners. Pages
205--232


CHAPTER XII.

LIVING BEYOND THE MEANS.

Hypocrisy and debt--Conventionalism--Keeping up appearances--Exclusive
circles--Women and exclusiveness--Women and extravagance--Running into
debt--The temptation of shopkeepers--Temptations to crime--How crime is
committed--Love of dress--Gents--Reckless expenditure--Knowledge of
Arithmetic--Marriage--Happy tempers--Responsibilities of
marriage--Marriage not a lottery--The man who couldn't say "No"--The
courage to say "No"--"Respectable" funerals--Funeral extravagance--John
Wesley's will--Funeral reform. Pages 233--258


CHAPTER XIII.

GREAT DEBTORS.

Greatness and debt--Seedy side of debt--Running up bills--Loan
clubs--Genius and debt--Fox and Sheridan--Sheridan's
debts--Lamartine--Webster--Debts of men of science--Debts of
artists--Italian artists--Haydon--The old poets--Savage and
Johnson--Steele and Goldsmith--Goldsmith's debts--Goldsmith's
advice--Byron's debts--The burden of debt--Burns and Sydney Smith--De
Foe and Southey--Southey and Scott--Scott's debts and labours--Great
poor men--Johnson's advice--Genius and debt--Literary men. Pages
259--285


CHAPTER XIV.

RICHES AND CHARITY.

Helping the helpless--Dr. Donne--Rich people--Love of gold--Eagerness to
be rich--Riches and poverty--Riches in old age--Riches no claim to
distinction--Democrats and riches--Saladin the great--Don Jose de
Salamanca--Compensations of poverty--Honest poverty--Poverty and
happiness--Charity--Evils of money-giving--Philanthropy and
charity--Rich people's wills--Stephen Girard--Thomas Guy--Educational
charities--Peabody's benefaction--Benefactors of the poor--The Navvy's
Home. Pages 286--314


CHAPTER XV.

HEALTHY HOMES.

Healthy existence--Necessity for pure air--The fever tax--The
Arcadians--The rural poor--Influence of the home--Unhealthy
homes--Health and drunkenness--Wholesome dwellings--Edwin
Chadwick--Expectancy of life--The poor laws--The sanitary idea--The
sanitary inquiry--Sanitary commission--Sanitary science--Results of
uncleanness--Losses by ill-health--That terrible Nobody!--Home
reform--Domestic improvement--Cleanliness--Dirt and immorality--Worship
in washing--Knowledge of physiology--Domestic economy--English
cookery--Morals and cookery--Work for ladies--Joseph Corbet's story.
Pages 315--353


CHAPTER XVI.

THE ART OF LIVING.

Art of living exemplified--Taste an economist--Contrasts in cottage
life--Difference in workmen--Living at home--Home and
comfort--Comfortable people--Beneficence of house thrift--Organization
and method--Industry and punctuality--Management of temper--Good
manners--Habitual politeness--French manners--Happiness in good
manners--Amusement--Relaxation--Influence of music--Household
elegance--Elegance of flowers--Common enjoyments--Portraits of great
men--Art at home--Final art of living. Pages 358--378


INDEX 379





A FABLE.

A grasshopper, half starved with cold and hunger, came to a well-stored
beehive at the approach of winter, and humbly begged the bees to relieve
his wants with a few drops of honey.

One of the bees asked him how he had spent his time all the summer, and
why he had not laid up a store of food like them.

"Truly." said he, "I spent my time very merrily, in drinking, dancing,
and singing, and never once thought of winter."

"Our plan is very different," said the bee; "we work hard in the summer,
to lay by a store of food against the season when we foresee we shall
want it; but those who do nothing but drink, and dance, and sing in the
summer, must expect to starve in the winter."




THRIFT.




