LETTER XXVI.

THE CHOICE OF A PROFESSION.


The considerate Knight of La Mancha would not dismiss his follower
and friend to the government of Barataria, without a few more last
words, and without arming him for his high functions with a copious
homily of counsels and admonitions. Before I leave you to the
stern encounter of the painful emergencies of life, to unravel its
intricacies, and settle its innumerable perplexing and difficult
alternatives, I do not mean to oppress your memory with the
thousand and one particular directions, to meet every imaginable
occurrence with the right mode of conduct. Innumerable cases of
perplexity will be continually occurring, that can only be settled
by extempore judgment and prudence. I shall limit my counsels to a
single one among the many questions of universal application, each
one of which present a great variety of aspects and alternatives;
questions of difficult solution for the young; and yet on the right
disposal of which depend their character, success and happiness
in life. Among the subjects to which I refer, are, the choice of
a profession--decision in regard to our plans and projects--the
selection of our company--the dispositions with which we should
regard the place assigned us in society--the deportment appropriate
to gentlemen and ladies--the proper selection of books--the mode
and place of worship, and what are the best evidences of true
wisdom in character. The first of these is the only one upon which
I shall offer you my remarks.

In the choice of a profession, the first point to be consulted is
our physical and mental temperament and endowment, or aptitude.
That some are constituted for sedentary and inactive pursuits,
others to beat the anvil, follow the plough, or mount the reeling
mast with a firm step in the uproar of a tempest; some for the
bar, others for the pulpit, and still others to be musicians,
painters, poets or engineers, I consider a truth so universally and
obviously taught by observation and experience, that I shall not
deem it necessary to pause to prove it to such as would contest
it. I am sufficiently informed that there are those who contend
that all minds are formed equal and alike--and that all the after
differences result from education and circumstances. With them,
Virgil and Byron had no constitutional aptitudes to poetry, and
the same training that gave Handel and Gluck their preëminence in
music, would have imparted to any other mind equal skill. According
to their system, La Place and Zerah Colburn were no earlier or
more strongly inclined to mathematics, than other children. These
sapient physiologists in descending to the animal tribes, ought to
find, that web-footed animals had no natural aptitude for water,
the canine tribes for animal food, and the ruminating, to feed on
grass and vegetables. I shall leave those who hold this dogma to
retain it unquestioned so far as I am concerned; and they will
be obliged to leave me to mine, which is, that there are immense
differences in the physical and mental constitution, differences
which every enlightened parent discovers in his children from the
very dawn of their faculties--differences which every intelligent
instructer notes in his pupils, as soon as he becomes intimately
acquainted with them--differences which, to keen and close
observation, distinguish more or less each individual in the
immense mass of society. No matter how much alike these persons are
reared and trained; the most striking diversities of endowment are
often observed in members of the same family, reared and educated
with all possible uniformity. This is, no doubt, a beautiful trait
of that general impress of variety, which providence has marked
upon every portion of the animate and inanimate creation. Nature
has willed, that not only men should possess an untiring diversity
of form, countenance and mind, but that not two pebbles on the
shore, or insects in the air, should be found precisely alike. The
sign manual of the Creator on his works is a grand and infinite
variety.

The physiological inquiry whence these differences of temperament
and aptitude arise, is one, which belongs to another subject;
though I have no wish to conceal my belief, that the fundamental
positions of phrenology are as immovably founded in fact, and as
certainly follow from observation, as the leading axioms of any
physical science. It is enough for my present purpose, that the
order of every form of society calls for an infinite variety of
aptitude, talent and vocation, and that nature has furnished the
requisite variety of endowment, adequately to meet those calls.

The ancient system, still in use, goes on the supposition, that
all minds are originally alike; and that all children are equally
fit to be trained for each of the vocations. Hence we see tailors
at the anvil, and blacksmiths on the shopboard, innumerable
excellent ploughmen generating prose, and sleeping at the bar and
pulpit, and ingenious fiddlers ruined as engineers; in a word, all
that ludicrous disarrangement and seeming play at cross purposes,
in virtue of which, men, who would have been borne, by a strong
current, to the first place in the profession for which nature
designed them, become dull and useless in another. A great part
of the whole labor of instruction has thus been worse than thrown
away. It has been the hard effort of poetic fiction, laboring the
huge stone up an acclivity, to see it recoil and hear it thunder
back again; the effort to circumvent, and cross the purposes of
nature.

It seems to me to be among the most responsible inquiries of a
parent and a conscientious instructor, what pursuit or calling is
indicated for his child by his temperament and aptitude? The boy,
who, like Pope, even in childhood lisps in numbers, because the
numbers come, will probably be found to have not only an ear for
the peculiar harmony of rhythm, but an inventive mind, stored with
images, and a quick eye to catch the various phases of nature and
society. If placed under favorable circumstances, and judicious
training, this child will become a poet, while ninety-nine in a
hundred of those, who make verses, could by no forcing of nature
ever rise higher than rhymers. Thus may be detected the embryo
germs of temperament, endowment and character, which give the
undeveloped promise of the future orator, lawyer, mathematician,
naturalist, mechanician, in a word, of the mind fitted to attain
distinction in any walk in society. I am aware of the mistakes,
which fond and doting parents are likely to make, in interpreting
an equivocal, perhaps an accidental sally of the cherished child,
to be a sure proof of genius and endowment. No judicious and
intelligent parent will be in much danger of being led astray by
fondness so weak and misguided.--Wherever real endowment exists, it
never fails to put forth continual indications. It is the elastic
vigor of nature working at the root, to which no foolish partiality
will be blind.

It is true, that nature, equally beneficent in what she has
granted, and what she has withheld, forms the million for the
common duties and undistinguished employments; stamps them at once
with a characteristic uniformity and variety; and sends them forth
with specific adaptations, but not so strongly marked, as not to
be mistaken with comparative impunity. Hence the ordinary pursuits
and employments of life are conducted with general success,
notwithstanding these smaller mistakes in regard to endowment.

Not so in those rarer instances, where she has seen fit to stamp
the clear and strong impress of peculiar endowment and aptitude,
in which the embryo poet, painter, mathematician, naturalist, and
orator are indicated by such unequivocal signs, as cannot easily
be overlooked, or mistaken by any competent judge. Hence, in the
biography of most of those who have truly and greatly distinguished
themselves, we are informed that the most ordinary people about
them were perfectly aware of the harbingers of their future
greatness. I am confident, that to keen and faithful observation
these harbingers are as palpable in the germ, as in the
development. To mistake in such a case, and not only to withdraw
the youthful aspirant from the career to which nature beckons him,
but to force him into one, in which every effort must be rowing
against the stream, is to consign him to an Egyptian bondage, a
slavery of the soul, by which many a spirit of firmer mould has
been broken down, and lost to society, and others worse than lost,
rendered the scourge and curse of all with whom their lot was cast.

Such as have arrived at a maturity of reason and years, to have the
responsibility of the choice of a profession cast upon themselves,
will infer, what are my views in regard to the first element, by
which they ought to be directed. It involves a previous question,
for what pursuit or calling their temperament, faculties and
powers best fit them? By long and close observation, pursued
with a fidelity proportioned to its importance, by intent study
of themselves, as called out by the changes of their health and
prospects, the fluctuations of their spirits, their collisions
with society, in all the contingencies that befall them, they can
scarcely fail to form some conception of the peculiar cast of their
powers, and the walk in life, for which their capabilities are best
adapted. If they select wisely in this respect, habit and time will
certainly render it the profession of their inclinations.

As soon as the mind begins to survey the professions, in regard
to the honors, emolument and success, which they respectively
offer, there is great danger, lest imagination, taking the place
of reason, should look at the scene through a prism, and see
all the chances of an illusive brilliancy of promise, which
sober experience will be sure to disappoint. There are the
immense promises of the law, alluring a crowd of aspirants and
competitors, the greater portion of whom must fail to realize their
expectations. There are the honors of the physician, binding him,
by the strongest of all ties, to the confidence and affection of
the families that employ him. He exercises the only profession that
does not depend upon the caprice of fashion, or the vibrations of
transient feeling.--There is the ministry, with its time-honored
claims, its peculiar title to be admitted to the privacy of
affection, sickness and death, and its paramount capability of the
highest forms of that only eloquence that swells and softens the
heart, by coming home to men’s business and bosoms. There is the
varied range, and the rapidly acquired fortunes of merchandize and
commerce; the growing interest and importance of the new portico
to a new order of nobility, manufactures. There is agriculture,
always seen to be the most satisfactory and useful of employments,
and now rapidly coming to be viewed in the light of scientific
investigation and of a liberal pursuit. To adjust and settle the
respective views, which the judgment and imagination will take of
the chances of these various pursuits, and their contiguity to
love, marriage, wealth, and distinction, will be found to be no
easy task. Sometimes one view will predominate--sometimes another;
and the mind appears like a pendulum vibrating between them.

Reason presents one decisive view of the subject. All these
chances--all these balances of advantage and disadvantage have
long since settled to their actual and natural level. If the law
presents more tempting baits, and more rich and glittering prizes,
over-crowded competition, heart-wearing scramble, difficulty of
rising above the common level, into the sun and air of distinction,
are appended, as inevitable weights, in the opposing scale. The
advantages and disadvantages of all the professions are adjusted
by the level of society, exactly in the same way. He who is guided
in this inquiry by common sense, will comprehend at a glance, that
it is impossible, in the nature of things, to combine all the
advantages and evade all the disadvantages of any one pursuit. No
expectation more irrational and disappointing can be indulged, than
to unite incompatible circumstances of happiness. The inquirer
must reflect, that such a pursuit connects a series of fortunate
chances; but there are the counterbalancing evils. Such another
has a different series of both. It is folly to expect to form an
amalgam of these immiscible elements. Reason can expect no more
than that we unite in the calling, finally fixed upon, as many
fortunate circumstances as possible, and avoid, as far as may be,
its inconveniences and evils.




NOTES.




NOTES.


Note 1, page 39.

The history of circumstances under which I commenced reading the
book of M. Droz, _sur l’ art d’ étre heureux_, the substance of the
first chapter of which is given as above, will not be irrelevant,
I would hope, _to you_, if to others. It was a beautiful April
morning, and I had wandered away from the town, with the book
in my hand, among the hills. I inhaled a bland atmosphere that
just ruffled half formed leaves, and shook from trees, shrubs and
flowers the pearly drops and the delicious aroma of the season.
A dun, purple, smoky vapor veiled the brilliancy of the sun and
gave the face of nature its most exquisite coloring. A repose,
like sleep, seemed to rest upon the earth, only interrupted by the
ruminating of the flocks and herds on the hill sides. The bees
sped away to their nectar cells from tree and flower, leaving upon
the dark and fleeting line of their passage through the air a
lulling hum like the tones of an Eolian harp. A large town, with
its ceaseless and heavy roll of mingled sounds, lay outstretched
beneath my feet. Painted boats were slowly wending their way along
a canal from the town, and winding their course round the foot of
the hills. Before me was a vast panorama of activity, business,
commerce and all the accompaniments of a busy town. A few paces
behind me, and I was plunged in a forest where town and commerce
and life were hidden as if by the shifting of a scene, and the jay
screamed, and the woods showed as to the red man who had seen
them centuries before. A beautiful spring branch murmured by me in
its deep and flood-worn channel down the glen. A little advance
spread the town before me. A little retreat gave me back to the
wildness of nature in the forest. Here I had often enjoyed much of
the little that life allows us to enjoy, in quiet communion with
nature and my own thoughts. I had never experienced it in higher
measures than at this moment. Could I, by a volition, have arrested
the flight of time and the succession of sensations, here would I
have fixed the _punctum stans_ of existence, and been content to
have this scene always around me, and the enjoyment of this union
of meditation and repose, perpetual.

But a change came over my thoughts, as I read the quaint axiom,
laid down with such mathematical precision, _man is formed to be
happy_. What I saw and what I felt, my own consciousness assented
to the proposition. But, startled by a transient feeling of pain,
a new train of ideas succeeded. I have only to pass, said I, the
short interval between this repose, verdure, quietness and internal
satisfaction, to reach the scene of dust and smoke before me.
Besides spires and mansions, I shall see hovels, poor, blind, lame,
squalid, blaspheming youth, imbecile age, prostitutes, beggars,
haunts of felons and outlaws; and even in the abodes of what shows
external comfort and opulence, the sick and dying hanging in
agonies of suspense upon the countenance of their physician and
friends, as they catch gleams of hope or shades of despair from
their aspect. Many of these sick, even if they recover, will only
be restored to trembling age, to perpetual and incurable infirmity,
and to evils worse than death. Yet, unhappy in living, and afraid
to die, they cling to this wretched existence as though it were
the highest boon. These varied shades of misery that the picture
before me will present to the slightest inspection, in ten thousand
forms and combinations, are visible in every part of our world. I,
too, shall soon add to the deepness of the shading. My friends will
depart in succession; and in my turn, on the bed of death, I shall
look in the faces of those most dear to me, as I am compelled to
depart out of life. What an affecting contrast with what I see and
what I am!

Why there is this partial evil in the world is not a question which
I shall here attempt to vex; for I could add nothing to what has
already been said upon the subject. It is enough that the evil
does actually exist. Is it remediless? Can life be so spent as to
leave a balance of enjoyment set over against the evil? These are
my questions. There will always be inequality, ignorance, vice,
disease, a measureless amount of misery and death. What portion
of the evils of life can be cured? What portion must be manfully,
piously endured? What transient gleams of joy can be made to
illumine the depth of shade?

I yield entire faith to the doctrine before you, that, estimate
these evils as highly as you may, a balance of enjoyment may
still be struck in favor of life. I do not doubt, that more than
one half the suffering and sorrow which every individual endures
is simply of his own procuring, and not only that it might have
been wholly avoided, but that positive enjoyment might have been
substituted in its place. An inconceivable mass of misery would at
once be struck from the sum if, as I have already remarked, we knew
the physical, organic and moral laws of our being, and conformed
ourselves to them. A uniform, consistent and thorough education
would cure us of innumerable errors of opinion, injurious habits,
and a servile conformity to established and prescribed prejudices,
and would impart to us wisdom, force of character and resignation,
to enable us to sustain, as we ought, those that are unavoidable.
Imperfection, pain, decay and death, in the inevitable measures
belonging to organized beings, would remain. The dignity of true
philosophy, the stern consciousness of the necessity of courage,
profound and filial submission to the divine will, and the well
defined and investigated hopes of religion would accomplish the
remainder.

Consider one single evil--fear, unnecessary fear, an entirely
gratuitous infusion of bitterness in the cup of life. I ask the man
who has seen fourscore winters to tell me, were all that he has
suffered in his pilgrimage cast into one account, what would be the
greatest item in the sum? I believe that almost every one might
answer, that more than half might be charged to one single source
of suffering--fear--fear of opinion, reproach, shame, poverty,
pain, danger, disease and death. I pause not to consider the usual
dull illustrations of the wisdom and utility of assigning to us
the instinct of fear, to put us on our guard and to enable us to
ward off evils. It is not this instinctive shrinking and vigilance
to avoid evil that I consider. Let education have its most perfect
work in raising us superior to this servile and tormenting passion,
and too much of it would still remain. Of all that we have suffered
from fear, what portion has been of any service in shielding us
from that which we apprehended? Not only have we avoided no evil
in consequence, but the enervating indulgence of this passion
has taken from us our quickness of foresight, our coolness of
deliberation, our firmness of action and resolve, by the exercise
of which, we might have escaped all that we dreaded. We may
calculate then, that every pang we have felt from this source has
been just so much gratuitous agony.

Not only natural instincts, but acquired habits are transmitted;
and this evil of fearfulness, this foreboding of apprehension,
shaping the fashion of uncertain ills, has been the growing
inheritance of countless generations; and a shrinking and
effeminate timidity has been woven into our mental constitution
by nature. Education, instead of resisting, or counteracting, or
diminishing the transmitted mischief, has labored with terrible
effect, to make it a principle and a motive to action, and the
most efficient engine of the inculcated systems of morality and
religion. Fear of death, and a slavish terror, springing from
misapprehensions of the character of the divine being, and unmanly
and debilitating horrors in regard to the unknown future in another
life, these have been the chief sources of this evil. Terribly have
the father and the mother, the minister and the school-master, and
general prescription and example concurred, to strengthen this
barbarous instrument of governing, which never inspired a good
action, and which it would be cruel to apply to a slave. Horrible
have been the bondage, the mean abjectness of spirit, the long
agony of the soul, which this inculcation has inspired.--We have
been sedulously trained in a course of discipline which has made
us afraid of our own shadows in the dark, and inspired us with
shrinking and terror in view of a silent and peaceful corpse,
which, in the eye of sober reason, should originate associations no
more fearful, than a waxen figure. We, who are the victims of this
inborn and instinctive inheritance, we, who have had it inwoven by
precept, education and example, and the prevalent impression, that
it is one of the purest and most religious motives of action, are
best able from our own consciousness, and the memory of what we
have suffered from it, to present just views of it to others.--It
may be in us an ingrafted principle, too deep to be uprooted
by any rules, or reasons, or system of discipline; a habit too
unyieldingly become a part of our nature, to be overcome. But with
minds more docile, with temperaments more pliant, with habits
less fixed, it may be otherwise. The next generation may transmit
a more manly and less timid nature to the generations to come.
Education, building on the basis of minds of more force, may then
accomplish its perfect work, imbuing them with a filial confidence
in the Almighty, a sense of the beauty of well-doing, and a perfect
fearlessness in regard to everything, but doing wrong. The happier
generation of that era, will be spared the agony of all deaths, but
the single one of nature; and will be fortified by discipline, and
the force of general opinion and example, to regard this inevitable
law of our being, this merciful provision of providence, this rest
for the worn and weary, as the hireling regards the evening shade,
when he reposes from his labors and receives his reward. I shall
elsewhere advert to this evil in more detail, and point out such
remedies, as appear to me to be suggested by reason, education and
religion.


Note 2, page 41.

This classification of the great divisions of our species, as they
are occupied in the pursuit of happiness, seems to me to unite
truth with poetry and philosophy, and to be both happy and just.
The disappointed, who affirm that the earth offers no happiness,
the gloomy, who view life as a place of penance, austerity and
tears, the dissipated and voluptuous, who seek only pleasure, and
whose doctrine is, that life offers no happiness but in unbridled
indulgence, the ambitious, who consider happiness to consist only
in wealth, power and distinction, and a very numerous class, who
have no object in view, but to vegetate through life by chance,
constitute the great mass of mankind. The number of those who
have lived by system, and disciplined themselves to the wise and
calculating pursuit of happiness, has always been small. But
there have still been some, enough to prove the practicability
of the art.--Wherever we find a person, who declares that he has
lived happily, if his enjoyments have been of a higher kind,
than the mere vegetative easiness of a felicitous temperament
and an unthinking joyousness, we shall find on inquiry, that he
has been a philosopher in the highest and best sense. He may
scarcely understand the import of the term; but, however ignorant
of systems, and the learning of the schools, if he have made it
his chief business, to learn by the study of himself, and general
observation, how to be happy, he is the true sage. He may well
be content, let others regard him as they may; for he has put in
requisition the best wisdom of life. No one maxim, especially,
ever included more important and practical truth, than that, to be
happy, we must assiduously train ourselves to retain through life
a keen and juvenile freshness of sensibility to enjoyment, and
must early learn to anticipate the effect of experience and years
in cultivating a stern indifference, a strong spirit of endurance,
and unshrinking obtuseness to pain. It has been my fortune to see
examples of persons who enjoyed life even to old age with all the
ardor and the quick perception of the young, and who had always
been as remarkable for their impassive and heroic endurance of pain.


Note 3, page 43.

We are told, in ridicule of this study, that men have been very
happy without rules, and before any system had been laid down,
and will continue to be happy, unconscious of the means by which
they arrived at their enjoyment. So have men reasoned without
acquaintance with the rules of logic; but this proves not the
inutility of the study. Let the objector convince us that the happy
without thought and rules would not have been happier if they had
sought enjoyment with the keen and practical intelligence of a
Franklin.

Whatever men do well without definite aim and without rules, it is
clear to me, they would do better with these advantages. The same
argument equally militates with all means of moral instruction.
‘The world,’ the objector may say, ‘will proceed as before, say
what we may.’ But this would be deemed no just ground of objection
to an attempt to improve the age, though the efforts may have
little visible and apparent effect.


Note 4, page 44.

No term has been more hackneyed, in these days, than education.
We have had system upon system, and treatise upon treatise; and
more has been written and declaimed upon this subject than almost
any other. And yet, scarcely a word has been said upon a grand
and radical defect in all existing systems which reduces to a
very humble scale the results of the best concerted efforts. I
lay out of the question all other incongruities, that I might
easily mention, and come directly to that which I have chiefly in
my mind. Each of the different instructors, through whose forming
hands the pupil passes, communicates to him different, militant
and incompatible impulses; so that, instead of a continuous
operation and an onward movement, it seems to be the work of each
successive teacher to undo that of all the others. The father and
mother, besides various minor inculcations, labor, as their highest
object, to infuse into the mind of their child, ambition, the
desire of preëminence and distinction. The school-master instils
the same principles under such different circumstances as to
render the envy, rivalry and competition of the school-room almost
another series of impulses. The minister and the catechism enjoin
humility, meekness and a disposition to prefer others in honor
before themselves. ‘Be honest and high-minded,’ say the parents
and teachers. ‘Be adroit, and circumvent those who are watching
to take advantage of your weakness and inexperience,’ says the
master at the counting-desk. The elder friends teach one class of
maxims, and the younger another. The actual world inculcates rules
different from all the rest. Thus the parents, the school-master,
the minister, the politician, society and the world are continually
varying the direction of the youthful traveller. No wonder that
most people either have no character, or one that is a compound of
the most incongruous elements. A pupil, to have a strong, wise,
marked and efficient character, should have had it steadily trained
to one end; and every impulse ought to have been in a right line
and concurrent with every other. Such must be the case before
honest and uniform characters will be formed.

There is little force in the objection, that he who has not been
constantly happy himself ought not to presume to teach others to
be happy. On the contrary, as the author beautifully suggests,
none can discuss, with so much experience and force of truth, the
dangers of shipwreck, as they who have themselves suffered it. If
the art of happiness can be taught, the teacher must necessarily
have paid the price of a qualification to impart it, in having
been himself unhappy. Conscious that he had the susceptibility of
enjoyment, and wanted only the right direction of the means, he
will be able to set up way-marks, as a warning to others, at the
points where he remembers that he went astray himself.


Note 6, page 45.

The necessity of moderating our desires and reducing them within
the limits of what we may reasonably hope to acquire, has been
the beaten theme of prose and song for so many ages that the
triteness of repetition has finally caused the great truth to
be almost disregarded by moralists. Yet, who can calculate the
sum of torment that has been inflicted by wild and unreasonable
desires, by visionary and puerile expectations, beyond all
probable bounds of means to realize them, indulged and fostered
until they have acquired the force of habit! Whose memory cannot
recur to sufferings from envy and ill will, generated by cupidity,
for the possessions and advantages of others that we have not!
Who can count the pangs which he has endured from extravagant
and unattainable wishes! Poetry calls our mortal sojourn a vale
of tears; yet what ingenuity to multiply the gratuitous means
of self-torment! Has another health, wealth, beauty, fortune,
endowment, which I have not? Envy will neither take them from
him, nor transfer them to me. Why, then, should I allow vultures
to prey upon my spirit? Learn neither to regret what you want
and cannot supply, nor to hate him who is more fortunate. With
all his apparent advantages over you, he wants, perhaps, what
you may possess, a tranquil mind. There is little doubt that you
are the happier person if you contemplate his advantages and his
possessions with a cheerful and unrepining spirit.

I present two considerations only, as inducements to control and
regulate your desires. 1. In indulging them beyond reason you are
fostering internal enemies and becoming a self-tormentor. In the
quaint language of the ancient divines, they are like fire, good
servants but terrible masters. 2d. The higher gifts of fortune, the
common objects of envious desire, are awarded to but a few. The
number of those who may entertain any reasonable hope of reaching
them is very small. But every one can moderate his desires. Every
one can set bounds to his ambition. Every one can limit his
expectations. What influence can fortune, events, or power exercise
over a person, who has learned to be content with a little, and
who has acquired courage to resign even that without repining?
Franklin might well smile at the impotent malice of those who would
deprive him of his means and his business, when he proved to them
that he could live on turnips and rain water. It is not the less
true or important, because it has been a million times said, that
happiness, the creature of the mind, dwells not in external things.


Note 7, page 47.

Wherever civilized man has been found, the first effort of his
mind, beyond the attainment of his animal wants, has been to
travel into the regions of imagination, to create a nobler and
more beautiful world than the dull and common-place existing one,
to assign to man a higher character and purer motives than belong
to the actual race. To possess a frame inaccessible to pain and
decay, and to dwell in eternal spring, surrounded by beauty and
truth, is an instinctive desire. A mind of any fertility can
create and arrange such a scene; and in this dreaming occupation
the sensations are tranquillizing and pleasant beyond the more
exciting enjoyment of actual fruition. With the author, I deem
the propensity for this sort of meditation neither unworthy in
itself, nor tending to consequences to be deprecated. So far as
my own experience goes, and I am not without my share, it neither
enervates nor satiates. It furnishes enjoyment that is calm and
soothing; and such enjoyment, instead of enfeebling, invigorates
the mind to sustain trials and sorrows. Why should we not enter
into every enjoyment that is followed by no painful consequences?
Why should we not be happy when we may? Is he not innocently
employed who is imagining a fairer scene--a better world--more
benevolence, and more joy than this ‘visible diurnal sphere’
affords? Addison is never presented to me in a light so amiable
as when he relates his day-dreams, his universal empire, in which
he puts down all folly and all wickedness, and makes all his
personages good and happy. Every writer who has produced a romance
worth reading, has been endowed in this way, as a matter of course;
and I confidently believe that the greatest and best of men have
been most strongly inclined to this sort of mental creation. May
not their noblest achievements have been the patterns of those
archetypes? I have no doubt that imaginings infinitely more
interesting than any recorded in romances, Arabian tales, or any
other work of fiction, have imparted their transient exhilaration
to meditative minds, and have passed away with the things that
never grew into the material and concrete grossness of sensible
existence. If ink and paper and printing could have been created as
cheaply and readily as a new earth and better men and women, and
scenes more like what we hope for at last, the world would have had
bequeathed to it more volumes, than would have weighed down all
the ponderous dulness of by-gone romance. I cannot assure myself,
that you would have been amused, or instructed in reading; but you
would then have been able to form some idea of the hours of pain,
embarrassment, lack of all external means of pleasant occupation,
journeying, cold and watching, that have been beguiled by this
employment. I only add that, so far as my experience extends, the
first calm days of spring, and the period of Indian summer in
autumn are most propitious to this sort of revery.


Note 8, page 48.

These and the subsequent views of ambition in this essay of M.
Droz, have been the theme of severe and sweeping strictures upon
the general tendency of his book. Ambitious and aspiring men will
find it ridiculous, of course, to exact, as a pre-requisite to
the pursuit of happiness, the abandonment, or the moderation of
ambitious thoughts, especially in such a country as ours, where
some boon is held out to tempt these aspirings in almost every
condition, from the mansion to the cabin. It may not be amiss
for men, who are themselves aspirants, and to whom the access to
distinction and power is easy, and the attainment probable, to
declaim against the tendency of these maxims. I know well, that
in every rank and position, the inculcation of aspiring thoughts,
emulation and rivalry is the first and last lesson, the grand
and beaten precept, upon which the million are acting. I am well
aware how many hearts are wrung by all the fierce and tormenting
passions, associated with this devouring one. I affirm nothing in
regard to my own interior views, respecting what the world calls
fame, glory and immortality. Those who are most dear to me, will
not understand me to be entering my _caveat_ to dissuade them from
this _last infirmity of noble minds_. Could I do it with more
eloquence than ever yet flowed from tongue or pen, there will
always be a hundred envious competitors for every single niche
in the temple of fame. It can be occupied but by one; and he who
gains it will exult in his elevation only during its freshness
and novelty. The rest, to the torment of fostered and devouring
desires, will add the bitterness of disappointment.

Since it is a fact out of question, that the greater portion of
the species can never secure the objects of their ambition, is it
ill-judged in one who treats upon the science of happiness, to
write for the million instead of the few favorites of fortune?
The principles of a philosophic investigation ought not to be
narrowed down to meet the wishes of the few. The question is,
whether, taking into view ambition and all the associated feelings,
the toil of pursuit, and the difficulty and unfrequency of the
attainment of its objects, it is, on the whole, favorable to
happiness to cherish the passion, or not? I am clear, that even
the successful aspirants, if their rivalry were more generous and
philanthropic, and their indulgence of the cankering and corroding
of ill-concealed envy, derision, hate and scorn, were regulated,
would be not the less rapid in reaching the goal, or happy in the
fruition of their attainment. I have little doubt, if an exact
balance of enjoyment and suffering could be struck, at the last
hour between two persons, whose circumstances in other respects
had been similar, one of whom had been distinguished in place
and power, in consequence of cultivating ambition; and the other
obscure in peaceful privacy, in consequence of having chosen that
condition, that the scale of happiness would decidedly incline
in favor of the latter. In a word, it is the index of sound
calculation, to prepare for the fate of the million, rather than
that of the few. Repress ambition, as much as we may, there will
always remain enough to render the world an aceldama, and the human
heart a place of concentrated torment.

It is clear, therefore, to me, that in making up the debt and
credit account of life, in relation to happiness, most of the
sentiments associated with ambition, and its prolific family of
self-tormenting passions, may be set down as gratuitous items
of misery, superinduced by our own voluntary discipline. I shall
be asked, what is to stimulate to exertion, to study, toil and
sacrifice, to great and noble actions, and what shall lead to fame
and renown, if this incentive be taken away? I answer, that, what
is ordinarily dignified with the appellation of ambition, is a vile
mixture of the worst feelings of our nature. There is in all minds,
truly noble, a sufficient impulse towards great actions, apart from
these movements, which are generally the excitements of little and
mean spirits. Take the whole nature of man into the calculation,
and there can never be a want of sufficient impulse towards
distinction, without a particle of those contemptible motives,
which are generally put to the account of praiseworthy incitement.
Truly great men have been remarkable for their exemption from
envy, the inseparable concomitant of conscious deficiency; and
for a certain calm and tranquil spirit, indicating moderation and
comparative indifference in the struggle of emulation. They are
able to say, in regard to the highest boon of ambition,

      ‘I neither spurn, nor for the favor call,
       It comes unasked-for, if it comes at all.’

Why, then, in a world, and in an order of society, where ambition,
with its associated passions, brings in an enormous amount to
the mass of human self-inflicted torment, should he be censured,
who advises, that in the philosophic and calculating pursuit of
happiness, this element of misery should be, as much as possible,
repressed? The question may be more strongly urged, when we take
into the account, the consideration, that the far greater portion
of the species must calculate on the bitterness of disappointment,
in addition to the miseries which are inseparable from the
indulgence of this passion. All the inordinate thirst for power
and fame of the countless aspirants, who desire to be Alexanders,
Cæsars and Napoleons, not only is so much subtracted from their
enjoyment, and added to their misery, but has little tendency to
aid them to attainments, which, after all, are as frequently the
award of contingency, as of calculation.

Let the evils of retirement and obscurity, be fairly balanced
with those of gratified ambition, and let the aspirant feel, that
they are absolutely incompatible, the one with the other.--Let
him then make his election, in view of the consequences, and not
foolishly expect that he can unite incompatible advantages. If he
chooses the dust and scramble of the arena, and the intoxicating
pleasures at the goal, let him not repine, that he cannot unite
with them those of repose, retirement and a tranquil mind. If, on
the contrary, he prefers to hold on the noiseless tenor of his
way, in peace and privacy, let not the serpents of envy sting him,
when he sees the car of the fortunate aspirant drawn forward by
the applauding million. Let not murmurs arise in his heart, when
he hears, or reads of the rewards, honors and immortality of those
whom he may believe to be endowed no higher than himself with
talents or virtues. Let him say, ‘no one can show me the mind, or
paint me the consciousness of that man. Fortune and my own choice
have assigned me the shade. Let me not embitter its coolness and
its satisfactions, by idle desires to unite advantages, that are,
in their nature, incongruous. Let me remember, that mine is the
condition of the million. My Creator cannot have doomed so vast
a proportion of his creatures to a state, which is necessarily
miserable. All that remains to me, is to make the best of the
common lot.’


Note 9, page 50.

Severe strictures have, also, been passed upon this maxim. I well
know, that the common rules proposed to the young, in commencing
their serious and more advanced studies, lead them to look forward
to happiness, as a garland suspended from the goal, an object only
in remote expectation, the fruition of which should be hoped for
only at a period of life, when few are capable of enjoyment, even
if the means were in their power. To calculate on comfort and
repose, early in life, has been considered as a sort of effeminate
weakness.

These unphilosophic views of education have, more than almost any
other, thrown over the whole course of preparatory discipline for
life, a repulsive gloom, tending to fill the mind of the pupil
with dismay and disgust in view of his studies.--The young should
be early imbued with the sentiment, that God sent them here to be
happy, not in indolence, intoxication, voluptuousness or insanity;
but in earnest and vigorous discipline for coming duties. And at
this bright epoch, when nature spreads a charm over existence, a
philosophic teacher may easily train them to invest their studies,
labors, and pursuits, and perhaps even their privations and
severer toils, with a coloring of cheerfulness and gayety, when
contemplated as the only means of discipline by which they may hope
to reach a desired end. They should be trained to meet events, and
brave the shock of adversity with a firm and searching purpose,
to find either a way to mitigate the pressure, or to increase
self-respect by the noble pride of manifesting to themselves, with
how much calmness and patient endurance they can overcome the
inevitable ills of their condition. In other words, they should
make enjoyment a means, as well as an end, that they may carry
onward, from their first days, an accumulating stock of happiness,
with which courage and cheerfulness may paint future anticipations
in the mellow lustre of past remembrances. In this way the bow of
promise may be made to bend its brilliant arch over every period of
this transient existence, connecting what has been, and what will
be, in the same radiant span.

Entertaining such views of the direction which might be given to
the juvenile mind, I mourn over those weak parents, who are nursing
their children with effeminate fondness, not allowing the _winds
to visit them too roughly_, pampering their wishes, instead of
teaching them to repress them: and rather striving to ward from
them all pains and privations, than teaching them that they must
encounter innumerable sorrows and disappointments, and disciplining
them to breast the ills of life with a conquering fortitude.
Opulence generally gives birth to this injudicious plan of parental
education. Penury, as little directed by sound views, but impelled
by the stern teaching of necessity, imparts to the children of the
poor, a much more salutary discipline, and they ordinarily come
forward with a more robust spirit, with more vigor, power and
elasticity; and it is in this way, that providence adjusts the
balance of advantages between these different conditions.

We have all admired the practical philosophy of the man, who, when
sick of a painful disease, thanked God that he was not subject to a
still more painful one; and when under the pressure of the latter,
found cause for cheerfulness, that he was not visited with both
diseases at the same time. Akin to this was the noble fortitude of
the mariner, who, when a limb was carried away by a cannon-ball,
congratulated himself that it was not his head. I do not say
that any one can find cheerfulness in contemplating such Spartan
spirits, but that a philosophy of this sort would disarm the common
ills of life of much of their power, and would even enable the
sufferer to find enjoyment in the midst of them.

It would be no disadvantage even to the ambitious and aspiring
to abstract, from the toils of their pursuit, the bitter and
corroding spirit of rivalry and envy, and in its stead to cultivate
sentiments of kindness, complacency and moderation. Let their ends
be so noble, as to give an air of dignity to the means that they
employ, and they will throw a splendor of self-respect over their
course. Let the aspirant say, ‘I struggle not for myself, but
to procure competence for aged parents, to gild their declining
years with the view of my success. It is for dependent relatives,
orphans, the poor and friendless, whom Providence has given
particular claims on me, that I struggle. It is to benefit and
gladden those who are dearer to me than life, and not for my own
sordid vanity and ambition, that I strive to toil up the ascent of
fame.

In fine, the author, while he inculcates the maxim that we should,
from the beginning, study to number happy days, would not teach,
as he has been charged with teaching, that we may give labor and
study and the toil of preparation to the winds, and consult only
the indolent leading of our passions; for he knows, as do we all,
that this course results in anything but ‘happy days.’ He would
send us, on the contrary, in pursuit of happiness, to the teaching
of wisdom and experience, that never bestow impracticable lessons.
He would only inculcate, that while others have taught us to seek
ultimate happiness through means of pain, we should make the means
themselves immediate sources of enjoyment. It is a fact out of
question, that we may train ourselves to find enjoyment in those
toils and privations, which are to others, sources of disgust
and sorrow. Who has not thrilled, as he read of the author, who,
oppressed with cares, infirmities and years, took leave of a
book, the result of the most laborious and protracted study, that
was to be published only after his death, with a pleasant ode of
thankfulness to it, as having furnished him agreeable occupation,
and beguiled years of sorrow and pain? On this subject, I too can
speak experimentally. I have often experienced an inward conscious
satisfaction in realizing the pleasure and enjoyment, which I
found in the same pursuits and labors, which were the most painful
drudgery to others, equally qualified to pursue them with myself.
The bee extracts honey from the same flower which to the spider
yields only poison.

Nothing but experience can teach us to what extent force of
character, and a capacity without cowardly shrinking, to face
danger, pain and death, may be acquired.--Compare, for example, a
militia-man torn from the repose of his retreat, and forced into
immediate battles, with the same person in the same predicament,
when he shall have become a trained veteran. Compare the only child
of weak, fond and opulent parents, as he is seen in the hour of
apprehended shipwreck, or of fierce conflict with the enemy, with
the sailor-boy, born in the same vicinity, but compelled by the
rough discipline of poverty, to encounter the elements, and the
aspect of danger and death from boyhood.

I shall take occasion hereafter, to remark on the stubborn and
invincible apathy of the red men of our forests, in the endurance
of slow fire, and all the forms of torture, which the ingenuity
of Indian revenge can devise. I no longer trace this apparent
insensibility to pain and fear, as I formerly did, to a more
callous frame, and nerves of obtuser feeling. I see in it the
astonishing result of their institutions, and the influence of
public opinion upon them. In the same connexion, I shall remark
upon the testimony which the conduct of martyrs bears to the same
point. Place a sufficient motive before the sufferer, and the
proper witnesses around him, and he may be disciplined to endure
anything without showing a subdued spirit. The most timid woman
will not shrink from a surgical operation, when those she loves
and respects, surround her and applaud her courage. Leave her
alone with the surgeon, and the very sight of his instrument will
produce shrieks and faintings. The mad personage who leaped the
Genesee falls, fell a victim, to the influence which encouraged
vanity and ambition exert upon their subject to spur him on to
any degree of daring. If the right application of a motive, so
little worthy as the mere gratification of a moment’s vanity, can
harden the spirit for such attempts, what might not be effected by
a discipline, wisely guided by a simple purpose to impart force,
energy and unshrinking courage, to meet and vanquish the inevitable
evils of life? To me there is nothing incredible in the story of
the Spartan boy, who had stolen the fox, and allowed the animal,
while concealed under his mantle, to tear his entrails, rather
than, by uttering a groan, to commit his character for hardihood
and capability of adroit thieving. Parents, your children will
be compelled to encounter fatigue, privation and pain, under any
circumstances in which they can be placed. You can easily pamper
them to an effeminacy that will shrink from any effort, and, if I
may so quote, ‘to die of a rose in aromatic pain;’ to be feeble,
timid, repining, and yet voluptuous. You can as easily teach them
to find pleasure in labor, and in the sentiment of that force of
mind, with which they can firmly meet pain, privation, danger and
death. Train them for the world in which they are destined to live.
Teach them to _quit themselves like men, and be strong_.


Note 10, page 51.

It is impossible to present a better summary of the essentials of
happiness. As the author remarks, they are difficult to unite. Yet,
whoever lacks either, must be peculiarly unfortunate, or indulgent
to himself, if he cannot trace the want to some aberration or
neglect of his own. Health, perhaps, is the least within our
power; for, by the fault of our ancestors, we may have inherited a
constitution and temperament essentially vitiated and unhealthy. We
may lose health by casualty or by the influence of causes utterly
beyond our knowledge or our control. But for one person thus
afflicted with want of health, it is notorious that a hundred are
so from causes which they may trace to their own mismanagement.
Tranquillity of mind, is certainly a frame, on which we have a
controlling influence. Whoever, in our country, has not competence,
must assuredly seek the cause, if he have health, in his own want
of industry or management. Most of the complaints of the caprice,
infidelity and unworthiness of friends would have a more equitable
application to our own want of temper, truth and disinterestedness.
These things, indispensable to happiness, are far more subject to
our command, than our self-flattery will allow us to imagine. The
greater portion of those about us might unite all these advantages.
Yet, if all misery, other than that which arises from want of
being able to unite all these numerous and difficult requisites to
happiness, were abstracted from human nature, I am confident that
a moiety of the sorrows of earth would be removed; in other words,
that a philosophic pursuit of happiness, would at once deliver us
from more than half of our suffering here below.


Note 11, page 59.

The memory of almost every person who has been present at a
funeral, attended by a protestant minister of a certain class, will
furnish him with recollections of these preposterous harangues
of attempted consolation. The mourners are instructed that it is
sinful to grieve; that grief implies want of faith in the great
truths of the gospel; that Christianity forbids it; and, more than
all, that it argues doubt of the happiness of the deceased; or a
murmuring want of submission to the Divine will. Such doctrines,
in the minds of weak and superstitious mourners who feel that it
is not in their power to repress grief, inspire painful distrust
and self-reproach; and, in men more disciplined in the ways
of the world, and more acquainted with human nature, contempt
for the ignorant folly or gross hypocrisy of the declaimer. The
unchanging constitution of human nature revolts at such maxims.
Whoever affects to be insensible to the loss of a child, relative,
or friend, is either a stranger to his own perceptions, practises
deceit, or has no heart to be grieved. Christianity is preëminently
the religion of tenderness, and forbids the indulgence of no
inherent emotion of our nature within its proper limits. It is most
absurd of all, to suppose that God has forbidden, or interprets
as murmurs, the sorrows that we feel from his stroke. There are
few persons so disinterested, even if they were assured beyond a
doubt, that the person they mourn is happy, as not to grieve at the
final earthly severance which cuts off the accustomed communion of
heart; and interdicts the mourner from the sight and participation
of that happiness. The cause of Christianity has suffered beyond
calculation, from the exaggeration of its requirements by weak
enthusiasts, or designing bigots. Distorted views and impracticable
requisitions have disgusted more persons with the system of the
gospel than Hume’s argument against miracles, or all the sophistry
of unbelief. The gospel takes into view the whole nature of man,
and all its precepts announce, _nolumus leges naturæ mutari_--_we
will that the laws of nature should not be changed_.


Note 12, page 61.

It is not necessary to recur to the history of great revolutions
to furnish the most impressive examples of human vicissitude and
instability. The Latin poet had reason for his maxim, who said,

      ‘Si fortuna juvat caveto tolli;
       Si fortuna tonat caveto mergi.’

Life in every country and in all time has been full of affecting
instances of the young, beautiful, endowed and opulent struck
down in the brightest presage of their dawn. That is the true
philosophy which draws, from continual exposure to these blows, a
motive, to make the most, in the way of innocent enjoyment, of the
period that is in our power.


Note 13, page 62.

This beautiful painting furnishes an impressive emblem of the
capability of the human constitution, corporeal and mental, to
assimilate itself to any change; and of becoming insensible, by
habit, to any degree of uniform endurance. Those fanatics in the
early ages of the church, preposterously called saints, and others
like them, professing all forms of religion, that may still be
found in the oriental countries, who sit for years on a pillar
under the open sky, or curve themselves into a half circle and
remain in that position until their forms grow to it, shortly cease
to feel much uneasiness in a posture which becomes habitual. To
restore them to their original forms, after nature has affixed her
seal of consent to the distortion, would, probably, cause as much
pain as was requisite to acquire the habit. We have all read the
affecting tale of the prisoner released from the Bastille after
a confinement of more than a quarter of a century. He found the
ordinary pursuits and intercourse of life insupportable, and begged
to be restored to his dungeon. This is a most important aspect
of the nature of man which parents and instructers have as yet
scarcely taken into view in their efforts to mould the youthful
character. Children can as easily be formed to be Spartans as
Sybarites; and, in the former case, they not only acquire the noble
attributes of courage and force of character, but contract habits
of patient and manly endurance, furnishing a better shield against
the ills of life than any in the command of opulence or foresight.


Note 14, page 65.

‘Fate leads the willing, drags the unwilling on,’ and the single
question is, by which of these processes would we choose to meet
our lot? No doctrine of the true philosophy lies so obviously on
the surface as the wisdom of resignation; the disposition, in the
exercise of which, more than in any order, a wise man differs from
the million of murmuring and repining beings about him, who are
madly struggling with the inexorable powers of nature, and doubting
their evils by this useless and painful resistance. When we can
no longer either evade or resist fortune, we can, at least, half
disarm her by a calm and manly resignation.


Note 15, page 69.

The instinctive sentiment of the love of country and home is
beautifully described in these paragraphs. In health and good
fortune, the amusements and distractions of life, may keep this
sentiment out of sight. But ‘_dulces moriens reminiscitur Argos_’
is the feeling with which most strangers die in a foreign land.
In every heart, rightly constituted, the moment the absence of
adventitious pleasures forces the mind back upon itself, the
instinctive feeling resumes its original force. It seems to me
always an unfavorable trait in the character of an immigrant from
abroad, that he is disposed to speak unfavorably of his native
country, or does not seem to prefer it to all others. God has
wrought into the mind of every good man a filial feeling towards
his native country.


Note 15a, page 69.

None of the sentiments and maxims of M. Droz have been more
severely censured than those of the succeeding paragraphs. I am as
little disposed to inculcate an indolent philosophy, as any other
person. These views seem peculiarly unfitted for the genius of our
country, where everything respires, as it ought, energy, industry,
a fixed purpose and a keen pursuit. That such are the requirements
of our institutions is a truth too strongly forced upon us by
the order of everything in our country, to require any other
proof. I would be the last person to feel disposed to recommend
a philosophy, which would tend to quench that busy and daring
spirit which is the most striking characteristic of our nation.
No elevation or opulence among us can dispense with a definite
pursuit. So forcibly is every citizen reminded of this, by all he
sees about him, that without a pursuit, no one among us can sustain
his own self-respect. He, who courts seclusion and retirement, on
the principles of the author is obliged, even in his retirement,
to keep himself engaged. He must devote himself to agriculture,
manufactures, or some other absorbing pursuit.

It is hardly necessary to add that no American is in danger
of subscribing to his disqualifying views of the law, or any
other profession. A freeman ought to hold, that he can confer
respectability upon whatever pursuit circumstances may impel him
to follow. Happily, no harm would result, in our country, from the
dislike of the author to the law. By what seems to me an unhappy
general consent among us, the law is absorbing in the temptations
that it offers to our young men. It is the prescribed avenue to all
honor and place. All our functionaries must have passed into the
temple of power and fame through this portico. Hence it is, and
probably long will be thronged by a great corps of supernumeraries.
I would certainly be the last, not to think respectfully of the
profession; but still I dislike to see so many of our aspiring
young men crowding into it, to meet inevitable disappointment.

But critics will moderate their strictures upon the author, when
they call to mind, that although there is no such class, as people
of leisure in our country, it constitutes a great and powerful one
in France; perhaps greater in proportion, than any other country.
The chief application of these paragraphs must be to men of that
condition, of whom the better class make literature at once
their amusement and pursuit. For such, these are, probably, the
wisest and best precepts that could be given. The whole of that
part of this chapter, which inculcates an inactive retirement,
is altogether calculated for another meridian, than that of our
country. I have entirely omitted some of the passages, as not
only of erroneous general tendency, but altogether inapplicable
to any order of things among us. But admitting this, and a few
other trifling exceptions, I have been astonished at the charges
which have been brought against the moral tendency of the general
opinions of M. Droz.


Note 16, page 73.

This short chapter upon health seems to me full of the soundest
practical wisdom. Every one must be aware, that the wise pursuit
of happiness must be preceded by the preserving of health. The
wise ancients justly made the _mens sana in corpore sano_, to
be the condition, if not the essence of human happiness. Most
treatises upon health have oppressed the subject by too many, and
too intricate rules. It would be difficult to add to the author’s
precepts, brief as they are, so far as they relate to the moral and
intellectual regimen necessary to health. I add a remark, or two,
touching some physical appliances, that should be appended to the
moral rules.

So far as my reading and observation extend, there are but three
circumstances, which have almost invariably accompanied health and
longevity. The favored persons have lived in elevated rather than
in low and marshy positions; have been possessed of a tranquil and
cheerful temperament, and active habits; and have been early risers.

It is related that the late King George the Third, who made the
causes of longevity a subject of constant investigation, procured
two persons, each considerably over a hundred years of age, to
dance in his presence. He then requested them to relate to him
their modes of living, that he might draw from them, if possible,
some clue to the causes of their vigorous old age. The one had been
a shepherd, remarkably temperate and circumspect in his diet and
regimen; the other a hedger, equally noted for the irregularity,
exposure, and intemperance of his life. The monarch could draw
no inference, to guide his inquiries, from such different modes
of life, terminating in the same result. On further inquiry, he
learned, that they were alike distinguished by a tranquil easiness
of temper, active habits, and early rising.

After all the learned modern expositions of the causes of
dyspepsia, I suspect that not one in a thousand is aware how much
temperance and moderation in the use of food conduce to health.
There are very few among us who do not daily consume twice the
amount of food, necessary to satisfy the requisitions of nature.
The redundant portion must weigh as a morbid and unconcocted mass
upon the wheels of life. Every form of alcohol is unquestionably
a poison, slow or rapid, in proportion to the excess in which it
is used. Disguise it is as we may, be the pretexts of indulgence
as ingenious and plausible, as inclination and appetite can frame,
it retains its intrinsic tendencies under every sophistication.
Wine, in moderation, is, doubtless, less deleterious than any
of its disguises. In declining age, and in innumerable cases of
debility, it may be indicated as a useful remedy; but even here,
only as a less evil to countervail a greater. Pure water, all other
circumstances equal, is always a healthier beverage for common use.
Next to temperance, a quiet conscience, a cheerful mind, and active
habits, I place early rising, as a means of health and happiness. I
have hardly words for the estimate which I form of that sluggard,
male or female, that has formed the habit of wasting the early
prime of day in bed.--Laying out of the question the positive loss
of life, the _magna pars dempta solido de die_, and that too of the
most inspiring and beautiful part of the day, when all the voices
of nature invoke man from his bed; leaving out of the calculation,
that longevity has been almost invariably attended by early rising;
to me, late hours in bed present an index to character, and an omen
of the ultimate hopes of the person who indulges in this habit.
There is no mark, so clear, of a tendency to self-indulgence. It
denotes an inert and feeble mind, infirm of purpose, and incapable
of that elastic vigor of will which enables the possessor always
to accomplish what his reason ordains. The subject of this
unfortunate habit cannot but have felt self-reproach, and a purpose
to spring from his repose with the freshness of the dawn. If the
mere indolent luxury of another hour of languid indulgence is
allowed to carry it over this better purpose, it argues a general
weakness of character, which promises no high attainment or
distinction.--These are never awarded by fortune to any trait, but
vigor, promptness and decision. Viewing the habit of late rising,
in many of its aspects, it would seem as if no being, that has
any claim to rationality, could be found in the allowed habit of
sacrificing a tenth, and that the most pleasant and spirit-stirring
portion of life, at the expense of health, and the curtailing of
the remainder, for any pleasure which this indulgence could confer.


Note 17, page 76.

From personal experience and no inconsiderable range of
observation, I am convinced that the author has by no means
overrated the influence of imagination upon health and disease. It
is indeed astonishing, at this late period, when every physiologist
and physician is ready to proclaim his own recorded observations
upon the medicinal influence of the moral powers, the passions, and
especially the imagination, that so few medical men have thought
it an object to employ them as elements of actual application.
Hitherto these unknown and undefined powers of life and death
have been in the hands of empirics, jugglers, mountebanks and
pretended dispensers of miraculous healing. It is, at the same
time, matter of regret, that scientific physicians, instead of
questioning their undeniable cures, and pouring attempted ridicule
upon them, have not separated the true from the false, and sought
access to the real fountain of the efficacy of their practice,
the employment of confident faith, hope, and the unlimited agency
of the all pervading power of the imagination. Many physicians
are sufficiently wise, and endowed with character, to exercise
circumspection in giving their opinions and pronouncing upon
the prognostics of their patients. They regulate their words,
countenance and deportment with a caution and prudence which speak
volumes in regard to their conviction of the influence which
imprudence in these points might have.

In fact, it is only necessary to observe the intense and painful
earnestness with which the patient and the friends watch his
countenance and behaviour, to be aware what an influence may
be thus exerted. It is only requisite to understand with what
prying anxiety the sick man questions those around him, what the
physician thinks and predicts of his case, to make him sensible
how vigilantly he should be on his guard, in spending his judgment
rashly in the case. All this negative wisdom, in the application
of moral means, is sufficiently common. Not to possess it, in a
considerable degree, would indicate a physician unacquainted with
the most common etiquette of a sick chamber.

But, as yet, we see the positive employment of these means almost
wholly interdicted by custom to regular physicians. We contend
for their exercise only within the limits of the most scrupulous
veracity and the most severe discretion. What powers would he not
exert, who, snatching these moral means from the hands of empirics,
and who, to thorough acquaintance with all that can be known in
regard to physical means, should join the wise and discriminating
aid of an imagination creating a healing world of hope and
confidence about the patient? Such a benefactor of our species
will, ere long, arise, who will introduce a new era into medicine.

Who can doubt that implicit faith in the healing powers of prince
Hohenlohe may have wrought cures, even in cases of paralysis,
without the least necessity for introducing the vague and
misapplied term, a miracle; or that some out of many persons in an
asylum of paralytics would find themselves able to fly when bombs
fell upon the roof of their receptacle?

The influence of a vigorous will upon the physical movements of
our frame has scarcely been conjectured, much less submitted to
the scrutiny of experiment. Yet it would be easy, I think, to
select innumerable cases where, by its means, men have exerted
powers previously unknown to themselves. We see the immediate
application of almost superhuman energy upon the access of frenzy
to the patient; and this affords conclusive proof that, upon the
addition of the due amount of excitement, the body and mind become
capable of incredible exertions, and yet sink into infantine
debility the moment that the excitement is withdrawn. Every one
has been made aware of what mere resolution can do, in sustaining
the frame in cases of cold, exposure, hunger and exhaustion. All
these instances are only different forms of proof, which might
be multiplied indefinitely, of the agency of moral powers upon
physical nature. Under similar influences, omens and predictions,
in weak and superstitious minds, become adequate causes of their
own completion. Since perfect knowledge alone can deliver the mind
from more or less susceptibility of this influence, it is important
that it should be wisely directed to bear, as far as it may, upon
the imagination, in kindling it to confidence, cheerfulness and
hope.


Note 18, page 79.

      ‘Why drew Marseilles’ good bishop purer breath,
       When the air sickened, and each gale was death?’

Because he was sustained by a cheerful reliance upon Providence,
a firm determination to do his duty, and have no fear of
consequences. The whole scope of my own observation, beside the
sick bed, perfectly coincides with these views. I do not say that
there are not numberless exceptions. But of this I am confident,
that the general rule is, that persons who attend the sick and
dying, in cases of epidemic disease of a mortal type, with a
fearless and cheerful mind, escape; while the timid, who are
alarmed and have an implicit belief in the danger of contagion,
succumb.


Note 19, page 83.

If there ever was an age when invalids and the suffering might
promise themselves sympathy in the dolorous detail of their
symptoms, which is questionable, it certainly is not now, during
the era of labor-saving machinery, political economy, and the
all-engrossing influence of money and corporate achievement. He who
now suffers from acute pain, in any form, will do wisely to summon
all his strength and philosophy to suppress any manifestation in
his countenance and muscles, rather than task his eloquence in
framing his tale of symptoms.

This whole chapter upon health abounds in the highest practical
wisdom, and the hints in it might easily be expanded to a volume. I
only add, that I earnestly recommend a poem upon the same subject,
one, as it seems to me, among the most classical and beautiful
in our language, and which has become strangely and undeservedly
obsolete--Dr Armstrong’s Art of Health.


Note 20, page 83.

How often have similar thoughts pressed upon my mind, as I have
stood over the bed of the sick and dying! Here is the peculiar
empire of minds truly and nobly benevolent, where the head and main
prop of a family is preparing to conflict with the last enemy:
where pain and groans, terror and death, fill the foreground, and
the dim but inevitable perspective of desolation, struggle and
want, in contact with indifference and selfishness, opens in the
distance before the survivors. Let us thank God for religion.
Philosophy may inculcate stern endurance and wise submission; but
knows not a fit and adequate remedy. The hopes and the example
imparted by him _who went about doing good_, are alone sufficient
for the relief of such cases, of which, alas! our world is full.


Note 21, page 86.

No view of human life is more consoling or just than that presented
in these paragraphs. Yet no human calculation will ever reach
the sum of agony that has been inflicted by the jealousy, envy
and heart-burning that have resulted from that most erroneous
persuasion, that certain conditions and circumstances of life bring
happiness in themselves. Beautifully has the bible said, that ‘God
has set one thing over against another’--has balanced the real
advantages of the different human conditions. The result of my
experience would leave me in doubt and at a loss, in selecting
the condition which I should deem most congenial to happiness. I
should have to balance abundance of food, on the one hand, against
abundance of appetite, on the other; the habit superinduced by the
necessity of being satisfied with a little, with the habit of being
disgusted with the trial of much. There are joys, numerous and
vivid, peculiar to the rich; and others, in which none but those
in the humbler conditions of life can participate. In the whole
range of the enjoyment of the senses, if there be any advantage,
it belongs to the poor. The laws of our being have surrounded the
utmost extent of human enjoyment with adamantine walls, which one
condition can no more overleap than another. It is wonderful to
see this admirable adjustment, like the universal laws of nature,
acting everywhere and upon everything. Even in the physical world,
what is granted to one country is denied to another; and the
wanderer who has seen strange lands and many cities, in different
climes, only returns to announce, as the sum of his experience
and the teaching of years, that light and shadow, comfort and
discomfort, pleasure and pain, like air and water, are diffused in
nearly similar measures over the whole earth.


Note 21a, page 88.

It needs but little acquaintance with human condition to perceive,
in the general adjustment of advantages settled by Providence,
that great proportions of them have been thrown into opposite
scales, and so contrasted that the selection of one class implies
the rejection of the other. For example, smitten with the thousand
temptations of wealth, you are determined to be rich. Be it so.
Industry, frugality and the convergence of your faculties to
this single point will hardly fail to render you so. But then
you will not be so absurd as to envy another the fame of talents
and acquirements which required absorbing devotion to pursuits
incompatible with yours.

You are rich, and complain of satiety and _ennui_. Knew you not,
when you determined to be rich, that poor people sing and dance
about their cabin fires? You have gained power and distinction
and discovered the heartless selfishness of your competitors and
dependents. Were you ignorant that friendship can only be purchased
by friendship; and that, in selecting your all-engrossing pursuit,
you have precluded yourself from furnishing your quota of the
reciprocity? The choices of life are alternatives. You may select
from this scale, or that. But, in most cases, you cannot take from
both. How much murmuring would be arrested if this most obvious
truth were understood and men would learn to be satisfied with
their alternative! Choose wisely and deliberately; and then quietly
repose on your choice. Say, ‘I have this; another has that. I am
certain that I have my choice. I do not know but his condition was
forced upon him.’


Note 22, page 89.

If I have ever allowed myself the indulgence of envy, it is after
having tasted the pleasure of rewarding merit, or relieving
distress, in thinking how continually such celestial satisfactions
are within the reach of the opulent. What a calm is left in the
mind after having wiped away tears! What aspirations are excited
in noting the joy and gratitude consequent upon misery relieved!
How delightful to recur to the remembrance during the vigils of
the night watches! How it expands the heart to reflect upon the
consciousness of the all powerful and all good Being, measuring the
circuit of the universe in doing good! Unhappily, the experience
of all time demonstrates that the possession of opulence and power
not only has no direct tendency to inspire increased sensibility
to such satisfactions, but has an opposite influence. For one,
rendered more kind and benevolent by good fortune, how many become
callous, selfish and proud by it! Kindly and wisely has Providence
seen fit to spare most men this dangerous trial.


Note 23, page 92.

This chapter of the author, among the rest, has been obnoxious
to severe strictures. I am sensible that the young require the
exercise of cautious discretion in few questions more than in
this, ‘How far is it wise to disregard public opinion?’ To press
the point too far is to incur the reputation of eccentricity
and arrogant confidence in our own judgment. Implicitly to
copy the expressions and habits of the multitude precludes all
pursuit of happiness by system; and reduces the whole inquiry to
the injunction, to walk with the rest, and add our _ennui_ and
disappointment to the mass of the unhappiness of all those who
have gone before. If certain modes appear to me, after the most
deliberate examination, conducive to my happiness, why should I
be deterred from adopting them, because I am not countenanced by
the general opinion and example of a crowd, each individual of
which I should altogether reject as a teacher and an example? If
I avow that the ten thousand, in all time, have formed the most
erroneous judgments, touching the wisdom of human pursuits, why
should I continue blindly to copy their errors? He is certainly
the most fortunate man who, if an exact account of his sensations
and thoughts could be cast into a sum at his last hour, would be
found to have enjoyed the greatest number of agreeable moments,
pleasurable sensations and happy reflections. If to court
retirement, repose, the regulation of the desires and passions,
and the cultivation of those affections which are best nurtured in
the shade, be the most certain route to happiness, why should I
be swayed from choosing that path by the suggestions of ambition,
avarice and the spirit of the world, which enjoin the common course?

Yet every one is, more or less, a slave to the prevalent fashions
of thinking and acting. How much vile hypocrisy does this slavery
which covers the face of society with a vast mask of semblance,
engender? Contemplate the routine of all the professions which we
make and infringe in a single day, in the manifest violation of
our inward thought and belief; and we must admit that the world
agrees to enact a general lie, alike deceiving and deceived,
through terror of being the first to revolt against the thraldom of
opinion. The very persons, too, who cherish the profoundest secret
contempt for the judgment of the multitude, are generally the
loudest and the first in decrying any departure from the standard
of public opinion almost as an immorality.

I would by no means desire to see those most dear to me arrogantly
setting at defiance received ideas and usages. These have, as the
author justly remarks, a salutary moral sway in repressing the
influence of the impudent and abandoned. I am not insensible to
the danger of following our independent judgment beyond the limits
of a regulated discretion. But there is no trait in the young for
which I feel a more profound respect, than the fixed resolve to
consult their own light, in setting the rules of their conduct and
selecting their alternatives. A calm and reflecting independence,
an unshaken firmness in encountering vulgar prejudices, is what I
admire as the evidence of strong character, fearless thinking and
capability of self-direction.


Note 24, page 98.

How often must every reflecting mind have been led to similar
views of human nature! To form just estimates and entertain
right sentiments of our kind, we must not contemplate men under
the action of the narrowness of sectarian hate, or through the
jaundiced vision of party feeling. We must see them in positions
like those so happily presented by the author, when great and
sweeping calamities level men to the consciousness and the
sympathies of a common nature, and a sense of common exposure to
misery, and open the fountains of generous feeling. Who has not
seen men, on such occasions, forget their pride, their miserable
questions of rank and precedence, and meet with open arms and the
mingled tears of gratitude and relief, persons, the view of whom
under other circumstances, would have called forth only feelings of
scornful comparison and reckless contempt?

The incident of the hostile French and German posts is a singularly
touching one. In what a horrid light does it place the character
and passions of princes, generals, conquerors and warriors, in
all time, who for their measureless cupidity, or the whim of
their ambition, have used these amiable beings, formed with
natural sympathies to aid and love each other, as the mechanical
engines of their purposes, to meet breast to breast as enemies,
and plunge the murderous steel into each others’ hearts! Hence,
rivers of life blood have flowed as uselessly as rain falls upon
the ocean! It is difficult to determine whether we ought most to
execrate the accursed ambition of the few, or despise the weak
stupidity of the many who have been led, unresistingly, like
animals to the slaughter, only the more firmly to rivet the chains
of the survivors. What a view does war present, of the miserable
ignorance, the brute stupidity of the mass of the species, and the
detestable passions of those called the great, in all time! Who
does not exult to see the era, every day approaching, when men will
be too wise, too vigilant and careful of their rights to become
instruments in the hands of others; when the rational consciousness
of their own predominant physical power shall be guided by wisdom,
self-watchfulness and self-respect? Then, instead of being tamely
led out to slay each other, when invoked to this detestable sport
of kings, they will show their steel to their oppressors.


Note 24a, page 99.

I am as much impressed with the eloquence of this passage as
with its truth. I reserve more particular views of religion for
comments on the letter upon the subject. I wish to present in this
place, as consonant with the spirit of this passage, one view of
religion which has long been one of my most fixed and undoubting
conclusions. It is, that man is a religious being, by the organic
constitution of his frame, still more than by any intellectual
process of reasoning. I have no doubt, that a rightly organized
and well endowed man, born and reared in a desert isle, without
ever being brought into contact with man or any discipline to call
forth reason or speech, would be subject to precisely the same
emotions as, varied and moulded by the circumstances of birth and
education, constitute the substance of all the religions in the
world; in other words, that man is constituted a religious animal
in the same way as he clearly is an animal with other instincts
and passions. I am aware, that divines and moralists do not often
insist upon the religious instinct, as one of the most conclusive
and convincing arguments (to me, at least,) of the soul’s
immortality. It seems with them the favorite view to consider
religion a science that may be taught, like geometry or chemistry.

To me, this absorbing subject presents a very different aspect. I
see man everywhere religious in some form. The sentiment takes the
molding of his accidental circumstances. It is poetry, enthusiasm,
eloquence, bravery; but in every form an aspiration after the vast,
illimitable, eternal, shadowy conceptions of an unknown hereafter,
that the senses have not embodied. It is rational or fanciful, it
is respectable or superstitious, it is a pure abstraction or a
gorgeous appeal to the senses, according to one’s country, training
and temperament. But man, whether he be a dweller in the far isles
of the sea, or in the crowded mart, whether christian or savage,
is everywhere found, in some form, invoking a God and reposing the
hopes and affections of his worn heart in another and a better
world; and extending his faith to an immortal life and an eternal
sphere of action.

Instead of searching for this universal principle with
metaphysicians, pronouncing upon it with dogmatists, or deducing it
from creeds, or creeds from it, I behold in it the same unwritten
revelation which we call instinct. Vague and undefined as is this
law, and questioned by some as is even its existence, it announces
to us one of the most impressive and beautiful homilies upon the
truth and goodness of the Author of our being. It may be called
the scripture of the lower orders, guiding them, with unerring
certainty, to their enjoyments and their end. Beasts feel it, and
graze the plain. Birds feel it, and soar in the air. Fishes feel
it, and dart along their liquid domain; each feeding, moving,
resting, playing and perpetuating its kind, according to its
organic laws. Winter comes upon the gregarious tribes of water
fowls enjoying themselves in the Canadian lakes. They listen to
this call from heaven, and mount the autumnal winds; and without
chart or compass, by a course to which that of circumnavigators
is devious, they sail to the shores of the south, where a softer
atmosphere and new supplies of food await them. It leads the young
one of these animals, scarcely yet disengaged from the shell, to
patter its bill in the dry sand, impatiently to search for water
before it has yet seen it. It creates in the new born infant a
purpose to search for its supplies in the yet untasted fountains of
the maternal bosom. It guides all the lower orders of being through
the whole mysterious range of their peculiar habits and modes of
life. Under its influence, animals and men exercise powers which
transcend the utmost efforts of our reason. Who can tell me why the
duckling plunges into the water with the shell on its head? Who can
inform me how the affectionate house dog, blindfolded and conveyed
in utter darkness in a carriage to a distance of fifty leagues,
the moment he is emancipated, returns by a more direct route than
that by which he came? There would be no use in presenting the
most extended details of these developments of instinct through
the whole range of animated nature. Every one knows that wherever
we discern them, either in the structure or habits of the animal,
or both, they are indications of unerring guidance, the voice of
eternal and unswerving truth, which, as soon as promulgated, is
received as the parental counsel of the Author of nature.

He who could interpret the language and the gestures of the lower
orders would see in the structure and manifested wants of fishes,
that water was provided as a home for them, had he seen them in the
air. When he had noted the movements and heard the cries of the new
born infant, he would be in no doubt, that the nutriment in the
maternal bosom was stored for it somewhere. Seeing the structure,
the starting pinions and plumage of the unfledged bird in its nest,
he could be at no loss in reasoning, that as these indications of
contrivance for other modes of life were lost in its present manner
of existence, it was intended for movements, where pinions and
plumage would avail it.

As certain as these instincts and indications are the pledged
verity of the Author of nature, that a sphere is provided for
the exercise of these undeveloped powers, and a corresponding
gratification for these instinctive desires, so sure as they
point out, in a language, which can neither deceive nor be
mistaken, the aim and end of the animal to which they belong,
so sure, if religion be an instinctive sentiment, and the hope,
and the persuasion of another existence result from the organic
constitution of our nature, there must be another life. That it is
so, the usages and modes of all people that have yet been known,
the people of the first ages, and the last, the people of the
highest refinement, and those, who scarcely know the use of fire,
have concurred to prove to us. Superficial travellers, indeed, have
told us of newly discovered tribes, who had no visions of a God--a
worship, or an hereafter. Other travellers have followed them, and
observed better, and discovered, that their predecessors based the
fact on their own ignorance. They have been found to belong to the
general analogy, and to look to

      ‘Some happier land in depth of woods embraced;
       Some lovelier island in the watery waste.’

It seems to me, that this universal agreement of religious ideas is
the most unequivocal manifestation, that the sentiment of religion
is an instinct, that is exhibited in the whole range of animated
nature. If so, it is the offered pledge of the divine veracity,
that the soul is immortal; and that as certain as the instinct of
migrating birds is proof, that the milder skies which they seek,
exist, and are prepared for them, so surely the undeveloped powers
of the spirit, which have no range on the earth, have a country
prepared also for them. Our aspirations, our _longings after
immortality_, every mode of worship, and every form of faith--are
the rudiments, the germs, the starting pinions of the embryo
spirit, which is to escape from its nest at death, and fly in the
celestial atmosphere, in which it was formed to move.

To me these universal religious manifestations are proofs, that
religion springs not, as some suppose, from tradition; or, as
others think, from reasoning. It is a sentiment. It is an inwrought
feeling in our mental constitution, an unwritten, universal, and
everlasting gospel, pointing to God and immortality. Bring the most
uninstructed peasant, who has seen nothing of the earth, but its
plains, in sight of Chimborazo. The thrill of awe and sublimity,
that springs within him at the view, and lifts his spirit above
the blue summits to the divinity, is one of the forms, in which
this sentiment acts. The natural mental movements, in view of the
illimitable main, of the starry firmament, of elevated mountains,
of whatever is vast in dimension, irresistible in power, terrible
in the exercise of anger, in short, all those emotions, which we
call the sublime, are modified actings of the religious sentiment.
Justly has the author pronounced the universality of these ideas
the highest testimony to the elevation of human nature. It is the
most impressive and interesting attribute of the soul, that it is
subject to these impulses. It is a standing index, that the godlike
stranger, imprisoned in clay, has, inwrought in its consciousness,
indelible impressions of its future destiny.


Note 25, page 101.

Whoever philosophically considers the constitution of the human
mind--how much we are the creatures of our circumstances, how much
we are blown about by impulse and passion, the dimness of our own
mental vision upon most subjects, the narrow limit, which separates
between truth and falsehood, right and wrong, and moreover, that
we ourselves view everything through the coloring of our own pride
and prejudice--will perceive at once, that, under all circumstances
of error and even of crime, men are quite as worthy of pity, as
of vindictive blame. A little, cold and selfish mind invariably
finds much matter for bitter censure in every act, that, according
to its own chart, is an aberration. On the contrary, nothing, in
my estimate, so decidedly marks a generous and noble, as well as
an enlightened and a philosophic spirit, as the disposition to be
indulgent in its construction of the views and conduct of others,
and to interpret all by the comment of palliation and kindness,
whenever the case will admit of them. Great minds fail not to be
conscious what a weak, miserable compound of vanity, impulse,
ignorance and selfishness is that lord of creation, that passive
molding of circumstances, which we call man. Of course in calmly
scanning his views and conduct, all other sensations than those
of pity and kindness, die away within him. As the human mind is
exalted by its light, and its intrinsic elevation towards the
divinity, in the same proportion it soars above the mists of its
own passions and prejudices, and sees little in humanity to inspire
other feelings, than those of compassion and benevolence. What is
the view of human nature, presented to a wise and good man?

      ‘’Tis but to know how little can be known,
       To see all others’ faults, and feel our own.’


Note 26, page 102.

I am not certain, that the real spirit of tolerance has made so
much progress in this age, as is commonly imagined. Who among us
admits in practice, as well as theory, that the mind is passive in
receiving evidence, and forming conclusions, which it cannot shape,
except according to impressions, which it has much less power to
exclude, or evade, than is generally believed? Who among us acts
on the conviction, that errors of opinion are almost invariably
involuntary? Every view of human nature, and the laws of the human
mind ought to inspire us with an unlimited feeling of tolerance
towards those who differ from us in opinion, howsoever widely. We
cannot fail so to feel, if we reflect that, had we been in their
situation, and under their circumstances, and they in ours, our
views might have been reversed. Yet it is scarcely possible to
converse with any one a few moments, without starting them by
some opposing opinion, that jars with their excited feelings and
a certain amount of estrangement is the result. Who can conduct a
disputed point, in politics or religion, with an unruffled temper?
Angry disputation is only another form of intolerance. If we
narrowly inspect the actings of human nature, we shall discover,
that the whole world is composed of individuals, almost every one
of whom thinks he has a right to be offended with every other one,
who does not adopt his opinions.

It is very true, that the age of actual persecution, by fines,
imprisonment and death, is gone by. But this results rather
from practical political progress of ideas, than from a settled
conviction that no one mind has a right to find, in the opinions
of another mind, cause of offence. Whoever cannot look upon the
most opposite faith and opinions of his neighbor, in religion, in
politics, and the ordinary concerns of life, without any feeling of
temper and bitterness, in view of that difference, is in heart and
spirit intolerant. In this view, who can justly and fully lay claim
to toleration? The whole world is divided into millions of little
parties and sects, often finding the bitterest germs of contention
in the smallest differences. Scarcely one in ten thousand, of all
these sects and parties, has real philosophic magnanimity enough to
perceive, that all other men have as much claim for indulgence to
their opinions, as he exacts for his own.


Note 27, page 102.

It would be amusing, if such important consequences did not flow
from the error, to perceive, how much weight most people attach
to the sect and party to which the persons, about whom they are
forming an estimate, belong. The externals, the deportment, dress
and manner are often strongly influenced by these matters; but
the mental complexion or temperament far less than is commonly
supposed. We meet with people, every day, of the most exclusive and
bigoted creeds, who act liberally: and again with people, who have
much liberality and catholicism in their mouths, and very little
in their temper and spirit. I have met with liberal and illiberal
people, in almost equal proportions, in all the sects, parties
and denominations, with which I have been acquainted. Still, I do
not, as from these remarks it might be inferred that I do, deem
error, even in abstract opinions, such as those which appertain
to religious and metaphysical subjects, as of no consequence. But
I have not time, nor have I place, in a note, for explaining my
convictions on this subject.


Note 27a, page 104.

An indiscreet and exaggerating zeal often injures the cause it
would wish to serve. The gospel is best sustained by its own
unborrowed glory, and is prejudiced by adventitious appendages.
I have often heard ministers declare, from the pulpit, that the
duty of forgiveness, and of loving and doing good to enemies was
a peculiar discovery of the gospel, a precept unknown before. We
have never considered it among the objects of the mission of our
Lord, to reveal a new code of morals. The grand eternal principles
of this science were originally engraven on the heart. Man could
not have existed in society without them. Whoever has read the
elaborate and eloquent treatises of heathen moralists, will
perceive, that there was little left incomplete in the code; and
that these sublime virtues were eulogized, as beautiful and just
in theory, if not to be expected in practice. It is the spirit,
unction and tenderness of gospel inculcation, that is unique and
original. The heathen ethical writers had not failed to enjoin it
upon the members of communities, to aid and love one another. But
it is only necessary to glance upon the apostolic epistles, to see
that Christians were a new and peculiar people, bound together by
cords of affection, altogether unknown in the previous records of
the human heart. What tenderness, what love, _stronger than death_,
what sublime disinterestedness! How reckless to the sordid motives
of ambition and interest, which ruled the surrounding world! We
scarcely need other evidence, that this simplicity of love, so
unlike aught the world had seen before, was not an affection of
earthly mold; and that this new and strong people were not bound
together by ties, which had relation to the grossness of earthly
bonds. To me there is something inexpressibly delightful and of
which I am never weary, in contemplating the originality and
simplicity of early Christian affection, nor is it one of the
feeblest testimonies to the glory and divinity of the gospel.

For the rest, I have much abridged the paragraphs, to which this
note alludes, and have interpolated some expressions, not found in
the original--because I would not allow myself to leave anything
equivocal, touching my own views of the importance of Christian
morals and example.

It would be useless to add to the beautiful views, presented by
the author, of the disposition to oblige, and the necessity of
cultivating modesty, and an equal and serene temper. One cannot
enlarge upon these beaten topics, as he has foreseen, without
running into common-places. These virtues are preëminently their
own reward. Whoever chooses to indulge the opposite tempers has
only to reflect, that he assumes the thankless office of becoming
a self-tormentor, and injures no one so much as himself. Of these
fierce passions, the heathen poets have given us an affecting
emblem in the undying vultures, gnawing upon the ever growing
entrails of Tityus. If you would form the sublimest conceptions
of the eternal and underived satisfaction of the divinity,
cultivate dispositions to oblige, and seize occasions to practise
beneficence. If you would image more impressive ideas of the
torment of demons than poets have dreamed, muse upon injuries;
cultivate envy and revenge, and wish that you had the bolts of the
thunderer, only that you might hurl them upon your foes. If you
would experience the eternal gnawing of the vulture allow yourself
in the constant indulgence of your temper.


Note 28, page 109.

To those, who have already assumed this tie, or contemplate
assuming it, not a word need be said upon the most worn of all
themes, the paramount influence of marriage, beyond all other
relations, in imparting the coloring of brightness or gloom to
all subsequent life. The place, in which the only satisfactions
of life, that are worth any serious pursuit, are to be found, is
within the domestic walls. Honor, fame, wealth, luxury, literary
distinction, everything is extrinsic, and hollow, everything the
mere mockery and shadow of joy, but the comfort of a quiet and
affectionate home. Whoever does not share this faith with me, will
hardly be enlightened to the true sources of enjoyment by any
lucubrations of mine. Instead of details and declamation upon this
truth, I present an unvarnished, unexaggerated view, an abstract,
if I may so say, of the circumstances, under which the greater
number of marriages are consummated in our country, and I imagine,
in most civilized countries. It may not embrace the exact train of
the incidents connected with every case; but will serve, in the
phrase of the makers of calendars, ‘without material variation,’
as an outline of the history of those courtships that terminate in
matrimony. What wonder, that wedded life is so often unhappy!

I am compelled to believe, that very few marriages take place in
consequence of such an intimate acquaintance of the parties with
each other’s unsophisticated and interior character, as to justify
the chances of affection and domestic happiness. The first adverse
circumstance is, that both are constantly on such a trial to make
a show of wit, good temper, and manners, as to render the whole
scene, from commencement to close, a drama, in which all is acting;
in which there is no admission to the real life behind the scenes,
until after marriage. How often does the actor or actress, who
successfully personated a wit, and an angel, detect in the other
party a simpleton, a brute, or a termagant! The walk of life, in
which they are found, may vary the shades, but it changes not the
natural circumstances of a picture, which, in its broader features,
applies alike to elevated and humble life.

The parties, in the bloom of life, in all the excitement of
juvenile buoyancy, moving in the illumined atmosphere of
imagination, meet at the party, ball-room, assembly, church, or
other place of concourse, for which the young dress, to look
around, and be gazed upon. They are clad in their gayest, and stand
on their best. No airs, or graces, that mothers, or friends, or
society, or their Chesterfield, or their imaginations can suggest,
are pretermitted. No attempted inflictions are spared from any
relentings of mercy. Many gratuitous nods and smiles and remarks,
and much odious affectation, inspired by the love of conquest, pass
well enough in the tinsel illusion of the scene and circumstances.
Accident brings the couple into contact. They sing, dance, walk,
converse, or, in some of these ways, are thrown together. Or,
perhaps, some officious mediator reports, to the one, flattering
remarks made by the other. The first impulses to the acquaintance
are those of vanity, and the instinctive attraction of persons,
so situated, towards each other. A vague and momentary liking,
which might be effaced, as easily as mists vanish in the sun, is
the result. The lady, from the delicacy of her organization, and
the quickness of her perceptions, is the first aware of the new
state of mutual feeling; and by conjoining a happy combination of
coquetry, shyness, and encouragement, adds fuel to the kindling
spark. They converse apart, and the masonic pressure of hands
is interchanged. Compliments ensue, more or less polished, and
eloquent, according to their native readiness and artificial
training. Vanity comes in with her legion of auxiliaries, and,
in the same proportion as memory invests this intercourse with
pleasant sensations and agreeable associations, conversation with
other persons, between whom and themselves these processes have
not commenced, becomes tasteless and irksome; and ennui in all
other society does its part to put imagination in action. They
find themselves weary and sad in separation. Fancy runs riot and
begins to weave her fairy tissue, and to build her oriental bowers.
The parties are now in love, as they believe, and as the world
pronounces. Now commence the hours of poetry and sentimentality;
and the spring time of their new born passion. Not a moment, for
discriminating observation of each other’s character, has yet
occurred.

The freshness of the vernal inclination acquires the fervor
of settled and summer passion. The preliminaries of form are
commenced; and under such associations, and with such mutual
inclinations, incompatibility, unfitness, opposition of friends,
all obstacles that are not absolutely insurmountable, disappear.
What parent can resist the impassioned eloquence of a child, or
contemplate for a moment the prospect of inflicting the agony of
a disappointed and hopeless love! Have they measured each other’s
understanding and good sense? No: this requires a discrimination,
for which in the fever, the delirium of the senses, they have
no capacity. Know they aught of each other’s worth and good
temper? No. Lovers find nothing to jar their temper, or try their
disposition. Surrounded by a halo of imagination, everything about
them is invested with its brilliancy. The silliest remark of the
_inamorata_ sounds in the ears of the lover, like the response of
an oracle; and he is astonished and enraged that all others do not
see, and hear with him. Everything that is said becomes wisdom,
and everything done noble and graceful. Who has not heard all
these ascriptions, all these extravagant eulogies, applied to a
fair female, uttering nothing, and incapable of uttering anything,
but voluble and vapid nonsense; or worse, ebullitions of envy,
detraction and bad feeling! Meanwhile, the parties, enveloped in
illusion, would not see real character, if they could; and could
not, if they would. Is this extravagant, or exaggerated? Let the
well known fact, that sensible men oftener marry fools, and gifted
women coxcombs, than otherwise, be received as evidence, that this
great transaction is generally commenced, and terminated under a
spell, in which the actors see nothing, as it really is, and as
it appears to disinterested spectators. After having united many
hundred pairs myself, and seen all aspects of society, such seem
to me the most common circumstances appended to the beginning,
progress and issue of courtship, in its common forms.

When ambitious views, the lust of wealth, and purposes of
aggrandizement, are the prompting incitements, the order of
circumstances indeed may be essentially varied, without much
altering the result. The excitement of the senses and the illusions
of the imagination give place to these more sordid motives. They
are, however, equally absorbing with the former. The faculties,
having converged to the point of cautious and keen speculation,
allow no greater scope, and furnish no happier facilities, for
noting the development of understanding, character and temper,
than in the other predicament. The appetite for money, and the
burning of ambition may as effectually blind the aspirant to the
silliness and bad temper of her who is seen through the flattering
medium of his plans and his hopes, as could his vanity and his
youthful inclinations. How can a person be expected to compare,
and discriminate traits, and the almost imperceptible lights and
shades of character, whose whole mind is intensely concentrated
on the chances of his speculation, the fear of rivals, the danger
of mishap, and the means of hastening the issue? Who, under such
circumstances, inquires about the elements of happiness or misery,
the good sense, the regulated temper, the discretion, health,
temperament, and habits, that appertain to the means, by which a
fortune and a name are to be obtained? These are passed by, as
subordinate considerations. Suppose inquiries touching these points
to glance through the mind. Suppose the speculator to have lucid
glimpses, and some startling premonitions of the importance of
settled and discriminating views, in relation to these matters;
contemplated through golden associations and in the glare of
ambitious hopes, they will be hardly likely to undergo a very
severe or sifting scrutiny.

The marriage, whether of love, of ambition, of convenience or mere
animal impulse, takes place. The music and dancing are no more,
and the brilliancy of the bridal torch is extinct, and with those
physical _parapharnalia_, one mental illusion after another begins
to melt into thin air. The discriminating faculties, judgment and
the critical vision, now become morbidly sensitive and severe,
since satiety and the extinction of fancy and the imagination have
left these capacities to unchecked action, beholding the object
of their scrutiny continually, and close at hand. The medium
becomes as unnaturally dark, as it was unnaturally light before.
A thousand circumstances, never dreamed of in the philosophy of
love and courtship, crowd upon this disposition to cynical and
bilious criticism. Manifestations of temper and character, that
once indicated to the lover, amiability and intelligence, become,
to the moody husband or the discontented wife, marks of a weak
understanding and a bad heart; and in proportion, as they nourish
despondency and disappointment, they destroy the capability of
indulgence and forbearance, and resist efforts to soothe, and
correct, and conciliate.

In proportion as they become dissatisfied with each other, by
a mental progress, exactly the reverse of that which brought
them together, home is enveloped with associations of gloom. The
imagination finds sunshine in every other place; and every other
person is sensible and attractive, but the one they have sworn to
love and honor until death.

There are those who will see in these revolting representations, a
coloring of misanthropy; and pronounce this statement of the case
harsh beyond nature. I would it were so; for, unless I deceive
myself, I love my kind; and my only object is, to impress upon
the young the importance of inquiring, when contemplating this
vital and all important transaction, whether they see things in
the clear light of truth, and as they will certainly appear after
the delirium of love has passed away; or under the nameless and
numberless illusions of that fever of the senses, of vanity, and
instinct, too often miscalled by the name of love. I much mistake,
if the greater portion of the domestic infelicity, which is loudly
charged upon the wedded state in the abstract, is not owing to
this fascination, this incapacity to examine the only elements,
on which the happiness of a family must depend. All I would say,
is, before entering on this union, remember, that it is easier to
repent before, than after the evil is without a remedy. Pause and
scrutinize; and let not the first glimpse of real light open your
eyes to your true condition, when it is irretrievable.

I am as well aware, as the author can be, that there are many more
happy marriages, than vulgar opinion allows, and that even in
those, which are not reputed happy, in which the parties themselves
have had their criminating and complaining _éclaircissements_,
there is often much more affection, than has been allowed to exist.
Such is generally found to be the case, in the numberless attempted
separations, which prove abortive, when the final alternative is to
be adopted. I know, too, that the history of the manifestation of
conjugal affection is one of the most affecting and honorable to
human nature, that has ever been exhibited. No union of tenderness
and fortitude has ever been displayed in the annals of human
nature, that can be compared with the maternal love and conjugal
affection of a devoted wife. Of this, if I had space, and my scope
were different, I could cite numerous, and most impressive examples.


Note 28a, page 110.

I beg leave to enter my utter dissent to this doctrine. It seems
from a note appended to this chapter of the author, that dislike to
female authorship has been carried to the most ridiculous lengths
in France. This is the more astonishing, as no country has produced
so many admirable female writers, many of them peculiarly noted
for possessing the charm of simplicity, and freedom from pedantry
and affectation. A woman, not less than a man, is more amiable,
interesting and capable of sustaining any relation with honor and
dignity, in proportion as she is more instructed and enlightened.
It is to female pedants only, that the ridiculous question of the
French academy, whether a reputable woman could write a book,
ought to apply. If a woman really deserves a crown of laurels, it
sits more gracefully on her brow, than any chaplet of roses that
poet ever dreamed of. But let us have real, unpresuming knowledge,
without pedantry or affectation, either of which is always odious
in man or woman, but certainly, as it seems to me, most so in
woman.


Note 30, page 115.

Nothing, however, is more common, than this contemptible ambition
of wives to govern their husbands. It is said that there are
coteries of wives, who impart the rules in masonic conclave. Be
it so. Whoever exults in having usurped this empire, glories in
her shame. If there be any axiom universally applying to this
partnership, it is, that the interest and reputation of the concern
must be identical. However much a wife may humble her husband, in
general estimation, by presenting him in the light of a weak and
docile subject, with all sensible persons, she humbles herself
still more. If the slave is contemptible, the tyrant is still more
so. For the rest, this chapter contains more truth and impressive
eloquence upon this all important theme, than I have elsewhere met
in so small a compass.


Note 31, page 117.

I present you with the following development of these new emotions,
which, I hope, you will not find amiss. ‘William and Yensi were as
happy in this vale, as man can hope to be here below. They would
have requested nothing more of heaven, than thousands of years of
this half dreaming, yet satisfying existence. A daughter was born
to them, a desert flower of exquisite beauty even from its birth.
New and unmoved fountains of slumbering and mysterious affections
were awakened in the deepest sanctuary of their hearts. In the
clear waters of the brook, which chafed over pebbles, turfed with
wild sage and numberless desert flowers, under the overhanging
pines, in the tops of which the southern breeze played the grand
cathedral service of the mountain solitudes, William performed, as
priest, father and Christian, the touching ceremony of baptizing
his babe. Adding the name Jessy to that of the mother, it was
called Jessy Yensi. The sacred rite was performed on the sabbath,
as the sun was sinking in cloud-curtained majesty behind the
western mountains. The domestics, Ellswatta and Josepha, looked
on with awe. William read the Scriptures, prayed, and sang a hymn;
baptized his babe, and handed the nursling of the desert to Yensi.
As she received the beloved infant in her arms, after it had been
consecrated, as an inmate in the family of the Redeemer, while
tears of tenderness and piety filled her eyes and fell from her
cheeks, she declared, that she would no longer invoke the universal
Tien, that the God of William and her babe should be her God,
and that they would both call on the same name, when they prayed
together for the dear babe even unto death.’--_Shoshonee Valley_,
vol. i. p. 52, 53.

Of the emotions excited by all the incidents between the cradle
and the grave, none can be compared for depth and tenderness to
those, called forth by the birth and baptism of the first child of
an affectionate and happy husband and wife. Those, for whom this
work is more peculiarly intended, will be aware, to what incident
in our common stock of remembrances the above extract refers.
Delightful sentiments, and yet deeply tinged with sadness! What
a mystery is this conjoined miniature image of the parents, the
babe itself! What a mystery the world with its mingled lights and
shadows, upon which the feeble stranger is entering! What a mystery
the unknown bourne to which it is bound! What a mystery the God,
to whom it is consecrated! Callous and cold must be the heart of
parents, that this mutual pledge of love and duty will not unite in
one unchangeable sentiment of love and identity of interest, until
death.


Note 33, page 122.

My views touching the modes, in which the best results of education
are to be obtained, whether just or erroneous, have at least
the advantage of being entirely practical. I am sufficiently
convinced, that there must be an adequate and happy organization
and mental development, without which no education, however wise
and assiduous, will ever effect anything more, than mediocrity of
character and acquirement. In the present state of public opinion,
as great mistakes are made by expecting too much from the training
of schools, as were formerly committed by attempting too little.
The opulent, and people in the higher walks especially, are tempted
by their condition to believe, that wealth and distinction can
purchase, and even command mind, and that cultivation of it, by
which more enlarged and distinguished minds differ from the common
measure of intellect; a mistake, than which no other is more
universally, and palpably taught by every day’s experience. The
Author of our being reserves, and will never impart his own high
prerogative, to bestow mind; and he as often dispenses the noblest
and richest endowment of it in the lower, as in the upper walks
of life; though, as we have seen, he has indicated, in the order
of nature, a process of unlimited improvement of organization and
endowment.

But the substratum of a practical and well endowed mind, to begin
with, being granted, I beg leave to add my conviction to that of M.
Droz, a conviction, which, as I think, will resume its authority
and influence, when most of the present tedious and endless
systems and projects of education will have passed into their
merited oblivion. It is, that strong, latent and distinguished
character and acquirement receive in domestic education, that
predominant and fashioning direction, which they retain through
life. The peculiar impress of a parent, a family-friend, a single
tutor, is often as distinctly marked upon the whole after life
of the scholar, that becomes truly distinguished, as though he
had been wax in the hands of a moulder. The numerous tutors of
opulent families, and of public institutions, seldom impart the
same advantage. Their different views and modes of discipline
countervail, and neutralize each other. The Greeks and the great
Romans taught at home, the master being a member and an honored
one of the family. The master and the pupil walked, conversed,
and pursued their amusements together; and the sweet associations
of home and the shade and freedom from restraint were conjoined
with the lessons. When the good Plutarch paints to us, with his
inimitable _naiveté_, one of his favorite characters, he indicates
as his first felicity, that it was his lot to have the training
of an Aristotle, or some similar worthy. Consult the English
Plutarch for the same fact. Could all the commencing circumstances
of most of the great men, who have lived, be exactly traced, we
should find the same truth disclosed. That the development of
strong inclination for books, studies and literature depends
almost entirely on domestic habits and pursuits, the family, in
which _our_ common remembrances centre, is a striking example.
During the years, in which the minds of this family received their
unchangeable impress, the members were almost as vagrant in their
modes, as the Tartars. All their education, except domestic, was
exceedingly imperfect and desultory. Books were often wanting;
adequate teachers always. But the love of the parents for books
and reading was a simple, natural, unaffected and intense impulse.
They loved the thing for its own sake, and independent of all its
results. The first instruments of pleasure, and things of estimated
value, that greeted the infant eyes of the children, were books;
not furniture, dress, and the imposing ostentation of a modern
parlor. Pleasant conversations, disputes, between laughter and
seriousness, about these books, were the first conversations that
greeted their listening ears. These conversations were perceived
to be of deep and heart-felt interest, and as little mixed with
pedantry and formality, as the manifestations of instinct. The
children saw, that to those, they most loved, admired, and were
disposed to imitate, books were the grand sources of interest,
converse and enjoyment. They as naturally imbibed similar tastes,
as, to use a coarse illustration, the children of savages learn
to love hunting. The first thing for which they contended, and
with which they wished to play, was a book, or a picture. Their
first lispings were trials of skill, touching the comparative
progress, which they had made in their knowledge of the contents
of these books, and the application of it to present use. These
trials they saw to be the chief points of interest and amusement
for their parents. Thus, habits of reading and application _grew
with their growth and strengthened with their strength_; and many
a criticism, if not erudite and profound, at least eliciting
hearty praise and laughter, passed away unrecorded in their
domestic privacy. Their neighbors admired, and, I fear, envied,
and calumniated; but could not but take astonished note of such
results in a family without wealth, without the common appliances,
which themselves could so much better afford, and which they had
been accustomed to consider the only price, at which intellectual
improvement could be purchased. It was placed beyond question, or
denial, that the members of that family had right views, quiet
and unawed self-respect, and could converse rationally, upon
every other topic, as well as books; that tact and discrimination
pervaded their manifestations of thought and pursuit; and that they
possessed an inexhaustible source of amusement, and satisfaction
independent of wealth, fashion, society, distinction, or any
external resource whatever--the habit of internal reflection,
comparison and pleasant converse with themselves.

Parents, when you have imparted to your children habits and tastes,
like these, you have bequeathed them an intellectual fortune, which
few changes can take away; and which is as strictly independent, as
anything earthly can be. You have unlocked to their gratuitous use
perennial fountains of innocent and improving enjoyment. You have
secured them forever against the heart-wearing gloom of _ennui_,
insufficiency to themselves, and slavish dependence upon others for
amusement. Spend as lavishly as you may, in multiplying fashionable
instructers, and blazon, as much as you will, the advantages of
your children; if they do not perceive, while the rudiments of
their taste and habits are forming, that you consider literature,
science and the improvement of intellect a matter of paramount
interest and importance, you will never cause their stream to
flow higher, than your fountain. An occasional parlor lecture, or
a high wrought eulogy, will not convince them, or avail to your
purpose. They must see this preference, as all others, which they
will be inclined to copy, manifested in your whole deportment and
conversation.

But, while I am convinced, that parents will find efforts to
train their children to be highly intellectual, rowing against
the current, unless they evince, themselves, by their habitual
examples, that they consider it a higher attainment, to possess
literature and conversational powers, than fashion, or wealth or
the common objects of pursuit, in other words, that all efficient
education must be essentially domestic, I would not be understood
to undervalue public schools and colleges. I am aware, that in
these places are best imparted the knowledge and adroitness
that fit them for the keen scramble of ambitious competition.
But in regard to those boys who leave their competitions behind
the classes of the university, I think on examination, we shall
find, that the germ and the stamina of this progress were early
communicated by instruction and example at home. At table, around
the evening fire, in the Sabbath walk, in the common family
intercourse, in the intervals of the toil of your profession,
whatever it be, the taste and the permanent inclination for
literature and intellectual cultivation are imparted. This can
never be, if behind all your eulogy of these things, you discover,
that your ruling passion is money, or the sordid objects of common
pursuit.


Note 34, page 124.

It is a common and, I much fear, a well founded complaint, that
some latent mischief in our system of education, political
institutions, the ordering of our establishments, or in all
these together, has generated, as a prevalent moral evil, filial
unkindness and ingratitude. Scramble, competition and rivalry
are the first, last, and universally witnessed order of things
in our country. Nothing becomes a topic of conversation that
is of absorbing interest, but acquisition and distinction. The
manifestations of an intellect, sharpened for the pursuit of
these things, is the subject of most earnest eulogy. Children, by
our usages, are early cast upon their own resources, and taught
to shift for themselves. The consequence seems to be, that the
parental and filial ties are severed, as soon as the children are
able to take care of themselves, almost as recklessly, in regard
to subsequent duty, piety or affection, as those of the lower
animals. When we see a spectacle so revolting, and unhappily so
common, of sons who, as soon as they have realized _the portion of
goods that falleth to them_, or of daughters, as soon as they have
secured lovers or husbands, forgetting the authors of their days,
it becomes us to search deeply for the defect in our discipline, or
institutions, that originates the evil. The callous hearts of such
children may no longer be appalled by the terrible execution of the
Jewish law against such monsters. They may neither feel, nor care,
how _sharper than a serpent’s tooth_, may be this want of filial
piety to their parents. But, by a righteous reaction of the divine
justice, more terribly vindictive than the threatened judgment of
the Jewish law, thankless children bear in their hearts the certain
guaranty of their own self-inflicted punishment. They part forever
with the purest and noblest sentiments of the human heart; and they
procure for themselves the sad certainty of being cast off in their
turn, by their children, in the helpless period of their old age.


Note 35, page 124.

The history of literature proves, that none of the more unworthy
sentiments of human nature have been so adverse to friendship,
as the vanity of literary rivals. From many noble examples of
a contrary kind, which we might cite, I select the intercourse
between Racine and Boileau. When Racine was persuaded, that his
malady would end in death, he charged his eldest son to write to
M. de Cavoye, to ask him to solicit the payment of what was due of
his pension, that his family might not be left without ready money.
He wrote the letter and read it to his father. ‘Why did you not,’
said he, ‘request the payment of the pension of Boileau at the
same time? Write again, and let him know, that I was his friend in
death.’ This friend came to receive his last adieu. Racine rose in
bed, as far as his weakness would allow. As he embraced his friend,
he said ‘I regard it a happiness to die in your presence.’


Note 36, page 126.

The celebrated Voiture, one of the _beaux esprits_ of the age of
Louis XIII. had lost all his money, and had an immediate call for
200 pistoles. He wrote to the Abbe Costar, his faithful friend.
This admirable letter presents us with a trait of that confidence
and frankness, which sincere friendship inspires. It was this.

‘I yesterday lost all my money, and 200 pistoles more, which I
have promised to pay today. If you have that sum, do not fail to
send it. If not, borrow it. Obtain it, as you may, you must lend
it me. Be careful, to allow no one to anticipate you, in giving me
this pleasure. I should be concerned lest it might affect my love
for you. I know you so well, that I am aware, you would find it
difficult to console yourself. To avoid this misfortune, rather
sell what will raise it. You see how imperious my love for you is.
I take a pleasure in conducting in this manner towards you. I feel,
that I should have a still greater, if you would be as frank with
me. But you have not my courage in this point. Judge, if I am not
perfectly assured in regard to you, since I will give my promise to
him, who shall bring the money.’ The Abbe Costar replied--‘I feel
extreme joy, to be in condition to render you the trifling service,
you ask of me. I had never thought, that one could purchase so
much pleasure for 200 pistoles. Having experienced it, I give you
my word, that, for the rest of my life, I will retain a little
capital, always ready for your occasions. Order confidently at your
pleasure. You cannot take half the satisfaction in commanding, that
I shall in obeying. But submissive as you may find me in other
respects, I shall be revolted, if you wish to compel me to take a
promise from you.’


Note 37, page 128.

Although I do not intend to cite in this place the story of Damon
and Pythias, nor to harp upon discussions of a theme, upon
which there has been more odious prosing, and more semblance of
sentiment than all others, yet a subject, intrinsically of the
first importance, and founded in nature, can never cease to have
claims upon attention, in consequence of having been hackneyed to
thread-bare triteness. There is such an affection, as friendship.
It belongs to man, and is the highest honor of his nature, less
gross and terrene, than the short epilepsy, the transient and
fitful fever of the senses, commonly dignified with the name of
love, and warmer, more exhilarating, and elevated, than mere
esteem, and common liking; it excites, without inflaming; it
thrills, without jealousy, corroding fear, or morbid solicitude.
It is that sentiment, which a poet would naturally assign to
intellectual beings of a higher order, who were never invested with
the corporeal elements of mortality.

I wish those, most dear to me, implicitly to believe in friendship.
I would a thousand times prefer, that they should err on the
side of credulity, than of suspicion and distrust. I deprecate,
above all things, that they should give up human nature. I
consider real misanthropy the last misfortune. I would, rather, my
children should meet with treachery and inconstancy every day of
their lives, than resign themselves to the morbid and heartless
persuasion, weakly considered an attribute of wisdom and greatness,
that men are altogether selfish, and unworthy of confidence. It
is a persuasion, that not only forever invests the universe in an
Egyptian gloom, ‘_that may be felt_,’ but, by an energetic bearing
on all the faculties and sources of feeling, causes the heart,
that entertains such views to become what it believes to be the
character of the species.

No scruples of false decorum shall withhold me from saying, that,
amidst all the selfishness, which optics of the most charitable
vision could not but discover on every side, I have seen
friendship, pure, holy, disinterested, like that of the angels;
nay, more--have been myself the subject of it. My heart swells, and
will to its latest pulsation, with the remembered proofs. True, the
instances, that have fallen within the compass of my experience,
are very few. But they are sufficient to settle my conviction, that
the sentiment, which has inspired the enthusiasm of eloquence,
painting and song, in all time, is not the illusion of a weak and
misguided imagination. Selfish as man is, we often see instances of
the most generous and devoted friendship, even in this silver age,
the age of revenue and political economy.

With my author I believe, that where the sentiment exists between a
man and a woman, admitting each to possess the estimable endowments
peculiar to each sex, and so exists, as not to be modified by any
of those countless associations of another order of sentiment, that
almost imperceptibly invest relations between the two sexes, it is
more vivid, permanent and disinterested, more capable of making
sacrifices, and more tender and delightful than it can be between
persons of the same sex. Of this class are the most noble, touching
and sublime examples of a constancy under every form of proof, that
the history of the human heart records.

While every one is sensible, that there must exist between
characters, that are susceptible of all the fidelity and beauty
of this sentiment, a certain adaptation of circumstances, and
conformity of disposition, mind, development and temperament, I
believe with St Pierre, that it is desirable, that there should be
a certain contrast as well as much fitness. Constant assentation,
the same opinions, tastes, tempers and views have been found by
experience, not to generate the most permanent, and pleasant unions
of the sort. The moral, as well as the physical appetite, would
grow weary of perpetual uniformity and unvarying similarity, and
requires the spice, afforded by the mixture of various ingredients
of affectionate contrariety. Both the love and friendship, most
likely to endure, spring up between the placid and piquant, the
tranquil and energetic, the monotonously sweet tempered and the
sensitive, whose irritability is held in check by good sense,
kindness and self-control;--between the temperament, connected
with blue eyes and fair hair, and that of the keen, deep black
eye, and raven locks. ‘Soldiers,’ says St Pierre, ‘on long and
distant expeditions, should be associated with ministers, lawyers
with naturalists, and in general, the strongest contrasts of
profession’--_all nature’s discord thus making all nature’s peace_.
But I am perfectly aware, that there will be great danger of making
fatal mistakes, in acting on this principle. I am confident,
that is true in the abstract; but let sentimentalists beware of
trenching too confidently on ground, where the limits between
safety and ruin are so narrow, and difficult to discern. Doves of
a different feather may pair happily, but not doves and vultures.
There must be a certain compatibility not only of character, but of
age, condition and circumstances, as we are broadly instructed in
the fable of the frog thinking to wed with the ox.

Any discussion of the details, touching the requisite circumstances
of compatibility to form friendships with any chance of their being
pleasant and permanent, as well as the obligations and duties
involved by it, would require a volume, and would carry me utterly
beyond my present purpose. Books are ample, if not interesting
and just, in the information which they impart upon this subject.
With my views of its obligations and duties in few words, I shall
dismiss it.

In a pecuniary point of view the claims of friendship are only
limited by the sterner demands of justice. The common adage, which
calls upon us to be just, before we allow ourselves to be generous,
is worthy to be written in letters of gold; though it has been a
thousand times wrested by selfish and cold hearts, into a pretext
for their avarice. Whoever should think of lavishing his money
upon a friend, in order to absolve himself from the more difficult
calls of justice, would show a mind, too weak and incapable of
discrimination, to honor that friend by his bounty. But, grant that
the friends have delicacy, consideration and gentlemanly tact, and
they may possess a common purse, without danger to the duties of
either.

The fame and character of the one are strictly the property of
the other. Let no one, who has the least particle of the base
alloy of envy in his feelings towards him, whom he calls his
friend, who is willing to hear, and countenance abatements of his
qualities, talents, or virtues, dare to assume that almost sacred
name. He is equally unworthy of it, if he stand by in neutrality
when calumny is busily passing against him; and still more, if by
smiles he gives his countenance, and half his consent to the story
of detraction and abatement. It is a forfeiture of the right to
the name, though it may be a less worthy one, to make the person,
called friend, the subject of jest and ridicule. In regard to all
these points, the duties are clear, distinct, palpable and not
to be compromised. Every honorable mind feels, in witnessing any
infraction of the laws of equity, or strict justice, a sentiment
of recoil and disgust, difficult perhaps to define, but one which
instantly designates the person guilty of it, as unworthy of the
name of friend. Honest, frank and disinterested advice, especially
in relation to concerns of great interest to the party, is a
paramount obligation, whether the advised will bear, or forbear.
This prerogative may, indeed, be claimed by unfeeling and rude
bluntness. But, by a discriminating mind, the suggestions of a
counterfeit, will never be mistaken for those of genuine friendship.

The time, the courtesy and the amount of intercourse, due from
one friend to another, can never be brought under subjection to
rules. Moral, like physical attraction, acting unconsciously, will
regulate this portion of duty, with the unvarying certainty of
the laws of nature. If persons, claiming to sustain this relation
to each other, do not wish to be as much together, as duty and
propriety will admit; if they allow this matter to be settled by
the rigid tithing of etiquette, they are anything rather than real
friends.

I have been struck by an incident in the life of a religious woman,
I think it was Mrs Graham. There was a sacramental pledge between
her and a friend, that, whichever of them should be first called
from life, the other should visit her in the sickness, which
she should consider her last, and not leave her, until she had
received her last sigh. Sublime test of affection! What a tender,
sacred office, after a life of friendship, thus, by a sacramental
contract, to close the eyes of the friend beloved in life, and
separated only by death! There can be no doubt that the feelings,
called thus into action, are peculiarly fitted to mitigate the
last sorrows; and in the simple grandeur of such a sentiment,
so manifested, the departing friend will see a proof, that such
affections are, in their own nature, immortal; and that such ties
shall be renewed in the eternal regions of the living.

When friends are separated wide from each other by distance,
duty, and the stern calls of our pursuits, I admire the custom of
baptizing, if I may so say, our remembrances, by giving the names
of our dear and distant friends to the hills, valleys, streams,
trees or pleasant views in our walks; or the objects most familiar
and pleasant to our view. The stern silence of nature may thus be
compelled to find a tongue, and discourse with us of those we love.

In a word, the name, I am sensible, is too often a morbid mockery
of cold and affected sentimentalism, both weak and disgusting,
the cant term for the intercourse between the enlarged prisoners
of boarding schools. But the sentiment exists, pure, simple
delightful. Neither fawning, nor cant, nor flattery, nor any
mixture of earth’s mould makes any part of it. Honorable,
dignified, unshaken, it feels its obligations, and discharges
them. The reputation, character and whole interest of the friend
is its object; and his highest happiness its prayer. In holy
segregation from the hollow intercourse, false phrases and
deceitful compliments of fashion, and what is called the world,
it is faithful and consistent, under all proofs and trials, until
death; and when the eyes of the departed are closed, his memory is
enshrined in the remembrance of the survivor. Thank God! I have
seen, I have felt, that there are such friendships; and if there is
anything honorable, dignified and attractive in aught, that earth
presents, it is the sight of two friends, whose attachment dates
from their first remembered sentiment; and has survived difference
of opinion and interest, the changes of distance, time and
disease, and those weaning influences, which, while they crumble
the most durable monuments, convert most hearts to stone.


Note 38, page 129.

I have long been in the habit of measuring the character, mental
power and prospects of the young, who are brought by circumstances
under my observation, by the power which they evince, to resist the
suggestion of the senses. In the same proportion, as I see them
capable of rising above the thraldom of their appetites, capable
of that energy of will, that gives the intellectual control over
the animal nature, I graduate them higher in the scale of moral
power and prospect. But if, in their course, they manifest the
clear preponderance of the animal; if sloth, sensuality, and the
inclinations, which have no higher origin than the senses, sway
them beyond the influence of advice and moral suasion, be they
ever so beautiful, endowed, rich, distinguished, be their place in
general estimation ever so high, I put them down, as belonging to
the animal, and not the intellectual orders. They can never reach
higher worth and success, than that, which is the blind award of
accident.


Note 39, page 131.

It seems to me, that writers on taste have not seen all the
importance of uniting physical with moral ideas, to give them any
deep and permanent interest. This subject might be enlarged to any
extent, by carrying out the details, suggested by the striking,
just, but necessarily very brief views of the author. We have here
a clue, by which we may explore a whole universe of the highest
and purest pleasures which can touch the heart, and which to the
greater portion of the species have no existence.

There are travellers more learned, and equally capable of noting
facts with M. de Chateaubriand. They have traversed the same
countries, seen the same objects, and collected an immense mass
of facts, which they have published, on their return, to be read
by none, but kindred spirits, as dull as themselves. In his
record of his travels in the same countries, we are beguiled
onward, under the spell of a sustained charm. The imagination is
constantly in action; the heart swells; images of grandeur and
beauty, remembrances of pathos and power are evoked from every
side, and the shadows of the past throng round us. Why is it
so? The former see brute nature, in its lifeless and motionless
materiality, divorced from mind and memory. The latter not only
sees that universe with a radiant eye, but holds converse with a
superincumbent universe, as much more vast, beautiful, touching,
diversified, than the other, as mind is superior to matter. It is
this creation of thoughts, remembrances, poetry, and affecting
images, in his mind, intimately connected with the other, and
overshadowing it, like an illumined stratum over a region covered
with palpable mist, by virtue of which he makes nature eloquent.
This is the charm spread over all the beautiful passages that
abound in his writings; a peculiar aptitude to associate nature,
in every position and form, with the universe of thought within
him. Such is the endowment of all poets, orators, and painters,
that have produced efforts worthy of immortality. Common writers
see nature dead, silent, sterile--mere brute and voiceless
matter. Endowed minds kindle it into speech, beauty and grandeur;
interpreting it by the internal world in their own minds.


Note 39a, page 134.

These illustrations of the importance of uniting moral with
physical ideas, in regard to vision, landscape, painting and music,
are as true, as they are eloquent and striking. Who has not had
the vivid remembrance of home recalled in a distant land, by a
tree, a feature in the landscape, a blue hill in the distance!
How readily the shadowy images of memory are evoked! Every one is
acquainted with the touching circumstance in the character of
the Swiss soldiers serving in foreign countries. Great numbers of
them used to serve, as stipendaries, in the French armies. It was
forbidden to play, in their presence, the air _Ranz des vaches_.
Homesickness and desertion scarcely failed to ensue from hearing
it. The wild and plaintive air reminded them of ‘Sweet home,’
their mountains, their simple pleasures, and the range and lowing
of their kine. The beautiful Scotch airs derive their charm from
their association with mountain scenery, and the peculiar history
and manners of a highly sensitive, intelligent and national
people. The same may be said of the unrivalled _Erin go Bragh_, in
relation to the Irish; in a word of the national music of every
people. Associate any idea with sentiment and the heart, and it
becomes touching, and sublime, and capable of stirring the deepest
fountains of feeling, according to the remembrance with which it is
allied.


Note 40, page 136.

I have heard persons, endowed with keen feelings, repiningly
contrast the miseries which they endured from an excess of
irritable and unregulated sensibility, with the apparently joyous
apathy of fat and fortunate burghers, who seem to find no sorrows
and no troubles in life, and who hear with incredulity and, in
fact, with an entire want of comprehension, about sufferings
resulting from witnessing misery, which we have no means of
relieving, and the sorrows, from innumerable sources, to which
those of a keenly sensitive nature are subject. I have never seen
these contrasts of character in this light. I unhesitatingly
believe that a righteous Providence has exactly and admirably
adjusted the weights in either scale. The great mass, who are not
disturbed with excess of feeling, are, from the same temperament,
interdicted from a whole universe of enjoyments, into which those,
who possess sensibility, and regulate it aright, have free access.


Note 41, page 137.

Man seems to contain, according as he is contemplated in different
lights, inexplicable contradictions of character; and to be at one
time all tenderness of heart; and at another an odious compound
of insensibility and cruelty; according to the circumstances
with which he is surrounded, and the positions in which he is
placed. Who could believe, that it was the same being, that now
dissolves into tears at the rehearsal of a tragedy, on reading a
romance or witnessing a spectacle of misery, and now hurries from
these emotions to see a bull-fight; and in passing to the show,
encourages two bullies in the street to form a ring, to bruise
each other! Who would believe, that it has always been considered
an attribute in the more susceptible sex, to regard duellists with
a partial eye; to give a secret place in their kind feelings to
those who are reckless of their own and another’s blood; and more
than all to look propitiously on soldiers encrimsoned with the
fresh stains of the battle field? Nay, more, who reads without
astonishment, and almost without unbelief, that a whole people, in
the days of the pagan Roman emperors, days of the utmost luxury of
taste and refinement, days, in which, in all probability, traits
of kindness, generosity and magnanimity were no more uncommon than
now, the ladies of the greatest and most splendid city in the world
thronged with an irrepressible curiosity, and an intense desire,
to see naked gladiators lacerate, and stab each other, and old and
feeble men torn in pieces by lions and wild beasts, when merely a
movement of a finger would save them!

The ministers of the gospel, who attribute the abhorrence, which
the same spectacles would excite in the population of a Christian
city, to the humanizing influences of our faith, forget that such a
city has seen, times without number, its inhabitants pouring forth
from its gates, to witness miserable victims burnt to death at an
_auto da fé_, and shouting with joy at the spectacle.

Protestant ministers exult, in contrasting the influences of the
reformed faith with results like these; and yet witness their
congregations thronging in crowds to see a wretched criminal
swinging in the agonies of strangulation. The same people thrill
with horror, as they hear, around their evening fire, how those
whom they call savages, dance, and yell round the stake, at which
a captive enemy is burning. To the red man it seems the extreme of
cold-blooded ferocity, to execute a criminal with a halter, by the
hands of a person who bears no ill will to the victim.

Far be it from me to question one of the sublime trophies of the
gospel, or to doubt its refining and humanizing influences. But the
whole aspect of history and society compels me to believe, that
fashion and prevalent opinions exert an influence, that will bring
men to tolerate almost anything. I much fear, that the spectacles
of the Roman Amphitheatre might be revived, if a certain number of
any community would pertinaciously conspire, to write in favor of
them, and countenance them by their presence.


Note 42, page 137.

To present, in contrast, the favorable side of human
contradictions:--I have seen a man plunge into the water, and
put his own life at fearful jeopardy, to rescue a stranger from
drowning. I have witnessed instances of disinterested and heroic
sacrifice, which present men in the aspect of angels, in every walk
of life. Such sublime samples of the capability of our nature are
the appropriate theme of oratory, painting and song; and cannot
be too much blazoned. Pity it is that history did not select more
instances, and dwell upon them with more partial eulogy, instead of
amplifying the revolting details of war.

Two instances of affecting manifestation of tenderness are deeply
impressed upon my memory, simply because they were elicited by
common cases of suffering; and had in them nothing of romance, or
of uncommon tendency to excite the feelings.

I was passing in the streets of one of our northern cities. On the
marble door steps of a sumptuous mansion sat a ragged boy, with
a look at once dogged and subdued, manifesting long acquaintance
with sorrow and want. Near him sat an aged woman, apparently his
mother, decrepit, worn and squalid, with her face turned from me.
The boy was devouring with voracious greediness a piece of dried
herring. Fair and richly dressed children were passing to their
morning school. Most of them jeered him, in passing, calling on him
to get down from the steps, and asking him if he was very hungry?
‘Yes, and you would be hungry, and sad too, if you was poor and a
stranger, and had to take care of an old mother, and had walked as
far as I have.’ One of the boys lingered behind, as if ashamed of
his feelings. I noticed his broad, high forehead, and eye speaking
a soul within. His eyes filled with tears, as he handed the boy
money. My own eyes moistened, as I witnessed the angelic expression
of this noble boy, who I dare affirm, had not the spirit to do such
things by halves.

The other was in another extremity of our country, where money and
cotton, sugar and slaves, balls and theatres are the all-absorbing
objects of interest. A large group of gaily dressed gentlemen
and ladies were promenading, in company with an heiress and her
intended husband, who were shortly to be married, and they were
merely discussing the preparations. A poor, pale boy, apparently a
stranger, came up to them, with his written petition for charity;
and with the low and subdued tone of voice appropriate to shame,
bashfulness and misery, began to tell his little story. The
splendid laughers walked on with an incurious carelessness. One of
the group lingered behind. He was struggling with the difficulties
of obtaining a profession, and aiding in the support of a distant
family. But, he bestowed on the boy one of his few remaining
dollars. When I see such instances of native tenderness of heart, I
thank God that men are not totally depraved.


Note 43, page 138.

Every one who has had extensive acquaintances, and been exposed
to frequent requests for letters of recommendation, and to
procure the intervention and aid of opulent friends, must feel
the importance and justice of these remarks. We ought not to
refuse such letters from indolence, selfishness, or the commonly
alleged fear of troubling our friends. But then, the case must be
such, as will bear us out, in being measured and scrupulous, in
regard to the existence, the actual truth and justice, of what we
advance; otherwise our inter-position will soon be rendered cheap
and inefficient; and will react, in creating want of respect for
the writer, instead of good feeling toward the person recommended.
Such, in a great measure, is the result, in the current value of
these letters, as they are emitted, according to the common forms
of society.


Note 44, page 139.

A most affecting proof, that the human heart is not intrinsically
bad, and that the obduracy and cold-blooded selfishness of the
world is adventitious, and the result of our modes and our
training, is, that the sisters of charity, the truly beneficent
everywhere, create a deep sensation of respect in beholders.
Efficient charity is almost the only thing, that no one feels
disposed to question, or slander. A corpse was borne slowly by me,
to the place of its long sleep. An immense procession followed
with sorrow and respect impressed upon their countenances. I
asked, whom they were burying. ‘A single woman without wealth or
connexions.--But her life has been marked by beneficence.’ If that
sex, which so instinctively desire to appear to advantage, knew, in
what light a lady, distinguished by fortune and cultivation appears
while traversing the dirty and dark lanes of a city, to seek out,
and relieve cases of misery, they would practise charity, were it
from no higher motive, than to create a sensation, and appear
lovely. Every one knows the example of the sublime, quoted by
Longinus from Moses. A passage in the Gospel seems to me still more
sublime. _He went about doing good._ All other homage, than that
which the heart pays to beneficence, is adventitious. This is real.


Note 45, page 141.

Of all the pleasures of our earthly sojourn, after those of a
good conscience, the most varied, and yet equable, healthful and
permanent are those of reading. ‘I have never,’ says a respectable
writer, ‘passed a comfortable day without books since I was capable
of reading.’ It is certainly pleasant, to be able to converse with
the wise and instructed of all countries and all times without
formality, without embarrassment, and just as long as we choose;
and then dismiss one of them without any apology, and sit down
with another. We travel without expense with them. We inhabit the
tropics, or the polar circle, the table summits of mountains, or
the wide plains, at our choice. We journey by land or by sea. We
select congenial minds, and make them converse with us about our
congenial pursuits. We throw away no voice. We never dialogue in
wrath; and intelligence converses with intelligence, divested of
terrene grossness and passion. When detained on long journeys,
in some remote interior tavern, by a storm, or inability to find
a conveyance, how keenly, while reading almanacks of the past
years, and old fragments of books, found on the dusty shelf of
the ordinary, have I felt the value of books, as a perfect cure
for the impatience of such a position. In this state of privation
and intellectual fasting, we master dull and tiresome books,
which, under other circumstances, we should not have dreamed of
reading. Then the mind is taught to pay the proper homage to these
intellectual resources.

The pleasures of winter reading, in the sacred privacy of the
parlor, are thus finely described by Thomson, the painter of
nature.

                  ‘There studious let me sit,
      And hold high converse with the mighty dead;
      Sages of ancient time, as gods revered,
      As gods beneficent, who bless’d mankind
      With arts, with arms, and humanized a world.
      Roused at th’ inspiring thought, I throw aside
      The long-lived volume; and, deep-musing, hail
      The sacred shades, that slowly-rising pass
      Before my wondering eyes. First Socrates,
      Who, firmly good in a corrupted state,
      Against the rage of tyrants single stood,
      Invincible! calm Reason’s holy law,
      That voice of God within th’ attentive mind,
      Obeying, fearless, or in life or death:
      Great moral teacher! Wisest of mankind!
      Solon the next, who built his commonweal
      On equity’s wide base; by tender laws
      A lively people curbing, yet undamped
      Preserving still that quick peculiar fire,
      Whence in the laurel’d field of finer arts,
      And of bold freedom, they unequall’d shone,
      The pride of smiling Greece and human kind.
      Lycurgus then, who bow’d beneath the force
      Of strictest discipline, severely wise,
      All human passions. Following him, I see,
      As at Thermopylæ he glorious fell,
      The firm devoted chief,[C] who proved by deeds
      The hardest lesson which the other taught.
      Then Aristides lifts his honest front;
      Spotless of heart, to whom th’ unflattering voice
      Of freedom gave the noblest name of Just;
      In pure majestic poverty revered;
      Who, e’en his glory to his country’s weal
      Submitting, swell’d a haughty rival’s[D] fame.
      Rear’d by his care, of softer ray appears
      Cimon sweet-soul’d; whose genius, rising strong,
      Shook off the load of young debauch; abroad
      The scourge of Persian pride, at home the friend
      Of every worth and every splendid art;
      Modest and simple, in the pomp of wealth.
      Then the last worthies of declining Greece,
      Late call’d to glory, in unequal times
      Pensive appear. The fair Corinthian boast,
      Timoleon, happy temper! mild and firm,
      Who wept the brother while the tyrant bled.
      And, equal to the best, the Theban Pair,[E]
      Whose virtues, in heroic concord join’d,
      Their country raised to freedom, empire, fame.
      He too, with whom Athenian honor sunk,
      And left a mass of sordid lees behind,
      Phocion the Good; in public life severe,
      To virtue still inexorably firm;
      But when, beneath his low illustrious roof,
      Sweet peace and happy wisdom smooth’d his brow,
      Not friendship softer was, nor love more kind.
      And he, the last of old Lycurgus’ sons,
      The generous victim to that vain attempt,
      To save a rotten state, Agis, who saw
      E’en Sparta’s self to servile avarice sunk.
      The two Achaian heroes close the train:
      Aratus, who a while relumed the soul
      Of fondly lingering liberty in Greece;
      And he, her darling as her latest hope,
      The gallant Philopœmen; who to arms
      Turn’d the luxurious pomp he could not cure;
      Or toiling on his farm, a simple swain;
      Or, bold and skilful, thundering in the field.
        ‘Of rougher front, a mighty people comes!
      A race of heroes! in those virtuous times
      Which knew no stain, save that with partial flame
      Their dearest country they too fondly loved:
      Her better Founder first, the light of Rome,
      Numa, who soften’d her rapacious sons;
      Servius the king, who laid the solid base
      On which o’er earth the vast republic spread.
      Then the great consuls venerable rise.
      The public Father[F] who the private quell’d,
      As on the dread tribunal sternly sat.
      He whom his thankless country could not lose,
      Camillus, only vengeful to her foes.
      Fabricius, scorner of all-conquering gold;
      And Cincinnatus, awful from the plough.
      Thy willing victim,[G] Carthage, bursting loose
      From all that pleading Nature could oppose,
      From a whole city’s tears, by rigid faith
      Imperious call’d, and honor’s dire command.
      Scipio, the gentle chief, humanely brave,
      Who soon the race of spotless glory ran,
      And, warm in youth, to the poetic shade
      With Friendship and Philosophy retired.
      Tully, whose powerful eloquence a while
      Restrain’d the rapid fate of rushing Rome.
      Unconquer’d Cato, virtuous in extreme;
      And thou, unhappy Brutus, kind of heart,
      Whose steady arm, by awful virtue urged,
      Lifted the Roman steel against thy friend.
      Thousands besides the tribute of a verse
      Demand; but who can count the stars of heaven?
      Who sing their influence on this lower world?
        ‘Behold, who yonder comes! in sober state,
      Fair, mild, and strong, as is a vernal sun;
      ’Tis Phœbus’ self, or else the Mantuan swain!
      Great Homer too appears, of daring wing,
      Parent of song! and, equal by his side,
      The British Muse; join’d hand in hand they walk,
      Darkling, full up the middle steep to fame,
      Nor absent are those shades, whose skilful touch
      Pathetic drew th’ impassion’d heart, and charm’d
      Transported Athens with the moral scene;
      Nor those who, tuneful, waked th’ enchanted lyre.
        ‘First of your kind! society divine!
      Still visit thus my nights, for you reserved,
      And mount my soaring soul to thoughts like yours.
      Silence, thou lonely power! the door be thine;
      See on the hallow’d hour that none intrude,
      Save a few chosen friends, who sometimes deign
      To bless my humble roof, with sense refined,
      Learning digested well, exalted faith,
      Unstudied wit, and humor ever gay.
      Or from the Muses’ hill will Pope descend,
      To raise the sacred hour, to bid it smile,
      And with the social spirit warm the heart?
      For though not sweeter his own Homer sings,
      Yet is his life the more endearing song.’


Note 46, page 142.

Whoever has attempted to concentrate his thoughts in fixed
contemplation upon the origin of the human race, the object of our
present existence, and our prospects beyond it, upon the character
and plan of the divinity, and the mode of his being, must have
felt a painful vagueness, a dizzying sense of the weakness of our
powers, very naturally preparing us for superstitious and terrific
views of the first cause. But when, in the clear light of reason,
I look upon his creation, on his star-spangled firmament, and the
glory of his works, I should as soon doubt my own existence, as
the perfect wisdom and goodness of the author of my being. All
religion, which does not strengthen our confidence in this, must
be a dreary illusion. Horrible dreams, dating their origin from
the associations of childhood, and the rant of wild and visionary
ministers, may sometimes interpose, in the uncertain moments
between sleeping and waking, as among the gloomy presentiments
and partial delirium of ill health. But every rational mind must
finally settle to repose in that glorious persuasion, which
instantly irradiates the moral universe with perennial sunshine.
‘The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice.’ In this or any other
world, in our present or any other forms of conscious being, we may
advance upon the unexplored scenes with a full confidence that we
can never travel beyond the beneficence and equity of the infinite
mind.

One of the standing themes of Christian pulpits is the puerile
and absurd views, which the common creed of the Greeks and Romans
presented of the rabble divinities of their Pantheon; deities, who
fought, intrigued, made love, and intoxicated themselves; deities,
who had great power in a valley, and none on the adjoining hills;
deities, who were conquered, and transferred with their territory,
and became in consequence subservient to their conquerors. I have
heard discussions of this kind in the discourse of the sabbath
morning: and, in that of the evening, views of Christian theology,
scarcely less narrow and unworthy of the Supreme Being. I am
compelled to believe, from reading and observation, that the mass
of the people, in all churches, have had no other conception of
the divinity, than that of a being molded much like themselves.
We cannot avoid discovering, that their ideas of a God are gross,
material, local, partial; that they behold him, as the God of their
place, party and passions. Converse with the fiercer sects, and
you perceive, that their views immediately become vague, as soon
as they contemplate the Almighty occupied with concerns beyond
their sect. It seems beyond their thoughts, to realize, that their
denomination bears to the species little more than the proportion
of a drop to the ocean: and that the Supreme Being cannot be
rationally supposed more concerned about them, than any other equal
number of his children.

Nothing can be more philosophical, or consoling, than the Scripture
views of what has been called a _particular providence_. But,
as we hear it generally expounded from the press, the pulpit,
and in common conversation, it offers views of the divine Being
and government, scarcely less weak, monstrous and unworthy, than
those entertained by the ancient pagans. What a conception, to
suppose that a perfect law, as wise and equitable in its general
operation, as infinite wisdom and goodness could ordain, could
be continually infringed, to meet countless millions of opposing
prayers and interests! What a view of God, to imagine, that
earnest and concurrent prayers can at any time divert him from his
purpose, and change his plans! What palpable misinterpretation of
the Scriptures, to suppose, that they give any countenance to such
debasing conceptions of God! Hear rigid sectarians converse, and
you discover, that they think little of the divine providence,
which has no reference to their individual interests and concerns.
From the tone of their conversations, it is but too manifest, that
they have an interior confidence, that they can obtain of the
divine power, almost what they will.

The testimony of church history and the experience of time
testify, that the million, under all degrees of light, shrink from
the difficult and philosophical idea of the real Jehovah of the
Bible; and form, instead, the easy and natural image of a limited,
partial, changeable God, whom importunity can easily induce to
swerve from his purpose; and who is, in many respects, such a
being as themselves. It is the embodied conception of their own
narrow views, assigned to a local habitation. To him the countless
millions of other lands, and other forms of worship, are not, like
them, as children. Unable to rise to the Supreme Being, they have
brought Him down to them.

A few minds, from age to age, elevated by endowment and
circumstances far above their cotemporaries, have not only
embraced, in common with others, the easy and simple sentiments
of Him, which the heart entertains, but have raised their
contemplations so high, as to behold Him in the light of
truth--have seen Him, in some sense, _as He is_--have been filled
with awe and confidence, in the view of his immutability, and with
filial and cheerful resignation, in seeing in the universe, its
order, mutations and variety, in the mixed condition of man, in a
word, in every feature of the natural and moral creation, as in a
mirror, a perfect transcript of the divine perfections--a pattern
of an archetype without a shade of defect. Instead of bringing the
Divine Being down to them, they have raised themselves up to Him.
The veil, that screens his glory from the feeble vision of the
multitude, has been removed. Being assured, that He has made of one
blood all nations, that dwell on the earth, they have seen it to be
impossible, that He should look upon one portion of his children
with more favor than on another. They have seen, in the superior
light and advantages of one part of the species over another, not
the indication, of what is technically called _special favor_, but
the natural result of the operation of his universal laws. They
have seen, that if the inhabitants of one region are enabled to
rise higher in the intellectual scale, and pay him a more spiritual
and worthy homage--the simple inhabitants of _distant, barbarous
isles_ have an organization admitting them to be as happy as their
natures will admit, and as full of enjoyment as their measure can
contain. If they are unable to offer an intellectual worship,
the service of their minds, their hearts are formed for fervent
admiration and worship of the thunderer--the being, who raises
fruits and flowers, and hangs out his bow on their clouds. They
see, in all this, _that God, also, hath set one thing over against
another_.


Note 47, page 144.

The wisdom of allowing any place to the imagination, among the
faculties to be nurtured, I have often heard called in question.
The extremes of opinion frequently meet in the same point. The
most earnest declaimers against the indulgence of the imagination
are commonly found among the class of strict religionists. It is,
at the same time, a strong and prominent trait in the system of
Mr Owen ‘the philosopher of circumstances,’ and his followers,
that we ought to eradicate this faculty, if possible, or at least
suppress its exercise; and reduce all mental operations to the
cultivation of the reasoning powers. For me, I hold, that we are
as much indebted to the author of our being for granting us this
faculty, as any other. I see nothing wrong, or unphilosophical
in cultivating it to the utmost extent; provided our imaginings
would be innocent, if we could render them realities; unless it
can be shown, that the indulgence of this faculty enervates the
mind, and unfits it for encountering the stern duties and trials
of life. So far from believing this to be the natural tendency of
its allowed exercise, my experience has led me to suppose, that
persons, strongly endowed with this faculty, are most likely to
show energy for the discharge of common duties; and constancy and
cheerfulness in encountering trials. Are the southern people of
Europe, for example, less firm in conflicting with danger and
sorrow, or more feeble and remiss in the discharge of duties,
than the northern nations, admitted to be far less imaginative?
Within the range of my experience, I find those possessed of the
most vivid imagination, the most prompt to duty, and the most
cheerful in sorrow. The moody advocates of pure and exclusive
reason lay feeling, one of the strongest impulses to duty, out
of the question; and would extinguish one of the surest supports
in sorrow, the power of creating a bright internal world for
ourselves, when the external world is involved in unavoidable gloom.

They who decry the indulgence of the imagination, must, of course,
object to the endowment of poets and painters; and equally to
the pleasure derived from reading poetry, and contemplating
paintings. The whole empire of these kindred studies is that of
the imagination. Let us try the alleged puerility of indulging
this faculty. No one will deny, that it is the highest wisdom to
seek to be as happy, as we innocently may. When a mental faculty
is employed in creating within us a celestial world, peopled
with nobler beings, acting from higher motives, and showing a
happier existence; and in substituting the beautiful possible for
the tame real; if we find innocent happiness in this celestial
castle-building, are we not employing reason, only in a different
direction from the common? When any one can prove to me, that
it is puerile, to make ourselves happy, and from sources always
within our own control, then I will admit, that ideal pleasures are
unworthy of a reasonable being. Prove only, that the indulgence
of the faculty enervates the mind, and indisposes it for duty
and constancy in suffering, and I will grant at once, that it
should be stifled, or its action restricted or suppressed. So far
from believing this to be the fact, I would counsel him, whom
I most love, to seek in her whom he would select for his wife,
a cheerful and active imagination. It is an egregious mistake,
that mathematicians and practical men have generally been found
destitute of a good development of this faculty. Contrary to the
vulgar and hackneyed theme of pulpit declamation, I have found
on examination, that some of the most energetically charitable
women, I have ever known, were veteran novel readers; as have also
been some of the most profound lawyers that have ever adorned the
judgment seat in our country.


Note 48, page 145.

It is not exactly true, that this faculty can be subjected to the
complete control of the will. I know of no point in metaphysics,
connected, also, with an important question in rhetoric, upon which
less light has been thrown, than the question, how far, and in
what way the imagination can be cultivated: and by what methods
brought under the control of the will. A system of useful and
practical rules for this result is, as far as my reading extends, a
desideratum. Dr Johnson, it is well known, believed, that a man’s
muse was _sua dextra_, his own will, industry and habits, and that
by a vigorous effort over himself, he could write, for example,
at any time. This may be true in efforts, in which imagination is
not required; but, where the vivid exercise of this faculty is
requisite to excellence, it is not true. Let the most amply endowed
poet suffer under mental depression, dyspepsia, a concurrence of
small misfortunes and petty vexations. Let him write in a smoky
apartment, and look abroad upon a leaden sky, marked with the
dulness of winter, without its storms and congenial horrors. He may
repair to his rules. He may apply the whip and spur, and invoke the
nimble fancies from the vasty deep, and the muses from their hill,
but they will not answer, nor come at his bidding.

The imagination may be cultivated to a certain extent; and brought
by rules and intense concentration of mind, in a certain degree,
under the control of the will. Those, who would nurture it, ought
intensely to study those rules. But, after all, to be able to
exercise it in high measures of vivacity, is an endowment, in the
bestowment of which nature has been more capricious than in almost
any other. Even when possessed in copious measures, its province
lies so intermediate between corporeal and mental influence,
between the prevalent temperament of the period of its action, and
the concurrence of external circumstances beyond our control, that
we can easily see, why the wise ancients, who thought more justly
upon these subjects, and more profoundly than the moderns seem to
be willing to apprehend, attributed the successful efforts of the
muses to a superior and celestial influence. He, who pushes the
theory of our control over this faculty beyond truth, adopts an
error, nearly if not quite as dangerous, as he, who holds, that we
have no control over it at all.

A thousand external circumstances, which it would require
a volume to enumerate, must concur with a certain easy and
strong excitability in the physical and mental frame; and that
excitability called into action by the right sort of stimulants,
to impart happy and vigorous action to the imagination. Milton
affirmed, that his muse was most propitious in the spring. As far
as I can judge, the season of reproduction, and the awakening of
the slumbering powers of nature, in the aroma and brilliancy of
vegetation and flowers, acts too voluptuously on the senses, to
give the highest and best direction to the imagination. The Indian
summer days of autumn, with the associated repose of nature, the
broad and crimson disk of the sun enthroned in the dome of a misty
sky, the clouds sleeping in the firmament, the gorgeous coloring
of the forests, the flashing fall of the first leaves, and the not
unpleasing sadness of the images, called up by the imperceptible
decay of nature, and the stealthy approach of winter, seem to me
most favorable to heavenly musing. A cloudless morning, a beautiful
sun, the glittering brightness of the dew drops, the renovated
freshness of nature, morning sounds, the mists rolling away from
the path of the sun, a bland southwest breeze, good health,
self-satisfaction, the recent reception of good news, and the right
train of circumstances all concur to put this faculty into its
happiest action.

Every one is acquainted with the unsparing ridicule bestowed on
Bayes, in Buckingham’s Rehearsal, for announcing, that he always
took physic, before he wrote. Yet the dull coxcomb had reason and
truth on his side. Mental action is more dependent upon corporeal,
and the ethereal powers upon the right disposition of that
organized clod, the body, than most are willing to acknowledge. Who
has not felt, when first going abroad from severe sickness, the
new aspects of nature, a fullness of heart, and the crowding of
innumerable images upon the thoughts, which have no place in the
mind, after a turtle feast or a full dinner? When the digestive
powers are oppressed with morbid accumulation, the wheels of mental
movement, as every one knows, move heavily. Students, orators,
painters, poets, imaginative men must live as near famine as may
be, and the most useful stimulants are coffee and tea. Every one
has read, that Byron’s inspiration was gin. It may be, that the
detestible combination of terebinthine and alcoholic excitement may
have aroused from the mouldy and terrene dormitories of his brain
the images of Don Juan, and the obscene, irreligious, anti-social,
and fierce thoughts, that abound in his works. But I would hardly
believe, on his own assertion, that he wrote the Prisoners of
Children under such an influence. The muse of alcohol is accursed;
and her influence is too corroding, dreggy, and adverse to life, to
originate ideas worthy of being handed down in immortal verse. If
these baleful aids were resorted to at all, I should consider opium
a thousand times preferable to alcohol.

I know, from my own experience, that this reality of actual
and present existence may be imparted to the creations of the
imagination, by long habits of subjecting it to the control of the
will. The enjoyment, resulting from reality, may be more intense,
but it is, also, more tumultuous and feverish. I know of no
happiness, more pure, prolonged and tranquil, more like what we may
imagine to be the bliss of higher intelligences, than to be able
to create this sunshine of the soul, this fair and celestial world
within ourselves, and make ourselves free denizens of the country.
From these fairy mansions labor, care and want are excluded. The
obstacles and impediments of time, distance, and disease, both of
body and mind, are excluded. The inhabitants, walking in the light
of truth and the radiance of immortal beauty, from sin and death
forever free, unite the wisdom of angels to the simplicity and
affectionate confidence of children.


Note 50, page 146.

No people, in my estimation, are farther from true wisdom, than
they, who denounce these pleasures of the imagination, as the
puerile follies of weak minds. They who are most prompt to bring
the charge, are generally destitute of the faculty, and its
kindred endowments themselves; and seem to desire that other minds
should be reduced to their own scale of sterility. Puerile, to
avail ourselves of the power of rendering ourselves innocently
happy! To me the puerility belongs to those who mostly abstain
from contemplating the few gleams of sunshine, that we can behold
between the cradle and the grave. ‘But these joys are unreal!’
What is there in the _vain show_ of life, that is not so? See the
greedy scramble of ambition, after honor, wealth and distinction,
the painted baubles of insects, who hold all by the frail tenure of
life! Life itself, what is it, but a dream, sometimes illumined by
the rainbows of imagination and hope?


Note 51, page 149.

A being endowed with such intense emotions, as man; and so placed,
as to have them so strongly called forth by the relations he
contracts: so much in the dark in regard to his origin, his end and
everything about him, conscious, that he must shortly leave home,
all that he loves, the view of the earth and the sky, and that
body, which long habit has taught him to consider as himself, to
molder back to the soil, should naturally be expected to have this
tendency to melancholy. Beautifully said the fabulist, ‘that he who
formed us, moistened the clay of our structure not with water but
tears.’ The natural expression of the human countenance in sleep
is shaded with a slight veil of melancholy. It has been observed,
that the national music of all people, and, more especially, of
the uncivilized tribes, is on a key of melancholy. Most of the
voices of the animal tribes are of this cast. The strain of the
nightingale is the deepest expression of this sentiment. Religion
should be the grand re-agent, in bringing light and cheerfulness to
a universe of sadness and death, by presenting new views of that
universe, its author, his beneficence, and the ultimate hope of the
soul.

      ‘See truth, love and mercy in triumph descending,
       And nature all glowing in Eden’s first bloom;
       On the cold cheek of death smiles and roses are blending.
       And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb.’


Note 52, page 149.

With the honorable exception of some towns and districts in our
country, the epitaphs and monumental inscriptions are utterly
beneath criticism. The greater portion are from Watts, and the
other minor poets, too often little more than extravagant, coarse,
miserable conceits. Here and there, a beautiful quotation from
the Bible, such as ‘Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord;’
‘Man cometh forth, like a flower, and is cut down,’ only serve
to render the worthlessness of the remainder more conspicuous
by contrast. What adds to the unpleasant effect is, that no
inconsiderable portion of them are absolutely misspelt, to say
nothing of the punctuation. Strange, that survivors should incur
the expense of a slab, and permit a stone-cutter to select, spell,
and point the inscriptions. It is to be hoped, that some competent
writer will, ere long, take in hand this matter, so vital to the
literary reputation of our country, and introduce a thorough and
general reform, by wiping away this national stain, and introducing
that beautiful and sublime simplicity, which ought always to
characterize monumental inscriptions.

Akin to the bad taste of this sort, is the slovenly manner in which
our church-yards are kept, in whole sections of the country. Who
has not felt pain, at seeing many and even most of these places
sacred to memory, in the western county especially, uninclosed,
trampled upon by cattle, and the narrow heap of turf disturbed by
swine?

Of writers, whose works have been immortalized by the muse
of melancholy, I am acquainted, in the French language, with
Chateaubriand, who has produced occasional passages of this class
not to be surpassed; and Lamartine, whose poetry breathes a rich
and deep strain of melancholy. Young’s Night Thoughts, Blair’s
Grave, and Porteus ‘on Death,’ are celebrated English specimens
of this class of poetry. In our country the Thanatopsis of Bryant
ranks quite as high as either of the former writers in this walk.
Some of the lines are of exquisite beauty, as paintings of the
trophies of the tomb. Another age will do justice to many of the
thoughts in the Sorotaphion of a young poet, who has written on the
remote shores of Red River.

The first lines of the inscription on the famous Roman statue of
Sleep are the sublimest concentration of melancholy thought:

‘It is better to sleep, than wake; and best of all to be in marble.’

The same may be said of that of the orphan nun, who died in the
prime of youth and beauty: ‘I was alone among the living. I am
alone here.’

But it is in the book of Job, that poetic images, upon which has
been thrown the shade of a sublime melancholy, are set forth, with
a power and pathos that leave little more, to succeeding writers in
that walk, than to study, combine, and reproduce their features.
How perfectly has this author given utterance to the groans of one
in utter despondency and bereavement! Here the heart speaks its
own language, with a simplicity and truth to make its way to every
other heart. These features fix the date of this poem at a period
antecedent to the settled art of writing, and plagiarizing the
shadow of a shade, more conclusively than volumes of criticism.
He copied not; but drank at the fountain; feeling deeply, and
expressing what he felt.


Note 53, page 150.

When in my travels I pass through a town, or village, which I have
not seen, if I have sufficient leisure, the first place which
I visit, is uniformly the church-yard. The feeling that I am a
stranger, that I know not the scenery, and that it knows not me,
naturally induces a sort of pensive meditation, which disposes me
for that sojourn. I form certain estimates of the taste and moral
feeling of the people, from the forms and devices of the slabs
and monuments; and the order in which the consecrated ground is
inclosed, and kept. The inscriptions are ordinarily, in too bad a
taste to claim much interest, though there are few church-yards,
that cannot show some monuments, which, by their eccentric
variation from the rest, mark character. All this is a matter of
trifling interest, compared with the throng of remembrances and
anticipations, that naturally crowd upon the spirit of a stranger
in such a place. Youth with its rainbows, and its loves; mature
age with its ambitious projects; old age in the midst of children,
death in the natal spot, or the house of the stranger; eternity
with its dim and illimitable mysteriousness; these shadowy images,
with their associated thoughts, pass through the mind, and return,
like the guests at an inn. While I look up towards the rolling
clouds, and the sun walking his unvarying path along the firmament,
how natural the reflection, that they will present the same aspect,
and suggest the same reflections, that the trees will stand forth
in their foliage and the hills in their verdure, to him who comes
after me, when I shall have taken my place with the unconscious
sleepers about me! I never fail to recollect the charming
reflections in a number of the Spectator, that treats upon a visit
to Westminster Abbey, the most impressive writing of the kind, as
it seems to me, in our language.

Here is the place to reflect upon the folly, if not the guilt, of
human hatred and revenge, ambition and avarice, and the million
puerile projects and cares, that are incessantly over-clouding the
sunshine of existence. What an eloquent lesson do these voiceless
preachers read, upon the wisdom of most of those thoughts and
solicitudes, that disturb our course through life!

The heart cannot but be made better by occasional communion with
these tenants of the narrow house, where--

      ‘Each waits the other’s license to disturb
       The deep, unbroken silence.’


Note 53a, page 152.

It is questionable, how far they could lay claim to be the real
friends of humanity, who would reason away this last, best solace
of human wretchedness, even were it proved an illusion. But man
is just as certainly and necessarily a religious being, as he
is a being constituted with appetites and passions. Grant, that
there are people, who seem wholly destitute of the religious
sentiment. Such are the real Atheists from internal conviction; for
observe, there are many, who assume to be such, to pass for free
and independent thinkers, and who are most likely, in their dying
moments, to require absolution and extreme unction. But if there
are men thus monstrously constituted, so are there individuals
apparently as destitute of the common appetites and passions. We
take no account of such exceptions, in indicating a general rule;
and say, that man is constituted a religious being, and possessed
of certain appetites and passions; although there may be selected a
few individuals, who seem entirely without either.

Religion is the key stone of the arch of the moral universe. It
is the fountain of endearing friendship; and on it are founded
those sublime relations, which exist between the visible and the
invisible world; those, who still sojourn here, and those who
have become citizens of the country beyond us. It is the poesy of
existence, the basis of all high thought and virtuous feeling; of
charities and morals; and the very tie of social existence. Let no
person claim to be good, while laying an unhallowed hand upon this
ark of the covenant of the Eternal with the children of sorrow and
death.


Note 54, page 154.

Treatises upon the evidences of religion may be useful for
theological students; and I have heard people affirm, that they
have been rescued by such works from the gloom of unbelief. But,
believing, as I do, that we were constituted religious animals,
if such a term may be admitted, and that the religious sentiment
is a part of our organization, I have quite as much confidence in
the arguments of the heart, as of the head. I undertake not to
pronounce, whether M. de Chateaubriand were a good christian, or
not. But I affirm, that I have nowhere seen my own views of the
process, by which the original endowment of the religious sentiment
is called into action, so eloquently described, as in the following
extract from that writer.

‘My mother, after being thrown, at the age of seventy-two years,
into a dungeon, where she saw a part of her children perish,
expired at last upon a couch of straw, to which her miseries
had consigned her. The remembrance of my errors infused great
bitterness into her last days. In death she charged one of my
sisters to recall me to that religion, in which I had been reared.
My sister transmitted me the last wish of my mother. When this
letter reached me beyond the seas, my sister herself was no more.
She had died from the consequences of her imprisonment. These two
voices, proceeding from the tomb, this death, which served as the
interpreter of the dead, deeply struck me. I did not yield, I
admit, to great supernatural lights. My conviction proceeded from
the heart. I wept, and I believed.’


Note 55, page 157.

The belief naturally originated by the sentiment of religion, or
what may be called the faith of the heart, is presented in the last
fruitless attempt of the old man, to cheer the despair of Paul in
the exquisite tale of Paul and Virginia. ‘And why deplore the fate
of Virginia? Virginia still exists. There is, be assured, a region,
in which virtue receives its reward. Virginia now is happy. Oh! if
from the abode of angels, she could tell you, as she did, when she
bade you farewell, “O Paul, life is but a trial. I was faithful to
the laws of nature, love and virtue. Heaven found I had fulfilled
my duties, and snatched me forever from all the miseries, I might
have endured myself; and all, I might have felt for the miseries
of others. I am placed above the reach of all human evils, and you
pity me! I am become pure and unchangeable, as a particle of light,
and you would recall me to the darkness of human life. O Paul! O
my beloved friend! Recollect those days of happiness, when in the
morning we felt the delightful sensations excited by the unfolding
beauties of nature; when we gazed upon the sun, gilding the peaks
of those rocks; and then spreading his rays over the bosom of the
forests. How exquisite were our emotions, while we enjoyed the
glowing colors of the opening day, the odors of our shrubs, the
concerts of our birds! Now at the source of beauty, from which
flows all that is delightful on earth, my soul intuitively sees,
tastes, hears, touches, what before she could only be made sensible
of through the medium of our weak organs. Oh! what language can
describe, those shores of eternal bliss, which I inhabit forever!
All, that infinite power and celestial bounty can confer, that
harmony, which results from friendship with numberless beings,
exulting in the same felicity, we enjoy in unmixed perfection.
Support, then, the trial which is allotted you, that you may
heighten the happiness of your Virginia, by love, which will know
no termination, by hymeneals, which will be immortal. There I will
calm your regrets; I will wipe away your tears. Raise your thoughts
towards infinite duration, and bear the evils of a moment.”’


Note 56, page 160.

Phrenologists affirm, that along the centre of the crown is
situated the organ of veneration, or religious sentiment; that,
where it is large, the subject is strongly endowed with religious
feeling, and the contrary, when it is otherwise; that, with some
few monstrous exceptions, all possess this organ in a larger
or smaller degree; and that, as the sentiment springing from
the action of this organ is directed towards proper or improper
objects, enlightened by reason, rendered gloomy by fear, or
superstitious by credulity, is the religious character of the
person. Neither my subject, nor my inclination calls upon me to
agitate a system, which has generally been met only with unsparing
ridicule, instead of manly argument. With its doctrines or merits I
intermeddle not in this place. But, as far as the system declares,
that those people, whom we call pious, whose tone of mind seems
to dispose them to strong religious feeling, are so inclined
from organization, rather than volition, or argument, I most
confidently believe. Morals, whatever is taught by the science of
ethics, dogmas, ceremonies, commonly phrased religion, make, in
my mind, no part of it. I consider religion to be simply love,
originating from instinctive impulses of veneration in the mind,
for whatever is powerful, beneficent, and worthy of love. Its
native tendency is to expend its affection, first upon the unknown
and incomprehensible power, from whom we derived our being, whom
the heart, without argument, intuitively perceives to be good.
Its next and associated tendency is philanthropy, or the love of
what bears the impress and image of God. If we possess not this
original organization, no argument will ever persuade us to be
religious. If we have it, we may be liberal, or bigoted, Christians
or Mahometans, earnest or cold, according to our proportion of
endowment, our training and circumstances. We may even adopt the
flippant arguments of the unbelieving, and enlist ourselves under
their banner. But the original principle is still within us,
uneradicated, and uneradicable; and ready, if circumstances should
favor the change, to present us in the form of devotees, or, as
the phrase is, _converted_. The whole wisdom and excellence of
religious training consist in enlightening this noble sentiment,
and giving it a right direction. I am the rather confirmed in these
views, by having remarked, that the chief, palpable and tangible
influences of religion, which I have witnessed in all the sects,
that I have had occasion to observe, have seemed to me to result
from the affectionate spirit of their worship, creating in them
strong dispositions to love one another.

Open the gospels and the epistles, and what is the first impression
from perusing these unique and original writings, so wholly unlike
any other recorded compositions, and bearing upon a theme of
such astonishing import? The simplicity and fervor, with which
the spirit of love is impressed upon the pages. The strong and
before unwitnessed manifestation of this spirit was the striking
aspect, which the first Christians presented to pagan beholders.
‘See!’ said they, ‘how these Christians love one another.’ Every
time, I peruse the writings of the New Testament, this peculiar
badge of discipleship seems more visibly impressed upon them. In
what other institution, but that of Christianity, was it ever
practicable to possess all things in common? Where has been the
community, in which no one felt want, when a disciple had wherewith
to satisfy it? In what other chronicles do we meet with such
affecting and sublime examples of devotion to each other, and a
constancy of affection, which showed itself proof against all other
human passions, selfishness, hope, fear, earthly love, and the
terror of death? What tenderness and singleness of heart in their
affection for each other! How beautifully they demonstrate, that
the sentiment, which actuated them, had gained a complete triumph
over all considerations, arising from objects below the sun? He on
whose bosom the loved disciple leaned must certainly be admitted to
know the peculiar and distinguishing feature of his religion. This
feature stands forth embodied in all his teachings. Philanthropy
is the predominant trait in the life of him, _who went about doing
good_. Consider the basis of religion to be a sentiment implanted
in our constitution, and this result would naturally be expected to
flow from its development.

True religion, consisting in an enlightened and affectionate
direction of the heart towards the divinity, and manifesting
itself in love to the human family, and in consequent obedience to
the universal and unchangeable laws of the Creator, can only be
expected to result from the highest discipline of the mind, and the
ultimate exercise of the purest reason. But the sentiment, from
which this religion springs, in some form or other, as naturally
impels the heart towards God, and its faith and aspirations towards
immortality, as fishes desire to find their home in the water,
or birds in the air; and as everything, that has life, obeys the
peculiar instincts and impulses impressed by the divine hand. Why
else, should every people under heaven, in all time, have been
found with a religion in some form, and hopes and fears beyond the
grave? Consider religion in this light, and its hopes are as sure,
as those objects, towards which the instincts of all other animals
prompt them.

Do I undervalue morals, since I do not deem them a part, of
what should be properly called religion? I trust, I cannot be
so mistaken. Ethics may be taught, as a science, and, however
important, seems to me no more a part of religion, than mathematics
or natural philosophy. Love will create morals; and its perfection
the perfection of morals, that we ascribe to angels. All that has
been urged from the pulpit, in regard to faith and works, as cause
and effect, may, with still more justice, be applied to love and
duty. Love is the faith of the heart, and its original impress,
when rightly trained in the science of ethics, and enlightened
by pure and simple reason, produces its results in the best
exemplification of the christian character.


Note 57, page 165.

That person has no right to complain of the shortness of life,
who lies in bed, either sleeping, or dozing, until nine; and
thus voluntarily consigns to unconsciousness a twelfth part of
his existence. As little reason has he for indulging a querulous
spirit on this score, if he spends without object a considerable
portion of his time with people, about whom he knows nothing,
except that they are incapable of furnishing a moment’s pleasure,
or instruction to any one. If each one noted down at night the
incidents of the day, that had occupied his time, and how much of
it he had appropriated to each, I fear all that portion, that we
call people of leisure would be able to show but a lean schedule
either of utility or enjoyment, as the result.

Complaints of the brevity of life are equally interdicted to all
those, who do not wisely improve every hour of the brief and
uncertain present. He, who regretted his stinted fortune, would
find, and deserve little sympathy, if, in the very moments of
complaining, he was seen inconsiderately squandering from that
limited fund. To form a resolution to mark every moment of life,
that we might, with a succession of pleasant ideas, would probably
triple the duration of most human lives. To sleep no more than
nature requires, to rise early, to discipline ourselves to preserve
an elastic and active spirit and a vigorous will, are parts of
this resolution. It is a much greater part, than is commonly
apprehended, to waste as little time as possible on those, who are
incapable of understanding us, and whom we are as little capable of
understanding. Reciprocal good feeling is much more likely to be
created, and sustained by those who are determined to avoid this
course, than those who, from mere unmeaning civility and common
etiquette, bring their incompatibilities together, to make common
stock of a mutual weariness with each other, which soon ripens into
concealed, if not expressed ill feeling.

They, who are accustomed to think in this direction, will easily
fill out the fine outline of the author’s views touching the right
mode to arrest the flight of time. To add to this sketch would
require an extent of detail, for which I have here no place. The
general principle of this process seems to consist in meeting pain
and adversity with a spirit so philosophic and firm that they will
recoil from it; and to dwell upon every innocent enjoyment, as
though it were our first, and would be our last; to prolong it by
investing it with all possible moral relations; and to discipline
the mind never to become hackneyed, sated, wearied, and callous to
the sense of objects in which man is bound to feel an interest,
alike by his duty and his nature.

Never was a more stupid maxim, than that common one, that _nil
admirari_ is the proper motto of a philosopher. To preserve a
freshness, a juvenile sensibility of the heart for the admiration
of whatever is new, beautiful and striking, for all the pleasures
of taste and the understanding, seems to me the true secret of
the highest wisdom. Who can fail to be inspired with disgust at
witnessing the common spectacle of _cognoscenti_, men of _virtu_,
travelled fools, who have been everywhere, and seen everything; and
by the contemptuous sneer, with which they effect to see, hear,
feel and speak of all, that passes under their present observation,
instruct you, that they are too wise, and of a taste too refined,
to be pleased with what satisfies untravelled people. For my part,
when I hear them boast of the music, paintings and architecture
of continental Europe, and England, as though all the sources of
beauty were there, I can only say, that nature is always at hand,
to mock at all the puny efforts of art; that she delights to mould
living faces and forms in remote country cottages, that no _beau
idéal_ can reach; that the songs of the birds, that return from
other climes to their forsaken groves with the first sunny days
of spring constitute a music richer to the heart, than the most
fashionable opera; and that a pure spring landscape is a pictured
thousand times more splendid, than any that ever adorned the walls
of the Louvre. He, who preserves, to his utmost age, his youthful
sensibility of heart, and who is willing to be pleased with
whatever will impart innocent pleasure, will find innumerable and
never failing occasions to give his heart up to the full impulses
of joy.

‘I pity,’ says Sterne, ‘the man, who can travel from Dan to
Beersheba, and cry ’tis all barren; and yet so it is; and so is
all the world, to him who will not cultivate the fruits it offers.
I declare said I, clapping my hands cheerly together, that were
I in a desert, I would find in it the wherewith to call forth
my affections. If I could not do better, I would fasten them on
some sweet myrtle, or seek some melancholy cypress, to connect
myself to. I would court its shade, and greet it kindly for its
protection; I would cut my name upon it, and swear, it was the
loveliest tree in the desert. If its leaves withered, I would teach
myself to mourn; and when they rejoiced, I would rejoice with them.’


Note 58, page 166.

I consider it no unimportant part of the process of prolonging our
earthly sojourn, to lay in, if I may so speak, as great a stock
as possible, of pleasant remembrances. I appeal to the experience
of every one, if the sudden recollection of a foolish thing that
we have said, or done, returning upon us after a lapse of years,
has not brought back with the convulsive shudder of shame, a long
train of associated remembrances, which have carried us back whole
days upon the scene? How long seem the periods, in which these
incidents occurred! Pleasant recollections are no less efficient,
in prolonging the periods, in which they occurred, adding their
duration to the sum of the fugitive existence that is stealing from
us.

For myself I can confidently affirm, that I have long since learned
to find my purest and most abiding satisfactions in the memory
of the past. I repeat all its happier passages and incidents. I
recall the bright days, verdant landscapes, loved persons, and
joyous sensations from their shadowy mansions. I renew my youthful
sports; and watch for the trout along the flush spring brooks. I
seat myself again on the sunny banks of the pleasant spots of my
career. I would be glad to convey some idea of the vivid pleasure,
I experience after a lapse of forty winters, from the deeply
impressed remembrance of one beautiful spring morning, after a
long and severe winter, when I was still a school-boy. The vast
masses of snow were beginning to melt. The birds of prey, shut up
in their retreats during the bitter winter, sailed forth in the
mild clear blue. The blue bird whistled; and my heart expanded with
joy and delight unknown, in the same degree, before or since. The
place where these thoughts, comprising my youthful anticipations,
hopes and visions occurred, will never be obliterated from my mind,
while memory holds her seat. I have a thousand such treasured
recollections, with which I can at any time, and to a certain
extent, cheer pain, sorrow and decay. These are enjoyments stored
beyond the reach of fortune, which we can prolong, and renew at
pleasure.

Is there not practical wisdom, in commencing every day with the
steady effort, to make as much of it, as if it were to be our whole
existence. If we have duties to perform, in themselves severe and
laborious, we may inquire, if there be not some way, by which to
invest them with pleasant associations? A man may find amusement
in his free thoughts, while following his plough upon the hill
side; in digging up the words for a dictionary, or in copying out
a brief. He may train himself, by an inefficient and shrinking
spirit, to recoil from these tasks, as insupportable burdens. How
many men find their pleasure, in what would be the positive horror
and torment of the indolent! How weak the spirit, and how silly
the vanity which we display, in ever renewing narrations of our
little personal troubles, pains and misfortunes! If we would have
the discretion to measure the sympathy, which we may expect from
others, in such discourses, by that, which we are conscious of
feeling for theirs of the same character, it would go far to teach
us the folly of that querulous spirit, which doles forth the story
of sufferings and sorrows, as though the narrator were the only
sufferer, and were entitled to a monopoly of all the passing pity.


Note 59, page 169.

This compendium of the moral acquirements, entering into the
character of an accomplished philosopher, I consider one of the
happiest, which any book of morals can show. Here is an ample
volume of ethics, on a page. How differently would a modern
auto-biographer have announced the same facts! In what rounded
periods and circuitous expressions would he have striven to
convey the same ideas, to impress the reader, that his modesty
forbade the frank personality of the Roman philosopher. The
whole spirit of this admirable summary would have evaporated in
barren generalities. What we admire in the ancients is their
noble simplicity and directness, which disdains the vanity of
circumlocution, that wishes to hide itself under the semblance of
modesty.

It seems to me, that it would not be amiss for the clergy of the
day to seek the models of their homilies and sermons in such a
manner of declaring moral truth. Abstract ethical declamation,
and all the scholastic acquirements and the _limæ labor_ are but
poor substitutes for that searching directness, which, avoiding
abstractions and generalities, appeals at once to the personal
consciousness. I allow, that I should love to hear such sermons,
as that of Dr Primrose to his fellow prisoners, in the Vicar of
Wakefield. There is no eloquence, there can be none, except in
simple and direct appeals to thought and conscience.


Note 60, page 171.

Various writers of splendid genius have tasked their imagination,
to present us with the results of endowing a person with
immortality on earth. Such a character has been delineated with
great power by Godwin, in his St Leon; and by Croly in the story
of _Salathiel, or the Wandering Jew_. It is an instructive labor,
to record the wanderings, changes, weariness, abandonment, and
final despair of a wretch cursed with immortality; and by the
circumstance rendered a monster, out of relation with human beings;
and cut off from all real sympathy with his mortal kind. It is
questionable, whether these writers, or any others who have drawn
similar pictures, have formed adequate conceptions, of what would
be the actual result of an earthly immortality. The view of the
author before me seems just. I can easily imagine the immortal
delivered from earthly sorrows. But, when I contemplate him
divested of the hopes, fears, affections and sympathies, which
trace their origin to our common mortal nature, I cannot imagine
the affections, that are to replace these.

I can conceive none other, than a being, who would become drowsy
at sixty, and sleepy at a hundred. All beyond presents to me a
lethargy of almost unconscious existence, from which my fancy can
devise no effort of sufficient energy to arouse him. In fact, it
is sufficient, that nature has awarded, in her universal decree,
that man should not be out of analogy and relation with the rest
of nature; to convince us, that the decision involves our best
interest. The more our views of nature enlarge, the more we become
conscious, that she has arranged all her laws with such perfect
wisdom, that if we could reverse any of them, we should do it at
the expense of our own happiness.

Of all pictures of men, rendered immortal upon earth, the most
forcible, brief and revolting, is that of Swift. ‘After this
preface, he gave me a particular account of the Struldbrugs among
them. He said, they commonly acted like mortals, till about
thirty years old; after which they grew melancholy and dejected,
increasing in both till they came to fourscore. This he learned
from their own confession; for otherwise, there not being more than
two or three of that species born in an age, they were too few to
form a general observation by. When they come to fourscore years,
which is reckoned the extremity of living in this country, they
had not only all the follies and infirmities of other men, but
many more, which arose from the dreadful prospect of never dying.
They were not only opinionative, covetous, peevish, morose, vain,
talkative, but incapable of friendship, and dead to all natural
affection, which never descended below their grandchildren. Envy
and their impotent desires are their prevailing passions. But those
objects, against which their envy seems particularly directed,
are the vices of the younger sort, and the death of the old. By
reflecting on the former, they find themselves cut off from all
possibility of pleasure; and whenever they see a funeral, they
lament, and repine, that others have gone to a harbor of rest, at
which they can never hope to arrive. They have no remembrance of
anything, but what they learned, and observed in their youth and
middle age, and even that is very imperfect; and for the truth or
particulars of any fact, it is safer to depend on common tradition,
than their best recollection. The least miserable among them, are
those, who turn to dotage, and entirely lose their memories. These
meet with more pity and assistance, because they want many bad
qualities, which abound in others.

‘If a Struldbrug happen to marry one of his kind, the marriage is
dissolved of course, by the courtesy of the kingdom, as soon as the
younger of the two comes to be fourscore; for the law thinks it a
reasonable indulgence, that those, who are condemned, without any
fault of their own, to a perpetual continuance in the world, should
not have their misery doubled by the load of a wife. As soon as
they have completed the term of eighty years, they are considered
dead in law. At ninety they lose their teeth and hair, and have
no distinction of taste, but eat and drink whatever they can get,
without relish or appetite. The diseases they were subject to,
still continue without increasing, or diminishing. In talking, they
forget the common appellations of things, and the names of persons,
even of those, who are their nearest friends and relations. For the
same reason, they can never amuse themselves with reading, because
their memory will not serve to carry them from the beginning of a
sentence to the end; and by this defect they are deprived of the
only entertainment whereof they might be capable.

‘They were the most mortifying sight I ever beheld, and the
women more horrible than the men. Besides the usual deformities
in extreme old age, they acquired an additional ghastliness, in
proportion to their number of years, which is not to be described;
and among half a dozen, I soon distinguished who was the oldest,
although there was not above a century or two between them.

‘The reader will easily believe, from what I have heard and seen,
that my keen appetite for perpetuity and life was much abated. I
grew heartily ashamed of the pleasing visions I had formed, and
thought no tyrant could invent a death into which I would not run
with pleasure, from such a life. The king heard all that had passed
between me and my friends upon this occasion, and rallied me very
pleasantly, wishing I could send a couple of Struldbrugs to my own
country, to arm our people against the fear of death.’


Note 61, page 171.

Fear, absolutely useless, gratuitous fear, probably constitutes
much the largest proportion of the whole mass of human misery;
and of this proportion the fear of death is the principal part.
There are but very few people who, in examining the feeling of
revulsion and horror, most constantly present to their minds, will
not find it to be the dread of death. The whole observation, which
I have made upon human nature, has only enlightened me the more
as to the universality and extent of the influence of this evil.
I see it infusing bitterness into the bosoms of the young, before
they are as yet capable of reflection; and ceasing not to inspire
its terrors into the heart, which has experienced the sorrows of
fourscore winters. I see little difference in the alarm with which
it darkens the mind of the heir, elate with youthful hope, and the
galley slave--those apparently the most happy, and the tenants of
penitentiaries and lazar-houses. All cling alike convulsively to
life, and shudder at the thought of death.

Part, and perhaps the greater part, of this fear is a sad
heritage, which has been transmitted down to us, an accumulating
fund of sorrow, for a hundred generations. I have stated my
conviction in another place, that our education, religious
ceremonies, domestic manners, in short, all the influences of the
present institutions of society tend to increase this evil. I am
well aware, at the same time, that the number of those, who will
admit it to be an evil, is but small. Most view it as it has been
considered in all Christian countries, from time immemorial, as
an instrument in the hand of God and his servants, to awe, and
restrain the mind, recall it from illusions and vanities, and
reduce it to the seriousness and obedience of religion. The broad
declamation of the pulpit for effect, revolting representations of
hell-torment and the vindictive justice of God, have passed with
a readier tolerance, under a kind of tacit allowance, that if the
means were unworthy, the proposed end was such as would sanctify
them. It is almost unnecessary to remark, that all my hope of
producing any useful impression is with the small, but growing
number, (in the next age, I trust, it will be a majority) who
hold this whole doctrine in utter unbelief; who have no faith in
amendment and conversion, that grows out of the base and servile
principle of fear; and least of all the fear of death; who believe
that a great reform, a thorough amelioration of our species, will
never be effected, until it is made a radical principle of our
whole discipline, and all our social institutions, to bring this
servile passion completely under the control of our reason. With
these, it is a deep and fixed conviction, that every thing base,
degrading and destructive of intellect and improvement, readily
associates with fear; and that the basis of true religion, generous
conception, high thoughts and really noble character, is firmly
laid in a young mind, when trained to become as destitute of fear,
as if it were conscious of being a sinless angel, above the reach
of pain or death.

It would be to no purpose for me to pause in this place, to obviate
the strictures of those who will denounce this doctrine, by quoting
from the scriptures the frequent inculcations of the _fear of the
Lord_, and the Apostle’s declaration, that by the _terrors of the
Lord we persuade men_. The true and religious fear, inculcated
in the scriptures, not only has no relation to the passion I am
discussing, but cannot exist, any more than the other requisite
traits of religious character, in a bosom swayed by the grovelling
and selfish passion of servile fear.

That nature has implanted in our bosoms an instinctive dread of
death, I readily admit. But fear, as a factitious and unnatural
addition to the true instincts of human nature, has been so
accumulated by rolling down through a hundred generations, that we
are in no condition to know the degree, in which nature intended
we should possess it. We have innumerable base propensities,
which we charge upon nature, that are, in fact, no more, than the
guilty heritage, bequeathed us by our ancestors. Nature could have
implanted no higher degree of instinctive dread of death, than
just what was requisite, to preserve the race from prodigal waste,
or rash exposure of a gift, which, once lost, is irretrievable.
If nature has inwrought in any constitution one particle of fear,
beyond what was required for this result, she has, as in all other
excessive endowments, granted reason and judgment, to regulate, and
reduce it to its due subordination.

Will not religion achieve the great triumph of casting out the
base principle of fear? I would be the last to deny, or undervalue
the trophies of true religion. I have no doubt that religion has,
in innumerable instances, extracted the pain and poison from the
sting of death. More than this, it would unquestionably produce
this triumph in every case, if every individual were completely
under the influence of the true principle. It would attain this end
by processes and discipline exactly concurrent, if not similar,
with those I am about to propose. But it is a lamentable fact,
that very few are under the influence of true religion. Of those,
whom charity deems most sincerely pious, under all professions and
forms, the far greater number exhibit, on the bed of dangerous
sickness, the same fear of death with the rest. We consider this
a generally conceded fact; for, among all but the most extravagant
sects, death-bed terror, or triumph has ceased to be considered a
test of the personal religion of the deceased. Even in the cases
of enthusiastic triumph in the last moments, which we have all
witnessed, and which are justly so soothing to the survivors, it
would often be difficult to determine the respective influence of
laudanum, and partial insanity doing its last work upon the nervous
system.

Be this as it may, the triumph over the fear of death, which I
would inculcate, should not be tested by the equivocal deportment
of the patient, in the near view of death; but by his own joyous
consciousness of deliverance from this tormenting thraldom and
bondage, during his whole life. Let fear and horror crowd what
bitterness they may into the last few hours, it can bear but little
proportion to the long agony of a whole life, passed in _bondage
through fear of death_. To produce the desired triumph, the highest
training of philosophy should concur with the paternal spirit and
the immortal hopes of the gospel; and a calm, reasoning, unboasting
fearlessness of death should enable us to taste all the little of
pure and innocent joy, that may be found between the cradle and
the grave--as unmolested, as unsprinkled with this fear, as if the
destroyer were not among the works of God.

How may this result be obtained? How may a generation be so trained
as to lose not a particle of enjoyment, nor be influenced to one
unworthy act, by the fear of death? To answer these questions, in
the requisite detail of illustration, would require volumes. It
might, perhaps, best be done by selecting a single child as an
example; and by developing, at every advancing step, the process
of his training; pointing out every instance, in which it would be
necessary to withdraw him from the influence of the present systems
of discipline; in which, in a word, his whole education should
be conducted with a preponderant purpose, among other desirable
results, to render him perfectly fearless of death. It is hoped
that some one of those, who believe this a chief desideratum in the
reformation and improvement of the present system of education,
will take this great point in hand; and in this way indicate to
the age the modes of discipline, through which this result may
be expected. It is obvious, that a much severer discipline would
be required for the first generation so trained, than for the
second; who, with less transmitted cowardice than their parents,
would perpetuate a constantly improving moral constitution to the
generations to come. My present plan admits only a brief summary of
motives and arguments, commonly adduced, as calculated to diminish,
regulate, and subdue the fear of death. It is evident, that these
motives and arguments are predicated upon present opinions, and
such as may be supposed capable of acting upon the existing
generation, enduring the hereditary and inculcated bondage of this
passion.

1. The terrific and undefinable images of horror, that
imagination affixes to the term _death_, are founded in an entire
misconception. The word is the sign of no positive idea whatever.
It conjures up a shadowy horror to the mind, finely delineated,
as a poetic personage, by Milton; and implies some agony that is
supposed to lie between the limits of existence and non-existence,
or existence in another form. This is simple illusion. So long
as we feel, death is not--and when we cease to feel, or commence
feeling in a changed form, death has been:--_fuit mors_. So
that the term imports a mere phantom of the imagination. In the
words of Droz, ‘it is not yet; or it is past.’ If one can arrest
the _punctum stans_, and the actual sensation, where waking
consciousness terminates, and sleep commences, he can tell us, what
death is. Every one is conscious of having passed through this
change; but no one can give any account, what were his sensations
in the dividing moment of interval between wakefulness and sleep.

2. Imagination is allowed to settle all the circumstances, and
form all the associations belonging to the supposed agony of this
event. It is one of the few important incidents in life, upon which
reason is never allowed to fix a calm and severe scrutiny. It has
been seen in a light, too sacred and terrible, to permit such a
lustration. ‘It is dreadful,’ says common apprehension, ‘for it
is the breaking up the long and tender partnership, and producing
a separation between the body and the soul--dreadful, because it
is the wages of sin, and is appointed to be a perpetual memorial
of the righteous displeasure of God in view of sin;’ ‘dreadful,’
say others, who most unphilosophically believe that man was not
originally intended to be mortal, ‘because a violence upon nature;
dreadful, because a departure of the spirit from the regions
of the living, and the light of the sun, into an unknown and
eternal condition. Suns will revolve, moons wax and wane, years,
revolutions, ages, counted by all the particles of mist in the
sea, will elapse, but the place, whence the spirit is gone, will
never know it more.’ ‘It is terrible,’ says common apprehension,
‘for it is often preceded and accompanied by spasm, and convulsive
struggle.’ The psalmody, which we sing in church, speaks of the
_ghastly paleness_, the _chill sweat_, and the _mortal coldness_,
circumstances all, which, seen in other associations, would assume
no aspect of peculiar terror.

Then, too, the attendants in the sick room with a look of horror
inspect the extremities of the patient, and petrify bystanders with
the terrible words, ‘he is struck with death,’ as though the grisly
phantom king of the poet’s song had invisibly glided in, and, with
his icy sceptre, given his victim the blow of mortal destiny. Who
knows not that, though there are usually mortal symptoms, which
enable an experienced eye to foresee approaching dissolution,
the term _death-struck_ imports nothing but the weakest vulgar
prejudice, a prejudice under the influence of which millions have
been suffered to expire, that might have been roused! Innumerable
persons, pronounced to be in that situation, have actually
recovered; and no moment, in the ordinary forms of disease, can
with any certainty be pronounced beyond hope and the chances of
aid, but that which succeeds the last sigh. Thus every thought of
the living, and every aspect of the dying, by a wayward ingenuity,
heightens the imagined horror of the event.

Then there are conversations and hymns and funeral odes and
Night Thoughts, which speak of the coldness, silence and eternal
desolation of the grave; as though the unconscious sleeper felt the
chill of the superincumbent clay, the darkness of his narrow house
or this terrible isolation from the living. The pale and peaceful
corpse is contemplated with a look of horror. Two, of stout heart
and tried friendship, abide near the kneaded clod, until the living
are relieved from their ghostly terrors, by its deposition out of
their sight in the narrow house. The family, the children, the
friends alike showing the creeping horror, glide quick and silently
on tiptoe through the apartment, where the sleeper lies. The first
nightfall after the disease is one of peculiar and unmitigated
horror. The family, however disinclined to union before, this
evening unite, with that impress on their countenances, which words
reach not. Now return to their thoughts the nursery tales, the
thrilling narratives of haunted houses and wandering ghosts; and
if the minister comes among them, it is probably to evoke before
their imaginations condemned spirits doomed to eternal sufferings,
quenchless flames, groans without respite, and all the ineffable
and eternal torments, that the clerical vocabulary of centuries has
accumulated.

Need we wonder, that in a christian country, and among families
of the best training, such impressions have become so universal,
that they, who would be reputed brave, blazon their courage, by
affirming their readiness to sleep in a cemetery, or the funeral
vault of a church! It requires no extraordinary effort, and nothing
more than the simple triumph of reason among the faculties, to
enable any man, to sleep alone in a charnel house with as little
dread, as in the apartment of an inn, so that the places were alike
in comfort and salubrity. It does not require us to be wise, or
courageous; but simply not cowards and fools, to feel as little
horror in the view of corpses, as statues of plaster or marble.
One of the most terrible ideas of death, after all, is, that we
shall thus, immediately upon our decease, inflict this shrinking
revulsion of terror upon all, who look at our remains.

The view, which reason takes of the sick and dying bed is, that,
in the far greater number of mortal cases, the transition from
life to death is as imperceptible, as the progress of the sun
and the seasons. One faculty dies after another. The victim has
received the three warnings unconsciously. Ordinarily, a person may
be said to have paid a third part of his tribute of mortality at
forty-five; half at fifty-five; and the whole at three score and
ten.

When acute and severe sickness assails the patient, he has passed
through what may be called the agony of death at a very early
period of his disease. His chief suffering is past, as soon the
irritability and the vigorous powers of life have been broken down.
When the disorder assumes the typhoid and insensible form, the
dull sleep, that precedes the final rest of the tomb, is already
creeping upon him; and severe suffering is precluded. If there are
convulsions after this, as often happens, they are seldom more
than spasmodic movements, impressed by the nervous action upon
the tendons, more terrible to the beholder, than the sufferer;
differing little from those starts and struggles, with which many
persons in high health commence sleeping and waking. He who has
experienced the sensation of fainting, and, still more, of an
epileptic fit, has suffered, I am ready to believe, all that there
is in dying.

3. Reason, calmly surveying the case of the dying person himself,
sees many alleviations, of which imagination, sketching under
the influence of the dread of death, takes no account. He finds
himself, in this new predicament, the absorbing object of all
interests and all solicitude and affection. It is not in human
nature, that this should not call up complacent emotions and
slumbering affections from their secret cells. The subsequent
progress towards the last moment brings an imperceptibly increasing
insensibility, manifested by drowsiness and sleep. Of those, who
preserve the exercise of their faculties entire to the last, many
instances are recorded of persons, who had shown the most unmanly
dread of death in their health, that have met dissolution with the
calmness of perfect self-possession. Of the rest, the greater
number die with little more apparent pain and struggle, than
accompany the act of sleeping. The greater freshness, vigor and
nervous irritability of young people and children cause that most
of the exceptions are of this description. In a great number of
cases, which I have witnessed, I have paused in doubt, whether the
person had yielded his last sigh, or not, after he had actually
deceased. To soften the last infliction, nature almost invariably
veils it under a low delirium, or absolute unconsciousness.

4. It is impossible to imagine a more obvious and unquestionable
principle of philosophy, than that every reasoning faculty of our
nature must declare to us, loudly and unequivocally, and with an
influence as strong as reason can command, that it is wisdom, nay,
the dictate of the least portion of common sense, to dread, to
resist, to repine, to groan, as little as possible, in view of an
endurance absolutely inevitable. If it be hard to sustain when met
with a fearless, resigned and unmurmuring spirit, it must certainly
be still harder, when we are obliged to bend our necks to it with
the excruciating addition of shrinking fear, dreadful anticipation
and ineffectual struggles to evade it, and with murmurs and groans,
at finding the inutility of these efforts. Innumerable examples
prove to us, that nature has kindly endowed us with reason and
mental vigor to such an extent, that, under the influence of
right motive and training, no possible form of suffering can be
presented, over which this power may not manifest, and has not
manifested a complete triumph.

Of these innumerable examples, it is only necessary to cite those
of the martyrs, of all forms of religion. These prove farther,
that this undaunted self-possession, in every conceivable shape
and degree of agony, was not the result of a rare and peculiar
temperament, a want of sensibility, or the possession of uncommon
physical courage; that it was not because there was no perception
of danger, or susceptibility of pain; this magnanimity, this
impassibility to fear and pain and death has been exhibited in
nearly equal degrees by people of every age, each sex and all
conditions. Let the proper motive be supplied, let the martyr have
had the common influence of the training of his faith, and the
consequence failed not. All the shades and varieties of natural and
mental difference of character were noted in the deportment of the
sufferers. But they were alike in the stern proof of a courage,
which defied death. The fact is proved by them, as strongly as
moral fact can be proved, that the mind of every individual might
find in itself native self-possession and vigor, to enable it to
display an entire ascendency over fear, pain and death.

Nor does this fact rest solely for support on the history of
martyrs, or sufferers at an _Auto da fé_, or by torture in any of
its forms. We could find examples of it in every department of
history, and every view of human character. The red men of our
wilderness, as we have elsewhere seen, are still more astonishing
illustrations of this fact--I say astonishing, because the timid
and effeminate white man shivers, and scarcely credits his senses,
as he sees the young Indian warrior smoking his pipe, singing
his songs, boasting of his victories and uttering his menaces,
when enveloped in a slow fire, apparently as unmoved, as reckless
and unconscious of pain, as if sitting at his ease in his own
cabin. All, that has been found necessary, by this strange
people, to procure this heroism, is, that the children, from
boyhood, should be constantly under a discipline, every part and
every step of which tends directly to shame and contempt at the
least manifestation of cowardice, in view of any danger, or of a
shrinking consciousness of pain in the endurance of any suffering.
The males, so trained, never fail to evidence the fruit of their
discipline. Sentenced to death, they almost invariably scorn to fly
from their sentence, when escape is in their power. If in debt,
they desire a reprieve, that they may hunt, until their debts
are paid. They then voluntarily return, and surrender themselves
to the executioner. Nothing is more common than for a friend to
propose to suffer for his friend, a parent for a child, or a child
for a parent. When the sufferer receives the blow, there is an
unblenching look, which manifests the presence of the same spirit,
that smokes with apparent unconcern amidst the crackling flames.

A proof, that this is the fruit of training, and not of native
insensibility, as others have thought, and as I formerly thought
myself, is that this contempt of pain and death is considered a
desirable trait only in the males. To fly, like a woman, like her
to laugh, and weep, and groan, are expressions of contempt, which
they apply to their enemies with ineffable scorn. The females,
almost excluded from witnessing the process of Spartan discipline,
by which the males acquire their mental hardihood, partake not of
the fruits of it, and with some few exceptions, are shrinking and
timid, like the children of civilization.

I know, that there will not be wanting those, who will condemn
alike the training and the heroism, as harsh, savage, unfeeling,
stoical and unworthy to be admitted, as an adjunct to civilization.
But no one will offer to deny, that the primitive Christian, put in
conflict with a hungry lion, that Rogers at the Smithfield stake,
that the young captive warrior, exulting, and chanting his songs
while enduring the bitterest agonies that man can inflict, in the
serene and sublime triumph of mind over matter, and spirit over the
body, is the most imposing spectacle we can witness, the clearest
proof we can contemplate, that we have that within us which is not
all of clay, nor all mortal; or doubt, that these persons endure
infinitely less physical pain, in consequence of their heroic
self-possession, than they would have suffered, had they met their
torture in paroxysms of terror, shrinking and self-abandonment.

However we may reason, however we may decry these views, as
savage, impracticable, unnatural and undesirable, the fact is,
that we all feel alike upon this subject. The thousands in a Roman
amphitheatre only evinced a trait, that belongs to our common
nature, when they instantly, and without consulting each other,
gave the signal to save that gladiator, who most clearly manifested
cool self-possession and contempt of death. After witnessing the
execution of a criminal, who shows courage, the spectators go away
describing, with animated gesture, and in terms of admiration, the
fearlessness of the fellow the moment before his death. We all
speak with unmingled satisfaction of the circumstance, in the death
of our friends, that they departed in the conscious dignity of
self-possession and hope. All readers are moved with one sensation,
as they read the record of the noble trait in the character of
Cæsar, gracefully folding himself in his mantle, after he had
received so many mortal thrusts. Few of us hear unmoved of the old
English patriot, who requested the executioner to support him up
the steps to the scaffold, adding that he would shift for himself
to get down; or of the other, who cried, as he stooped his head to
the block, _dulce et decorum est pro patria mori_! If I recollect,
it is Silliman, who gives the affecting notice of the last hours of
the duke of Richmond, the late governor general of Canada. Invested
with all conceivable circumstances to render life desirable, he
was bitten by a favorite dog in a rabid state; and died, in the
most excruciating tortures, of the terrible hydrophobia. When
the horrible paroxysm was felt by him to be approaching, he was
accustomed to nerve his sinking courage by these words; ‘Henry,
remember, that none of your ancestors were cowards.’ I give the
trait from recollection, but have heard substantially the same
account from other sources. This is the secret of the perverse
general admiration of warriors, and heroes, and great generals. It
is this principle in its blindness, which finds a niche of favor
in so many hearts for duellists. In a word, intrepidity, deny it
who may, is the trait which finds more universal favor with human
nature in general than any other. Why? Because we are weak and
frail beings, exposed to innumerable pains and dangers; and the
quality we most frequently need, is courage. Without it life is
a living death, a long agony of fear. With it, we die but once,
enduring at the most but a momentary pang, never anticipated, never
embittering a moment in advance with imaginary suffering.

We have no hesitation in affirming, that it would be no more
difficult to educate the coming generation of civilized people to
this spirit, than it is to impart it to the whole race of males
among the red men. However inferior we may count these people, in
comparison with ourselves in other respects, they have at least one
manifest advantage over us; they never torment themselves, because
they know they must die.

But we are told that the actual possession of this spirit would
produce such a recklessness of life, that the great ends of
Providence would be defeated; and people would expose themselves
to death with so little concern, that the race would waste away
and become extinct. We never need combat a theory, an abstract
opinion, when the case can be settled by a fact. Is it so with the
warriors of the red men? On the contrary, can another people be
found so wary, so adroit to evade, or resist danger, so fertile
in expedients to save life? The coward of their number meets the
death he would fly; and the intrepid warrior puts forth all the
resources of his instinctive sagacity, all his keen and practised
discernment, to discover the best means of evasion. If he must meet
that death, which his skill cannot evade, nor his powers resist, he
instantly settles down upon the resource of his invincible heroism
of endurance.

In fact, one of the direct fruits of the intrepidity we would
wish to see universal, is, that it will give its possessor all
possible chances for preserving health and life. It saves him from
the influence of fear, a passion among the most debilitating, and
adverse to life, of any to which our nature is subject. Braced by
his courage, he passes untouched amidst a contagious epidemic, to
which the timid and apprehensive nature falls a victim. In danger
it gives him coolness and self-command, to discover, and avail
himself of all his chances of wise resistance, or probable escape.
In sickness, he has all the aids to recover, which nature allows,
in being delivered from the most dangerous symptom in innumerable
maladies, the debilitating persuasion of the patient, that he shall
not rise from his sickness. In a word, the direct reverse of the
charge is the fact. The wise and enlightened fearlessness, which
I consider it so important to acquire, is in every way as much
the preserver of life, as it is indispensable to happiness; as
cowardice proverbially runs in the face of the hideous monster that
it creates.

5. The fact, that an evil is felt to be alleviated, which is shared
in common with all around us, has been generally recognised, though
this perverted sympathy has been traced to the basest selfishness,
by a humiliating analysis of our nature, which I have neither space
nor inclination to develope. We all know, that the same person, who
is most beneficent, most active in his benevolence, and large in
his wishes to do good, would shrink from a great calamity, which
he saw himself destined to encounter, for the first and the last
among his whole race. But inform him, that by an impartial award
he shares it in common with all his kind, and you reconcile him at
once to his lot. Whether the spirit of his resignation in this case
be pure, or polluted in its origin, it is not my present purpose
to inquire. It is sufficient to be assured, that there is such a
feeling deeply inherent in human nature. The suffering patient, as
he lays himself down to part from all friends, to be severed from
all ties, to see the green earth, the bright sun, and the visible
heavens no more, and to be conscious, that the everlasting circle
of ages will continue its revolutions without ever bringing him
back to the forsaken scene, cannot repine, that he has been put
upon this bitter trial alone. He must be deeply conscious, view
it in what aspect he may, that it presents no new harshness nor
horror to him. Of all the countless millions, that have passed
away, and been replaced by others, like the vernal leaves, death
has stood before every solitary individual of the mighty mass,
the same phantom king of terrors. Each has contemplated the same
inexorable, irreversible award, been held in the same suspense
of hopes, and fears, and compelled to endure the same struggles.
Looking upon the immense mortal drama of ages, the actors seem
slowly and imperceptibly to enter, and depart from the scene. But
in the lapse of one short age, the hopes, fears, loves and hatreds
of all the countless millions have vanished, to be replaced by
those of another generation. The heart swells at the recollection
how much each of these mortals must have endured, in this stern and
inevitable encounter, as measured by our own suffering in the same
case. It is only necessary for the patient to extend his vision
a few years in advance of his own decease; and his friends, his
children, his visitants, all that surround him, will in their turn
recline on the same bed. Who cannot feel the palpable folly of
repining at an evil shared with all, that have been, are, or will
be!

                  ‘Not to thy eternal resting place,
      Shalt thou retire alone:    *    *
          *    *  Thou shalt lie down
      With patriarchs of the infant world, with kings,
      The powerful of the earth, the wise, the good,
      Fair forms and hoary seers of ages past,
      All in one mighty sepulchre. The hills,
      Rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun; the vales
      Stretching in pensive quietness between;
      The venerable woods, rivers, that move
      In majesty, and the complaining brooks,
      That make the meadows green, and, poured round all,
      Old ocean’s gray and melancholy waste,
      Are but the solemn decorations all
      Of the great tomb of man.’

6. Philosophers and moralists will readily admit, that the only
easy and adequate remedy for the fear of death is the hope of
immortality. On the other hand, they, whose vocation it is to
question and decry the aids, which reason and philosophy offer
in the case, as sullen, cold, stoical, will not deny, that
‘innumerable’ examples have been offered in all countries, and
in all time, of men, who, in virtue of no higher discipline
than that of reason and philosophy, have met death with such
unshrinking and invincible firmness, as could hardly have been
rendered more illustrious by any additional motives. They have
shown, beyond all question, that nature has furnished us with a
power of resistance, which, when rightly called forth, enables
us to triumph over fear and death. The pagans of ancient story,
the unbelieving of christian lands, the red men of our forests,
offer us demonstrations to any extent. I am aware, in what places
this simplest of all truths is weakly denied. Those, for whom I
write, are of the number who exact the truth; and I have no fear to
declare it; nor would I contend for a moment with such as deny this
fact.

But I am not the less sensible, that the triumph, in these cases,
is bitter and painful. It can only be obtained by a violence done
to instinctive nature, connected with innumerable revulsions
and horrors, and to all those ineffable clingings to earth, and
shrinkings from the first step into the unknown land, that are
partly the heritage of nature, and partly the result of the
concurrent influence of all our institutions. It is a violence
to all the passions, affections, hopes and fears fostered by the
earth. But the victory has been wrought, and can be wrought, even
though the bosom, in which it is wrought become as of iron.

But the same triumph is won by the hope of immortality, by a
process, simple, easy, natural, in entire consonance with the most
tender affections and lively sympathies of flesh and blood. We lie
down in pain and agony, with a spirit of easy endurance, if we have
a confident persuasion that, during the night, we shall have shaken
off the cause of our sufferings, and shall rise to renewed health
and freshness in the morning. Death can bring little terror to him,
who believes that its darkness will instantly be replaced by the
light of another scene: and that the separation from friends in the
visible land, is only rejoining the more numerous group, who have
already become citizens of the invisible country.

To what extent am I the subject of this hope myself; and whence
do I derive my belief? These are questions which affection will
ask; and the answers, if devoid of interest _now_, will not be so
when the _memory of things that were shall come over the mind of
the reader like a cloud_, and when read as the thoughts of one,
who, during his whole sojourn, felt and reflected intensely upon
those subjects; and who will then himself have passed away to the
experience of all that which is here matter of discussion. Those
most dear to me will know what relations I sustained to these
subjects, during the best part of my life; and will not be without
solicitude to know my final thoughts upon them; thoughts, purified
at least from all stain of party interest and _esprit du corps_,
and put forth in the simple consciousness of my own convictions,
however they may be powerless to produce belief in the mind of
any other. With the fierce war cry of sects in religion, in their
acrimonious and never ending contests about abstract terms without
a meaning, their combats about the vague and technical phrases of
formulas of faith, I have long since had nothing to do. For many
years they have rung on my ear like the distant thunder of clouds
that have passed by. To the denunciations of those, who assume
to hold all truth imprisoned in their articles of confession, if
I might hope the distinction of receiving them, I am perfectly
callous. Neither would I desire to add another book to the millions
of volumes of polemic theology which already exist, and which have
as little bearing upon the knowledge, virtue and happiness of the
age, as the last year’s snow.

We are, after all, unconsciously influenced, and that in no slight
degree, by authority, however humble may be its claims, as a test
of truth. How did such a person believe on such a point? Many a
young aspirant suspends his opinion, until he hears; and settles
into fixed persuasion afterwards. How many are there, in christian
lands especially, who have never had a wandering or unbelieving
doubt of the soul’s immortality float over their minds? How many,
who have had no terrene and gross ideas, influenced by seeing the
tenement of flesh, by which all that was called the mind and the
soul stood visible to the eye, and tangible to the thought, yielded
up to consumption and decay? This is a question which no one can
answer for another. For myself, I believe unhesitatingly, and with
no stain of doubt, that I shall, in some way, exactly provided for
by Him who made me, exist after death, as simply conscious, that
I am the same person, as I am now in the morning, that I slept
at night. Do I derive this conviction from books and reasonings?
I am by no means sure that I do; though the gospel assuredly
speaks directly to my heart. I do ready homage to the talents and
learning of Clarke, Locke, Paley, Channing and a cloud of reasoning
witnesses, of whom every Christian may well be proud; and, most of
all, to the profound and admirable Butler.

I hear the author of our faith directly declaring a resurrection
and immortality. A single assertation from such a source were
enough. But I find him reasoning, and insisting less upon the
fact, than I should have expected, had he intended to implant it
in the mind, as it were a truth, chiefly to be apprehended by the
understanding. It seems to me that he so discusses it, as one who
was aware that it was already inwoven in the sentiments and hearts
of his hearers, vague, dark, without moral consequence, it may be;
but an existing sentiment, taken for granted, upon which he might
predicate his doctrines, as upon a thousand other facts, which we
can clearly perceive, he considers already admitted by his hearers.

Let a man walk in the fields on a June morning after night showers.
Let him seat himself for meditation on the hill-side, under the
grateful canopy of foliage. Let him ask himself to embody his
conceptions of the divinity, and to give form and place to the
Author of the glorious scene outstretched before him. He may have
just risen from reading the admirable demonstrations of Clarke,
and the astronomical sermons of Chalmers. He may concentrate his
conceptions by a fixedness of study, that may amount to pain. He
may bewilder his faculties, in attempting to embody something,
that his thoughts and reasonings can grasp. I know not what the
powers of others can achieve in this case. But I know, by painful
experiment, what mine cannot. I ask my understanding and reasoning
powers about this glorious Being. They inform me that it is a
subject that comes not within their purview. They can follow
the chain of reasoning, see that every link is complete, and the
demonstration irresistible. But when they wish to avail themselves
of their new truth, they have no distinct idea either of premises
or conclusion. It has evaporated in the analysis.

I ask my heart, or the source of my moral sentiment, be it what it
may, the same question. The grateful verdure, the matin freshness,
the glad voices, the aroma of flowers, the earth, the rolling
clouds, the sun, all the lamps, that will burn in the firmament by
night, my own happy consciousness in witnessing this impressive
scene, cry out _a God_. To my heart, it is the first, the simplest,
most obvious thought, presenting itself, it seems to me, as soon
as the consciousness of my own existence; certainly susceptible of
as little doubt. I have no need to define, analyze, embody. The
moment I attempt to do it, my thoughts are vague and unsettled. I
yield myself to the conviction. My heart swells with gratitude,
confidence, love. So good, so beneficent a Being can do nothing but
good, in this or any other world, to him who loves and trusts him,
and strives to obey his laws.

My most treasured hopes of immortality are from the same source.
Will this conscious being, capable of such remote excursions into
the two eternities between which its existence is suspended, live
beyond the present life? Not a particle of matter, for ought
that appears, can be annihilated. Will the nobler thoughts, the
warmer affections perish, as though they had not been? We ask
our senses, and they can give us no hope. The body lives, and we
speak of it as including the conscious being. We see it die, pass
under the empire of corruption, molder, and incorporate with its
kindred elements. The sensible evidence, that the person exists,
is entirely destroyed. The most insatiate appetite of our natures,
however, craves continued existence, and ceases not to seek for
it. The inquirer after immortality cannot but be in earnest in
this pursuit. The arguments of the venerable sages of old are
spread before him. From the soul’s nature, from the unity of
consciousness, the incorruptibility of thought, the everlasting
progress, of which our faculties are capable, the strong and
unquenchable desire of posthumous fame, the sacredness of earthly
friendships, and similar arguments, they strove to establish, on
the basis of reasoning, the conviction of immortality.

From these reasonings he repairs to the Scriptures. A strange book,
utterly unlike any writings that had appeared before, declares
that we shall exist forever. The religion which has arisen from
this book, in its whole structure and dispensation, is predicated
on the assumed fact, that we shall exist forever in another life,
happy or miserable, according to our deeds on earth. Jesus,
_the author and finisher of this faith_, announces himself _the
resurrection and the life_; with a voice of power calls his dead
friend from the tomb; declares, that death has no power over
himself; that, after suffering a violent death, on the third day
from that event, he shall arise from the dead. He arises, according
to his promise; and, in the midst of his awe-struck friends he
visibly ascends to his own celestial sphere. Millions, as by one
impulse, catch the spirit of this wonderful book--love each other
with anew and single-hearted affection, as unlike the spirit of
all former ties of kindness and love, as the doctrines of this
religion are different from those of paganism. The new sect look
with a careless eye upon whatever is transitory; and will submit
to privation, derision and torture, of whatever form, rather than
waver, or equivocate, in declaring themselves subjects of this
hope of immortality. This Christian hope, in every period from the
time of its author, has made its way to the heart of millions, who
have laid themselves down on their last bed, and felt the approach
of their last sleep, expecting, as confidently to open their eyes
on an eternal morning, as the weary laborer, at his evening rest,
trusts that he shall see the brightness of the morrow’s dawn.

I recur, with new and unsated satisfaction, to these arguments for
the soul’s immortality. I love to evoke the venerable shades of
Socrates and Plato and Cicero, and hear them, each in his own way,
persuade himself, that the thoughts and affections, of which he
was conscious, could only belong to an immortal spirit. I listen to
the eloquent and impressive apostrophe of Tacitus, to the conscious
spirit of him, whose life he had so charmingly delineated, with
feelings which I cannot well describe.

‘Si quis piorum manibus locus; si, ut sapientibus placet, non
cum corpore extinguontur magnæ animæ, placide quiescas; nosque,
domum tuam, ab infirmo desiderio, et muliebribus lamentis, ad
contemplationem virtutum tuarum voces, quas neque lugeri, neque
plangi fas est: admiratione te potius temporalibus laudibus, et, si
natura suppeditet, similitudine decoremus.’[H]

I repair with new confidence and hope to the gospel, and strive to
imbibe the cheering conviction, as I hear Paul sublimely declare,
_that this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
immortality, and that death shall be swallowed up in victory_.

I have no disposition to deny that these arguments would be, in
themselves, insufficient to turn the balance against the evidence
of the senses, and produce the conviction of immortality from the
deductions of simple reason, if religion were an impression to be
raised and sustained by argument. But, if we are religious, in
some form, from our very constitution, if immortality be felt as
a sentiment, with more or less clearness and force, I deem that
these arguments have their appropriate effect, in giving form and
direction to this interior sentiment; that believers have been
such, because these doctrines have found a concurrent sympathy
in their spirit, a suitableness to the wants of their heart, a
development of the germ of their hopes. It seems to me, that
whoever has a heart, cannot look upon the earth and the firmament,
without exclaiming ‘there is a God,’ nor within himself, without a
conviction, that his soul is immortal.

I see in the enthusiasm,--the embraces, cries, tears, swoonings and
the revolting extravagances of various sects under the influence
of high religious excitement, nothing more than the morbid
development of this latent religious sentiment. Instead of being,
as scoffers affirm, subjects of a mere factitious intoxication,
these people, who seem only to demand wings, to soar aloft, are
only manifesting the unregulated action of nature working at the
bottom of their hearts.

For myself I feel that I am immortal, and that those fellow
sojourners, to whom I have been attached by the affection of long
intimacy, and the reception of many and great kindnesses, will
exist with me hereafter. I pretend to conceive nothing, I wish
to inquire nothing, about the mode, the place and circumstances.
I should as soon think of disturbing myself, by endeavoring to
conceive the ideas that might be imparted by a sixth sense. It is
sufficient that my heart declares, that a being who has seen this
glorious world, cherished these warm affections, entertained these
illimitable aspirations, felt these longings after immortality,
indulged ‘_these thoughts, that wander through eternity_,’ _cannot_
have been doomed by Him, who gave them, to have them quenched
forever in annihilation. Even an illusion so glorious would be
worth purchasing at the price of a world. I would affirm, even to
repetition, that there is given us that high and stern power, which
implies a courage superior to any conflict, and which gives the
mind a complete ascendency over any danger, pain or torture, which
belongs to life or death. But we would not be so extravagant, as
for a moment, to question that death, as the present generation
have been trained, and as we are accustomed, by all we see, and
hear to view it, is a formidable evil, fitly characterized by its
dread name, _the king of terrors_. Many a debilitating interior
misgiving will assail the stoutest mind, in certain moments, in
view of it. There are dark intervals by night, in the midnight
hours of pain, periods between the empire of sleep and active
reason, when the terrific and formless image rushes in its terror
and indefiniteness upon the mind. As age steals upon us, and the
vivid perceptions, and the bright dreams of youth disappear, many a
dark shadow will cloud the sunshine of the soul. The conflict, in
which all these terrors are overcome by unaided nature and reason
is, as has been seen, a cruel one. The tender sensibilities, the
keen affections, the dear and delusive hopes of our nature must all
be crushed, before we can be unmoved in the endurance of the pain
and torture that precede, and the death that follows.

It is only to a firm and unhesitating faith, that it becomes as
easy and natural to die, as to sleep. Glorious and blessed hope,
the hope of meeting our friends, in the eternal land of those who
truly and greatly live forever! There we shall renew our youth, and
_mount as on the wings of eagles_.

      ‘But we shall meet, but we shall meet,
       Where parting tears shall cease to flow:
       And, when I think thereon, almost I long to go!’


Note 62, page 177.

That is an unworthy opponent, who assails what assumes to be
important truth, by no better argument than ridicule and sarcasm.
That is a despicable one, unworthy of exciting any feelings but
those of pity and contempt, who attempts to bring to bear upon
it the blind and fierce prejudices of the multitude. This last
is the prevalent mode of modern attack. By those, who deem that
wisdom will die with them, and that they can learn nothing more,
who dogmatize without examining, and measure the views of others
by their own preconceived and settled opinions, all the foregoing
doctrines, which militate with the established prejudices and
habits of the age, will be denounced, I am aware, as heretical,
imaginary, false.

‘He would teach people how to be happy,’ say they with a sneer,
‘as though they were not compelled to pursue happiness by a law
of their natures.’ My business is not with such opponents, and I
should consider their opposition an honor and a distinction.

The fact will remain true, be it welcomed, be it ridiculed, as it
may, that a few, in all time, have found the means of being more
comfortable and happy, than others in the same circumstances. They
had a method of their own in creating this difference. That method
might be so indicated, as to be reduced to general, and settled
rules. This is the amount of the foregoing doctrines. The object
has been to discuss and fix some of those rules. No moralist was
ever so stupid, as to expect, that the world would not pursue
its headlong course, inculcate what he might. Every one, who
understands the analogy of the present to the past, will expect
that no form of virtuous effort will be screened from question and
ridicule; and that no purity of purpose will conquer the blind and
fierce hate of the multitude.

But there will still be a few quiet, reflecting and philosophic
people. What is better, the number will be always increasing. For
such, are these my labors, and those, which I have adopted from
another, chiefly designed. Their suffrage is an ample reward. Their
plaudit is true fame. If they say, ‘we and those about us may be
better and happier; let us make the effort to become so,’ my object
is attained.

To encourage us to shake off the superincumbent load of
indifference, ridicule, and opposition, and to make efforts to
extend virtue and happiness, it is a sublime reflection, that
a thought may outlive an empire. Babylon and Thebes are, now,
nowhere to be found; but the moral lessons of the cotemporary wise
and good, despised and disregarded, perhaps, in their day, have
descended to us and are to be found everywhere. As the seminal
principles of plants, borne through the wide spaces of the air by
their downy wings, find at length a congenial spot, in which to
settle down, and vegetate, these seeds of virtue and happiness,
floating down the current of time, are still arrested, from age to
age, by some kindred mind, in which they germinate, and produce
their golden fruit. No intellect can conjecture, in how many
instances, and to what degree, every fit moral precept may have
come between the reason and passions of some one, balancing between
the course of happiness and ruin, and may have inclined the scale
in his favor. The consciousness of even an effort to achieve one
such triumph is a sufficient satisfaction to a virtuous mind.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] E.g. Robert Owen and others of the atheistical school.

[B] These _Notes_ will be found at the end of the volume. The small
numerals, in the text, refer to them.

[C] Leonidas.

[D] Themistocles.

[E] Pelopidas and Epaminondas.

[F] Marcus Junius Brutus.

[G] Regulus.

[H] Tacit. Vit. Agricolæ, _ad fin._




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

  The ERRATA (page vi) directs that the anchors for Notes [5] [29]
  [32] and [51] be deleted, since actual Notes for these references
  do not exist. However Note [51] does exist, it is Note [49] that
  is missing. Therefore, anchors for [5] [29] [32] and [49] have
  been deleted in this etext.  The ERRATA change for page 200,
  (replace “Note 5, page 44.” with “Note 6, page 45.”) has also
  been made.

  In addition to these four missing references, several anchors
  had the same number, but referenced two separate Notes. For clarity
  the duplicate anchor number has been amended with an ‘a’ suffix.
  The etext now has [15] and [15a]; [21] and [21a]; [24] and [24a];
  [27] and [27a]; [28] and [28a]; and [39] and [39a].

  There was a single anchor [53], but two separate Notes for this
  one anchor. A second anchor [53a] has been added on page 152, and
  the second Note heading “Note 53, page 150.” has been changed to
  “Note 53a, page 152.”

  Obvious punctuation errors have been corrected after careful
  comparison with other occurrences within the text and consultation
  of external sources.

  There are numerous typographical errors in the original text which
  have been corrected in the etext. These are noted below.

  Except for those specific changes also noted below, all misspellings
  in the text, and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.


  =Typographical errors=
  Page 20: =digust= changed into =disgust=
  Page 20: =nto= changed into =into=
  Page 23: =consisten twith= changed into =consistent with=
  Page 50: =commencment= changed into =commencement=
  Page 56: =associa ion= changed into =association=
  Page 56: =feeleness= changed into =feebleness=
  Page 61: =badethem= changed into =bade them=
  Page 96: =amy= changed into =may=
  Page 99: =pu= changed into =put=
  Page 101: =whe= changed into =when=
  Page 101: =exac= changed into =exact=
  Page 156: =Themore= changed into =The more=
  Page 158: =orms= changed into =forms=
  Page 161: =concsious= changed into =conscious=
  Page 172: =done upon upon earth= changed into =done upon earth=
  Page 174: =call us= changed into =calls us=
  Page 197: =corse= changed into =corpse=
  Page 198: =al= changed into =all=
  Page 208: =paticular= changed into =particular=
  Page 211: =controling= changed into =controlling=
  Page 219: =Hohenloe= changed into =Hohenlohe=
  Page 225: =resolved= changed into =resolve=
  Page 231: =e lfish= changed into =selfish=
  Page 241: =contemptiole= changed into =contemptible=
  Page 250: =permament= changed into =permanent=
  Page 253: =there= changed into =their=
  Page 255: =aquainted= changed into =acquainted=
  Page 256: =Home, sickness= changed into =Homesickness=
  Page 263: =Serviu= changed into =Servius=
  Page 264: =kind cf heart,= changed into =kind of heart=
  Page 267: =and and moral creation= changed into =and moral creation=
  Page 273: =some times= changed into =sometimes=
  Page 274: =conspicious= changed into =conspicuous=
  Page 296: =corse= changed into =corpse=
  Page 296: =corses= changed into =corpses=
  Page 305: =weekly= changed into =weakly=


  =Other changes=
  Page viii: =l’Art d’Etre Heureuse= changed into =l’Art d’Etre Heureux=
  Page 6: =wholly unnecessary= changed into =wholly necessary=
  Page 176: =L’ART D’ETRE HEUREUSE= changed into =L’ART D’ETRE HEUREUX=
  Page 185: =conscientious instructer= changed into =conscientious
             instructor=
  Page 193: =l’ art d’ étre heureuse= changed into =l’ art d’ étre
             heureux=
  Page 199: =different instructers= changed into =different instructors=
  Page 213: =Bastile after= changed into =Bastille after=
  Page 220: =Why drew Marseilles’s= changed into =Why drew Marseilles’=
  Page 240: =eclaircissemens= changed into =éclaircissements=
  Page 307: =A single asservation= changed into =A single assertation=



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF BEING HAPPY***


******* This file should be named 56869-0.txt or 56869-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/6/8/6/56869


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


