LETTER II.

A DIFFICULT AND DELICATE SUBJECT PROPOSED.--AGITATION OF IT
UNAVOIDABLE.--CHRISTIANS NORTH AND SOUTH SHOULD GIVE THE DISCUSSION
OF IT A RIGHT DIRECTION.--WE ARE ALL INTERESTED IN THE
ISSUE.--NORTHERN DISCLAIMERS.


MY DEAR CHRISTIAN BROTHER,--In my last I intimated that I hoped you and
I, by our correspondence, would be able to furnish the world a practical
illustration of good-nature and kind feeling in the discussion of a
subject that has been a fruitful source of trouble and unchristian
invective. You have already anticipated my theme--it is DOMESTIC
SLAVERY. It must be confessed that this is the most difficult and
delicate of all topics to be agitated by a Northerner and a Southerner,
and yet I have the fullest confidence that neither of us will give or
take offence. I need offer you no apology for calling your attention to
this subject at the present time. Not only is it a theme of vast
importance in itself, involving, either directly or indirectly,
interests most dear to you and to me, and to every one who has at heart
the welfare of his country and his race, but it is a subject that must
be discussed,--there is no avoiding it, however much you or I or other
individuals may desire it. It has come before the public mind in such a
manner as peremptorily to demand the attention of every Christian and
every patriot. Whether we approve or deprecate the peculiar causes that
have made this topic so prominent in our country, both North and South,
we have to take things as they are, and turn them to the best possible
account. Politicians and demagogues are all discussing American slavery,
and will continue to do so for the purpose of forwarding their own
favorite schemes; and any attempt to silence them would be as futile as
an effort to arrest the gulf-stream in its course. It remains only for
brethren, both at the South and North, to take up the subject as we find
it brought to our hands in the inscrutable providence of God, and, under
the guidance of his Spirit, given in answer to our prayers, take a truly
Christian view of some of its leading features, and then inquire, What
is duty? I think you will not claim, with some of your southern friends,
that slavery is a subject with which we at the North "have nothing to
do." As patriots, we have something to do with every thing that affects
the interests of our common country; and as Christians, we sustain
responsibilities which we cannot shake off toward all our brethren of
the human family, whether it be at the North or South--whether they be
bound or free. "Have we not all one Father? Hath not one God created
us?" "We are many members, but one body, and whether one member suffer
all the members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it."

Your candor will not impute to me any unkind or improper motive in
entering upon this discussion; and you will permit me, in the outset, to
enter a few disclaimers, in order that you may be the better able to
appreciate what I have to say.

In the first place, it is not my design to throw down the glove for the
purpose of enlisting you, or any of your friends, in a controversy; this
would be an unpleasant and profitless undertaking.

Nor is it to advocate the doctrine, that sustaining the legal relation
of master to a slave for a longer or shorter time is in all possible
cases sin. I will admit that there may be circumstances in which the
relation may subsist without any moral delinquency whatever; as, for
instance, persons may become slaveholders in the eye of the law without
their own consent, as by heirship; they sometimes become so voluntarily
to befriend a fellow-creature in distress, to prevent his being sold
away from his wife and family; persons sometimes purchase slaves for the
sole purpose of emancipating them. In these, and other circumstances
which might be mentioned, no reasonable man either North or South would
ever think of pronouncing the relation a sinful one.

Nor is it my design to question the conscientiousness or piety of all
slaveholders at the South, both among the laity and clergy. Whoever
makes the sweeping assertion, that "no slaveholder can be a child of
God," gives fearful evidence that he himself is deficient in that
"charity" which "hopeth all things." There is an obvious distinction
between those who hold slaves for merely selfish purposes and regard
them as chattels, and those who repudiate this system, and regard them
as men having in common with themselves human rights, and would gladly
emancipate them were there not legal obstacles, and could they do it
consistently with their welfare, temporal and eternal.

Nor is it my purpose to advocate immediate, universal, unconditional
emancipation without regard to circumstances. This doctrine is not held
by the great mass of northern Christians. There are, no doubt, some
cases where immediate emancipation would inflict sad calamities, both
upon the slaves themselves and the community. The opinions of northern
men have often been misunderstood and misrepresented on this subject.
The ground that calm, reflecting opponents of slavery take, is, that
slaveholders should at once cease in their own minds to regard their
slaves as chattels to be bought and sold and worked for mere profit, and
that they should take immediate measures for the full emancipation of
every one, as soon as may be consistent with his greatest good, and that
of the community in which he lives.

This, it is true, is virtually immediate emancipation; for it is at once
giving up the chattel principle, and no longer regarding servants as
property to be bought and sold. It is to act on the Christian principle
of impartial love, doing to them and with them, as, in a change of
circumstances, we would have them do to and with us. This does
immediately abolish, as it should do, the main thing in slavery, and
brings those who are now bondmen into the common brotherhood of human
beings, to be treated, not as chattels and brutes, but on Christian
principles, according to the exigencies of their condition as ignorant,
degraded, and dependent human beings, "endowed, however, by their
Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness," which rights should be acknowledged, and
with the least possible delay be granted.

Nor is it my design to reproach my southern brethren as being to blame
for the origin of slavery in these United States. Slavery was introduced
into this country by our fathers, who have long been sleeping in their
graves, and the North, if they did not as extensively, yet did as truly,
and in many cases did as heartily, participate in it, as the South; so
that, in respect to the origin of American slavery, we have not a word
to say, nor a stone to cast. And besides, our mother country must come
in and share with our fathers to no small extent in the wrong of
introducing domestic slavery to these colonies. Happily, as we think,
slavery was virtually abolished at the North by our ancestors of a
preceding generation; but for their act we are entitled to no credit.
Your ancestors omitted to do this; but for their omission you are
deserving of no blame. We would never forget, that slavery was entailed
upon our southern brethren, and for this entailment they are no more
responsible than for the blood that circulates in their veins.

If you will be so kind as to keep these disclaimers in mind, I think you
will better understand and appreciate what I shall hereafter say on the
subject. With the kindest wishes for you and yours, I remain, in the
best of bonds,

YOUR CHRISTIAN BROTHER.




