LETTER VII.

THE CROWNING EVIL OF SLAVERY.--PRECIOUSNESS OF THE BIBLE.--OUR
CHART AND COMPASS ON LIFE'S VOYAGE INDISPENSABLE.--ORAL
INSTRUCTIONS INSUFFICIENT.--DANGERS.--SHIPWRECK ALMOST
INEVITABLE.--WITHHELD FROM THE SLAVE.--SHUTS MULTITUDES OUT OF
HEAVEN.--AMERICAN BIBLE SOCIETY.--TESTIMONY OF GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.--OF SYNOD OF KENTUCKY.--OF DR. BRECKENRIDGE.


MY DEAR BROTHER,--There is one feature of slavery, fourthly, which gives
me more pain by far than any other, and I may say more than all others
put together, and that is, it imperils the immortal souls of millions of
our fellow-beings by keeping from them the Word of God.

Next to the Saviour, and the Holy Spirit, the most precious gift God has
bestowed on man is the Bible. This volume contains our only perfect rule
of life, and is our only guide to heaven. It teaches us our character
and our destiny; it alone raises the curtain between time and eternity,
and dissipates the darkness that otherwise would forever enshroud the
grave; it reveals to us another state of being, in which we shall be
happy or miserable, ages without end. On this Book alone do we depend
for our knowledge of the way of salvation by Christ. It is here we read
the story of the manger and the cross, and the wonderful plan of
redemption through atoning blood. What could we do without the Bible? It
is of infinitely greater value than houses and lands, silver and gold,
and every earthly good beside. To take from us the Bible, would be like
blotting out the sun in the heavens, and enveloping the universe in the
gloom and darkness of eternal night. Take from me riches, honors,
pleasures, comforts, and even liberty itself; and give me instead
thereof poverty, disgrace, pains, affliction, hunger, cold, nakedness,
and a dungeon; tear me from my friends, bind me with chains, scourge me
with the lash, brand my flesh with hot irons, deprive me of every source
of earthly good, and inflict upon me every kind of bodily and mental
anguish which the utmost refinement of cruelty can invent;--but give me
my Bible--leave me this precious treasure, which is the gift of my
heavenly Father, to teach me his will and guide me to himself. Torture
and destroy my body, if you will, but O! give me facilities for saving
my soul. Turn me not adrift on life's troubled ocean to seek alone a
far distant shore, exposed continually to storms, breakers, hidden
reefs, whirlpools, and shoals, with nothing but a few verbal
instructions to direct my way. If I am to make this fearful voyage, (and
make it I must,) take not from me my chart and compass. Your verbal
directions I shall be likely to forget when I most need them. The
polestar, which you tell me may be my guide, is often for a long time
concealed by impenetrable clouds. There are fearful maelstroms, near the
verge of whose deceptive and destructive circles my course lies, and ere
I am aware of it I shall have passed the fatal line, from which no
voyager returns. Between me and my desired haven there is a "hell-gate,"
where are sunken rocks and conflicting currents, and amid all these
complicated dangers my frail bark will make shipwreck, without my chart
and compass. Deprived of these, I cannot keep my reckoning, I cannot
shape my course, I cannot find my haven.

I need not tell you, my dear brother, that it is a part of the
slaveholding policy to take from thousands and millions of immortal
beings in our nominally Christian land, this precious chart and
compass,--the Bible, the only safe guide to heaven. I have often heard
you speak of it, and deplore it. Those severe laws which forbid
teaching the slave to read, do virtually take from him the Bible,--his
directory to the New Jerusalem. You may, indeed, give him oral
instruction, and in many instances, no doubt, they are blessed to his
conversion; but how utterly inadequate are they to his spiritual wants,
how imperfect are they at best, and in how many thousands of cases are
even these entirely wanting. Every enlightened and intelligent Christian
knows, from his own experience, how hard it is to enter the "strait
gate," and to keep in the "narrow way," and how needful to him are all
the helps within his reach, and then he is but "scarcely saved." What
hope is there, then, for the poor slave, who is deprived, not only of
most of the ordinary and extraordinary means of grace which we enjoy,
but is forbidden the printed Word of God? Is not a fearful
responsibility incurred by those who, for any reason, stand between God
and his children, and intercept those messages of grace and mercy which
are contained in the Holy Scriptures?

That noble institution, the American Bible Society, is multiplying
copies of the sacred Word by thousands and hundreds of thousands, and
scattering them over the land and the world; it hesitates not to thrust
them into the hands of the followers of the false prophet,--the deluded
followers of the man of sin,--the disciples of Confucius and
Zoroaster,--the worshippers of Juggernaut and Vishnoo, and the degraded
inhabitants of the South Seas and Caffraria;--it benevolently resolves
to put a copy of the Bible into the dwelling of every white family in
these United States; but it is obliged by law to pass by the cabin of
the slave, and leave more than three millions of immortal beings to find
the road to heaven the best way they can.

My brother, I cannot think of these things without the deepest grief,
and I know that you fully sympathize with me; but it is some consolation
to believe that the great mass of evangelical Christians take the same
views of the wrongs inflicted upon the slave that we do, for it is to
the Christian sentiment of this country that we must look for the
removal of them.

Our brethren of the Presbyterian church have borne their testimony most
fully and pointedly against the evils of slavery which we have been
considering. You doubtless recollect the action of the General Assembly
on this subject in 1818. A committee was appointed, to whom was referred
certain resolutions on the subject of selling a slave,--a member of the
church,--and which was directed to prepare a report to be adopted by
the Assembly, expressing their opinion in general on the subject of
slavery. The report of this committee was unanimously adopted, and
ordered to be published. It is, in part, as follows:--

"The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, having taken into
consideration the subject of slavery, think proper to make known their
sentiments upon it to the churches.

"We consider the voluntary enslaving of the one part of the human race
by another, as a gross violation of the most precious and sacred rights
of human nature; as utterly inconsistent with the law of God, which
requires us to love our neighbors as ourselves; and as totally
irreconcilable with the spirit and principles of the gospel of Christ,
which enjoins that all things 'whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them.' Slavery creates a paradox in the moral
system; it exhibits rational, accountable, and immortal beings in such
circumstances as scarcely to leave them the power of moral action. It
exhibits them as dependent on the will of others, whether they shall
receive religious instruction; whether they shall know and worship the
true God; whether they shall enjoy the ordinances of the gospel; whether
they shall perform the duties and cherish the endearments of husbands
and wives, parents and children, neighbors and friends; whether they
shall preserve their chastity and purity, or regard the dictates of
justice and humanity.

"Such are some of the consequences of slavery,--consequences, not
imaginary, but which connect themselves with its very existence. The
evils to which the slave is always exposed often take place in fact, and
in their very worst degree and form, and where all of them do not take
place, as we rejoice to say that in many instances, through the
influence of the principles of humanity and religion on the minds of
masters, they do not, still the slave is deprived of his natural right,
degraded as a human being, and exposed to the danger of passing into the
hands of a master who may inflict upon him all the hardships which
inhumanity and avarice may suggest."

An Address from the Synod of Kentucky, in 1835, to the Presbyterians of
that State, is much more specific in its delineations of the evils of
slavery, and in its denunciations of the system, and adopts language far
more severe than many northern Christians would think it expedient to
use. It presents a picture of its actual workings which could be drawn
only by one who had seen the original. If you have not read this
address, I beg that you will do so. It is altogether a southern
document. I have room only for a short extract.

Slavery is characterized as "a demoralizing and cruel system, which it
would be an insult to God to imagine that he does not abhor; a system
which exhibits power without responsibility, toil without recompense,
life without liberty, law without justice, wrongs without redress,
infamy without crime, punishment without guilt, and families without
marriage; a system which will not only make victims of the present
unhappy generation, inflicting upon them the degradation, the contempt,
the lassitude, and the anguish of hopeless oppression; but which even
aims at transmitting this heritage of injury and woe to their children
and their children's children, down to their latest posterity. Can any
Christian contemplate, without trembling, his own agency in the
perpetuation of such a system?"

Coincident with the judgment of these two most respectable and revered
ecclesiastical bodies is the testimony of one of the most prominent and
honored sons of the southern church, the Rev. Dr. R. L Breckenridge.
Says he:--

"What then is slavery? for the question relates to the action of certain
principles of it, and to its probable and proper results; what is
slavery as it exists among us? We reply, it is that condition enforced
by the laws of one half of the States of this confederacy, in which one
portion of the community, called masters, are allowed such power over
another portion called slaves, as----

"1. To deprive them of the entire earnings of their own labor, except so
much as is necessary to continue labor itself by continuing healthful
existence: thus committing clear robbery.

"2. To reduce them to the necessity of universal concubinage, by denying
to them the civil rights of marriage, thus breaking up the dearest
relations of life, and encouraging universal prostitution.

"3. To deprive them of the means and opportunities of moral and
intellectual culture, in many States making it a high penal offence to
teach them to read, thus perpetuating whatever of evil there is that
proceeds from ignorance.

"4. To set up between parents and their children an authority higher
than the impulse of nature and the laws of God, which breaks up the
authority of the father over his own offspring, and at pleasure
separates the mother at a returnless distance from her child, thus
abrogating the clearest laws of nature, thus outraging all decency and
justice, and degrading and oppressing thousands upon thousands of
beings, created like themselves in the image of the most high God! This
is slavery as it is daily exhibited in every slave State."

Yes, such is the nature and character of an institution in this
enlightened Christian republic, claiming to be the freest nation on
earth, calling itself "an asylum for the oppressed," inviting the
downtrodden subjects of all the despots of the old world to come to this
happy land, and place themselves under the protection of the American
eagle, and in this "eyrie of the free" taste and enjoy the sweets of
liberty!

The views presented in the above extracts may be taken, it is to be
presumed, as an exponent of the southern Christian sentiment on domestic
slavery. There are, indeed, exceptions. It is painful to notice that
within a few years some men of reputed piety and worth have been
attempting to maintain that American slavery is a "divine and
patriarchal institution," "sanctioned by the Bible,"--is "necessary to
the highest state of society," and is "to be perpetuated;" but I am
happy to believe that the number of those who hold such views,
repudiating those of the Presbyterian church, and at the same time call
themselves disciples of Him who said, "whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them," is comparatively small.

I close this long letter by subscribing myself, as ever,

Your affectionate

Friend and Brother.




