LETTER III.

THE REAL SUBJECT.--NOT TO BE CONFOUNDED WITH ANCIENT
SERVITUDE.--NOR TO BE JUDGED OF BY ISOLATED CASES.--NORTHERN MEN
COMPETENT AS OTHERS TO DETERMINE ITS TRUE CHARACTER.--SLAVERY
IGNORES OUR DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE.--IS INCONSISTENT WITH OUR
CONSTITUTION.


MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER,--I propose in this and subsequent letters to
take a brief, candid view of some of the prominent characteristics of
American slavery. I speak of servitude, not as it existed in patriarchal
times, for that is essentially a distinct matter. While it had some
things in common with American slavery, there was so much that was
dissimilar in the relation of master and servant, that analogy is in a
great measure destroyed.

Neither do I speak of slavery as I saw it developed on your plantation,
and on those of your immediate neighbors. When I went to the South, I
confess I went with strong prepossessions, (prejudices if you choose so
to call them,) against the "peculiar institution." I regarded it an
evil, and only an evil. But while my general views of the legitimate
workings of the system remain unchanged, candor compels me to admit,
that, if all slaves were as well cared for, as kindly treated, as well
instructed, and were they all as contented and happy as yours; and,
especially, were there no evils incident to the system greater than I
saw with you, I would simply divest slavery of its odious name, and it
would virtually be slavery no longer. The plantations at the South would
then, perhaps, with some propriety he denominated communities of
intelligent, happy, Christian peasants. And yet it is slavery, as it
really takes away inalienable rights. Would to God that slavery as it
exists with you were a fair illustration of the system. But alas! it is
not. Perhaps you may say that "it is impossible for a northern man to
speak of slavery so as to do the subject justice." You may indeed know
more and better than we do about the state and condition of the slaves.
But in some respects, where great principles are involved, we at the
North are more competent than you, for our judgment is less liable to be
biased by self-interest; and in my remarks I shall confine myself
chiefly to those points on which a northern man is at least as well
qualified to speak as a slaveholder.

What, then, are some of the prominent characteristics of American
slavery as a system?

FIRST, Slavery ignores and repudiates the foundation-stone on which
rests our renowned Declaration of Independence. That document, for more
than three fourths of a century, has been the boast and glory of
America. It is the platform on which our noble ancestors planted their
feet, with a consciousness that they stood on the eternal principles of
truth and justice. To maintain these principles, relying on God for aid,
they pledged to each other "their lives, their fortunes, and their
sacred honor." Our fathers knew that they were right, and, to carry out
the principles embodied in this Declaration, many of them cheerfully
poured out their heart's blood to defend the "unalienable rights" of
humanity.

Now let us turn our attention to the foundation paragraph of this
memorable Declaration;--I do not mean in that general way in which it is
often read, but minutely and particularly;--let us calmly look at it in
its full import, and not shrink back and avert our eyes on account of a
foreboding that we shall be led to conclusions which we would be glad to
avoid.

"We hold these truths to be self-evident;--that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness."

These significant words are inscribed upon the scroll of our nation's
history, and there they will remain till time shall be no longer. They
need no glossary or explanation. He who runs may read them, and he who
reads can understand them. The sentiment they embody it is impossible to
mistake; it stands out in bold relief, like the sun in the heavens. It
is, that every man has received, from a higher than earthly power, a
charter, which secures to him the unalienable right of life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness. It is impossible for the most ultra
advocate of "human rights" to paraphrase these words, or give them a
rendering so as to make them support his dogmas more strongly than they
now do. On the contrary, he would only weaken their force by the
attempt.

Now, my dear brother, I would candidly, seriously ask you--I would ask
all your southern friends--I would ask everybody, Can the sentiment of
that Declaration be consistent with American slavery? Are not slaves
men? Do color and degradation change a creature of God from a human
being to a soulless brute? No; our southern brethren would as
indignantly repudiate this infidel view as we at the North. Now if a
slave is a man, he has received from his Creator an unalienable right to
liberty if he chooses to avail himself of it, or else the first
principle laid down in our revered Declaration of Independence, so far
from being "self evident," is in fact untrue, and ought at once to be
taken from its honored position in the archives of these United States,
and consigned to the heaps of rubbish of the dark ages.

But does the slave enjoy this liberty? or is it within his reach? It
will not be pretended. The very name by which his class is designated
forbids it. The term free slave is a solecism. His liberty consists in
the freedom to do as he is told to do, or suffer punishment for his
disobedience, and he can pursue happiness only in accordance with the
will of his master.

There is the same incongruity between slavery and that clause in our
constitution which stipulates that "no person shall be deprived of life,
liberty, or property, without due process of law." Now, my brother, does
it not require considerable ingenuity and special pleading to avoid
conclusions to which unbiased common sense would arrive in an instant,
in the application of these declared rights to persons held as slaves? I
am not going to inflict upon you a dissertation, or a series of
syllogisms on this hackneyed subject, but I beg that you and your
friends will calmly look again at what, I doubt not, you have seen
before,--the palpable incongruity between the system of holding persons
perpetually in slavery without their consent, and those declared,
self-evident, heaven bestowed, unalienable rights professedly secured to
all men in these United States by our glorious constitution. Said that
great statesman and patriot, Henry Clay: "We present to the world the
sorry spectacle of a nation that worships Slavery as a household
goddess, after having constituted Liberty the presiding divinity over
church and state."

Surely something must be out of joint here. I have looked again and
again at this matter, I think with perfect candor, and I have tried to
the utmost of my ability to reconcile these apparent inconsistencies,
but I cannot do it. Can you?

Believe me, as ever, your sincere friend and

CHRISTIAN BROTHER.




