LETTER VIII.

THREE QUESTIONS SUGGESTED.--1. MUST SLAVERY BE PERPETUAL?--2. DOES
THE CHURCH OF CHRIST SUSTAIN ANY RESPONSIBILITY IN THIS MATTER?--3.
WHAT SHALL WE DO?


MY DEAR CHRISTIAN FRIEND,--I fear I shall make myself tedious to you by
dwelling so long upon this, to me, painful subject,--slavery. I will,
therefore, in the present letter, finish what I have to say for the
present, hoping that our future correspondence may be on more grateful
themes.

There are a few questions which are suggested to us by the brief view we
have taken of this most important subject. The first is, Must slavery,
with all its attendant evils, be perpetuated? Must this blot rest upon
our beloved country, and tarnish its escutcheon forever? I am persuaded
that the spontaneous answer from the Christian heart of this nation is,
_No!_ It was never contemplated by Washington nor Jefferson nor Adams,
nor by the framers of our Constitution, nor by the great mass of noble
patriots who perilled their all for the independence of their country,
that slavery was to be handed down to posterity. If you will look at the
writings of the leading public men of the last century, you will find,
that, almost without exception, they looked upon slavery in the United
States as a temporary evil, to be removed as soon as circumstances would
permit. They regarded it not only a wrong inflicted upon the slave, but
an incubus upon the nation, soon to pass away.

The great body of Christians in our land have been looking forward to
the time, and praying for its arrival, when all the oppressed within our
borders shall go free. That the time will come when slavery shall cease
in our land, I as fully believe as I believe that there is a God who
presides over and directs the destinies of men. You and I may not live
to see the day; but it will come.

Another question suggested is, Does the church of Christ in this country
sustain any responsibility in regard to slavery, and has she any duty to
discharge in relation to it? By the church of Christ, I mean the great
mass of Christians of every name who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity,
both North and South.

This question is easily answered. There are no evils existing in the
Christian's field of labor--the world--in regard to which he has not
some responsibility, and for the removal of which he is not bound to do
something. As a general truth, the nearer the evils come to our own
firesides and bosoms, the weightier those responsibilities become. The
hundreds of millions of heathens in foreign lands lying in sin and
degradation appeal to our sympathy and efforts, and that appeal we may
not disregard. But the heathen in our own land have on us much stronger
claims, and our obligations to put forth efforts in their behalf are
more imperious.

Slavery is a great evil and sin, which affects not only individuals, but
our country; and, both as Christians and patriots, we ought to be
sensibly alive to every thing that affects our common weal. You who live
at the South, it may be, have more responsibility in this matter than we
at the North; but none of us can say, "because I am not personally
implicated in inflicting wrongs upon the slave, therefore I have nothing
to do for their removal." Should this become the universal sentiment of
the church, Satan's kingdom in our world would never come to an end, and
wickedness would prevail forever. The spirit of Christianity, although
preëminently mild, gentle, patient, and long-suffering, is nevertheless,
in an important sense, aggressive. It has ever claimed the right of
interesting itself in the welfare of every human creature--to exert its
influence to check the progress of sin in every form--to attack error in
principle and in practice--to "loose the bands of wickedness,"--"undo
heavy burdens,"--"break every yoke,"--"deliver the poor and needy,"--and
to "remember them that are in bonds as bound with them." This, by some,
may be called officiousness, but we cannot help it; it is a part of the
Christian's legitimate business to volunteer his influence and his
services (in every proper way) in opposing wrong, and to stand up and
plead the cause of those who suffer it the world over. He cannot refrain
from doing so, without proving himself false to his Master and his
Master's cause.

Admitting, then, that all Christians have some kind of responsibility
and duty devolving on them, a most important question comes up. Thirdly,
what shall they do? There are certainly some things which it is
perfectly evident we should not do,--though we should rebuke this and
every sin, we should not give vent to our hatred of the system in
ebullitions of wrath, invective, and abuse toward slaveholders. Thus did
not Christ nor his apostles. This is not in accordance with the
Christian spirit, and could be productive only of evil.

Neither should we endeavor to exert an influence over the slaves to make
them restive and disobedient; none but an enemy to the true interests,
both of the slave and his country, would do that, unless under some
hallucination.

Neither should we interfere politically with slavery beyond the
boundaries of our own State, in States where it now exists by the laws
of the land. I might go on indefinitely, and specify what we should not
do; but this does not meet the case;--what shall we do? It would be
arrogance in me to attempt a full answer to a question that has engaged
the attention of many abler heads and better hearts than mine, but there
are some things which have already been said by others, that cannot be
too frequently repeated.

In the first place, we can commit this whole matter to God in humble,
earnest prayer. Here is something which we can all do, North and South,
and in which we shall all be agreed. However much we may differ in
regard to the safety and expediency of other measures to moderate the
condition of the slave and bring about his ultimate emancipation, we are
of one mind in regard to the safety and efficacy of prayer. One effect
of this will be to unite our own hearts more closely in sympathy and
love. There will be no danger of calling each other hard names, bandying
unchristian epithets, and biting and devouring one another, if we are in
the habit of meeting daily at the throne of grace to pray for a cause in
which we take a mutual interest.

By prayer we may hope to be enlightened more fully in regard to our
duty. "If any man lack wisdom," and surely we all do on this subject,
"let him ask of God."

In answer to prayer, we have reason to hope that God will open the eyes
to teach the hearts of all slaveholders, and lead them to "do justly and
love mercy," and also that he will, in his holy and wise Providence,
redress the wrongs of his oppressed children, and prepare the way for
their ultimate emancipation.

Prayer is the Christian's first and last resort. Let us, then, my dear
brother, pray over this subject continuously, and with an earnestness
commensurate with its importance, and then, I doubt not, we shall
ourselves be more enlightened than we now are as to our future course.

A second duty, hardly less obvious than prayer, is to use all the
influence we possess to prevent the extension of the domain of slavery.
To this end, we should utter our voices long and loud in remonstrance
against any such measure. If we and our legislators may not politically
interfere with slavery in States where it now exists, we may interfere
to prevent it from exerting its baleful influence over territory now
free. We should do many things for the sake of peace and conciliation.
We have heretofore made concessions and compromises--perhaps too
many--on this subject; but here is where the people of God, North and
South, should make a stand, and declare before heaven and earth, and
with an emphasis which cannot be misunderstood, that not another inch of
our public domain shall be cursed with slavery for any consideration
whatever, if our influence can prevent it. In our remonstrances, we will
be respectful, but firm. Let our politicians know that all persons who
are governed by Christian principle, through the length and breadth of
the land, have taken their position, and that the mountains shall be
removed out of their places, ere they will swerve from it, and there
will be but little danger of slave extension.

In the third place, we should use every endeavor to disseminate the
gospel of Christ, and bring its principles to bear upon all classes of
persons, North and South. If we can do this effectually, it is all
sufficient. The Gospel, if faithfully applied, is a sure remedy for
every social and moral evil that ever existed. We at the North should
demonstrate to our slave-holding friends whom we wish to influence, that
we ourselves are governed by its spirit, and actuated by its principle,
in all that we do in relation to this subject. It is not ambition, a
lust for power, sectional jealousy, a spirit of censoriousness or
ill-will, that prompts us to what they have been in the habit of
regarding as intermeddling with their affairs, in which we have no
concern, but a spirit of love,--love not less to them than to their
slaves. And then, in the temper of Christ, we will bring the Gospel to
bear on the slaveholder's conscience and sense of justice. We will hold
up and keep before his mind the great rule of life given by Him who
spake as never man spake,--"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do you even so to them." Let this rule be once adopted and carried
out, and it is enough. Human beings would no more be sold as beasts in
the market, and driven to unrequited toil; the minds of men would no
longer be kept in ignorance; the domestic circle would never again be
invaded by the hand of sordid avarice separating husbands and wives,
parents and children, doing savage violence to the noblest affections
of our nature; the Bible would be put into the hands of every slave, and
he would be taught to read it; common schools and Sabbath schools would
be everywhere established and maintained, as well for the slave as for
the white child; the master would regard those whom he now holds as
property as his own brethren, going with him to the same judgment, and
destined finally to dwell with him as his equals, in the same heaven,
and to wear as bright crowns and sing as rapturous a song as he. He
would immediately set himself about preparing his slaves for
emancipation, and for the enjoyment of those natural rights, of which
they have for so long a time been most unjustly deprived. In short,
slavery, as the term is now understood, would cease instantly, and a
kind, parental guardianship would take its place, and every southern
plantation would be transformed into a moral garden of beauty and
happiness, and universal and entire emancipation would follow with the
least possible delay. And, finally, we should if possible bring the
Gospel to bear upon the great body politic, upon our presidents, our
governors, our National and State legislators. It would seem that some
of our lawmakers are much better acquainted with Blackstone and Vattel,
than they are with the Lord Jesus Christ, or they would not disgrace
our statute-books with laws which ignore the "higher laws" of God. We
should often remind them that this is a Christian, and not a heathen or
infidel republic; and that every enactment, not consistent with the
gospel of Christ and inalienable human rights, does violence to the
Christian sentiment and Christian conscience of the nation, and must be
repealed. If they will not hear us, we have only to appoint more
faithful servants, who will do as they are told. We have no idea of
"uniting church and state," but to infuse as much of the Gospel into the
state as possible is both a privilege and duty; and when all our affairs
and institutions, public, domestic, and private, are administered on
gospel principles, we shall become a free, prosperous, and happy people,
and not till then.

And now, may God bless you, my dear brother, and guide you, and guide us
all, to pursue such a course in regard to the three and a half millions
of slaves in our professedly free republic as will afford us the most
satisfaction when we meet them as our equals at the judgment-seat of
Christ.

With high esteem and much affection,

I remain your Christian brother,

A. C. BALDWIN.




AN ESSAY,

BY

REV. TIMOTHY WILLISTON.

  IS AMERICAN SLAVERY AN INSTITUTION WHICH CHRISTIANITY
     SANCTIONS, AND WILL PERPETUATE? AND, IN VIEW
       OF THIS SUBJECT, WHAT OUGHT AMERICAN
         CHRISTIANS TO DO, AND REFRAIN
                  FROM DOING?

    Homo sum; humani nihil a me alienum puto.--TERENCE.
        Bear ye one another's burdens.--PAUL.




ESSAY.


A great moral question is, in this nineteenth century, being tried
before the church of Christ, and at the bar of public sentiment. It is,
Whether the system of servitude known as American slavery be a system
whose perpetuity is compatible with pure Christianity? Whether, with the
Bible in her hand, the church may lawfully indorse, participate in, and
help perpetuate, this system? Or whether, on the other hand, the system
be, in its origin, nature, and workings, intrinsically evil; a thing
which, if, like concubinage and polygamy, God has indeed tolerated in
his church, he never approved of; and which, in the progress of a pure
Christianity, must inevitably become extinct? I feel assured that the
latter of these propositions will, without argument, command the assent
of the mass of living Christians. But there are those in the church who
array themselves on the other side. While they would not justify the
least inhumanity in the treatment of slaves, they profess to believe
that slavery itself has the approbation of Jehovah, and may with
propriety be perpetuated in the church and the world. At their hands I
would respectfully solicit a patient hearing, while I proceed to assign
several reasons for differing with them in opinion.

First. Slavery is a condition of society not founded in nature. When
God, in his Word, demands that children shall be in subordination to
their parents, and citizens to the constituted civil authorities, we
need no why and wherefore to enable us to see the reasonableness of
these requirements. We feel that they are no arbitrary enactments, but
indispensable to the best interests of families and of society, and
therefore founded in nature. We are prepared, too, from their obvious
necessity and utility, to rank them among the permanent statutes of the
Divine Legislator. But can as much be said of slavery? Is there such an
obvious fitness and utility in one man's being, against his will, owned
and controlled by another, as to prepare us to say that such an
ownership is founded in the very constitution of things? None will
pretend that there is. Not only is slavery not founded in nature, but,

Second. It is condemned by the very instincts of our moral constitution.
These instincts seem to whisper that "all men are born free and equal;"
equal, not in intellect, or in the petty distinctions of parentage,
property, or power; but having, as the creatures of one God, an equal
right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Job's moral
instincts taught him, that the fact of all men's having one and the same
Creator gave his servants a right to contend with him, when wronged; and
that, if he "despised their cause," he must answer it to his God and
theirs. That men of all races and grades are essentially equal before
God; that every man has a right to himself, to the fruits of his toil,
and to the unmolested pursuit of happiness, in all lawful ways; and
hence, that slavery, as existing in these States, is a gigantic system
of evil and wrong,--are truths which the moral sense of men is
everywhere proclaiming with much emphasis and distinctness. If it be not
so, what means this note of remonstrance, long and loud, that comes to
our ears over the Atlantic wave? Why else did a Mohammedan prince,[I]
(to say nothing of what nearly all Christian governments have done,)
put an end to slavery in his dominions before he died? And how else
shall we account for that moral earthquake which has for years been
rocking this great republic to its very centre? One cannot thoughtfully
observe the signs of the times,--no, nor the workings of his own heart,
methinks,--without perceiving that slavery is at war with the moral
sense of mankind. If there be any conscience that approves, it must be a
conscience perverted by wrong instruction, or by a vicious practice. And
can that be a good institution, and worthy of perpetuity, which an
unperverted conscience instinctively condemns?

Third. The bad character of slavery becomes yet more apparent, if we
consider the manner in which it has chiefly originated and been
sustained. Did God institute the relation of master and slave, as he did
the conjugal and parental relations? It is not pretended. In what, then,
did slavery have its beginning? Doubtless the first slaves were
captives, taken in war. In primitive ages, the victors in war were
considered as having a right to do what they pleased with their
captives; and so it sometimes happened that they were put to death, and
sometimes that they were made to serve their captors as bondmen. Thus
slavery was at first the incidental result of war. But as time rolled
on, the love of power and of gain prompted men to make aggressions on
their weaker neighbors, for the very purpose of enslaving them; and,
eventually, man-stealing and the slave-trade became familiar facts in
the world's history. Upon these has slavery, for centuries past,
depended mainly for its continuance. And, although these feeders of
slavery are now by Christian nations branded as piracy and strictly
vetoed, they are far from being exterminated. Indeed, it seems to be
well understood, that, if all commerce in slaves, foreign and domestic,
ceases, slavery itself must soon become extinct.

Now if man-stealing be an act which the Word of God and the moral
instincts of men do most pointedly condemn,--and I will attempt no
demonstration of this here,--what shall we say of that which is its
legitimate offspring and dependant? Far be it from me to affirm, that,
circumstanced as our southern brethren are, it is just as criminal for
them to hold slaves as it would be to go now to Africa and forcibly
seize them. But, in the spirit of love, I would ask my slave-holding
brother, Can that be a justifiable institution, and deserving to be
upheld, which has so bad a parentage? "Do men gather grapes of thorns?"
"Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?"

Fourth. There are, in the Scriptures, many clear indications that
slavery has not the approbation of God, and hence has not the stamp of
perpetuity upon it. Under this head, let us notice several distinct
particulars.

1. Had God regarded servitude as a good thing, he would not, in
authoritatively predicting its existence, have said, "Cursed be Canaan;
a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren." What God visits
men with as a curse cannot be intrinsically good and beneficial.

2. The judgments with which God visited Egypt and her proud monarch, for
refusing to emancipate the Israelites, and for essaying to recapture
them, when let go, and the wages which he caused his people, when
released, to receive for their hitherto unrequited tolls, clearly evince
that he has no complacency in compulsory, unrewarded servitude.

3. The same thing is indicated by the fact that God has, by statute,
provided expressly for the protection and freedom of an escaped slave;
but not for the recovery of such a fugitive by his master. "Thou shalt
not deliver unto his master, the servant which is escaped from his
master unto thee: he shall dwell with thee, even among you in that place
which he shall choose.... Thou shalt not oppress him." Now be it, if
you will, that this statute had reference only to servants who should
escape into the land of Israel from Gentile masters; does it not
indicate a strong bias, in the mind of God, to the side of freedom,
rather than that of slavery? And does it not establish the point, that,
in God's estimation, one man cannot rightfully be deemed the property of
another man? Were it otherwise, would not the Jew have been required to
restore a runaway to his pursuing master, just as he was to restore any
other lost thing which its owner should come in search of? Or, to say
the least, would not the Israelites have been allowed to reduce to
servitude among themselves the escaped slave of a heathen master? But
how unlike all this are the actual requirements of the statute. God's
people must neither deliver up the fugitive nor enslave him themselves;
but allow him to dwell among them as a FREEMAN, just "where it liketh
him best." And, in this connection, how significant a fact is it, that
the Bible nowhere empowers the master from whom a slave had escaped to
pursue, seize, and drag back to bondage that escaped slave.

4. That which constitutes the grand fountain of slavery,--the forcible,
stealthy seizure of a man, for the purpose of holding or selling him as
a slave,--was, under the Mosaic dispensation, punishable with death;
and is, in the New Testament, named in connection with the most heinous
crimes. "He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in
his hand, he shall surely be put to death." What could more forcibly
exhibit God's disapprobation of one of the distinctive features of
slavery,--compulsion? What more impressively show the value that he puts
upon a man's personal independence,--his right to himself? Now if God
doomed that man to die a felon's death who should steal and sell a
fellow man, can it be that he would hold him guiltless who should buy
the stolen man, knowing him to have been stolen? God's people were,
indeed, allowed to "buy bondmen and bondmaids" of the strangers that
dwelt among them, and of the surrounding heathen. But were they ever
allowed to buy persons whom they knew to have been unlawfully obtained,
and offered for sale in manifest opposition to their own wishes? If they
were not,--and, from the statute just referred to, it seems certain that
they were not,--does American slavery derive countenance from that which
was tolerated in the Jewish church and nation? True, the slaves now held
as such among us were not themselves feloniously seized on a foreign
soil, torn away from kindred, homes, and country, and sold into hopeless
bondage in a strange land; but their sires and grandsires were.
Man-stealing is confessedly the stock out of which has sprung, and grown
to its present dimensions, the vast and overshadowing Upas of American
slavery; and if the Bible brands that stock as pestiferous, must not the
entire tree partake of the noxious influence? Again: if, as competent
critics assert, the popular sense of the word rendered "men-stealers,"
in 1 Tim. i. 10, be "those who deal in men--literally, slave-traders,"
then trafficking in slaves for mercenary ends is, by Paul, ranked among
vices the most abominable; and American slavery is, if possible, more
pointedly condemned by that passage than by the statute found in Ex.
xxi. 16. For who does not know that trading in "the persons of men" has
ever been, and yet is, a main pillar in the fabric of slavery? Indeed,
man-stealing and slave-trading are to slave-holding precisely what the
business of the distiller and of the vendor is to the vice of
intemperance. There is, in either case, a trio of associated evils; and
it is difficult to say which member of either trio is the most repulsive
and harmful.

If, now, it be objected to this argument from the Bible, that the Mosaic
institutes expressly recognize such a thing as involuntary servitude,
and prescribe rules for its regulation, I answer: true, but the
servitude thus recognized and regulated by statute was of a far milder
type than that which is legalized in these American States. For, 1. It
allowed the bondman a large amount of leisure, or time which he need not
devote to his master's service; 2. It made it possible for him to
accumulate a considerable amount of property; 3. It placed him on a
perfect level with his master, in regard to religious privileges; 4. It
gave him his freedom whenever he should be so chastised as to result in
permanent injury to his person: thus operating as a powerful preventive
of inhumanity in chastising; 5. It respected the sanctity of the
conjugal and parental relations, when existing among bondmen, and did
not authorize a compulsory severing of family ties; 6. It made no
provision for the sale of a servant by his Jewish master, nor for any
such domestic commerce in the persons of men as is practised in the
southern States of this Union; 7. It provided for the periodical
emancipation of all that were in bondage; thus aiming a fatal blow at
the very existence of servitude in the Hebrew commonwealth. I may not,
consistently with the necessary brevity of a tract designed for popular
perusal, go into any demonstration of the facts above asserted. For
proof that they are facts, let my readers studiously examine the Mosaic
books, and the Rev. A. Barnes's "Inquiry into the Scriptural Views of
Slavery." I see not how any candid and discriminating investigator can
help being convinced that the servitude which was temporarily tolerated
in the Jewish church, was, in numerous respects, very unlike to that
which exists among us, and far less repulsive.

But suppose, for argument's sake, it had been just as repulsive a system
as ours, would the fact of its having been tolerated under the Jewish
economy prove it to be intrinsically good, and worthy of being
perpetuated? Then, by parity of reasoning, the good men of ancient times
might safely have concluded that certain other practices were good and
would endure, which we know were not good, and were not to last. Had the
question been propounded in Abraham's or in David's day, whether
polygamy and concubinage were approved of God, and would be perpetuated
in the church, it is probable that even the saints of those periods
would have responded affirmatively. The fact that God had so long
allowed his people to practise these things unrebuked, might, to them,
have seemed sufficient proof that these practices were intrinsically
proper, and were to rank among the permanent fixtures of human society.
But were Abraham and David now on the earth, with what changed feelings
would they regard the cast-off system of concubinage and a plurality of
wives. Again: suppose the conjecture had been hazarded, three thousand
years ago, that woman, from being a menial drudge, or a mere medium of
bestial indulgence, would one day occupy the dignified position to which
Christianity has actually lifted her, would not incredulity have lurked
in every heart, and found expression on every tongue? Now there are
plain indications, not only in the Word, but the providences of God,
that he never regarded slavery with complacency, any more than he did
polygamy, concubinage, or the serfdom of woman; and that he never
designed its perpetuity. Scrutinizing that Word and those providences,
one needs no prophetic ken to enable him to predict with certainty,
that, when Christ's millennial reign is ushered in, contraband will be
inscribed on slavery, as it already has been on some other evils that
were once tolerated, not only in society, but in the church of God.

But I shall be reminded here, that, when the apostles were disseminating
Christianity in the Roman empire, there prevailed throughout that empire
a system of slavery more odious and oppressive than ours; and yet that
both slaveholders and slaves were converted and admitted to the church,
without its affecting the relation of master and slave; that the New
Testament instructs the parties how to demean themselves in that
relation, but nowhere enjoins emancipation on the master, or encourages
absconding or non-submission in the slave; in short, that it nowhere
expressly condemns slavery, or intimates that its extermination was to
be expected or desired. In reply to this, I would say,--

(1.) To infer, because the New Testament enjoins obedience on slaves,
and makes no direct attack on the institution of slavery, that it
therefore sanctions the institution, and would have it perpetuated, is
as much a _non sequitur_ as to infer, because God enjoins on men
subjection to existing civil authorities, whatever may be their
character, that he as much approves of a despotic as of a constitutional
government,--of the government of Ferdinand of Naples as of that of
Victoria of England. Nor is it more difficult to comprehend why God has,
in the Scriptures, made no direct assault on slavery, than it is to see
why He has not directly assailed governmental despotisms, or expressed
any preference for one form of government over another. An obvious and
far-seeing wisdom is discernible in this, which it behooves us to
admire, and not unfrequently to imitate. Had the apostles or the
Scriptures openly denounced all absolutism, whether civil or domestic,
it would have aroused unnecessary prejudice and opposition, and diverted
the attention of men from the grand object aimed at in giving the world
a written and preached gospel. God deemed it wiser to reach these evils
through the slow but sure progress of certain great principles laid down
in his Word, than through the medium of specific prohibitions.

(2.) The fact that the apostles received into the church converts who
not only held slaves, but held them under a slave-system that was
awfully despotic, was no indorsement on their part of that odious
system, nor even of the slightest inhumanity on the part of a master
towards his slaves. It does, indeed, prove that a man may be a
Christian, without ceasing to be a slaveholder in form; but not that a
master may indulge in all the legal barbarities of the system, and yet
be a Christian. Merely to sustain the relation of a Christian master for
the good of the slave, or from the necessity of the case, is one thing,
while to advocate and defend this chattel system, and hold in bondage
fellow human beings for personal and selfish ends, is quite another
thing. Nowhere do the Scriptures countenance, or even wink at, the least
degree of inhumanity or injustice in the treatment of servants. So far
from this, they expressly enjoin it on masters to "give unto their
servants that which is just and equal," all the law of disinterested
love would require; accompanying the injunction with the significant
hint, that they themselves have a Master, and that with him there is "no
respect of persons."

(3.) Though the Scriptures do not directly assail the system of slavery,
they indirectly and obviously condemn it, and that very abundantly.
Slavery is indirectly and yet strongly rebuked in such passages of
Scripture as the following: "Wo unto him that ... useth his neighbor's
service without wages." "Is not this the fast that I have chosen, ... to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke?" "What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy?" ... "Have we not all one Father? Hath not
one God created us?" ... "And hath made of one blood all nations of men,
for to dwell on all the face of the earth; ... that they should seek the
Lord." ... "God is no respecter of persons." "The people of the land
have used oppression, ... therefore have I poured out mine indignation
upon them." ... "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." "Therefore,
all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them." It needs no unusual acuteness to see, that, were the spirit of
these and kindred passages (for numerous others of the sort might have
been cited) everywhere acted out, slavery would as readily vanish, as do
the icebergs of the North, if perchance they float away into milder
latitudes.

Fifth. To the four reasons already assigned for thinking that slavery
has not God's approbation, and ought not to be perpetuated, I will add
but one more,--its baleful effects. (1). As it respects worldly thrift,
or pecuniary prosperity. It is a fact, that slavery exerts a depressing
influence on the business welfare of any community where it prevails;
and that, other things being equal, slaveholding States can never
compete with free ones in the item of financial prosperity. A necessary
brevity forbids my pointing out the causes of this fact; but my readers
will, without my aid, readily ascertain what they are. Suffice it to
say, it has become a settled maxim of political economy, that there
exists an antagonism between slavery and the highest business prosperity
of any people that tolerates it; and the southern States of this Union
furnish abundant confirmation of its truth. (2.) I will name but one
other thing,--its baneful influence on character and morals. That
slavery tends to debase the character and morals of the slaves will
scarcely be questioned. Apart from the ignorance naturally resulting
from their condition, that condition powerfully tends to render them
sensual, indolent, artful, mendacious, stealthful, and revengeful. But
is the bad moral tendency of the institution limited to the bondmen?
Exerts it no corrupting influence on the hearts, the habits, and morals
of the masters? Is it not its legitimate tendency to foster in them such
vices as indolence, effeminacy, licentiousness, covetousness,
inhumanity, haughtiness, and a supreme regard for self? Of course, I do
not affirm that it uniformly produces these sad effects on the character
of masters. So far from this, there may doubtless be found slaveholders,
who, in all that adorns and ennobles human character, will compare
favorably with the very best men at the North. I think it will be
conceded, however, that the legitimate tendency is to evil, and that the
effects of slavery on the character of its sustainers are, in the main,
disastrous; and that the depreciated state of morals prevailing where
slavery exists is mainly attributable to this as its source. I need not
here enter into detail. Facts are too well known to make this
necessary.

Thus have we contemplated several distinct reasons for believing that
slavery is no good thing,--has not the sanction of Jehovah,--and cannot
with propriety be perpetuated. Its contrariety to nature,--its
antagonism to the moral sense of mankind,--its disgraceful parentage and
manner of support,--its condemnation by the Bible,--and its disastrous
influence on financial prosperity, on character, and on public
morals,--all proclaim that slavery, so far from being a good thing, is a
tremendous curse; yea, more, that it is a stupendous wrong; and hence,
that it should be tolerated in the church of Christ no longer than the
best interests of all concerned may render necessary for a safe
termination.

But it may be, after all, that I have failed to secure the assent of
some of my southern brethren to the justness of the foregoing positions
and inferences. It may be that they still regard the system of bondage
prevailing in their midst as in the main beneficial, defensible from the
Bible, and, with some modifications perhaps, worthy of perpetuity. Well,
brethren, suppose you do thus regard it; and for argument's sake
suppose, too, that you may possibly be right,--that slave-holding may be
in itself the harmless thing which you deem it; ought you not
cheerfully to abandon it, in obedience to a great Bible
principle,--that of refraining from things which are in themselves
lawful, or which your conscience may not condemn, out of regard to the
conscience of aggrieved Christian brethren, or to the prejudices of
those whose salvation you would not obstruct? You are aware, brethren,
that this magnanimous principle Paul both inculcated and exemplified.
You are also aware that a large majority of the Christians now living
regard your cherished institution as unjustifiable, and at variance with
the spirit of Christianity; and, so regarding it, they long for its
extinction, and are grieved with you for cleaving to it so tenaciously,
and refusing to concert measures for its ultimate overthrow. Indeed,
they are more than grieved; they are profoundly agitated by the fresh
developments of the iniquitous system which you are helping to uphold;
and there seems no prospect, while that system endures, of their
becoming tranquillized. A tempest has sprung up and is raging in the
church of Christ,--to say nothing of the civilized world,--which seems
not likely to cease till its cause be removed; and slavery is that
cause. Now I put it to you, brethren, if here be not an opportunity of
exemplifying, on a broad scale, the self-denying and noble principle
which Paul indicates in the words, "All things are lawful for me, but
all things are not expedient;" "Eat not for his sake that shewed it, and
for conscience' sake: ... conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the
other;" "Though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant
unto all, that I might gain the more." Have it, if you will, that the
brethren for whose sake you are asked to make this sacrifice are weak
brethren, and their consciences weak. Your obligation to make it is none
the less on that account; for the principle just adverted to
contemplates cases of this very sort. Since the practice which grieves
these weak brethren is one that you can probably abandon without
wounding your own conscience, are you at liberty to undervalue their
conscience by persisting in that which grieves them?

But how much weightier does this argument become, when it is remembered
that the opposers of slavery, besides being exceedingly numerous, have,
many of them, been eminent,--not merely for a conscientious piety, but
for talent, for research, for scholarship, for broad and comprehensive
views of things;--and that the list embraces distinguished southern, as
well as northern men; and men of celebrity in both church and state.
There have been found in the anti-slavery ranks, presidents and noble
men, jurists and legislators, statesmen and divines, scholars and
authors, poets and orators. And, still further to enhance the dignity of
the cause, it should be remembered that several General Assemblies of
the Presbyterian Church of the United States, together with numerous
lesser ecclesiastical bodies, have lifted up their voice in opposition
to slavery, and proclaimed substantially the same views which this
humble Essay has aimed to exhibit. Now if, as we have seen, a
deferential regard should be had to the conscience of aggrieved
Christian brethren, even when they are few and feeble-minded, how much
more, when the aggrieved ones are counted in hundreds of thousands? when
theirs is an intelligent piety and an enlightened conscience? and when,
too, their remonstrance is backed up by a public sentiment that is
wellnigh unanimous through all christendom?

If now, in spite of all these considerations, I still have readers that
say in their hearts, slavery must be perpetuated, they will pardon me
for lingering no longer in the hope of changing their views. I would be
indulged, however, in one parting interrogation. Has it never occurred
to you, brethren, that yours is, on some accounts, a very unfavorable
stand-point from which to form just and disinterested views of slavery;
and that your very position as slave-holders, and your long familiarity
with the system and its evils, may have blinded you to the magnitude of
those evils, and to the great desirableness of their being removed? May
it not be that long use, and self-interest, and the love of power and
ease, have conspired to warp your judgment, blunt your sensibilities,
and cause you to view slavery through a deceptive medium?

Having, as I hope, the cordial assent of the great mass of my readers,
northern and southern, to the foregoing argument against slavery and its
perpetuity, we are now prepared to advance to the last great division of
our subject, and to inquire: What are the duties, positive and negative,
which this subject imposes on American Christians? What does it demand
that we, as Christians, should do, and refrain from doing? This question
subdivides itself thus: What ought we northern and professedly
anti-slavery Christians to do, and not do? And, next, What duties,
positive and negative, does the question devolve on professing
Christians in the slave-holding States?

I. We are to consider what we, the northern and avowedly anti-slavery
section of the American church, ought, in view of this subject, both to
do, and refrain from doing. In reply to the question, What ought we to
do? I would say,--

1. It is not only our right, but duty, temperately and with Christian
courtesy to continue to discuss this great theme, both orally and with
the pen; and especially to endeavor to bring the truth into contact with
the mind and heart of our southern brethren,--if, peradventure, we may
thus persuade them soon to cease their connection with slavery. Freedom
of discussion is one important safeguard of the public weal; and that
must be regarded as a bad, untenable cause which will not bear the test
of a full and free discussion before the world. Free inquiry, too, has
not only preceded all great reformations, but has been an important
instrument in bringing them about. That great moral change known as the
temperance reformation is but one example among many that might be
adduced. If slavery is ever to be numbered in history among the things
that are past, it will be by having Bible light and truth made to
converge upon it, through the lens of free public discussion. Hence,
believing as we do that American slavery is an enormous evil and a
gigantic wrong,--a thing with which the church should cease to have
connection as speedily as may be,--as Christians we may, we must, employ
our tongues and our pens in behalf of the enslaved, till our world
shall cease to contain such a class of men.

2. We ought so to exercise the right of suffrage as to resist the
extension of slavery beyond its present limits. I say nothing here of
the political question of State rights, or of interfering with slavery
in States where it now exists. The question of authorizing by law the
extension of slavery into new States and Territories, or of admitting
new States with pro-slavery constitutions, is another and very different
thing from that of disturbing the compact in relation to slavery entered
into by the founders of this republic. The concessions in relation to
the slave interest which our fathers made by no means oblige us to make
further concessions, by consenting that slavery shall overstep her
present geographical limits. I know not what others may think; but, for
one, I feel constrained, by a sense of duty to God and my country, so to
vote as to have my votes tell against the spread of slavery. I must
carry my Christian principles of love and humanity to the ballot-box, as
well as elsewhere. Though long identified with one of the political
parties, I have of late felt myself bound, as a voter, to ignore the
ancient party lines, and even to ignore all other questions, compared
with the one great and absorbing one, Shall slavery be allowed to have
more territory, in which to breed and expand itself? In my deliberate
judgment, all Christian patriots should, so far as their votes can
speak, say to the system of bondage existing in our midst, "Hitherto
shalt thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed." This becomes now a moral and a religious duty.

3. In our visits to the throne of grace, we ought, with more frequency
and fervor, "to remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them."
Assured that all hearts and events are at God's disposal, that he abhors
oppression, and that prayer is the Christian's mode of taking hold of
God's strength, we must make full proof of this as a weapon with which
to effect the subversion of slavery. It may be that importunate,
persevering prayer will effect more in behalf of the enslaved than all
other instrumentalities. It is, at least, quite certain that other means
will prove inefficacious, if this be not superadded.

But the question we are considering has a negative as well as positive
side; and we will next inquire, what we anti-slavery Christians ought to
refrain from doing.

1. We must not, in our efforts to subvert slavery, indulge in an
unchristian spirit, or in language adapted needlessly to anger and
alienate those whom it should be our aim to win. A cause that is
intrinsically good may be advocated in a bad spirit, or with improper
weapons; and such may have sometimes been the case with ours. Would that
all men had ever borne it in mind, that truth and love are the only
weapons with which to wage a successful conflict with this or any other
deep-seated moral evil.

2. We must not, in our zeal for emancipation, allow mere feeling or
benevolent impulses partially to dethrone reason; and thus disqualify
ourselves for taking impartial views of the subject, or for accurately
discriminating between truth and error. There may have been men in the
anti-slavery ranks, with whom sympathy was every thing, and reason--and
even the Bible--comparatively nothing. In obeying the injunction to
"remember them that are in bonds," they may have neglected to remember
any thing else. Slavery seemed to occupy their entire field of vision.
Hence, not fully informed in regard to the actual condition of things at
the South, they have erroneously supposed that the slave codes
prevailing there were the standard by which to judge of the actual
condition of the slaves, and that all the Southern church was actually
practising the barbarities authorized by those codes. As there was no
just appreciation of the actual conduct of masters towards their
servants, so there was no allowance made for the circumstances which
conspired to render them masters, nor for the obstacles which stand in
the way of their ceasing to be masters. It must be admitted, that
generally, where unrighteous laws are suffered to exist, the mass of the
community will not be better than the laws; but there are
exceptions,--men who intend to give heed to a higher law. So much for
allowing an amiable but blind sympathy to usurp that throne which reason
and revelation were designed conjointly to occupy. It scarcely need be
added, that these ultraisms have done much to prejudice the anti-slavery
cause, and bring it, in the eyes of some, into unmerited contempt. We
must wipe away that reproach, by so conducting our warfare with slavery
as to evince that we are neither men of one idea, nor men whose judgment
is led captive by their sensibilities.

3. We must not, in opposing slavery, indorse the sentiment, that one
cannot in any conceivable circumstances give credible evidence of piety,
and yet continue in form to hold slaves; that being a master is,
in any and in all circumstances, a disciplinable offence in the
church; or that it should, without exception, constitute a barrier to
church-membership, or to the communion of saints at Christ's sacramental
board. While we believe that all the great principles of God's Word go
to subvert slavery, and while we are constrained to regard the holding
of slaves as diminishing the evidence of a man's piety, and thus far
alienating his claims to a good standing in the Christian church, we may
nevertheless make exceptions, and not keep a man out of the church, or
discipline him when in it, merely because he sustains temporarily the
relation of master, not for selfish ends, but, as in rare cases, for
benevolent reasons. But if a man defends the system, and takes away from
a fellow man inalienable human rights, then we may and should refuse him
admission, or subject him to discipline, as the case may be. But,
obvious and important as is this distinction, it is one which some
anti-slavery men may have failed to make; and that failure may have
prejudiced or retarded the cause of emancipation. A good cause suffers
by having a single uncandid statement or untenable argument advanced in
its support; and the friends of the enslaved must afford their opponents
no room for saying, that their reasonings are illogical or
anti-scriptural.

4. We must not, in seeking the extinction of American slavery, so
insist on its immediate abolition as to repudiate the responsibility
which a master owes to this dependent and depressed class of his fellow
beings; but that that end be kept steadily in view, to be accomplished
as speedily as is consistent with the best good of the parties
concerned. The immediate and total extinction of southern slavery, if
not obviously impossible, is of questionable expediency. The upas of
American slavery has struck its roots so deep, and shot its branches so
far, and so interlaced itself with all surrounding objects, that, to
have it instantaneously and unreservedly uprooted, might prove, in many
cases, disastrous; and, at all events, is not to be expected. To say
nothing of other obstacles to the immediate abolition of Southern
slavery, the highest good of many of the slaves makes it inexpedient.
Some, probably many of them, need to pass through an educating
process,--a kind of mental and moral apprenticeship,--in order to their
profiting largely by the boon of emancipation.[J]

II. We are now to inquire, lastly, what duties, positive and negative,
this great question devolves on those Christians among whom American
slavery has its seat, or who are personally identified with it. Hoping,
brethren, that the sentiments thus far advanced are your sentiments, I
shall have your further assent when I say,

1. That the extinction, at the earliest consistent date, of the system
of servitude existing among you, is a result at which you ought steadily
and strenuously to aim. And, as you see, we base this obligation of
yours, not on the assumption of any sinfulness which you may sustain to
slavery, but on the acknowledged injustice and woes, past, present, and
prospective, of the system as a system,--its contrariety, as a system,
to the fundamental principles of Christianity. Did we regard you as
necessarily sinners, if in any sense you hold slaves, then the least we
could ask of you would be, that with contrition of heart you should
instantaneously cease to indulge in this sin, for all sin should be
immediately abandoned. As it is, we only ask, that, just as fast as your
slaves can be prepared for freedom, and as the providence of God may put
it in your power to liberate them, you will do so. We are not so unwise
as to expect that the work of extinction can be accomplished in a day.
We know, too, that you are not, in your church capacity, the constituted
arbiters of the question as a question of State policy. And, so long as
your legislatures and their constituencies are resolved on maintaining
the system, perhaps you will be unable to effect as much as you desire
in the way of promoting its overthrow. And yet, brethren, there is a way
in which we think you can, with entire safety and manifest propriety,
contribute largely and directly to the extinction of American slavery.
Would the entire Southern church cease all personal participation in
slavery, and throw her whole weight and influence into the scale of
slavery's complete subversion, that "consummation devoutly to be wished"
would soon ensue. Slave-holding, no longer practised or justified by the
church, but discountenanced, could not long retain its foothold in the
State. Now if this be so, our slaveholding brethren will confess that
they are imperiously bound, by motives of Christian duty, to liberate
their bondmen with all consistent speed. Meantime, and as one important
means of qualifying them for freedom, you ought,

2. To see to it that not only your own, but all the bondmen among
you,--your entire slave population,--are furnished with the Bible, and
qualified to read and comprehend it; and also with stated preaching.
They need a written and preached gospel, were it only to fit them to
exchange, with advantage, a state of vassalage for the dignity of
freemen; for all experience proves that the Bible and the pulpit are of
all instruments the best to qualify men safely to exercise the right of
self-government. But there is a servitude more dreadful by far than any
domestic bondage that men have ever groaned under; and your slaves need
the Bible, and the Bible preached, to prove God's instruments of
breaking the chains imposed by Satan, and making them Christ's freemen.
Before God and in prospect of eternity, the distinctions between the
master and his slave dwindle into insignificance. Having souls that are
alike impure and alike precious, alike remembered by a dying Saviour and
alike in need of the regenerating change, they stand alike in need of
God's Word, written and preached, as the Spirit's instrument in renewing
and sanctifying the soul. Hence the Bible and preaching are as much the
rightful inheritance of the slave as of the master. We rejoice that
these truths and the obligations resulting therefrom are, to some
extent, recognized by southern Christians; and that, in spite of certain
adverse statutes, so much is being done there for the spiritual
well-being of the slaves. Go on, brethren, in the good work of
evangelizing your slave population; in teaching them the art of reading
and the rudiments of knowledge; in putting the Bible into their hands,
and affording them stated opportunities to read it, and to hear it
expounded by you and by Christ's ministers. Go on, we say, till there be
not one southern slave, who, in point of religious privileges, is not on
a footing of equality with yourselves. Prosecuting this laudable work in
the spirit of love, you will probably encounter no serious opposition.
The adverse but dead statutes referred to will not, we hope, be
galvanized into life, in order to oppose you.

It only remains that we name a few things, which we trust our Southern
brethren will unite with us in saying that they should refrain from
doing. (1.) You ought not to, and we trust you will not, betray
impatience and irritation, whenever we of the North attempt to press the
claims of the enslaved on your attention. Your doing this,--as you
sometimes have,--seems to indicate, that, in your opinion, we Northern
Christians have no responsibility in regard to slavery and its evils;
and that when we discuss this theme we make ourselves "busybodies in
other men's matters." To the justness of this opinion we cannot
subscribe. While we disclaim all right or intention to break our compact
with you as States, we feel that American slavery is a question of too
great moment to ourselves and to unborn generations for us to have no
concern with or responsibility for; and as patriots, as philanthropists,
as Christians, we are constrained to do all that we rightfully may for
the downfall of this hoary system of wrong and woe. If any of you differ
with us in opinion on this theme, we trust you will allow us to discuss
it to our heart's content; and that you will listen to our reasonings
with Christian meekness and candor. Not to do so will be construed as an
evidence of intrinsic weakness in your cause. (2.) You will freely
admit, we presume, that certain practices are authorized by your slave
laws, in which you must not indulge even so long as by any necessity
you hold slaves. Your slave codes, for example, do not recognize the
sanctity of family ties and the domestic affections as existing among
slaves; but, as Christian masters, you must. You doubtless believe, as
do we, that the marriage relation, with all its rights and immunities,
was as much designed for the negro as for the white man; that he, as
truly as the other, is entitled to "cleave unto his wife," unexposed to
the danger of man's putting asunder what God hath so closely joined,
that "they are no more twain, but one flesh." You believe, too, that God
united husband and wife thus indissolubly, not simply that they might be
a help and solace to each other in the toilsome pilgrimage of life, but
that the children with which God should bless them might grow up under
their supervision, and by them be qualified for a career of usefulness
and honor. Thus you believe, and believing thus, you will not, we trust,
counteract God's benevolent designs, by countenancing, in your own
practice, the separation of husbands and wives, or of parents and their
offspring. We feel assured, that, whatever your laws may allow, or
non-professing masters around you may do, you will never ignore the
conjugal or parental rights of your servants, or indulge in any thing
adapted to mar their domestic enjoyment. Were you to do so, we confess
we could not extend to you "the right hand of fellowship" as brethren in
Christ. Were a church-member of ours to practise thus, we should regard
him as amenable to discipline. We should also regard it as disciplinable
for a master to overwork, or brutally chastise, or but half feed and
clothe his servants; or to hold slaves for mere purposes of gain, or to
traffic in them. None of these inhumanities could we reconcile with the
obligations of a Christian profession; and we confidently hope that in
these views you will heartily concur, and that with them your practice
will correspond.

Christian brethren of the North and the South! The question we have been
considering is one of vast moment. Upon the right disposition of it are
suspended, under God, interests of immeasurable value, and which stretch
far out into the unseen future of our country and the world. Coming ages
and unborn generations are to be affected; favorably or otherwise, by
the decision of this vexed question; and, brethren, unless I misjudge,
its right decision is, to a very great extent, lodged in our hands. As
decides the American church, so, methinks, will decide the American
people. And now,--may I confess it?--I have dared to hope that the
sentiments of this Essay are not only sound, but in unison with the
views of the great mass of American Christians. Are we not agreed in
this: that American slavery is a system of deep injustice and wrong, not
sanctioned by the Word or the providence of God; fraught with
incalculable mischief to the interests of both masters, and slaves, and
to the social and religious well-being of our whole country; a blot on
the escutcheon both of the nation and of the church; a weapon for
scepticism to wield, and an obstacle to the introduction of millennial
glory; and hence, a system which ought speedily to terminate, and which
all good men should unitedly oppose and seek to subvert? If we are thus
agreed, let us join hands as well as hearts, and, swerving neither to
the extreme of passive indifference on the one hand nor to that of
erratic fanaticism on the other, in the majesty of principle let us move
calmly onward, a phalanx of Christian philanthropists, attempting naught
but what they are assured God would have them attempt, and employing
only such means as are warranted by an enlightened conscience. Leaning
prayerfully on Him who hears the sighing of the oppressed, let us push
vigorously forward, and, though the year of jubilee has not yet fully
come, be assured it will come,--that proud day, when not only
"throughout all the land," but throughout the civilized world, liberty
shall be proclaimed "unto all the inhabitants thereof." Hasten its
advent, "O Thou that hearest prayer," and that "delightest in mercy!"
Amen and Amen.


FOOTNOTES:

[A] An extended passage containing the extract may be found conveniently
in Chambers' Cyclopædia of English Literature, vol. 2, p. 246.

[B] Genesis, 10th Chapter. Vide, Kitto's Cyclopædia, for views in this
connection.

[C] Col. 4:1; "Ye masters, give unto your servants that which is just
and equal." That is, act towards them on the principles of justice and
equity. Justice requires that all their rights, as men, as husbands, and
as parents, should be regarded. And these rights are not to be
determined by the civil law, but by the law of God.... But God concedes
nothing to the master beyond what the law of love allows. Paul requires
for servants not only what is strictly just, but τὴν ἰσότητα. What is
that? Literally, it is _equality_. This is not only its signification,
but its meaning. Servants are to be treated by their masters on the
principles of equality. Not that they are to be equal with their masters
in authority or station or circumstances; but that they are to be
treated as having, as men, as husbands, and as parents, equal rights
with their masters. It is just as great a sin to deprive a servant of
the just recompense for his labor, or to keep him in ignorance, or to
take from him his wife or child, as it is to act thus towards a free
man. This is the equality which the law of God demands, and on this
principle the final judgment is to be administered. Christ will punish
the master for defrauding the servant as severely as he will punish the
servant for robbing his master. The same penalty will be inflicted for
the violation of the conjugal or parental rights of the one as of the
other. For, as the apostle adds, there is no respect of persons with
him. At his bar the question will be, "What was done?" not "Who did it?"
Paul carries this so far as to apply the principle not only to the acts,
but to the temper of masters. They are not only to act towards their
servants on the principles of justice and equity, but are to _avoid
threatening_. This includes all manifestation of contempt and ill
temper, or undue severity. All this is enforced by the consideration
that masters have a Master in heaven, to whom they are responsible for
their treatment of their servants.... Believers will act in conformity
with the Gospel in this. And the result of such obedience, if it could
become general, would be, that first the evils of slavery, and then
slavery itself, would pass away naturally, and as healthfully as
children cease to be minors.

_Prof. Hodge's Commentary._

[D] See 2 Brevard's Digest, 229; Prince's Digest, 446.

[E] Civil Code, Art. 35.

[F] Job ch. 32, v. 17-20, Barnes's translation.

[G] It is sometimes said that the crime of adultery is neither
perpetrated nor encouraged by the breaking up of slave-families,
because, generally, the connections formed are not truly marriage, not
being solemnized according to forms of law, and hence the marriage
obligation _cannot_ be violated.

It may be replied, if this be so, it presents slavery in a worse light
still, for it encourages and perpetuates a state of universal
concubinage. But it is _not_ so. When a slave takes a companion, and
they consent and engage to live together as husband and wife until
death, and they thus declare their intentions before others, whether any
legal form is gone through or not, they are as truly "no more twain but
one flesh" as were Adam and Eve. It has been thus decided by our courts
in regard to white persons.

[H] Rev. R. I. Breckenridge, D. D.

[I] Mehemet Ali.

[J] The publishers understand the writer to mean, that the working of
them without wages,--the withholding that which is just and
equal,--should be immediately and universally abandoned, and that
emancipation should be granted as speedily as the slaves can be prepared
to use and enjoy their freedom. The right should be acknowledged, and
the needful means for its security immediately used. The writer does not
say, that holding men in bondage is not generally sinful, nor that all
sin should not be immediately repented of and forsaken, but only that
there may be exceptions where for a time, and under very peculiar
circumstances, it may not be sinful, and cannot consistently with the
greatest good be abandoned, without some previous means of preparation.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Prize Essays on American Slavery, by 
R. B. Thurston and A.C. Baldwin and Timothy Williston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLAVERY ***

***** This file should be named 32422-0.txt or 32422-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/2/32422/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

