LETTER VI.

SACREDNESS OF THE MARRIAGE RELATION.--GOD ALONE CAN DISSOLVE
IT.--THE "HIGHER LAW."--SLAVERY SANCTIONS POLYGAMY AND
ADULTERY.--RELATION OF PARENTS TO THEIR CHILDREN.--FEARFUL
RESPONSIBILITY ASSUMED.


MY DEAR CHRISTIAN BROTHER,--My objections to any system of government
that interferes at will with the family relation, and forcibly separates
husbands and wives, parents and children, do not arise chiefly from the
personal wrongs and bitter woes inflicted upon its victims. A
contemplation of these is calculated to affect our sensibilities, and
excite the tender sympathies of our nature; but there is a more enlarged
Christian view which forces itself upon us. If we could by some magic
process allay the anguish of the stricken heart, and heal its wounds
when the strongest ties of nature are rent asunder,--could we even
obliterate the susceptibilities of the soul, destroy natural affection,
and render man more callous than the brutes, so that he could be torn
from his home and kindred with less pain than they,--in a _moral_ point
of view the case would be altered but little. As I have remarked in a
previous letter, the _marriage relation_ was instituted by God, and he
made it indissoluble. "What God hath joined together let not man put
asunder," is the language of "holy writ;" and whoever, for any cause
which God himself has not specified, breaks up this relation, encroaches
upon God's prerogative, and goes directly in face of his positive
commands. Much has been said of late, seriously, sarcastically, and
contemptuously, about a "higher law;" but notwithstanding the improper
use often made of that term, there is an important sense in which you,
and I, and every Christian recognize what that term implies. If, on any
subject whatever, human enactments do obviously conflict with the
enactments of God, then God's law is the "_higher_," and must be obeyed.
To deny this is worse than infidelity.

Now, brother, does not the system of slavery in the United States
tolerate, and even authorize, the forcible rending asunder of the
marriage tie? Are not husbands, not seldom, but often, sold from their
wives, and wives from their husbands, and new matrimonial alliances
formed by them, with consent and encouragement of their masters? Thus
is flagrant adultery sanctioned in nearly one half of the States of this
Christian Republic, and in some cases the crime is almost, if not quite,
forced upon the wretched perpetrators of it. When God's law is
disregarded, and an ordinance on which depends all we hold dear in
social and Christian life is trampled in the dust by an institution
existing in the midst of us, what shall we say? If slavery were a
question merely of expediency, political economy, or even personal wrong
and suffering, it would be easier to keep silence; but when God is
dishonored, and gross sin sanctioned by law, is it not the duty of his
children, North and South, to enter their solemn, earnest, decided
protestations? You will agree with me, that no Christian can or ought to
acquiesce in what, either directly or indirectly, violates a positive
divine precept; and against what shall he remonstrate, if not against a
system that encourages polygamy and legalizes adultery?[G]

There is another view in which the operation of the system of slavery;
in breaking up families, has affected my mind powerfully and painfully.
Parents sustain most important relations to their children, as well as
to each other. Who can be so much interested in the temporal and eternal
well-being of the child as those by whose instrumentality he had his
existence? Who has so much influence over him, or who could direct his
feet in the way he should go, so well? God has imposed upon all parents
most important duties, which they may not neglect. These duties are as
truly incumbent on the slave-parent as on the master who sustains the
same relation. It may be, indeed, extensively true that he does not
understand them, and is in a great measure incompetent to discharge
them; and that often the child suffers nothing morally or intellectually
by being removed from his influence. But this results in a great measure
from the hopeless ignorance in which the parent is involved. There are,
however, as you can bear witness, multitudes of exceptions. In how many
cases are slave-parents truly pious and intelligent, and feel as much
solicitude for the eternal interests of their children, as you do for
yours, and pray with them as frequently and as fervently. With how much
pleasure did you and I listen to your "Jamie," one time when we were
taking an evening stroll past his cabin, and overheard his family
prayer. With what simplicity and earnestness did he pour out his soul to
God for the salvation of his "dear children." And do you not remember,
too, how with equal importunity he prayed God to "bless dear kind Massa
and Missus, and dere precious children, and also Massa's friend, and dat
all may meet to praise Jesus togedder in heaven," and how we found it
difficult to speak for a minute or two, and how the big tear-drops stood
in our eyes, and we couldn't help it?

You told me there were a great many "Jamies" at the South, and I have no
doubt of it; they love their little ones as well, and who so competent
to train them up for Christ? Who will presume to step in between these
parents and their children and say, this family altar shall be broken
down, and those who have bowed around it shall be separated, to meet no
more till they meet at the judgment? Who will peril his own soul by
taking those children away from such an influence, and for a pecuniary
consideration cast them upon the wide world with none to instruct them,
and none to care or pray for them, except their heart-broken parents
whom they have left behind? I would not do it, neither would you, for
the wealth of the world; and yet, is it not often done? In speaking of
this subject, one of the most eminent southern divines[H] uses the
following language: "Slavery, as it exists among us, sets up between
parents and their children an authority higher than the impulse of
nature and the laws of God; breaks up the authority of the father over
his own offspring, and at pleasure separates the mother at a returnless
distance from her child, thus outraging all decency and justice." I
shall refer to the sentiments of this brother again.

I remain as ever,

Affectionately yours, etc.




