LETTER IV.

SLAVERY TRANSFORMS MEN TO CHATTELS.--SOUTHERN
LAWS.--SLAVE-AUCTIONS.--MEN PLACED ON A LEVEL WITH BRUTES.--NO
REDRESS FOR WRONGS.--IGNORANCE PERPETUATED BY LAW.


MY DEAR CHRISTIAN FRIEND,--A second characteristic of American slavery
is, It regards human beings, declared to be in the "image of God," as
"chattels,"--things or articles of merchandise. "Slaves," say the laws
of South Carolina and Georgia, "shall be deemed, sold, taken, reputed,
and adjudged in law to be chattels personal in the hands of their owners
and possessors, and their executors, administrators and assigns, to all
intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever."[D] "A slave," says the
code of Louisiana, "is one who is in the power of his master, to whom he
belongs. The master may sell him, dispose of his person, his industry,
and his labor; he can do nothing, possess nothing, nor acquire any
thing, but what must belong to his master."[E]

Thus, rational, immortal beings, children of our common Father in
heaven, are taken from the exalted scale in which God placed them, and
degraded to that of the brute creation. They are, as you know,
advertised, mortgaged, attached, inherited, leased, bought, and sold
like horses and cattle. Like them they are brought to the auction block,
and like them subjected to a rigid examination as to their age, and
soundness of wind, chest, and limb. Said a gentleman to me: "When I was
at----, I visited the slave mart; and as I saw one and another and
another of my fellow-beings brought forward to the block, and rudely
exposed and minutely examined, in order to ascertain their marketable
value in dollars and cents, and then struck off to the highest bidder,
amid the gibes and jeers of the vulgar, my heart was nigh unto bursting,
and I was obliged to turn away my eyes and weep, exclaiming, O God! can
it be! thy children! my brothers and sisters of humanity,--perhaps my
fellow-heirs of heaven,--precious souls for whom the Saviour died, whose
names may be written in the Book of Life, and over whose repentance
angels may have rejoiced! Can it be?"

For myself, I never witnessed any such scenes, and heaven grant I never
may. It is enough, and too much for me to know, that they exist. I
allude to them in this connection, not to awaken and pain your
sensibilities, but simply to illustrate the fact, that American slavery
sanctions them, and by its operation brings down the noblest work of God
to a level of the beasts that perish. As far as it can do so, it
dehumanizes man, and treats him as a thing without a soul. It may be
remarked, however, in passing, "A man's a man, for a' that."

I might speak in this connection of the obstacles which are thrown in
the way of the slave's obtaining redress for his wrongs should he
unfortunately get into the hands of a cruel and unreasonable master,
being forbidden to defend himself, and not allowed the testimony of his
brethren to be given in his behalf; but there are other features of this
system which more urgently demand our attention.

Neither will I dwell upon the ignorance and mental degradation which are
an essential part of the system. You need not be informed, that, in ten
States, knowledge is kept from the slave by legal enactments,--that
teaching him to read is regarded a crime, to be severely "punished by
the judges." I was happy to find that you and a great many others
totally disregard that law, and, in spite of legislators and penal
statutes, you teach your slaves to read, and in some cases to write. For
this _crime_, I doubt not but heaven, at least, will forgive you. I
shall allude to this latter topic again in a future letter.

Most truly and affectionately, yours, etc.




LETTER V.

DOMESTIC LIFE.--THE MARRIAGE RELATION.--DOMESTIC HAPPINESS A RELIC
OF PARADISE.--ITS ENDEARMENTS.--ITS VALUE.--THE BARBARISM OF
INVADING THE DOMESTIC SANCTUARY.--AN ILLUSTRATION.


MY DEAR BROTHER,--I come now, in the third place, to speak of slavery as
it is related to the endearments and duties of domestic life. On this
subject my heart is full. I am almost afraid to speak, lest I say what I
ought not; and yet I cannot keep silence. I can, in a good measure,
sympathize with Elihu when he said,--

    "For I am full of words,
     The spirit within me doth constrain me,
     Behold I am as wine which hath no vent,
     I am ready to burst like new bottles,
     I will speak that I may breathe more freely,
     I will open my lips and reply."[F]

We now approach a topic more intimately connected with the present and
future happiness of the human race than almost any other. Man was not
completely blest, even in Eden, until God instituted the marriage
relation. His Creator gave him a companion to participate in his joys,
binding them together by ties which no human power might sunder.
Paradise was lost by sin, but as our first parents were exiled thence,
God in infinite kindness permitted them to take one of its purest,
sweetest sources of joy with them to this world of sorrows.

    "Domestic happiness! thou only bliss
     Of Paradise that has survived the fall!"

You, my dear brother, are a husband and father, and can appreciate my
meaning, when I speak of the richness, the tenderness, the depth, of
connubial and paternal love; how it lights up this dark world with
smiles,--how it stimulates us to manly exertion,--how it lightens the
burdens of human life, and enables us cheerfully to sustain its ills,
while it almost restores to us Eden itself. To understand what is meant
by the term domestic happiness, it is necessary for you and me only to
look at the circles around our own firesides, and listen to the musical
accents of the loved ones who dwell there, as they pronounce the words
husband, father, mother, brother, sister, and exchange with them kind
looks and the affectionate embrace. What earthly joys can be compared
with those of home? What would tempt us to part with them? All the gold
in California and Australia would be spurned in contempt, if offered in
exchange. What should we say, and what should we do, were any power on
earth to interfere with our fireside delights, and attempt to wrest them
from us?

Suppose Providence had cast our lot under a despotic government, which
we will suppose to be for the most part kind and paternal, but having
this peculiarity,--every now and then, finding its finances embarrassed,
it should be in the habit of selling some of its subjects to a foreign
power to strengthen its exchequer, and should arbitrarily select its
victims from this family and that;--how should you feel were the doomed
family your own? What would have been your emotions this morning, had
some one come to your room and told you that that bright-eyed boy,
"Willie," who last night sat upon your knee and amused you with his
innocent prattle, showed you his toys, examined your pockets, played
with your hair and features, and finally clasped his little arms around
your neck and impressed the "good-night" kiss upon your lips, had been
seized by an officer, and sold from your sight forever to you know not
whom, and to be carried you know not whither? Nay, more;--suppose that
while he was yet speaking, there came also another with the tidings that
the same fate had befallen your first-born,--your daughter, just budding
into womanhood,--the affectionate, joyous, light-hearted "Kate," whose
voice to your ear is sweeter than the music of flowing waters, whose
feet are swifter than those of the light gazelle, as with open arms she
bounds to meet you on your return from a temporary absence, to welcome
you home with a tear of joy in her eye and a kiss upon her lips,--that
she too had been by the officials of the government clandestinely
abducted from your dwelling, and sold, literally sold, for a valuation
put upon her person in dollars and cents, to a hopeless captivity, to
spend her days in unrequited toil, or, not unlikely, in ministering to
the caprices and brutal passions of a stranger?

And while he was yet speaking, and as your _wife_, half frantic with
grief and terror, was entwining her arms around you, and you were
striving to ease your bursting heart, to crown the whole, suppose
another official and his posse had entered your apartment, and by force
of arms had torn her from your embrace, and with thongs upon her hands,
and a bandage over her mouth, hurried her away to greet your sight no
more? What a scene! There go in one direction the children of your body,
"bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh," to an unknown but fearful
destiny! In another is ruthlessly borne the object dearer to you than
all the world beside,--one whom you had solemnly sworn to love, cherish,
and protect until death,--the light of your dwelling,--the mother of
your children,--the mutual sharer of all your joys and sorrows,--the
richest and most precious treasure heaven ever gave you!--there she goes
in an agony of wo, to toil under a burning sun, compelled to call
another man her husband, or, it may be, to grace her master's seraglio!
Merciful God! what meaneth this? What horde of barbarians from the dark
corners of the earth have found their way hither to lay waste all that
is beautiful and lovely! What fiend from the pit has been let loose to
enter this little Paradise to destroy and bear away all the good that
was left of the primitive Eden!

No ruthless band of barbarians from benighted lands have found their way
to this Christian domestic sanctuary,--no malignant spirit from below
has been here to snatch the only type of Heaven that escaped his grasp
six thousand years ago. "Think it not strange," brother, "concerning
this fiery trial as though some strange thing had happened to you." This
is only the legitimate working of the patriarchal system of government
under which we live. Be calm,--this is all done according to law, and
with as much kindness as the circumstances will permit. No stripes are
inflicted, and no more force is exerted than is absolutely necessary to
secure the object, and prevent a useless outcry; no ill-will is
entertained toward the victims of these outrages,--it is only because
the finances of the government are low, and must be replenished, and
this is the most convenient, and perhaps at present the only practical,
way of raising the money!

Now, my brother, what should you and I think of living under a
government where such things were permitted by the laws? It would not
reconcile us to the administration to be told, that such proceedings as
I have supposed are of rare occurrence, and that the general character
of the government is kind, that it dislikes exceedingly to sell its
subjects, and especially that it has a great repugnance to separating
husbands and wives, and breaking up of families, and does it only when
severely pressed by pecuniary necessity. To your and my mind this would
be altogether unsatisfactory; it would not change our opinion of the
system. No matter if the heart-rending scene I have supposed were
witnessed only once a year, or once in ten years,--I think we should
loudly protest against a system which allowed the occurrence of it at
all.

You will please, my dear sir, apply the foregoing illustration to the
liabilities and actual workings of the slave system at the South, just
so far as it is applicable, and no further. If there are any points in
which the analogy fails, I will thank you to point them out to me in
your next.

With much love and esteem,

I remain yours, most truly.




