
                           THE PHILOSOPHY OF
                           SPIRITUAL ACTIVITY
                      A Modern Philosophy of Life
                    Developed by Scientific Methods


                           By RUDOLF STEINER
                             Ph.D. (Vienna)

                Being an Enlarged and Revised Edition of
                      "The Philosophy of Freedom,"
                  together with the Original Thesis on
                          "Truth and Science"

                       AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION BY
                 Professor & Mrs. R. F. ALFRED HOERNLÉ


                          G. P. Putnam's Sons
                           London & New York








EDITOR'S NOTE


The following pages are a translation of Dr. Steiner's Philosophie der
Freiheit, which was published in Germany some twenty years ago. The
edition was soon exhausted, and has never been reprinted; copies are
much sought after but very difficult to obtain.

The popularity of Dr. Steiner's later works upon ethics, mysticism,
and kindred subjects has caused people to forget his earlier work upon
philosophy in spite of the fact that he makes frequent references
to this book and it contains the germs of which many of his present
views are the logical outcome. For the above reasons, and with the
author's sanction, I have decided to publish a translation.

I have had the good fortune to have been able to secure as joint
translators Mrs. Hoernlé, who, after graduating in the University of
the Cape of Good Hope, continued her studies in the Universities of
Cambridge, Leipzig, Paris, and Bonn, and her husband, Mr. R. F. Alfred
Hoernlé, Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Harvard University,
U.S.A., formerly Jenkyns Exhibitioner, Balliol College, Oxford,
their thorough knowledge of philosophy and their complete command
of the German and English languages enabling them to overcome the
difficulty of finding adequate English equivalents for the terms of
German Philosophy.

I am glad to seize this opportunity of acknowledging my indebtedness
to these two, without whom this publication could not have been
undertaken.


HARRY COLLISON.

March 1916.








EDITOR'S NOTE TO SECOND EDITION


In 1918 Dr. Steiner published a revised edition of the Philosophie
der Freiheit. For the translation of the new passages added to, and
of the incidental changes made in, this revised edition I am indebted
to Mr. Hoernlé, now Professor of Philosophy in the Armstrong College
(Newcastle-upon-Tyne), University of Durham.

At the author's request I have changed the title to Philosophy of
Spiritual Activity, and throughout the entire work "freedom" should
be taken to mean "spiritual activity."

Dr. Steiner's Ph. D. Thesis on "Truth and Science," originally
published as a prelude to The Philosophy of Freedom, has, with his
consent, been translated for this edition and been added at the end
of this volume.


H. C.

March 1921.








CONTENTS


    CHAP.                                                       PAGE

PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION (1918)                             XI

THE THEORY OF FREEDOM

    I     CONSCIOUS HUMAN ACTION                                   1
    II    WHY THE DESIRE FOR KNOWLEDGE IS FUNDAMENTAL             14
    III   THOUGHT AS THE INSTRUMENT OF KNOWLEDGE                  24
    IV    THE WORLD AS PERCEPT                                    48
    V     OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD                              73
    VI    HUMAN INDIVIDUALITY                                    101
    VII   ARE THERE LIMITS TO KNOWLEDGE?                         109

THE REALITY OF FREEDOM

    VIII  THE FACTORS OF LIFE                                    137
    IX    THE IDEA OF FREEDOM                                    146
    X     MONISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRITUAL ACTIVITY        178
    XI    WORLD-PURPOSE AND LIFE-PURPOSE (THE DESTINY OF MAN)    190
    XII   MORAL IMAGINATION (DARWIN AND MORALITY)                198
    XIII  THE VALUE OF LIFE (OPTIMISM AND PESSIMISM)             213
    XIV   THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE GENUS                           250

ULTIMATE QUESTIONS

    XV    THE CONSEQUENCES OF MONISM                             259

TRUTH AND SCIENCE

    I     PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS                               277
    II    THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM OF KANT'S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE  280
    III   THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE SINCE KANT                         291
    IV    THE STARTING-POINTS OF THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE         304
    V     KNOWLEDGE AND REALITY                                  319
    VI    THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE WITHOUT PRESUPPOSITIONS VERSUS
          FICHTE'S THEORY OF SCIENCE                             329
    VII   CONCLUDING REMARKS: EPISTEMOLOGICAL                    347
    VIII  CONCLUDING REMARKS: PRACTICAL                          351

APPENDICES

    I     ADDITION TO REVISED EDITION OF "THE PHILOSOPHY OF
          FREEDOM" 1918                                          357
    II    REVISED INTRODUCTION TO "THE PHILOSOPHY OF FREEDOM"    368
    III   PREFACE TO ORIGINAL EDITION OF "TRUTH AND SCIENCE"     374
    IV    INTRODUCTION TO ORIGINAL EDITION OF "TRUTH AND
          SCIENCE"                                               381








PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION (1918)


There are two fundamental problems in the life of the human mind,
to one or other of which everything belongs that is to be discussed
in this book. One of these problems concerns the possibility of
attaining to such a view of the essential nature of man as will
serve as a support for whatever else comes into his life by way
of experience or of science, and yet is subject to the suspicion of
having no support in itself and of being liable to be driven, by doubt
and criticism, into the limbo of uncertainties. The other problem is
this: Is man, as voluntary agent, entitled to attribute freedom to
himself, or is freedom a mere illusion begotten of his inability to
recognise the threads of necessity on which his volition, like any
natural event, depends? It is no artificial tissue of theories which
provokes this question. In a certain mood it presents itself quite
naturally to the human mind. And it is easy to feel that a mind lacks
something of its full stature which has never once confronted with
the utmost seriousness of inquiry the two possibilities--freedom
or necessity. This book is intended to show that the spiritual
experiences which the second problem causes man to undergo, depend
upon the position he is able to take up towards the first problem. An
attempt will be made to prove that there is a view concerning the
essential nature of man which can support the rest of knowledge; and,
further, an attempt to point out how with this view we gain a complete
justification for the idea of free will, provided only that we have
first discovered that region of the mind in which free volition can
unfold itself.

The view to which we here refer is one which, once gained, is
capable of becoming part and parcel of the very life of the mind
itself. The answer given to the two problems will not be of the
purely theoretical sort which, once mastered, may be carried about
as a mere piece of memory-knowledge. Such an answer would, for the
whole manner of thinking adopted in this book, be no real answer at
all. The book will not give a finished and complete answer of this
sort, but point to a field of spiritual experience in which man's
own inward spiritual activity supplies a living answer to these
questions, as often as he needs one. Whoever has once discovered the
region of the mind where these questions arise, will find precisely
in his actual acquaintance with this region all that he needs for the
solution of his two problems. With the knowledge thus acquired he may
then, as desire or fate dictate, adventure further into the breadths
and depths of this unfathomable life of ours. Thus it would appear
that there is a kind of knowledge which proves its justification and
validity by its own inner life as well as by the kinship of its own
life with the whole life of the human mind.

This is how I conceived the contents of this book when I first wrote
it twenty-five years ago. To-day, once again, I have to set down
similar sentences if I am to characterise the leading thoughts of
my book. At the original writing I contented myself with saying no
more than was in the strictest sense connected with the fundamental
problems which I have outlined. If anyone should be astonished at
not finding in this book as yet any reference to that region of the
world of spiritual experience of which I have given an account in my
later writings, I would ask him to bear in mind that it was not my
purpose at that time to set down the results of spiritual research,
but first to lay the foundations on which such results can rest. The
Philosophy of Spiritual Activity contains no special results of
this spiritual sort, as little as it contains special results of
the natural sciences. But what it does contain is, in my judgment,
indispensable for anyone who desires a secure foundation for such
knowledge. What I have said in this book may be acceptable even to
some who, for reasons of their own, refuse to have anything to do with
the results of my researches into the Spiritual Realm. But anyone who
finds something to attract him in my inquiries into the Spiritual
Realm may well appreciate the importance of what I was here trying
to do. It is this: to show that open-minded consideration simply of
the two problems which I have indicated and which are fundamental
for all knowledge, leads to the view that man lives in the midst of
a genuine Spiritual World. The aim of this book is to demonstrate,
prior to our entry upon spiritual experience, that knowledge of the
Spiritual World is a fact. This demonstration is so conducted that it
is never necessary, in order to accept the present arguments, to cast
furtive glances at the experiences on which I have dwelt in my later
writings. All that is necessary is that the reader should be willing
and able to adapt himself to the manner of the present discussions.

Thus it seems to me that in one sense this book occupies a
position completely independent of my writings on strictly spiritual
matters. Yet in another sense it seems to be most intimately connected
with them. These considerations have moved me now, after a lapse of
twenty-five years, to re-publish the contents of this book in the
main without essential alterations. I have only made additions of some
length to a number of chapters. The misunderstandings of my argument
with which I have met seemed to make these more detailed elaborations
necessary. Actual changes of text have been made by me only where
it seemed to me now that I had said clumsily what I meant to say a
quarter of a century ago. (Only malice could find in these changes
occasion to suggest that I have changed my fundamental conviction.)

For many years my book has been out of print. In spite of the fact,
which is apparent from what I have just said, that my utterances
of twenty-five years ago about these problems still seem to me just
as relevant today, I hesitated a long time about the completion of
this revised edition. Again and again I have asked myself whether I
ought not, at this point or that, to define my position towards the
numerous philosophical theories which have been put forward since the
publication of the first edition. Yet my preoccupation in recent years
with researches into the purely Spiritual Realm prevented my doing as I
could have wished. However, a survey, as thorough as I could make it,
of the philosophical literature of the present day has convinced me
that such a critical discussion, alluring though it would be in itself,
would be out of place in the context of what my book has to say. All
that, from the point of view of the Philosophy of Spiritual Activity,
it seemed to me necessary to say about recent philosophical tendencies
may be found in the second volume of my Riddles of Philosophy.


RUDOLF STEINER.

April 1918.








THE THEORY OF FREEDOM


I

CONSCIOUS HUMAN ACTION


Is man free in action and thought, or is he bound by an iron
necessity? There are few questions on which so much ingenuity has
been expended. The idea of freedom has found enthusiastic supporters
and stubborn opponents in plenty. There are those who, in their
moral fervour, label anyone a man of limited intelligence who can
deny so patent a fact as freedom. Opposed to them are others who
regard it as the acme of unscientific thinking for anyone to believe
that the uniformity of natural law is broken in the sphere of human
action and thought. One and the same thing is thus proclaimed, now
as the most precious possession of humanity, now as its most fatal
illusion. Infinite subtlety has been employed to explain how human
freedom can be consistent with determinism in nature of which man,
after all, is a part. Others have been at no less pains to explain
how such a delusion as this could have arisen. That we are dealing
here with one of the most important questions for life, religion,
conduct, science, must be clear to every one whose most prominent
trait of character is not the reverse of thoroughness. It is one
of the sad signs of the superficiality of present-day thought, that
a book which attempts to develop a new faith out of the results of
recent scientific research (David Friedrich Strauss, Der alte und
neue Glaube), has nothing more to say on this question than these
words: "With the question of the freedom of the human will we are
not concerned. The alleged freedom of indifferent choice has been
recognised as an empty illusion by every philosophy worthy of the
name. The determination of the moral value of human conduct and
character remains untouched by this problem." It is not because I
consider that the book in which it occurs has any special importance
that I quote this passage, but because it seems to me to express the
only view to which the thought of the majority of our contemporaries
is able to rise in this matter. Every one who has grown beyond the
kindergarten-stage of science appears to know nowadays that freedom
cannot consist in choosing, at one's pleasure, one or other of
two possible courses of action. There is always, so we are told,
a perfectly definite reason why, out of several possible actions,
we carry out just one and no other.

This seems quite obvious. Nevertheless, down to the present day, the
main attacks of the opponents of freedom are directed only against
freedom of choice. Even Herbert Spencer, in fact, whose doctrines are
gaining ground daily, says, "That every one is at liberty to desire or
not to desire, which is the real proposition involved in the dogma of
free will, is negatived as much by the analysis of consciousness, as by
the contents of the preceding chapters" (The Principles of Psychology,
Part IV, chap. ix, par. 219). Others, too, start from the same point
of view in combating the concept of free will. The germs of all the
relevant arguments are to be found as early as Spinoza. All that
he brought forward in clear and simple language against the idea of
freedom has since been repeated times without number, but as a rule
enveloped in the most sophisticated arguments, so that it is difficult
to recognise the straightforward train of thought which is alone in
question. Spinoza writes in a letter of October or November, 1674,
"I call a thing free which exists and acts from the pure necessity of
its nature, and I call that unfree, of which the being and action are
precisely and fixedly determined by something else. Thus, e.g., God,
though necessary, is free because he exists only through the necessity
of his own nature. Similarly, God knows himself and all else as free,
because it follows solely from the necessity of his nature that he
knows all. You see, therefore, that for me freedom consists not in
free decision, but in free necessity.

"But let us come down to created things which are all determined
by external causes to exist and to act in a fixed and definite
manner. To perceive this more clearly, let us imagine a perfectly
simple case. A stone, for example, receives from an external cause
acting upon it a certain quantity of motion, by reason of which it
necessarily continues to move, after the impact of the external cause
has ceased. The continued motion of the stone is due to compulsion, not
to the necessity of its own nature, because it requires to be defined
by the impact of an external cause. What is true here for the stone
is true also for every other particular thing, however complicated and
many-sided it may be, namely, that everything is necessarily determined
by external causes to exist and to act in a fixed and definite manner.

"Now, pray, assume that this stone during its motion thinks and
knows that it is striving to the best of its power to continue in
motion. This stone which is conscious only of its striving and is
by no means indifferent, will believe that it is absolutely free,
and that it continues in motion for no other reason than its own
will to continue. Now this is that human freedom which everybody
claims to possess and which consists in nothing but this, that men
are conscious of their desires, but ignorant of the causes by which
they are determined. Thus the child believes that he desires milk of
his own free will, the angry boy regards his desire for vengeance as
free, and the coward his desire for flight. Again, the drunken man
believes that he says of his own free will what, sober again, he would
fain have left unsaid, and as this prejudice is innate in all men,
it is difficult to free oneself from it. For, although experience
teaches us often enough that man least of all can temper his desires,
and that, moved by conflicting passions, he perceives the better and
pursues the worse, yet he considers himself free because there are
some things which he desires less strongly, and some desires which he
can easily inhibit through the recollection of something else which
it is often possible to recall."

It is easy to detect the fundamental error of this view, because it
is so clearly and definitely expressed. The same necessity by which
a stone makes a definite movement as the result of an impact, is
said to compel a man to carry out an action when impelled thereto by
any cause. It is only because man is conscious of his action, that he
thinks himself to be its originator. In doing so, he overlooks the fact
that he is driven by a cause which he must obey unconditionally. The
error in this train of thought is easily brought to light. Spinoza,
and all who think like him, overlook the fact that man not only is
conscious of his action, but also may become conscious of the cause
which guides him. Anyone can see that a child is not free when he
desires milk, nor the drunken man when he says things which he later
regrets. Neither knows anything of the causes, working deep within
their organisms, which exercise irresistible control over them. But
is it justifiable to lump together actions of this kind with those
in which a man is conscious not only of his actions but also of their
causes? Are the actions of men really all of one kind? Should the act
of a soldier on the field of battle, of the scientific researcher in
his laboratory, of the statesman in the most complicated diplomatic
negotiations, be placed on the same level with that of the child
when he desires milk? It is, no doubt, true that it is best to seek
the solution of a problem where the conditions are simplest. But
lack of ability to see distinctions has before now caused endless
confusion. There is, after all, a profound difference between
knowing the motive of my action and not knowing it. At first sight
this seems a self-evident truth. And yet the opponents of freedom
never ask themselves whether a motive of action which I recognise
and understand, is to be regarded as compulsory for me in the same
sense as the organic process which causes the child to cry for milk.

Eduard von Hartmann, in his Phänomenologie des Sittlichen Bewusstseins
(p. 451), asserts that the human will depends on two chief factors,
the motives and the character. If one regards men as all alike, or at
any rate the differences between them as negligible, then their will
appears as determined from without, viz., by the circumstances with
which they come in contact. But if one bears in mind that men adopt an
idea as the motive of their conduct, only if their character is such
that this idea arouses a desire in them, then men appear as determined
from within and not from without. Now, because an idea, given to us
from without, must first in accordance with our characters be adopted
as a motive, men believe that they are free, i.e., independent of
external influences. The truth, however, according to Eduard von
Hartmann, is that "even though we must first adopt an idea as a
motive, we do so not arbitrarily, but according to the disposition
of our characters, that is, we are anything but free." Here again
the difference between motives, which I allow to influence me only
after I have consciously made them my own, and those which I follow
without any clear knowledge of them, is absolutely ignored.

This leads us straight to the standpoint from which the subject will
be treated here. Have we any right to consider the question of the
freedom of the will by itself at all? And if not, with what other
question must it necessarily be connected?

If there is a difference between conscious and unconscious motives of
action, then the action in which the former issue should be judged
differently from the action which springs from blind impulse. Hence
our first question will concern this difference, and on the result
of this inquiry will depend what attitude we ought to take up towards
the question of freedom proper.

What does it mean to have knowledge of the motives of one's
actions? Too little attention has been paid to this question, because,
unfortunately, man who is an indivisible whole has always been torn
asunder by us. The agent has been divorced from the knower, whilst he
who matters more than everything else, viz., the man who acts because
he knows, has been utterly overlooked.

It is said that man is free when he is controlled only by his reason,
and not by his animal passions. Or, again, that to be free means to
be able to determine one's life and action by purposes and deliberate
decisions.

Nothing is gained by assertions of this sort. For the question is just
whether reason, purposes, and decisions exercise the same kind of
compulsion over a man as his animal passions. If, without my doing,
a rational decision occurs in me with the same necessity with which
hunger and thirst happen to me, then I must needs obey it, and my
freedom is an illusion.

Another form of expression runs: to be free means, not that we can will
what we will, but that we can do what we will. This thought has been
expressed with great clearness by the poet-philosopher Robert Hamerling
in his Atomistik des Willens. "Man can, it is true, do what he wills,
but he cannot will what he wills, because his will is determined by
motives! He cannot will what he wills? Let us consider these phrases
more closely. Have they any intelligible meaning? Does freedom of will,
then, mean being able to will without ground, without motive? What
does willing mean if not to have grounds for doing, or striving to do,
this rather than that? To will anything without ground or motive would
mean to will something without willing it. The concept of motive is
indissolubly bound up with that of will. Without the determining
motive the will is an empty faculty; it is the motive which makes
it active and real. It is, therefore, quite true that the human will
is not 'free,' inasmuch as its direction is always determined by the
strongest motive. But, on the other hand, it must be admitted that it
is absurd to speak, in contrast with this 'unfreedom,' of a conceivable
'freedom' of the will, which would consist in being able to will what
one does not will" (Atomistik des Willens, p. 213 ff.).

Here, again, only motives in general are mentioned, without taking into
account the difference between unconscious and conscious motives. If
a motive affects me, and I am compelled to act on it because it proves
to be the "strongest" of its kind, then the idea of freedom ceases to
have any meaning. How should it matter to me whether I can do a thing
or not, if I am forced by the motive to do it? The primary question
is, not whether I can do a thing or not when impelled by a motive,
but whether the only motives are such as impel me with absolute
necessity. If I must will something, then I may well be absolutely
indifferent as to whether I can also do it. And if, through my
character, or through circumstances prevailing in my environment,
a motive is forced on me which to my thinking is unreasonable, then
I should even have to be glad if I could not do what I will.

The question is, not whether I can carry out a decision once made,
but how I come to make the decision.

What distinguishes man from all other organic beings is his rational
thought. Activity is common to him with other organisms. Nothing is
gained by seeking analogies in the animal world to clear up the concept
of freedom as applied to the actions of human beings. Modern science
loves these analogies. When scientists have succeeded in finding among
animals something similar to human behaviour, they believe they have
touched on the most important question of the science of man. To what
misunderstandings this view leads is seen, for example, in the book
Die Illusion der Willensfreiheit, by P. Ree, 1885, where, on Page 5,
the following remark on freedom appears: "It is easy to explain why
the movement of a stone seems to us necessary, while the volition
of a donkey does not. The causes which set the stone in motion are
external and visible, while the causes which determine the donkey's
volition are internal and invisible. Between us and the place of their
activity there is the skull cap of the ass.... The causal nexus is
not visible and is therefore thought to be non-existent. The volition,
it is explained, is, indeed, the cause of the donkey's turning round,
but is itself unconditioned; it is an absolute beginning." Here again
human actions in which there is a consciousness of the motives are
simply ignored, for Ree declares, "that between us and the sphere of
their activity there is the skull cap of the ass." As these words
show, it has not so much as dawned on Ree that there are actions,
not indeed of the ass, but of human beings, in which the motive,
become conscious, lies between us and the action. Ree demonstrates
his blindness once again a few pages further on, when he says,
"We do not perceive the causes by which our will is determined,
hence we think it is not causally determined at all."

But enough of examples which prove that many argue against freedom
without knowing in the least what freedom is.

That an action of which the agent does not know why he performs
it, cannot be free goes without saying. But what of the freedom
of an action about the motives of which we reflect? This leads us
to the question of the origin and meaning of thought. For without
the recognition of the activity of mind which is called thought,
it is impossible to understand what is meant either by knowledge of
something or by action. When we know what thought in general means,
it will be easier to see clearly the role which thought plays in human
action. As Hegel rightly says, "It is thought which turns the soul,
common to us and animals, into spirit." Hence it is thought which we
may expect to give to human action its characteristic stamp.

I do not mean to imply that all our actions spring only from the sober
deliberations of our reason. I am very far from calling only those
actions "human" in the highest sense, which proceed from abstract
judgments. But as soon as our conduct rises above the sphere of the
satisfaction of purely animal desires, our motives are always shaped by
thoughts. Love, pity, and patriotism are motives of action which cannot
be analysed away into cold concepts of the understanding. It is said
that here the heart, the soul, hold sway. This is no doubt true. But
the heart and the soul create no motives. They presuppose them. Pity
enters my heart when the thought of a person who arouses pity had
appeared in my consciousness. The way to the heart is through the
head. Love is no exception. Whenever it is not merely the expression
of bare sexual instinct, it depends on the thoughts we form of the
loved one. And the more we idealise the loved one in our thoughts,
the more blessed is our love. Here, too, thought is the father of
feeling. It is said that love makes us blind to the failings of the
loved one. But the opposite view can be taken, namely that it is
precisely for the good points that love opens the eyes. Many pass
by these good points without notice. One, however, perceives them,
and just because he does, love awakens in his soul. What else has he
done except perceive what hundreds have failed to see? Love is not
theirs, because they lack the perception.

From whatever point we regard the subject, it becomes more and more
clear that the question of the nature of human action presupposes
that of the origin of thought. I shall, therefore, turn next to
this question.








