VII

CONCLUDING REMARKS: EPISTEMOLOGICAL


We have laid the foundations of the Theory of Knowledge as the
science of the significance of all human knowledge. It alone clears
up for us the relation of the contents of the separate sciences to
the world. It enables us, with the help of the sciences, to attain
to a philosophical world-view. Positive knowledge is acquired by us
through particular cognitions; what the value of our knowledge is,
considered as knowledge of reality, we learn through the Theory
of Knowledge. By holding fast strictly to this principle, and by
employing no particular cognitions in our argumentation, we have
transcended all one-sided world-views. One-sidedness, as a rule,
results from the fact that the inquiry, instead of concentrating on
the process of cognition itself, busies itself about some object of
that process. If our arguments are sound, Dogmatism must abandon its
"thing-in-itself" as fundamental principle, and Subjective Idealism its
"Ego," for both these owe their determinate natures in their relation
to each other first to thinking. Scepticism must give up its doubts
whether the world can be known, for there is no room for doubt with
reference to the "Given," because it is as yet untouched by any of
the predicates which cognition confers on it. On the other hand, if
Scepticism were to assert that thinking can never apprehend things as
they are, its assertion, being itself possible only through thinking,
would be self-contradictory. For, to justify doubt by thinking is to
admit by implication that thinking can produce grounds sufficient to
establish certainty. Lastly, our theory of knowledge transcends both
one-sided Empiricism and one-sided Rationalism in uniting both at a
higher level. Thus it does justice to both. It justifies Empiricism
by showing that all positive knowledge about the Given is obtainable
only through direct contact with the Given. And Rationalism, too,
receives its due in our argument, seeing that we hold thinking to be
the necessary and exclusive instrument of knowledge.

The world-view which has the closest affinity to ours, as we
have here built it up on epistemological foundations, is that of
A. E. Biedermann. [61] But Biedermann requires for the justification
of his point of view dogmatic theses which are quite out of place
in Theory of Knowledge. Thus, e.g., he works with the concepts of
Being, Substance, Space, Time, etc., without having first analysed the
cognitive process by itself. Instead of establishing the fact that the
cognitive process consists, to begin with, only of the two elements,
the Given and Thought, he talks of the Kinds of Being of the real. For
example, in Section 15, he says: "Every content of consciousness
includes within itself two fundamental facts--it presents to us, as
given, two kinds of Being which we contrast with each other as sensuous
and spiritual, thing-like and idea-like, Being." And in Section 19:
"Whatever has a spatio-temporal existence, exists materially; that
which is the ground of all existence and the subject of life has an
idea-like existence, is real as having an ideal Being." This sort of
argument belongs, not to the Theory of Knowledge, but to Metaphysics,
which latter presupposes Theory of Knowledge as its foundation. We
must admit that Biedermann's doctrine has many points of similarity
with ours; but our method has not a single point of contact with
his. Hence, we have had no occasion to compare our position directly
with his. Biedermann's aim is to gain an epistemological standpoint
with the help of a few metaphysical axioms. Our aim is to reach,
through an analysis of the process of cognition, a theory of reality.

And we believe that we have succeeded in showing, that all the disputes
between philosophical systems result from the fact that their authors
have sought to attain knowledge about some object or other (Thing,
Self, Consciousness, etc.), without having first given close study
to that which alone can throw light on whatever else we know, viz.,
the nature of knowledge itself.








VIII

CONCLUDING REMARKS: PRACTICAL


The aim of the preceding discussions has been to throw light on the
relation of our personality, as knower, to the objective world. What
does it signify for us to possess knowledge and science? This was
the question to which we sought the answer.

We have seen that it is just in our knowing that the innermost kernel
of the world manifestly reveals itself. The harmony, subject to law,
which reigns throughout the whole world, reveals itself precisely in
human cognition.

It is, therefore, part of the destiny of man to elevate the fundamental
laws of the world, which do indeed regulate the whole of existence
but which would never become existent in themselves, into the realm
of realities which appear. This precisely is the essential nature
of knowledge that in it the world-ground is made manifest which in
the object-world can never be discovered. Knowing is--metaphorically
speaking--a continual merging of one's life into the world-ground.

Such a view is bound to throw light also on our practical attitude
towards life.

Our conduct is, in its whole character, determined by our moral
ideals. These are the ideas we have of our tasks in life, or, in other
words, of the ends which we set ourselves to achieve by our action.

Our conduct is a part of the total world-process. Consequently, it,
too, is subject to the universal laws which regulate this process.

Now, every event in the universe has two sides which must be
distinguished: its external sequence in time and space, and its
internal conformity to law.

The apprehension of this conformity of human conduct to law is but
a special case of knowledge. Hence, the conclusions at which we have
arrived concerning the nature of knowledge must apply to this sort of
knowledge, too. To apprehend oneself as a person who acts is to possess
the relevant laws of conduct, i.e., the moral concepts and ideals, in
the form of knowledge. It is this knowledge of the conformity of our
conduct to law which makes our conduct truly ours. For, in that case,
the conformity is given, not as external to the object in which the
action appears, but as the very substance of the object engaged in
living activity. The "object," here, is our own Ego. If the Ego has
with its knowledge really penetrated the essential nature of conduct,
then it feels that it is thereby master of its conduct. Short of this,
the laws of conduct confront us as something external. They master
us. What we achieve, we achieve under the compulsion which they wield
over us. But this compulsion ceases, as soon as their alien character
has been transformed into the Ego's very own activity. Thereafter, the
law no longer rules over us, but rules in us over the actions which
issue from our Ego. To perform an act in obedience to a law which is
external to the agent is to be unfree. To perform it in obedience to
the agent's own law is to be free. To gain knowledge of the laws of
one's own conduct is to become conscious of one's freedom. The process
of cognition is, thus, according to our arguments, the process of
the development of freedom.

Not all human conduct has this character. There are many cases in
which we do not know the laws of our conduct. This part of our conduct
is the unfree part of our activity. Over against it stands the part
the laws of which we make completely our own. This is the realm of
freedom. It is only in so far as our life falls into this realm that
it can be called moral. To transform the actions which are unfree
into actions which are free--this is the task of self-development for
every individual, this is likewise the task of the whole human race.

Thus, the most important problem for all human thinking is to conceive
man as a personality grounded upon itself and free.








APPENDICES


APPENDIX I

ADDITION TO THE REVISED EDITION OF "THE PHILOSOPHY OF FREEDOM," 1918.


Various criticisms on the part of philosophers with which this book
met immediately upon its publication, induce me to add to this Revised
Edition the following brief statement.

I can well understand that there are readers who are interested
in the rest of the book, but who will look upon what follows as a
tissue of abstract concepts which to them is irrelevant and makes
no appeal. They may, if they choose, leave this brief statement
unread. But in philosophy problems present themselves which have their
origin rather in certain prejudices on the thinker's part than in
the natural progression of normal human thinking. With the main body
of this book it seems to me to be the duty of every one to concern
himself, who is striving for clearness about the essential nature of
man and his relation to the world. What follows is rather a problem
the discussion of which certain philosophers demand as necessary to a
treatment of the topics of this book, because these philosophers, by
their whole way of thinking, have created certain difficulties which
do not otherwise occur. If I were to pass by these problems entirely,
certain people would be quick to accuse me of dilettantism, etc. The
impression would thus be created that the author of the views set
down in this book has not thought out his position with regard to
these problems because he has not discussed them in his book.

The problem to which I refer is this: there are thinkers who find a
particular difficulty in understanding how another mind can act on
one's own. They say: the world of my consciousness is a closed circle
within me; so is the world of another's consciousness within him. I
cannot look into the world of another's mind. How, then, do I know
that he and I are in a common world? The theory according to which
we can from the conscious world infer an unconscious world which
never can enter consciousness, attempts to solve this difficulty as
follows. The world, it says, which I have in my consciousness is the
representation in me of a real world to which my consciousness has no
access. In this transcendent world exist the unknown agents which cause
the world in my consciousness. In it, too, exists my own real self,
of which likewise I have only a representation in my consciousness. In
it, lastly, exists the essential self of the fellow-man who confronts
me. Whatever passes in the consciousness of my fellow-man corresponds
to a reality in his transcendent essence which is independent of
his consciousness. His essential nature acts in that realm which,
on this theory, is equally beyond consciousness. Thus an impression
is made in my consciousness which represents there what is present
in another's consciousness and wholly beyond the reach of my direct
awareness. Clearly the point of this theory is to add to the world
accessible to my consciousness an hypothetical world which is to my
immediate experience inaccessible. This is done to avoid the supposed
alternative of having to say that the external world, which I regard
as existing before me, is nothing but the world of my consciousness,
with the absurd--solipsistic--corollary that other persons likewise
exist only within my consciousness.

Several epistemological tendencies in recent speculation have joined
in creating this problem. But it is possible to attain to clearness
about it by surveying the situation from the point of view of spiritual
perception which underlies the exposition of this book. What is it
that, in the first instance, I have before me when I confront another
person? To begin with, there is the sensuous appearance of the other's
body, as given in perception. To this we might add the auditory
perception of what he is saying, and so forth. All this I apprehend,
not with a passive stare, but by the activity of my thinking which
is set in motion. Through the thinking with which I now confront the
other person, the percept of him becomes, as it were, psychically
transparent. As my thinking apprehends the percept, I am compelled to
judge that what I perceive is really quite other than it appears to the
outer senses. The sensuous appearance, in being what it immediately is,
reveals something else which it is mediately. In presenting itself to
me as a distinct object, it, at the same time, extinguishes itself
as a mere sensuous appearance. But in thus extinguishing itself it
reveals a character which, so long as it affects me, compels me as a
thinking being to extinguish my own thinking and to put its thinking
in the place of mine. Its thinking is then apprehended by my thinking
as an experience like my own. Thus I have really perceived another's
thinking. For the immediate percept, in extinguishing itself as
sensuous appearance, is apprehended by my thinking. It is a profess
which passes wholly in my consciousness and consists in this, that the
other's thinking takes the place of my thinking. The self-extinction
of the sensuous appearance actually abolishes the separation between
the spheres of the two consciousnesses. In my own consciousness this
fusion manifests itself in that, so long as I experience the contents
of the other's consciousness, I am aware of my own consciousness
as little as I am aware of it in dreamless sleep. Just as my waking
consciousness is eliminated from the latter, so are the contents of
my own consciousness eliminated from my perception of the contents
of another's consciousness. Two things tend to deceive us about
the true facts. The first is that, in perceiving another person, the
extinction of the contents of one's own consciousness is replaced not,
as in sleep, by unconsciousness, but by the contents of the other's
consciousness. The other is that my consciousness of my own self
oscillates so rapidly between extinction and recurrence, that these
alternations usually escape observation. The whole problem is to be
solved, not through artificial construction of concepts, involving an
inference from what is in consciousness to what always must transcend
consciousness, but through genuine experience of the connection between
thinking and perceiving. The same remark applies to many other problems
which appear in philosophical literature. Philosophers should seek
the road to unprejudiced spiritual observation, instead of hiding
reality behind an artificial frontage of concepts.

In a monograph by Eduard von Hartmann on "The Ultimate Problems of
Epistemology and Metaphysics" (in the Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
philosophische Kritik, Vol. 108, p. 55), my Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity has been classed with the philosophical tendency which seeks
to build upon an "epistemological Monism." Eduard von Hartmann rejects
this position as untenable, for the following reasons. According to
the point of view maintained in his monograph, there are only three
possible positions in the theory of knowledge. The first consists in
remaining true to the naïve point of view, which regards objects of
sense-perception as real things existing outside the human mind. This,
urges Von Hartmann, implies a lack of critical reflection. I fail
to realise that with all my contents of consciousness I remain
imprisoned in my own consciousness. I fail to perceive that I am
dealing, not with a "table-in-itself," but only with a phenomenon
in my own consciousness. If I stop at this point of view, or if
for whatever reasons I return to it, I am a Naïve Realist. But this
whole position is untenable, for it ignores that consciousness has no
other objects than its own contents. The second position consists in
appreciating this situation and confessing it to oneself. As a result,
I become a Transcendental Idealist. As such, says Von Hartmann, I am
obliged to deny that a "thing-in-itself" can ever appear in any way
within the human mind. But, if developed with unflinching consistency,
this view ends in Absolute Illusionism. For the world which confronts
me is now transformed into a mere sum of contents of consciousness,
and, moreover, of contents of my private consciousness. The objects
of other human minds, too, I am then compelled to conceive--absurdly
enough--as present solely in my own consciousness. Hence, the only
tenable position, according to Von Hartmann, is the third, viz.,
Transcendental Realism. On this view, there are "things-in-themselves,"
but consciousness can have no dealings with them by way of immediate
experience. Existing beyond the sphere of human consciousness, they
cause, in a way of which we remain unconscious, the appearance of
objects in consciousness. These "things-in-themselves" are known only
by inference from the contents of consciousness, which are immediately
experienced but for that very reason, purely ideal. Eduard von
Hartmann maintains in the monograph cited above, that "epistemological
Monism"--for such he takes my point of view to be--is bound to declare
itself identical with one or other of the above three positions;
and that its failure to do so is due only to its inconsistency in not
drawing the actual consequences of its presuppositions. The monograph
goes on to say: "If we want to find out which epistemological position
a so-called Epistemological Monist occupies, all we have to do is
to put to him certain questions and compel him to answer them. For,
out of his own initiative, no Monist will condescend to state his
views on these points, and likewise he will seek to dodge in every
way giving a straight answer to our questions, because every answer he
may give will betray that Epistemological Monism does not differ from
one or other of the three positions. Our questions are the following:
(1) Are things continuous or intermittent in their existence? If the
answer is 'continuous,' we have before us some one of the forms of
Naïve Realism. If the answer is 'intermittent,' we have Transcendental
Idealism. But if the answer is: 'They are, on the one hand, continuous,
viz., as contents of the Absolute Mind, or as unconscious ideas,
or as permanent possibilities of perception, but, on the other hand,
intermittent, viz., as contents of finite consciousness,' we recognise
Transcendental Realism. (2) When three persons are sitting at a table,
how many distinct tables are there? The Naïve Realist answers 'one';
the Transcendental Idealist answers 'three'; but the Transcendental
Realist answers 'four.' This last answer does, indeed, presuppose
that it is legitimate to group together in the single question,
'How many tables?' things so unlike each other as the one table
which is the 'thing-in-itself' and the three tables which are the
objects of perception in the three perceivers' minds. If this seems
too great a licence to anyone, he will have to answer 'one and three,'
instead of 'four.' (3) When two persons are alone together in a room,
how many distinct persons are there? If you answer 'two'--you are a
Naïve Realist. If you answer 'four,' viz., in each of the two minds
one 'I' and one 'Other,' you are a Transcendental Idealist. If you
answer 'six,' viz., two persons as 'things-in-themselves' and four
persons as ideal objects in the two minds, you are a Transcendental
Realist. In order to show that Epistemological Monism is not one of
these three positions, we should have to give other answers than the
above to each of these three questions. But I cannot imagine what
answers these could be." The answers of the Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity would have to be: (1) Whoever apprehends only what he
perceives of a thing and mistakes these percepts for the reality of
the thing, is a Naïve Realist. He does not realise that, strictly,
he ought to regard these perceptual contents as existing only so long
as he is looking at the objects, so that he ought to conceive the
objects before him as intermittent. As soon, however, as it becomes
clear to him that reality is to be met with only in the percepts
which are organised by thinking, he attains to the insight that the
percepts which appear as intermittent events, reveal themselves as
continuously in existence as soon as they are interpreted by the
constructions of thought. Hence continuity of existence must be
predicated of the contents of perception which living thought has
organised. Only that part which is only perceived, not thought, would
have to be regarded as intermittent if--which is not the case--there
were such a part. (2) When three persons are sitting at a table,
how many distinct tables are there? There is only one table. But
so long as the three persons stop short at their perceptual images,
they ought to say: "These percepts are not the reality at all." As
soon as they pass on to the table as apprehended by thinking, there
is revealed to them the one real table. They are then united with
their three contents of consciousness in this one reality. (3) When
two persons are alone together in a room, how many distinct persons
are there? Most assuredly there are not six--not even in the sense
of the Transcendental Realist's theory--but only two. Only, at first,
each person has nothing but the unreal percept of himself and of the
other person. There are four such percepts, the presence of which in
the minds of the two persons is the stimulus for the apprehension of
reality by their thinking. In this activity of thinking each of the
two persons transcends the sphere of his own consciousness. A living
awareness of the consciousness of the other person as well as of his
own arises in each. In these moments of living awareness the persons
are as little imprisoned within their consciousness as they are in
sleep. But at other moments consciousness of this identification
with the other returns, so that each person, in the experience of
thinking, apprehends consciously both himself and the other person. I
know that a Transcendental Realist describes this view as a relapse
into Naïve Realism. But, then, I have already pointed out in this
book that Naïve Realism retains its justification for our thinking
as we actually experience it. The Transcendental Realist ignores
the true situation in the process of cognition completely. He cuts
himself off from the facts by a tissue of concepts and entangles
himself in it. Moreover, the Monism which appears in the Philosophy
of Spiritual Activity ought not to be labelled "epistemological,"
but, if an epithet is wanted, then a "Monism of Thought." All this
has been misunderstood by Eduard von Hartmann. Ignoring all that
is specific in the argumentation of the Philosophy of Spiritual
Activity, he has charged me with having attempted to combine Hegel's
Universalistic Panlogism with Hume's Individualistic Phenomenalism
(Zeitschrift für Philosophie, vol. 108, p. 71, note). But, in truth,
the Philosophy of Spiritual Activity has nothing whatever to do with
the two positions which it is accused of trying to combine. (This,
too, is the reason why I could feel no interest in polemics against,
e.g., the Epistemological Monism of Johannes Rehmke. The point of view
of the Philosophy of Spiritual Activity is simply quite different from
what Eduard von Hartmann and others call "Epistemological Monism.")








APPENDIX II

REVISED INTRODUCTION TO "PHILOSOPHY OF FREEDOM."


The following chapter reproduces, in all essentials, the pages
which stood as a sort of "Introduction" in the first edition of this
book. Inasmuch as it rather reflects the mood out of which I composed
this book twenty-five years ago, than has any direct bearing on its
contents, I print it here as an "Appendix." I do not want to omit it
altogether, because the suggestion keeps cropping up that I want to
suppress some of my earlier writings on account of my later works on
spiritual matters.

Our age is one which is unwilling to seek truth anywhere but in the
depths of human nature. [62] Of the following two well-known paths
described by Schiller, it is the second which will to-day be found
most useful:


    Wahrheit suchen wir beide, du aussen im Leben, ich innen
    In dem Herzen, und so findet sie jeder gewiss.
    Ist das Auge gesund, so begegnet es aussen dem Schöpfer
    Ist es das Herz, dann gewiss spiegelt es innen die Welt. [63]


A truth which comes to us from without bears ever the stamp of
uncertainty. Conviction attaches only to what appears as truth to
each of us in our own hearts.

Truth alone can give us confidence in developing our powers. He who
is tortured by doubts finds his powers lamed. In a world the riddle
of which baffles him, he can find no aim for his activity.

We no longer want to believe; we want to know. Belief demands the
acceptance of truths which we do not wholly comprehend. But the
individuality which seeks to experience everything in the depths of
its own being, is repelled by what it cannot understand. Only that
knowledge will satisfy us which springs from the inner life of the
personality, and submits itself to no external norm.

Again, we do not want any knowledge which has encased itself once and
for all in hide-bound formulas, and which is preserved in Encyclopædias
valid for all time. Each of us claims the right to start from the
facts that lie nearest to hand, from his own immediate experiences,
and thence to ascend to a knowledge of the whole universe. We strive
after certainty in knowledge, but each in his own way.

Our scientific theories, too, are no longer to be formulated as if we
were unconditionally compelled to accept them. None of us would wish to
give a scientific work a title like Fichte's A Pellucid Account for the
General Public concerning the Real Nature of the Newest Philosophy. An
Attempt to Compel the Readers to Understand. Nowadays there is no
attempt to compel anyone to understand. We claim no agreement from
anyone whom a distinct individual need does not drive to a certain
view. We do not seek nowadays to cram facts of knowledge even into
the immature human being, the child. We seek rather to develop his
faculties in such a way that his understanding may depend no longer on
our compulsion, but on his will. I am under no illusion concerning the
characteristics of the present age. I know how many flaunt a manner
of life which lacks all individuality and follows only the prevailing
fashion. But I know also that many of my contemporaries strive to order
their lives in the direction of the principles I have indicated. To
them I would dedicate this book. It does not pretend to offer the
"only possible" way to Truth, it only describes the path chosen by
one whose heart is set upon Truth.

The reader will be led at first into somewhat abstract regions,
where thought must draw sharp outlines, if it is to reach secure
conclusions. But he will also be led out of these arid concepts into
concrete life. I am fully convinced that one cannot do without soaring
into the ethereal realm of abstraction, if one's experience is to
penetrate life in all directions. He who is limited to the pleasures
of the senses misses the sweetest enjoyments of life. The Oriental
sages make their disciples live for years a life of resignation and
asceticism before they impart to them their own wisdom. The Western
world no longer demands pious exercises and ascetic practices as a
preparation for science, but it does require a sincere willingness
to withdraw oneself awhile from the immediate impressions of life,
and to betake oneself into the realm of pure thought.

The spheres of life are many and for each there develops a special
science. But life itself is one, and the more the sciences strive to
penetrate deeply into their separate spheres, the more they withdraw
themselves from the vision of the world as a living whole. There
must be one supreme science which seeks in the separate sciences the
elements for leading men back once more to the fullness of life. The
scientific specialist seeks in his studies to gain a knowledge of the
world and its workings. This book has a philosophical aim: science
itself is here infused with the life of an organic whole. The special
sciences are stages on the way to this all-inclusive science. A similar
relation is found in the arts. The composer in his work employs the
rules of the theory of composition. This latter is an accumulation
of principles, knowledge of which is a necessary presupposition for
composing. In the act of composing, the rules of theory become the
servants of life, of reality. In exactly the same way philosophy is
an art. All genuine philosophers have been artists in concepts. Human
ideas have been the medium of their art, and scientific method their
artistic technique. Abstract thinking thus gains concrete individual
life. Ideas turn into life-forces. We have no longer merely a knowledge
about things, but we have now made knowledge a real, self-determining
organism. Our consciousness, alive and active, has risen beyond a
mere passive reception of truths.

How philosophy, as an art, is related to freedom; what freedom is;
and whether we do, or can, participate in it--these are the principal
problems of my book. All other scientific discussions are put in only
because they ultimately throw light on these questions which are,
in my opinion, the most intimate that concern mankind. These pages
offer a "Philosophy of Freedom."

All science would be nothing but the satisfaction of idle curiosity
did it not strive to enhance the existential value of human
personality. The true value of the sciences is seen only when we
are shown the importance of their results for humanity. The final
aim of an individuality can never be the cultivation of any single
faculty, but only the development of all capacities which slumber
within us. Knowledge has value only in so far as it contributes to
the all-round unfolding of the whole nature of man.

This book, therefore, does not conceive the relation between science
and life in such a way that man must bow down before the world of
ideas and devote his powers to its service. On the contrary, it shows
that he takes possession of the world of ideas in order to use them
for his human aims, which transcend those of mere science.

Man must confront ideas as master, lest he become their slave.








APPENDIX III

PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION OF "TRUTH AND SCIENCE"


Contemporary philosophy suffers from a morbid belief in Kant. To
help towards our emancipation from this belief is the aim of the
present essay. It would indeed be criminal to try and minimise the
debt which the development of German philosophy owes to Kant's
immortal work. But it is high time to acknowledge that the only
way of laying the foundations for a truly satisfying view of the
world and of human life is to put ourselves in decisive opposition
to the spirit of Kant. What is it that Kant has achieved? He has
shown that the transcendent ground of the world which lies beyond
the data of our senses and the categories of our reason, and which
his predecessors sought to determine by means of empty concepts,
is inaccessible to our knowledge. From this he concluded that all our
scientific thinking must keep within the limits of possible experience,
and is incapable of attaining to knowledge of the transcendent and
ultimate ground of the world, i.e., of the "thing-in-itself." But
what if this "thing-in-itself," this whole transcendent ground of
the world, should be nothing but a fiction? It is easy to see that
this is precisely what it is. An instinct inseparable from human
nature impels us to search for the innermost essence of things,
for their ultimate principles. It is the basis of all scientific
enquiry. But, there is not the least reason to look for this ultimate
ground outside the world of our senses and of our spirit, unless a
thorough and comprehensive examination of this world should reveal
within it elements which point unmistakably to an external cause.

The present essay attempts to prove that all the principles which we
need in order to explain our world and make it intelligible, are within
reach of our thought. Thus, the assumption of explanatory principles
lying outside our world turns out to be the prejudice of an extinct
philosophy which lived on vain dogmatic fancies. This ought to have
been Kant's conclusion, too, if he had really enquired into the powers
of human thought. Instead, he demonstrated in the most complicated way
that the constitution of our cognitive faculties does not permit us
to reach the ultimate principles which lie beyond our experience. But
we have no reason whatever for positing these principles in any such
Beyond. Thus Kant has indeed refuted "dogmatic" philosophy, but he has
put nothing in its place. Hence, all German philosophy which succeeded
Kant has evolved everywhere in opposition to him. Fichte, Schelling,
Hegel simply ignored the limits fixed by Kant for our knowledge and
sought the ultimate principles, not beyond, but within, the world
accessible to human reason. Even Schopenhauer, though he does declare
the conclusions of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason to be eternal and
irrefutable truths, cannot avoid seeking knowledge of the ultimate
grounds of the world along paths widely divergent from those of his
master. But the fatal mistake of all these thinkers was that they
sought knowledge of ultimate truths, without having laid the foundation
for such an enterprise in a preliminary investigation of the nature
of knowledge itself. Hence, the proud intellectual edifices erected by
Fichte, Schelling and Hegel have no foundation to rest on. The lack of
such foundations reacts most unfavourably upon the arguments of these
thinkers. Ignorant of the importance of the world of pure ideas and
of its relation to the realm of sense-perception, they built error
upon error, one-sidedness upon one-sidedness. No wonder that their
over-bold systems proved unable to withstand the storms of an age
which recked nothing of philosophy. No wonder that many good things
in these systems were pitilessly swept away along with the errors.

To remedy the defect which has just been indicated is the purpose of
the following investigations. They will not imitate Kant by explaining
what our minds can not know: their aim is to show what our minds
can know.

The outcome of these investigations is that truth is not, as
the current view has it, an ideal reproduction of a some real
object, but a free product of the human spirit, which would not
exist anywhere at all unless we ourselves produced it. It is not
the task of knowledge to reproduce in conceptual form something
already existing independently. Its task is to create a wholly new
realm which, united with the world of sense-data, ends by yielding
us reality in the full sense. In this way, man's supreme activity,
the creative productivity of his spirit, finds its organic place
in the universal world-process. Without this activity it would be
impossible to conceive the world-process as a totality complete in
itself. Man does not confront the world-process as a passive spectator
who merely copies in his mind the events which occur, without his
participation, in the cosmos without. He is an active co-creator in
the world-process, and his knowledge is the most perfect member of
the organism of the universe.

This view carries with it an important consequence for our conduct,
for our moral ideals. These, too, must be regarded, not as copies of
an external standard, but as rooted within us. Similarly, we refuse
to look upon our moral laws as the behests of any power outside
us. We know no "categorical imperative" which, like a voice from the
Beyond, prescribes to us what to do or to leave undone. Our moral
ideals are our own free creations. All we have to do is to carry out
what we prescribe to ourselves as the norm of our conduct. Thus, the
concept of truth as a free act leads to a theory of morals based on
the concept of a perfectly free personality.

These theses, of course, are valid only for that part of our
conduct the laws of which our thinking penetrates with complete
comprehension. So long as the laws of our conduct are merely natural
motives or remain obscure to our conceptual thinking, it may be
possible from a higher spiritual level to perceive how far they are
founded in our individuality, but we ourselves experience them as
influencing us from without, as compelling us to action. Every time
that we succeed in penetrating such a motive with clear understanding,
we make a fresh conquest in the realm of freedom.

The relation of these views to the theory of Eduard von Hartmann,
who is the most significant figure in contemporary philosophy, will
be made clear to the reader in detail in the course of this essay,
especially as regards the problem of knowledge.

A prelude to a Philosophy of Spiritual Activity--this is what the
present essay offers. That philosophy itself, completely worked out,
will shortly follow.

The ultimate aim of all science is to increase the value of existence
for human personality. Whoever does not devote himself to science
with this aim in view is merely modelling himself in his own work upon
some master. If he "researches," it is merely because that happens to
be what he has been taught to do. But not for him is the title of a
"free thinker."

The sciences are seen in their true value only when philosophy explains
the human significance of their results. To make a contribution to such
an explanation was my aim. But, perhaps, our present-day science scorns
all philosophical vindication! If so, two things are certain. One
is that this essay of mine is superfluous. The other is that modern
thinkers are lost in the wood and do not know what they want.

In concluding this Preface, I cannot omit a personal observation. Up
to now I have expounded all my philosophical views on the basis of
Goethe's world-view, into which I was first introduced by my dear
and revered teacher, Karl Julius Schröer, who to me stands in the
very forefront of Goethe-students, because his gaze is ever focussed
beyond the particular upon the universal Ideas.

But, with this essay I hope to have shown that the edifice of my
thought is a whole which has its foundations in itself and which
does not need to be derived from Goethe's world-view. My theories,
as they are here set forth and as they will presently be amplified
in the Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, have grown up in the course
of many years. Nothing but a deep sense of gratitude leads me to
add that the affectionate sympathy of the Specht family in Vienna,
during the period when I was the tutor of its children, provided me
with an environment, than which I could not have wished a better, for
the development of my ideas. In the same spirit, I would add, further,
that I owe to the stimulating conversations with my very dear friend,
Miss Rosa Mayreder, of Vienna, the mood which I needed for putting into
final form many of the thoughts which I have sketched provisionally as
germs of my Philosophy of Spiritual Activity. Her own literary efforts,
which express the sensitive and high-minded nature of a true artist,
are likely before long to be presented to the public.


Vienna, December, 1891.








APPENDIX IV

INTRODUCTION TO ORIGINAL EDITION OF "TRUTH AND SCIENCE"


The aim of the following discussions is to reduce the act of cognition,
by analysis, to its ultimate elements and thus to discover a correct
formulation of the problem of knowledge and a way to its solution. They
criticise all theories of knowledge which are based on Kant's line
of thought, in order to show that along this road no solution of
the problem of knowledge can ever be found. It is, however, due to
the fundamental spade-work which Volkelt has done in his thorough
examination of the concept of experience, [64] to acknowledge that
without his preliminary labours the precise determination, which
I have here attempted of the concept of the Given would have been
very much more difficult. However, we are cherishing the hope that we
have laid the foundations for our emancipation from the Subjectivism
which attaches to all theories of knowledge that start from Kant. We
believe ourselves to have achieved this emancipation through showing
that the subjective form, in which the picture of the world presents
itself to the act of cognition, prior to its elaboration by science,
is nothing but a necessary stage of transition which is overcome in
the very process of knowledge itself. For us, experience, so-called,
which Positivism and Neo-Kantianism would like to represent as the
only thing which is certain, is precisely the most subjective of
all. In demonstrating this, we also show that Objective Idealism is
the inevitable conclusion of a theory of knowledge which understands
itself. It differs from the metaphysical and absolute Idealism of Hegel
in this, that it seeks in the subject of knowledge the ground for the
diremption of reality into given existence and concept, and that it
looks for the reconciliation of this divorce, not in an objective
world-dialectic, but in the subjective process of cognition. The
present writer has already once before advocated this point of view
in print, viz., in the Outlines of a Theory of Knowledge (Berlin and
Stuttgart, 1885). However, that book differs essentially in method
from the present essay, and it also lacks the analytic reduction of
knowledge to its ultimate elements.








NOTES

[1] Two souls, alas! reside within my breast,
    And each withdraws from, and repels, its brother.
    One with tenacious organs holds in love
    And clinging lust the world in its embraces;
    The other strongly sweeps, this dust above,
    Into the high ancestral spaces.

                                    Faust, Part I, Scene 2.

    (Bayard Taylor's translation.)

[2] Knowledge is transcendental when it is aware that nothing can
be asserted directly about the thing-in-itself but makes indirect
inferences from the subjective which is known to the unknown which
lies beyond the subjective (transcendental). The thing-in-itself is,
according to this view, beyond the sphere of the world of immediate
experience; in other words, it is transcendent. Our world can, however,
be transcendentally related to the transcendent. Hartmann's theory is
called Realism because it proceeds from the subjective, the mental,
to the transcendent, the real.

[3] The way in which the above view has influenced psychology,
physiology, etc., in various directions has been set forth by the
author in works published after this book. Here he is concerned only
with characterising the results of an open-minded study of thinking
itself.

[4] The passage from page 146 down to this point has been added,
or rewritten, for the present Revised Edition. (1918).

[5] A complete catalogue of the principles of morality (from the
point of view of Metaphysical Realism) may be found in Eduard von
Hartmann's Phänomenologie des sittlichen Bewusstseins.

[6] Translation by Abbott, Kant's Theory of Ethics, p. 180; Critique
of Pure Practical Reason, chap. iii.

[7] For the manner in which I have here spoken of "Materialism,"
and for the justification of so speaking of it, see the Addition at
the end of this chapter.

[8] Only a superficial critic will find in the use of the word
"faculty," in this and other passages, a relapse into the old-fashioned
doctrine of faculties of the soul.

[9] When Paulsen, p. 15 of the book mentioned above, says: "Different
natural endowments and different conditions of life demand both a
different bodily and also a different mental and moral diet," he
is very close to the correct view, but yet he misses the decisive
point. In so far as I am an individual, I need no diet. Dietetic
means the art of bringing a particular specimen into harmony with the
universal laws of the genus. But as an individual I am not a specimen
of a genus.

[10] The Editor would call the reader's attention to the fact that
this book was written in 1894. For many years Dr. Steiner's efforts
have been chiefly concentrated in upholding the Divinity of Christ
consistently with the broader lines of the Christian Churches.

[11] We are entitled to speak of thoughts (ethical ideas) as objects
of observation. For, although the products of thinking do not enter
the field of observation, so long as the thinking goes on, they may
well become objects of observation subsequently. In this way we have
gained our characterisation of action.

[12] Those who want to settle by calculation whether the sum total of
pleasure or that of pain is bigger, ignore that they are subjecting
to calculation something which is nowhere experienced. Feeling does
not calculate, and what matters for the real valuing of life is what
we really experience, not what results from an imaginary calculation.

[13] We disregard here the case where excessive increase of pleasure
turns pleasure into pain.

[14] Immediately upon the publication of this book (1894), critics
objected to the above arguments that, even now, within the generic
character of her sex, a woman is able to shape her life individually,
just as she pleases, and far more freely than a man who is already
de-individualised, first by the school, and later by war and
profession. I am aware that this objection will be urged to-day, even
more strongly. None the less, I feel bound to let my sentences stand,
in the hope that there are readers who appreciate how violently such
an objection runs counter to the concept of freedom advocated in this
book, and who will interpret my sentences above by another standard
than that of man's loss of individuality through school and profession.

[15] The Preface and Introduction to the original edition of "Truth
and Science" are printed as Appendix III and Appendix IV at the end
of this volume.

[16] l.c., p. 20.

[17] cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Intr. to 2nd edit., Section vi.

[18] Prolegomena, Section v.

[19] Critique of Pure Reason, Intr., Section iv.

[20] cf. his Analyse der Wirklichkeit, Gedanken und Tatsachen.

[21] "Possible" here means merely conceivable.

[22] cf. Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff, pp. 161 ff.

[23] This attempt, by the way, is one which the objections of Robert
Zimmermann (Über Kant's mathematisches Vorurteil und dessen Folgen)
show to be, if not wholly mistaken, at least highly questionable.

[24] Critique of Pure Reason, Intr. to 2nd edit., Section ii.

[25] cf. Kant's Theorie der Erfahrung, pp. 90 ff.

[26] l.c., Section v.

[27] cf. Kant's Theorie der Erfahrung, pp. 90 ff.

[28] cf. Die Grundsätze der reinen Erkenntnistheorie in der Kantischen
Philosophie, p. 76.

[29] l.c., p. 21.

[30] Zur Analyse der Wirklichkeit, pp. 211 ff.

[31] Darstellung der Kantischen Erkenntnistheorie, p. 14.

[32] Vierteljahrsschrift für Wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1877,
p. 239.

[33] System der Logik, 3rd edit., pp. 380 ff.

[34] Kritische Grundlagen des Transcendentalen Realismus, pp. 142-172.

[35] Geschichte der Neueren Philosophie, Vol. v., p. 60. Volkelt
is mistaken about Fischer when he says (Kant's Erkenntnistheorie,
p. 198, n.) that "it is not clear from Fischer's account whether,
in his opinion, Kant takes for granted only the psychological fact of
the occurrence of universal and necessary judgments, but also their
objective validity and truth." For, in the passage referred to above,
Fischer says that the chief difficulty of the Critique of Pure Reason
is to be found in the fact that "its fundamental positions rest on
certain presuppositions" which "have to be granted if the rest is to
be valid." These presuppositions consist for Fischer, too, in this,
that "first the fact of knowledge is affirmed," and then analysis
reveals the cognitive faculties "by means of which that fact itself
is explained."

[36] How far our own epistemological discussions conform to this
method, will be shown in Section iv, "The Starting-points of the
Theory of Knowledge."

[37] l.c., Preface, p. x.

[38] Zur Analyse der Wirklichkeit (Strassburg, 1876), p. 28.

[39] Kant's Erkenntnistheorie, Section i.

[40] A. Dorner, Das menschliche Erkennen (Berlin, 1887).

[41] Rehmke, l.c.

[42] Die Lehre vom Wissen (Berlin, 1868).

[43] Die Grundfragen der Erkenntnistheorie (Mainz, 1887) p. 385.

[44] System der kritischen Philosophie, I. Teil, p. 257.

[45] Das Grundproblem der Erkenntnistheorie, p. 37.

[46] Philosophische Monatshefte, Vol. xxvi (1890), p. 390.

[47] Das Grundproblem der Erkenntnistheorie, p. 1.

[48] By "concept" I mean a rule for the synthesis of the disconnected
data of perception into a unity. Causality, e.g., is a "concept." By
"idea" I mean nothing but a concept of richer connotation. "Organism,"
taken quite generally, is an example of an "idea."

[49] It ought not to be necessary to say that the term "centre,"
here, is not intended to affirm a theory concerning the nature of
consciousness, but is used merely as a shorthand expression for the
total physiognomy of consciousness.

[50] Fichte's Sämtliche Werke, Vol. I, p. 71.

[51] l.c., Vol. I, p. 97.

[52] l.c., Vol. I, p. 91.

[53] l.c., Vol. I, p. 178.

[54] l.c., Vol. I, p. 91.

[55] Geschichte der Philosophie, p. 605.

[56] Fichte, Sämtliche Werke, Vol. I, p. 94.

[57] l.c., Vol. I, p. 98.

[58] l.c., Vol. I, p. 422.

[59] Delivered in the autumn of 1813 at the University of Berlin. See
Nachgelassene Werke, Vol. I, p. 4.

[60] l.c., Vol. I, p. 16.

[61] cf. his Christliche Dogmatik, 2nd edit., 1884-5. The
epistemological arguments are in Vol. I. An exhaustive discussion
of his point of view has been furnished by E. von Hartmann. See his
Kritische Wanderungen durch die Philosophie der Gegenwart, pp. 200 ff.

[62] Only the very first opening sentences (in the first edition) of
this argument have been altogether omitted here, because they seem
to me to-day wholly irrelevant. But the rest of the chapter seems
to me even to day relevant and necessary, in spite, nay, because,
of the scientific bias of contemporary thought.

[63] Truth seek we both--Thou in the life without thee and around;
     I in the heart within. By both can Truth alike be found.
     The healthy eye can through the world the great Creator track;
     The healthy heart is but the glass which gives Creation back.

                                                                 Bulwer.

[64] Erfahrung und Denken, Kritische Grundlegung der Erkenntnistheorie,
von Johannes Volkelt (Hamburg und Leipzig, 1886).






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, by 
Rudolph Steiner

