CHAPTER III.

GROTESQUE RENAISSANCE.


§ I. In the close of the last chapter it was noted that the phases of
transition in the moral temper of the falling Venetians, during their
fall, were from pride to infidelity, and from infidelity to the
unscrupulous _pursuit of pleasure_. During the last years of the
existence of the state, the minds both of the nobility and the people
seem to have been set simply upon the attainment of the means of
self-indulgence. There was not strength enough in them to be proud, nor
forethought enough to be ambitious. One by one the possessions of the
state were abandoned to its enemies; one by one the channels of its
trade were forsaken by its own languor, or occupied and closed against
it by its more energetic rivals; and the time, the resources, and the
thoughts of the nation were exclusively occupied in the invention of
such fantastic and costly pleasures as might best amuse their apathy,
lull their remorse, or disguise their ruin.

§ II. The architecture raised at Venice during this period is amongst
the worst and basest ever built by the hands of men, being especially
distinguished by a spirit of brutal mockery and insolent jest, which,
exhausting itself in deformed and monstrous sculpture, can sometimes be
hardly otherwise defined than as the perpetuation in stone of the
ribaldries of drunkenness. On such a period, and on such work, it is
painful to dwell, and I had not originally intended to do so; but I
found that the entire spirit of the Renaissance could not be
comprehended unless it was followed to its consummation; and that there
were many most interesting questions arising out of the study of this
particular spirit of jesting, with reference to which I have called it
the _Grotesque_ Renaissance. For it is not this period alone which is
distinguished by such a spirit. There is jest--perpetual, careless, and
not unfrequently obscene--in the most noble work of the Gothic periods;
and it becomes, therefore, of the greatest possible importance to
examine into the nature and essence of the Grotesque itself, and to
ascertain in what respect it is that the jesting of art in its highest
flight, differs from its jesting in its utmost degradation.

§ III. The place where we may best commence our inquiry is one renowned
in the history of Venice, the space of ground before the Church of Santa
Maria Formosa; a spot which, after the Rialto and St. Mark's Place,
ought to possess a peculiar interest in the mind of the traveller, in
consequence of its connexion with the most touching and true legend of
the Brides of Venice. That legend is related at length in every Venetian
history, and, finally, has been told by the poet Rogers, in a way which
renders it impossible for any one to tell it after him. I have only,
therefore, to remind the reader that the capture of the brides took
place in the cathedral church, St. Pietro di Castello; and that this of
Santa Maria Formosa is connected with the tale, only because it was
yearly visited with prayers by the Venetian maidens, on the anniversary
of their ancestors' deliverance. For that deliverance, their thanks were
to be rendered to the Virgin; and there was no church then dedicated to
the Virgin, in Venice, except this.[27]

Neither of the cathedral church, nor of this dedicated to St. Mary the
Beautiful, is one stone left upon another. But, from that which has been
raised on the site of the latter, we may receive a most important
lesson, introductory to our immediate subject, if first we glance back
to the traditional history of the church which has been destroyed.

§ IV. No more honorable epithet than "traditional" can be attached to
what is recorded concerning it, yet I should grieve to lose the legend
of its first erection. The Bishop of Uderzo, driven by the Lombards from
his Bishopric, as he was praying, beheld in a vision the Virgin Mother,
who ordered him to found a church in her honor, in the place where he
should see a white cloud rest. And when he went out, the white cloud
went before him; and on the place where it rested he built a church, and
it was called the Church of St. Mary the Beautiful, from the loveliness
of the form in which she had appeared in the vision.[28]

The first church stood only for about two centuries. It was rebuilt in
864, and enriched with various relics some fifty years later; relics
belonging principally to St. Nicodemus, and much lamented when they and
the church were together destroyed by fire in 1105.

It was then rebuilt in "magnifica forma," much resembling, according to
Corner, the architecture of the chancel of St. Mark;[29] but the
information which I find in various writers, as to the period at which
it was reduced to its present condition, is both sparing and
contradictory.

§ V. Thus, by Corner, we are told that this church, resembling St.
Mark's, "remained untouched for more than four centuries," until, in
1689, it was thrown down by an earthquake, and restored by the piety of
a rich merchant, Turrin Toroni, "in ornatissima forma;" and that, for
the greater beauty of the renewed church, it had added to it two façades
of marble. With this information that of the Padre dell' Oratoria
agrees, only he gives the date of the earlier rebuilding of the church
in 1175, and ascribes it to an architect of the name of Barbetta. But
Quadri, in his usually accurate little guide, tells us that this
Barbetta rebuilt the church in the fourteenth century; and that of the
two façades, so much admired by Corner, one is of the sixteenth century,
and its architect unknown; and the rest of the church is of the
seventeenth, "in the style of Sansovino."

§ VI. There is no occasion to examine, or endeavor to reconcile, these
conflicting accounts. All that is necessary for the reader to know is,
that every vestige of the church in which the ceremony took place was
destroyed _at least_ as early as 1689; and that the ceremony itself,
having been abolished in the close of the fourteenth century, is only to
be conceived as taking place in that more ancient church, resembling St.
Mark's, which, even according to Quadri, existed until that period. I
would, therefore, endeavor to fix the reader's mind, for a moment, on
the contrast between the former and latter aspect of this plot of
ground; the former, when it had its Byzantine church, and its yearly
procession of the Doge and the Brides; and the latter, when it has its
Renaissance church "in the style of Sansovino," and its yearly honoring
is done away.

§ VII. And, first, let us consider for a little the significance and
nobleness of that early custom of the Venetians, which brought about the
attack and the rescue of the year 943: that there should be but one
marriage day for the nobles of the whole nation,[30] so that all might
rejoice together; and that the sympathy might be full, not only of the
families who that year beheld the alliance of their children, and prayed
for them in one crowd, weeping before the altar, but of all the families
of the state, who saw, in the day which brought happiness to others, the
anniversary of their own. Imagine the strong bond of brotherhood thus
sanctified among them, and consider also the effect on the minds of the
youth of the state; the greater deliberation and openness necessarily
given to the contemplation of marriage, to which all the people were
solemnly to bear testimony; the more lofty and unselfish tone which it
would give to all their thoughts. It was the exact contrary of stolen
marriage. It was marriage to which God and man were taken for witnesses,
and every eye was invoked for its glance, and every tongue for its
prayers.[31]

§ VIII. Later historians have delighted themselves in dwelling on the
pageantry of the marriage day itself, but I do not find that they have
authority for the splendor of their descriptions. I cannot find a word
in the older Chronicles about the jewels or dress of the brides, and I
believe the ceremony to have been more quiet and homely than is usually
supposed. The only sentence which gives color to the usual accounts of
it is one of Sansovino's, in which he says that the magnificent dress of
the brides in his day was founded "on ancient custom."[32] However this
may have been, the circumstances of the rite were otherwise very simple.
Each maiden brought her dowry with her in a small "cassetta," or chest;
they went first to the cathedral, and waited for the youths, who having
come, they heard mass together, and the bishop preached to them and
blessed them: and so each bridegroom took his bride and her dowry and
bore her home.

§ IX. It seems that the alarm given by the attack of the pirates put an
end to the custom of fixing one day for all marriages: but the main
objects of the institution were still attained by the perfect publicity
given to the marriages of all the noble families; the bridegroom
standing in the Court of the Ducal Palace to receive congratulations on
his betrothal, and the whole body of the nobility attending the
nuptials, and rejoicing, "as at some personal good fortune; since, by
the constitution of the state, they are for ever incorporated together,
as if of one and the same family."[33] But the festival of the 2nd of
February, after the year 943, seems to have been observed only in memory
of the deliverance of the brides, and no longer set apart for public
nuptials.

§ X. There is much difficulty in reconciling the various accounts, or
distinguishing the inaccurate ones, of the manner of keeping this
memorable festival. I shall first give Sansovino's, which is the popular
one, and then note the points of importance in the counter-statements.
Sansovino says that the success of the pursuit of the pirates was owing
to the ready help and hard fighting of the men of the district of Sta.
Maria Formosa, for the most part trunkmakers; and that they, having been
presented after the victory to the Doge and the Senate, were told to ask
some favor for their reward. "The good men then said that they desired
the Prince, with his wife and the Signory, to visit every year the
church of their district, on the day of its feast. And the Prince asking
them, 'Suppose it should rain?' they answered, 'We will give you hats to
cover you; and if you are thirsty, we will give you to drink.' Whence is
it that the Vicar, in the name of the people, presents to the Doge, on
his visit, two flasks of malvoisie[34] and two oranges; and presents to
him two gilded hats, bearing the arms of the Pope, of the Prince, and of
the Vicar. And thus was instituted the Feast of the Maries, which was
called noble and famous because the people from all round came together
to behold it. And it was celebrated in this manner:...." The account
which follows is somewhat prolix; but its substance is, briefly, that
twelve maidens were elected, two for each division of the city; and that
it was decided by lot which contrade, or quarters of the town, should
provide them with dresses. This was done at enormous expense, one
contrada contending with another, and even the jewels of the treasury of
St. Mark being lent for the occasion to the "Maries," as the twelve
damsels were called. They, being thus dressed with gold, and silver, and
jewels, went in their galley to St. Mark's for the Doge, who joined them
with the Signory, and went first to San Pietro di Castello to hear mass
on St. Mark's day, the 31st of January, and to Santa Maria Formosa on
the 2nd of February, the intermediate day being spent in passing in
procession through the streets of the city; "and sometimes there arose
quarrels about the places they should pass through, for every one wanted
them to pass by his house."

§ XI. Nearly the same account is given by Corner, who, however, does not
say anything about the hats or the malvoisie. These, however, we find
again in the Matricola de' Casseleri, which, of course, sets the
services of the trunkmakers and the privileges obtained by them in the
most brilliant light. The quaintness of the old Venetian is hardly to be
rendered into English. "And you must know that the said trunkmakers were
the men who were the cause of such victory, and of taking the galley,
and of cutting all the Triestines to pieces, because, at that time, they
were valiant men and well in order. The which victory was on the 2nd
February, on the day of the Madonna of candles. And at the request and
entreaties of the said trunkmakers, it was decreed that the Doge, every
year, as long as Venice shall endure, should go on the eve of the said
feast to vespers in the said church, with the Signory. And be it noted,
that the vicar is obliged to give to the Doge two flasks of malvoisie,
with two oranges besides. And so it is observed, and will be observed
always." The reader must observe the continual confusion between St.
Mark's day the 31st of January, and Candlemas the 2nd of February. The
fact appears to be, that the marriage day in the old republic was St.
Mark's day, and the recovery of the brides was the same day at evening;
so that, as we are told by Sansovino, the commemorative festival began
on that day, but it was continued to the day of the Purification, that
especial thanks might be rendered to the Virgin; and, the visit to Sta.
Maria Formosa being the most important ceremony of the whole festival,
the old chroniclers, and even Sansovino, got confused, and asserted the
victory itself to have taken place on the day appointed for that
pilgrimage.

§ XII. I doubt not that the reader who is acquainted with the beautiful
lines of Rogers is as much grieved as I am at the interference of the
"casket-makers" with the achievement which the poet ascribes to the
bridegrooms alone; an interference quite as inopportune as that of old
Le Balafré with the victory of his nephew, in the unsatisfactory
conclusion of "Quentin Durward." I am afraid I cannot get the
casket-makers quite out of the way; but it may gratify some of my
readers to know that a chronicle of the year 1378, quoted by
Galliciolli, denies the agency of the people of Sta. Maria Formosa
altogether, in these terms: "Some say that the people of Sta. M. Formosa
were those who recovered the _spoil_ ("predra;" I may notice, in
passing, that most of the old chroniclers appear to consider the
recovery of the _caskets_ rather more a subject of congratulation than
that of the brides), and that, for their reward, they asked the Doge and
Signory to visit Sta. M. Formosa; but _this is false_. The going to Sta.
M. Formosa was because the thing had succeeded on that day, and because
this was then the only church in Venice in honor of the Virgin." But
here is again the mistake about the day itself; and besides if we get
rid altogether of the trunkmakers, how are we to account for the
ceremony of the oranges and hats, of which the accounts seem authentic?
If, however, the reader likes to substitute "carpenters" or
"house-builders" for casket-makers, he may do so with great reason (vide
Galliciolli, lib. ii. § 1758); but I fear that one or the other body of
tradesmen must be allowed to have had no small share in the honor of the
victory.

§ XIII. But whatever doubt attaches to the particular circumstances of
its origin, there is none respecting the splendor of the festival
itself, as it was celebrated for four centuries afterwards. We find that
each contrada spent from 800 to 1000 zecchins in the dress of the
"Maries" entrusted to it; but I cannot find among how many contrade the
twelve Maries were divided; it is also to be supposed that most of the
accounts given refer to the later periods of the celebration of the
festival. In the beginning of the eleventh century, the good Doge Pietro
Orseolo II. left in his will the third of his entire fortune "per la
Festa della Marie;" and, in the fourteenth century, so many people came
from the rest of Italy to see it, that special police regulations were
made for it, and the Council of Ten were twice summoned before it took
place.[35] The expense lavished upon it seems to have increased till the
year 1379, when all the resources of the republic were required for the
terrible war of Chiozza, and all festivity was for that time put an end
to. The issue of the war left the Venetians with neither the power nor
the disposition to restore the festival on its ancient scale, and they
seem to have been ashamed to exhibit it in reduced splendor. It was
entirely abolished.

§ XIV. As if to do away even with its memory, every feature of the
surrounding scene which was associated with that festival has been in
succeeding ages destroyed. With one solitary exception,[36] there is not
a house left in the whole Piazza of Santa Maria Formosa from whose
windows the festa of the Maries has ever been seen: of the church in
which they worshipped, not a stone is left, even the form of the ground
and direction of the neighboring canals are changed; and there is now
but one landmark to guide the steps of the traveller to the place where
the white cloud rested, and the shrine was built to St. Mary the
Beautiful. Yet the spot is still worth his pilgrimage, for he may
receive a lesson upon it, though a painful one. Let him first fill his
mind with the fair images of the ancient festival, and then seek that
landmark the tower of the modern church, built upon the place where the
daughters of Venice knelt yearly with her noblest lords; and let him
look at the head that is carved on the base of the tower,[37] still
dedicated to St. Mary the Beautiful.

§ XV. A head,--huge, inhuman, and monstrous,--leering in bestial
degradation, too foul to be either pictured or described, or to be
beheld for more than an instant: yet let it be endured for that instant;
for in that head is embodied the type of the evil spirit to which Venice
was abandoned in the fourth period of her decline; and it is well that
we should see and feel the full horror of it on this spot, and know what
pestilence it was that came and breathed upon her beauty, until it
melted away like the white cloud from the ancient fields of Santa Maria
Formosa.

§ XVI. This head is one of many hundreds which disgrace the latest
buildings of the city, all more or less agreeing in their expression of
sneering mockery, in most cases enhanced by thrusting out the tongue.
Most of them occur upon the bridges, which were among the very last
works undertaken by the republic, several, for instance, upon the Bridge
of Sighs; and they are evidences of a delight in the contemplation of
bestial vice, and the expression of low sarcasm, which is, I believe,
the most hopeless state into which the human mind can fall. This spirit
of idiotic mockery is, as I have said, the most striking characteristic
of the last period of the Renaissance, which, in consequence of the
character thus imparted to its sculpture, I have called grotesque; but
it must be our immediate task, and it will be a most interesting one, to
distinguish between this base grotesqueness, and that magnificent
condition of fantastic imagination, which was above noticed as one of
the chief elements of the Northern Gothic mind. Nor is this a question
of interesting speculation merely: for the distinction between the true
and false grotesque is one which the present tendencies of the English
mind have rendered it practically important to ascertain; and that in a
degree which, until he has made some progress in the consideration of
the subject, the reader will hardly anticipate.

§ XVII. But, first, I have to note one peculiarity in the late
architecture of Venice, which will materially assist us in understanding
the true nature of the spirit which is to be the subject of our inquiry;
and this peculiarity, singularly enough, is first exemplified in the
very façade of Santa Maria Formosa which is flanked by the grotesque
head to which our attention has just been directed. This façade, whose
architect is unknown, consists of a pediment, sustained on four
Corinthian pilasters, and is, I believe, the earliest in Venice which
appears _entirely destitute of every religious symbol, sculpture, or
inscription_; unless the Cardinal's hat upon the shield in the centre of
the impediment be considered a religious symbol. The entire façade is
nothing else than a monument to the Admiral Vincenzo Cappello. Two
tablets, one between each pair of flanking pillars, record his acts and
honors; and, on the corresponding spaces upon the base of the church,
are two circular trophies, composed of halberts, arrows, flags,
tridents, helmets, and lances: sculptures which are just as valueless in
a military as in an ecclesiastical point of view; for, being all copied
from the forms of Roman arms and armor, they cannot even be referred to
for information respecting the costume of the period. Over the door, as
the chief ornament of the façade, exactly in the spot which in the
"barbarous" St. Mark's is occupied by the figure of Christ, is the
statue of Vincenzo Cappello, in Roman armor. He died in 1542; and we
have, therefore, the latter part of the sixteenth century fixed as the
period when, in Venice, churches were first built to the glory of man,
instead of the glory of God.

§ XVIII. Throughout the whole of Scripture history, nothing is more
remarkable than the close connection of punishment with the sin of
vain-glory. Every other sin is occasionally permitted to remain, for
lengthened periods, without definite chastisement; but the forgetfulness
of God, and the claim of honor by man, as belonging to himself, are
visited at once, whether in Hezekiah, Nebuchadnezzar, or Herod, with the
most tremendous punishment. We have already seen, that the first reason
for the fall of Venice was the manifestation of such a spirit; and it is
most singular to observe the definiteness with which it is here
marked,--as if so appointed, that it might be impossible for future ages
to miss the lesson. For, in the long inscriptions[38] which record the
acts of Vincenzo Cappello, it might, at least, have been anticipated
that some expressions would occur indicative of remaining pretence to
religious feeling, or formal acknowledgement of Divine power. But there
are none whatever. The name of God does not once occur; that of St. Mark
is found only in the statement that Cappello was a procurator of the
church: there is no word touching either on the faith or hope of the
deceased; and the only sentence which alludes to supernatural powers at
all, alludes to them under the heathen name of _fates_, in its
explanation of what the Admiral Cappello _would_ have accomplished,
"nisi fata Christianis adversa vetuissent."

§ XIX. Having taken sufficient note of all the baseness of mind which
these facts indicate in the people, we shall not be surprised to find
immediate signs of dotage in the conception of their architecture. The
churches raised throughout this period are so grossly debased, that even
the Italian critics of the present day, who are partially awakened to
the true state of art in Italy, though blind, as yet, to its true cause,
exhaust their terms of reproach upon these last efforts of the
Renaissance builders. The two churches of San Moisè and Santa Maria
Zobenigo, which are among the most remarkable in Venice for their
manifestation of insolent atheism, are characterized by Lazari, the one
as "culmine d'ogni follia architettonica," the other as "orrido ammasso
di pietra d'Istria," with added expressions of contempt, as just as it
is unmitigated.

§ XX. Now both these churches, which I should like the reader to visit
in succession, if possible, after that of Sta. Maria Formosa, agree with
that church, and with each other, in being totally destitute of
religious symbols, and entirely dedicated to the honor of two Venetian
families. In San Moisè, a bust of Vincenzo Fini is set on a tall narrow
pyramid, above the central door, with this marvellous inscription:

  "OMNE FASTIGIVM
   VIRTVTE IMPLET
   VINCENTIVS FINI."

It is very difficult to translate this; for fastigium, besides its
general sense, has a particular one in architecture, and refers to the
part of the building occupied by the bust; but the main meaning of it is
that "Vincenzo Fini fills all height with his virtue." The inscription
goes on into farther praise, but this example is enough. Over the two
lateral doors are two other laudatory inscriptions of younger members of
the Fini family, the dates of death of the three heroes being 1660,
1685, and 1726, marking thus the period of consummate degradation.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               NOBLE AND IGNOBLE GROTESQUE.]

§ XXI. In like manner, the Church of Santa Maria Zobenigo is entirely
dedicated to the Barbaro family; the only religious symbols with which
it is invested being statues of angels blowing brazen trumpets, intended
to express the spreading of the fame of the Barbaro family in heaven. At
the top of the church is Venice crowned, between Justice and Temperance,
Justice holding a pair of grocer's scales, of iron, swinging in the
wind. There is a two-necked stone eagle (the Barbaro crest), with a
copper crown, in the centre of the pediment. A huge statue of a Barbaro
in armor, with a fantastic head-dress, over the central door; and four
Barbaros in niches, two on each side of it, strutting statues, in the
common stage postures of the period,--Jo. Maria Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum; Marinus Barbaro, Senator (reading a speech in a Ciceronian
attitude); Franc. Barbaro, legatus in classe (in armor, with high-heeled
boots, and looking resolutely fierce); and Carolus Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum: the decorations of the façade being completed by two trophies,
consisting of drums, trumpets, flags and cannon; and six plans,
sculptured in relief, of the towns of Zara, Candia, Padua, Rome, Corfu,
and Spalatro.

§ XXII. When the traveller has sufficiently considered the meaning of
this façade, he ought to visit the Church of St. Eustachio, remarkable
for the dramatic effect of the group of sculpture on its façade, and
then the Church of the Ospedaletto (see Index, under head Ospedaletto);
noticing, on his way, the heads on the foundations of the Palazzo Corner
della Regina, and the Palazzo Pesaro, and any other heads carved on the
modern bridges, closing with those on the Bridge of Sighs.

He will then have obtained a perfect idea of the style and feeling of
the Grotesque Renaissance. I cannot pollute this volume by any
illustration of its worst forms, but the head turned to the front, on
the right-hand in the opposite Plate, will give the general reader an
idea of its most graceful and refined developments. The figure set
beside it, on the left, is a piece of noble grotesque, from fourteenth
century Gothic; and it must be our present task to ascertain the nature
of the difference which exists between the two, by an accurate inquiry
into the true essence of the grotesque spirit itself.

§ XXIII. First, then, it seems to me that the grotesque is, in almost
all cases, composed of two elements, one ludicrous, the other fearful;
that, as one or other of these elements prevails, the grotesque falls
into two branches, sportive grotesque and terrible grotesque; but that
we cannot legitimately consider it under these two aspects, because
there are hardly any examples which do not in some degree combine both
elements; there are few grotesques so utterly playful as to be overcast
with no shade of fearfulness, and few so fearful as absolutely to
exclude all ideas of jest. But although we cannot separate the grotesque
itself into two branches, we may easily examine separately the two
conditions of mind which it seems to combine; and consider successively
what are the kinds of jest, and what the kinds of fearfulness, which may
be legitimately expressed in the various walks of art, and how their
expressions actually occur in the Gothic and Renaissance schools.

First, then, what are the conditions of playfulness which we may fitly
express in noble art, or which (for this is the same thing) are
consistent with nobleness in humanity? In other words, what is the
proper function of play, with respect not to youth merely, but to all
mankind?

§ XXIV. It is a much more serious question than may be at first
supposed; for a healthy manner of play is necessary in order to a
healthy manner of work: and because the choice of our recreation is, in
most cases, left to ourselves, while the nature of our work is generally
fixed by necessity or authority, it may be well doubted whether more
distressful consequences may not have resulted from mistaken choice in
play than from mistaken direction in labor.

§ XXV. Observe, however, that we are only concerned, here, with that
kind of play which causes laughter or implies recreation, not with that
which consists in the excitement of the energies whether of body or
mind. Muscular exertion is, indeed, in youth, one of the conditions of
recreation; "but neither the violent bodily labor which children of all
ages agree to call play," nor the grave excitement of the mental
faculties in games of skill or chance, are in anywise connected with the
state of feeling we have here to investigate, namely, that sportiveness
which man possesses in common with many inferior creatures, but to which
his higher faculties give nobler expression in the various
manifestations of wit, humor, and fancy.

With respect to the manner in which this instinct of playfulness is
indulged or repressed, mankind are broadly distinguishable into four
classes: the men who play wisely; who play necessarily; who play
inordinately; and who play not at all.

§ XXVI. First: Those who play wisely. It is evident that the idea of any
kind of play can only be associated with the idea of an imperfect,
childish, and fatigable nature. As far as men can raise that nature, so
that it shall no longer be interested by trifles or exhausted by toils,
they raise it above play; he whose heart is at once fixed upon heaven,
and open to the earth, so as to apprehend the importance of heavenly
doctrines, and the compass of human sorrow, will have little disposition
for jest; and exactly in proportion to the breadth and depth of his
character and intellect, will be, in general, the incapability of
surprise, or exuberant and sudden emotion, which must render play
impossible. It is, however, evidently not intended that many men should
even reach, far less pass their lives in, that solemn state of
thoughtfulness, which brings them into the nearest brotherhood with
their Divine Master; and the highest and healthiest state which is
competent to ordinary humanity appears to be that which, accepting the
necessity of recreation, and yielding to the impulses of natural delight
springing out of health and innocence, does, indeed, condescend often to
playfulness, but never without such deep love of God, of truth, and of
humanity, as shall make even its slightest words reverent, its idlest
fancies profitable, and its keenest satire indulgent. Wordsworth and
Plato furnish us with, perhaps, the finest and highest examples of this
playfulness: in the one case, unmixed with satire, the perfectly simple
effusion of that spirit--in

  "Which gives to all the self-same bent,
   Whose life is wise, and innocent;"

Plato, and, by the by, in a very wise book of our own times, not
unworthy of being named in such companionship, "Friends in Council,"
mingled with an exquisitely tender and loving satire.

§ XXVII. Secondly: The men who play necessarily. That highest species of
playfulness, which we have just been considering, is evidently the
condition of a mind, not only highly cultivated, but so habitually
trained to intellectual labor that it can bring a considerable force of
accurate thought into its moments even of recreation. This is not
possible, unless so much repose of mind and heart are enjoyed, even at
the periods of greatest exertion, that the rest required by the system
is diffused over the whole life. To the majority of mankind, such a
state is evidently unattainable. They must, perforce, pass a large part
of their lives in employments both irksome and toilsome, demanding an
expenditure of energy which exhausts the system, and yet consuming that
energy upon subjects incapable of interesting the nobler faculties. When
such employments are intermitted, those noble instincts, fancy,
imagination, and curiosity, are all hungry for the food which the labor
of the day has denied to them, while yet the weariness of the body, in a
great degree, forbids their application to any serious subject. They
therefore exert themselves without any determined purpose, and under no
vigorous restraint, but gather, as best they may, such various
nourishment, and put themselves to such fantastic exercise, as may
soonest indemnify them for their past imprisonment, and prepare them to
endure their recurrence. This sketching of the mental limbs as their
fetters fall away,--this leaping and dancing of the heart and intellect,
when they are restored to the fresh air of heaven, yet half paralyzed by
their captivity, and unable to turn themselves to any earnest
purpose,--I call necessary play. It is impossible to exaggerate its
importance, whether in polity, or in art.

§ XXVIII. Thirdly: The men who play inordinately. The most perfect state
of society which, consistently with due understanding of man's nature,
it may be permitted us to conceive, would be one in which the whole
human race were divided, more or less distinctly, into workers and
thinkers; that is to say, into the two classes, who only play wisely, or
play necessarily. But the number and the toil of the working class are
enormously increased, probably more than doubled, by the vices of the
men who neither play wisely nor necessarily, but are enabled by
circumstances, and permitted by their want of principle, to make
amusement the object of their existence. There is not any moment of the
lives of such men which is not injurious to others; both because they
leave the work undone which was appointed for them, and because they
necessarily think wrongly, whenever it becomes compulsory upon them to
think at all. The greater portion of the misery of this world arises
from the false opinions of men whose idleness has physically
incapacitated them from forming true ones. Every duty which we omit
obscures some truth which we should have known; and the guilt of a life
spent in the pursuit of pleasure is twofold, partly consisting in the
perversion of action, and partly in the dissemination of falsehood.

§ XXIX. There is, however, a less criminal, though hardly less dangerous
condition of mind; which, though not failing in its more urgent duties,
fails in the finer conscientiousness which regulates the degree, and
directs the choice, of amusement, at those times when amusement is
allowable. The most frequent error in this respect is the want of
reverence in approaching subjects of importance or sacredness, and of
caution in the expression of thoughts which may encourage like
irreverence in others: and these faults are apt to gain upon the mind
until it becomes habitually more sensible to what is ludicrous and
accidental, than to what is grave and essential, in any subject that is
brought before it; or even, at last, desires to perceive or to know
nothing but what may end in jest. Very generally minds of this
character are active and able; and many of them are so far
conscientious, that they believe their jesting forwards their work. But
it is difficult to calculate the harm they do, by destroying the
reverence which is our best guide into all truth; for weakness and evil
are easily visible, but greatness and goodness are often latent; and we
do infinite mischief by exposing weakness to eyes which cannot
comprehend greatness. This error, however, is more connected with abuses
of the satirical than of the playful instinct; and I shall have more to
say of it presently.

§ XXX. Lastly: The men who do not play at all: those who are so dull or
so morose as to be incapable of inventing or enjoying jest, and in whom
care, guilt, or pride represses all healthy exhilaration of the fancy;
or else men utterly oppressed with labor, and driven too hard by the
necessities of the world to be capable of any species of happy
relaxation.

§ XXXI. We have now to consider the way in which the presence or absence
of joyfulness, in these several classes, is expressed in art.

1. Wise play. The first and noblest class hardly ever speak through art,
except seriously; they feel its nobleness too profoundly, and value the
time necessary for its production too highly, to employ it in the
rendering of trivial thoughts. The playful fancy of a moment may
innocently be expressed by the passing word; but he can hardly have
learned the preciousness of life, who passes days in the elaboration of
a jest. And, as to what regards the delineation of human character, the
nature of all noble art is to epitomize and embrace so much at once,
that its subject can never be altogether ludicrous; it must possess all
the solemnities of the whole, not the brightness of the partial, truth.
For all truth that makes us smile is partial. The novelist amuses us by
his relation of a particular incident; but the painter cannot set any
one of his characters before us without giving some glimpse of its whole
career. That of which the historian informs us in successive pages, it
is the task of the painter to inform us of at once, writing upon the
countenance not merely the expression of the moment, but the history of
the life: and the history of a life can never be a jest.

Whatever part, therefore, of the sportive energy of these men of the
highest class would be expressed in verbal wit or humor finds small
utterance through their art, and will assuredly be confined, if it occur
there at all, to scattered and trivial incidents. But so far as their
minds can recreate themselves by the imagination of strange, yet not
laughable, forms, which, either in costume, in landscape, or in any
other accessaries, may be combined with those necessary for their more
earnest purposes, we find them delighting in such inventions; and a
species of grotesqueness thence arising in all their work, which is
indeed one of its most valuable characteristics, but which is so
intimately connected with the sublime or terrible form of the grotesque,
that it will be better to notice it under that head.

§ XXXII. 2. Necessary play. I have dwelt much in a former portion of
this work, on the justice and desirableness of employing the minds of
inferior workmen, and of the lower orders in general, in the production
of objects of art of one kind or another. So far as men of this class
are compelled to hard manual labor for their daily bread, so far forth
their artistical efforts must be rough and ignorant, and their
artistical perceptions comparatively dull. Now it is not possible, with
blunt perceptions and rude hands, to produce works which shall be
pleasing by their beauty; but it is perfectly possible to produce such
as shall be interesting by their character or amusing by their satire.
For one hard-working man who possesses the finer instincts which decide
on perfection of lines and harmonies of color, twenty possess dry humor
or quaint fancy; not because these faculties were originally given to
the human race, or to any section of it, in greater degree than the
sense of beauty, but because these are exercised in our daily
intercourse with each other, and developed by the interest which we take
in the affairs of life, while the others are not. And because,
therefore, a certain degree of success will probably attend the effort
to express this humor or fancy, while comparative failure will
assuredly result from an ignorant struggle to reach the forms of solemn
beauty, the working-man, who turns his attention partially to art, will
probably, and wisely, choose to do that which he can do best, and
indulge the pride of an effective satire rather than subject himself to
assured mortification in the pursuit of beauty; and this the more,
because we have seen that his application to art is to be playful and
recreative, and it is not in recreation that the conditions of
perfection can be fulfilled.

§ XXXIII. Now all the forms of art which result from the comparatively
recreative exertion of minds more or less blunted or encumbered by other
cares and toils, the art which we may call generally art of the wayside,
as opposed to that which is the business of men's lives, is, in the best
sense of the word, Grotesque. And it is noble or inferior, first,
according to the tone of the minds which have produced it, and in
proportion to their knowledge, wit, love of truth, and kindness;
secondly, according to the degree of strength they have been able to
give forth; but yet, however much we may find in it needing to be
forgiven, always delightful so long as it is the work of good and
ordinarily intelligent men. And its delightfulness ought mainly to
consist _in those very imperfections_ which mark it for work done in
times of rest. It is not its own merit so much as the enjoyment of him
who produced it, which is to be the source of the spectator's pleasure;
it is to the strength of his sympathy, not to the accuracy of his
criticism, that it makes appeal; and no man can indeed be a lover of
what is best in the higher walks of art, who has not feeling and charity
enough to rejoice with the rude sportiveness of hearts that have escaped
out of prison, and to be thankful for the flowers which men have laid
their burdens down to sow by the wayside.

§ XXXIV. And consider what a vast amount of human work this right
understanding of its meaning will make fruitful and admirable to us,
which otherwise we could only have passed by with contempt. There is
very little architecture in the world which is, in the full sense of the
words, good and noble. A few pieces of Italian Gothic and Romanesque, a
few scattered fragments of Gothic cathedrals, and perhaps two or three
of Greek temples, are all that we possess approaching to an ideal of
perfection. All the rest--Egyptian, Norman, Arabian, and most Gothic,
and, which is very noticeable, for the most part all the strongest and
mightiest--depend for their power on some developement of the grotesque
spirit; but much more the inferior domestic architecture of the middle
ages, and what similar conditions remain to this day in countries from
which the life of art has not yet been banished by its laws. The
fantastic gables, built up in scroll-work and steps, of the Flemish
street; the pinnacled roofs set with their small humorist double
windows, as if with so many ears and eyes, of Northern France; the
blackened timbers, crossed and carved into every conceivable waywardness
of imagination, of Normandy and old England; the rude hewing of the pine
timbers of the Swiss cottage; the projecting turrets and bracketed
oriels of the German street; these, and a thousand other forms, not in
themselves reaching any high degree of excellence, are yet admirable,
and most precious, as the fruits of a rejoicing energy in uncultivated
minds. It is easier to take away the energy, than to add the
cultivation; and the only effect of the better knowledge which civilized
nations now possess, has been, as we have seen in a former chapter, to
forbid their being happy, without enabling them to be great.

§ XXXV. It is very necessary, however, with respect to this provincial
or rustic architecture, that we should carefully distinguish its truly
grotesque from its picturesque elements. In the "Seven Lamps" I defined
the picturesque to be "parasitical sublimity," or sublimity belonging to
the external or accidental characters of a thing, not to the thing
itself. For instance, when a highland cottage roof is covered with
fragments of shale instead of slates, it becomes picturesque, because
the irregularity and rude fractures of the rocks, and their grey and
gloomy color, give to it something of the savageness, and much of the
general aspect, of the slope of a mountain side. But as a mere cottage
roof, it cannot be sublime, and whatever sublimity it derives from the
wildness or sternness which the mountains have given it in its covering,
is, so far forth, parasitical. The mountain itself would have been
grand, which is much more than picturesque; but the cottage cannot be
grand as such, and the parasitical grandeur which it may possess by
accidental qualities, is the character for which men have long agreed to
use the inaccurate word "Picturesque."

§ XXXVI. On the other hand, beauty cannot be parasitical. There is
nothing so small or so contemptible, but it may be beautiful in its own
right. The cottage may be beautiful, and the smallest moss that grows on
its roof, and the minutest fibre of that moss which the microscope can
raise into visible form, and all of them in their own right, not less
than the mountains and the sky; so that we use no peculiar term to
express their beauty, however diminutive, but only when the sublime
element enters, without sufficient worthiness in the nature of the thing
to which it is attached.

§ XXXVII. Now this picturesque element, which is always given, if by
nothing else, merely by ruggedness, adds usually very largely to the
pleasurableness of grotesque work, especially to that of its inferior
kinds; but it is not for this reason to be confounded with the
grotesqueness itself. The knots and rents of the timbers, the irregular
lying of the shingles on the roofs, the vigorous light and shadow, the
fractures and weather-stains of the old stones, which were so deeply
loved and so admirably rendered by our lost Prout, are the picturesque
elements of the architecture: the grotesque ones are those which are not
produced by the working of nature and of time, but exclusively by the
fancy of man; and, as also for the most part by his indolent and
uncultivated fancy, they are always, in some degree, wanting in
grandeur, unless the picturesque element be united with them.

§ XXXVIII. 3. Inordinate play. The reader will have some difficulty, I
fear, in keeping clearly in his mind the various divisions of our
subject; but, when he has once read the chapter through, he will see
their places and coherence. We have next to consider the expression
throughout of the minds of men who indulge themselves in unnecessary
play. It is evident that a large number of these men will be more
refined and more highly educated than those who only play necessarily;
the power of pleasure-seeking implies, in general, fortunate
circumstances of life. It is evident also that their play will not be so
hearty, so simple, or so joyful; and this deficiency of brightness will
affect it in proportion to its unnecessary and unlawful continuance,
until at last it becomes a restless and dissatisfied indulgence in
excitement, or a painful delving after exhausted springs of pleasure.

The art through which this temper is expressed will, in all probability,
be refined and sensual,--therefore, also, assuredly feeble; and because,
in the failure of the joyful energy of the mind, there will fail, also,
its perceptions and its sympathies, it will be entirely deficient in
expression of character, and acuteness of thought, but will be
peculiarly restless, manifesting its desire for excitement in idle
changes of subject and purpose. Incapable of true imagination, it will
seek to supply its place by exaggerations, incoherencies, and
monstrosities; and the form of the grotesque to which it gives rise will
be an incongruous chain of hackneyed graces, idly thrown
together,--prettinesses or sublimities, not of its own invention,
associated in forms which will be absurd without being fantastic, and
monstrous without being terrible. And because, in the continual pursuit
of pleasure, men lose both cheerfulness and charity, there will be small
hilarity, but much malice, in this grotesque; yet a weak malice,
incapable of expressing its own bitterness, not having grasp enough of
truth to become forcible, and exhausting itself in impotent or
disgusting caricature.

§ XXXIX. Of course, there are infinite ranks and kinds of this
grotesque, according to the natural power of the minds which originate
it, and to the degree in which they have lost themselves. Its highest
condition is that which first developed itself among the enervated
Romans, and which was brought to the highest perfection of which it was
capable, by Raphael, in the arabesques of the Vatican. It may be
generally described as an elaborate and luscious form of nonsense. Its
lower conditions are found in the common upholstery and decorations
which, over the whole of civilized Europe, have sprung from this
poisonous root; an artistical pottage, composed of nymphs, cupids, and
satyrs, with shreddings of heads and paws of meek wild beasts, and
nondescript vegetables. And the lowest of all are those which have not
even graceful models to recommend them, but arise out of the corruption
of the higher schools, mingled with clownish or bestial satire, as is
the case in the latter Renaissance of Venice, which we were above
examining. It is almost impossible to believe the depth to which the
human mind can be debased in following this species of grotesque. In a
recent Italian garden, the favorite ornaments frequently consist of
stucco images, representing, in dwarfish caricature, the most disgusting
types of manhood and womanhood which can be found amidst the dissipation
of the modern drawingroom; yet without either veracity or humor, and
dependent, for whatever interest they possess, upon simple grossness of
expression and absurdity of costume. Grossness, of one kind or another,
is, indeed, an unfailing characteristic of the style; either latent, as
in the refined sensuality of the more graceful arabesques, or, in the
worst examples, manifested in every species of obscene conception and
abominable detail. In the head, described in the opening of this
chapter, at Santa Maria Formosa, the _teeth_ are represented as
_decayed_.

§ XL. 4. The minds of the fourth class of men who do not play at all,
are little likely to find expression in any trivial form of art, except
in bitterness of mockery; and this character at once stamps the work in
which it appears, as belonging to the class of terrible, rather than of
playful, grotesque. We have, therefore, now to examine the state of mind
which gave rise to this second and more interesting branch of
imaginative work.

§ XLI. Two great and principal passions are evidently appointed by the
Deity to rule the life of man; namely, the love of God, and the fear of
sin, and of its companion--Death. How many motives we have for Love, how
much there is in the universe to kindle our admiration and to claim our
gratitude, there are, happily, multitudes among us who both feel and
teach. But it has not, I think, been sufficiently considered how
evident, throughout the system of creation, is the purpose of God that
we should often be affected by Fear; not the sudden, selfish, and
contemptible fear of immediate danger, but the fear which arises out of
the contemplation of great powers in destructive operation, and
generally from the perception of the presence of death. Nothing appears
to me more remarkable than the array of scenic magnificence by which the
imagination is appalled, in myriads of instances, when the actual danger
is comparatively small; so that the utmost possible impression of awe
shall be produced upon the minds of all, though direct suffering is
inflicted upon few. Consider, for instance, the moral effect of a single
thunder-storm. Perhaps two or three persons may be struck dead within
the space of a hundred square miles; and their deaths, unaccompanied by
the scenery of the storm, would produce little more than a momentary
sadness in the busy hearts of living men. But the preparation for the
Judgment by all that mighty gathering of clouds; by the questioning of
the forest leaves, in their terrified stillness, which way the winds
shall go forth; by the murmuring to each other, deep in the distance, of
the destroying angels before they draw forth their swords of fire; by
the march of the funeral darkness in the midst of the noon-day, and the
rattling of the dome of heaven beneath the chariot-wheels of death;--on
how many minds do not these produce an impression almost as great as the
actual witnessing of the fatal issue! and how strangely are the
expressions of the threatening elements fitted to the apprehension of
the human soul! The lurid color, the long, irregular, convulsive sound,
the ghastly shapes of flaming and heaving cloud, are all as true and
faithful in their appeal to our instinct of danger, as the moaning or
wailing of the human voice itself is to our instinct of pity. It is not
a reasonable calculating terror which they awake in us; it is no matter
that we count distance by seconds, and measure probability by averages.
That shadow of the thunder-cloud will still do its work upon our hearts,
and we shall watch its passing away as if we stood upon the
threshing-floor of Araunah.

§ XLII. And this is equally the case with respect to all the other
destructive phenomena of the universe. From the mightiest of them to the
gentlest, from the earthquake to the summer shower, it will be found
that they are attended by certain aspects of threatening, which strike
terror into the hearts of multitudes more numerous a thousandfold than
those who actually suffer from the ministries of judgment; and that,
besides the fearfulness of these immediately dangerous phenomena, there
is an occult and subtle horror belonging to many aspects of the creation
around us, calculated often to fill us with serious thought, even in our
times of quietness and peace. I understand not the most dangerous,
because most attractive form of modern infidelity, which, pretending to
exalt the beneficence of the Deity, degrades it into a reckless
infinitude of mercy, and blind obliteration of the work of sin; and
which does this chiefly by dwelling on the manifold appearances of God's
kindness on the face of creation. Such kindness is indeed everywhere and
always visible; but not alone. Wrath and threatening are invariably
mingled with the love; and in the utmost solitudes of nature, the
existence of Hell seems to me as legibly declared by a thousand
spiritual utterances, as that of Heaven. It is well for us to dwell with
thankfulness on the unfolding of the flower, and the falling of the dew,
and the sleep of the green fields in the sunshine; but the blasted
trunk, the barren rock, the moaning of the bleak winds, the roar of the
black, perilous, merciless whirlpools of the mountain streams, the
solemn solitudes of moors and seas, the continual fading of all beauty
into darkness, and of all strength into dust, have these no language for
us? We may seek to escape their teaching by reasonings touching the good
which is wrought out of all evil; but it is vain sophistry. The good
succeeds to the evil as day succeeds the night, but so also the evil to
the good. Gerizim and Ebal, birth and death, light and darkness, heaven
and hell, divide the existence of man, and his Futurity.[39]

§ XLIII. And because the thoughts of the choice we have to make between
these two, ought to rule us continually, not so much in our own actions
(for these should, for the most part, be governed by settled habit and
principle) as in our manner of regarding the lives of other men, and our
own responsibilities with respect to them; therefore, it seems to me
that the healthiest state into which the human mind can be brought is
that which is capable of the greatest love, and the greatest awe: and
this we are taught even in our times of rest; for when our minds are
rightly in tone, the merely pleasurable excitement which they seek with
most avidity is that which rises out of the contemplation of beauty or
of terribleness. We thirst for both, and, according to the height and
tone of our feeling, desire to see them in noble or inferior forms. Thus
there is a Divine beauty, and a terribleness or sublimity coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of the highest art; and there is an
inferior or ornamental beauty, and an inferior terribleness coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of grotesque art. And the state of
mind in which the terrible form of the grotesque is developed, is that
which in some irregular manner, dwells upon certain conditions of
terribleness, into the complete depth of which it does not enter for the
time.

§ XLIV. Now the things which are the proper subjects of human fear are
twofold; those which have the power of Death, and those which have the
nature of Sin. Of which there are many ranks, greater or less in power
and vice, from the evil angels themselves down to the serpent which is
their type, and which though of a low and contemptible class, appears
to unite the deathful and sinful natures in the most clearly visible and
intelligible form; for there is nothing else which we know, of so small
strength and occupying so unimportant a place in the economy of
creation, which yet is so mortal and so malignant. It is, then, on these
two classes of objects that the mind fixes for its excitement, in that
mood which gives rise to the terrible grotesque; and its subject will be
found always to unite some expression of vice and danger, but regarded
in a peculiar temper; sometimes (A) of predetermined or involuntary
apathy, sometimes (B) of mockery, sometimes (C) of diseased and
ungoverned imaginativeness.

§ XLV. For observe, the difficulty which, as I above stated, exists in
distinguishing the playful from the terrible grotesque arises out of
this cause; that the mind, under certain phases of excitement, _plays_
with _terror_, and summons images which, if it were in another temper,
would be awful, but of which, either in weariness or in irony, it
refrains for the time to acknowledge the true terribleness. And the mode
in which this refusal takes place distinguishes the noble from the
ignoble grotesque. For the master of the noble grotesque knows the depth
of all at which he seems to mock, and would feel it at another time, or
feels it in a certain undercurrent of thought even while he jests with
it; but the workman of the ignoble grotesque can feel and understand
nothing, and mocks at all things with the laughter of the idiot and the
cretin.

To work out this distinction completely is the chief difficulty in our
present inquiry; and, in order to do so, let us consider the above-named
three conditions of mind in succession, with relation to objects of
terror.

§ _XLVI_. (A). Involuntary or predetermined apathy. We saw above that
the grotesque was produced, chiefly in subordinate or ornamental art, by
rude, and in some degree uneducated men, and in their times of rest. At
such times, and in such subordinate work, it is impossible that they
should represent any solemn or terrible subject with a full and serious
entrance into its feeling. It is not in the languor of a leisure hour
that a man will set his whole soul to conceive the means of representing
some important truth, nor to the projecting angle of a timber bracket
that he would trust its representation, if conceived. And yet, in this
languor, and in this trivial work, he must find some expression of the
serious part of his soul, of what there is within him capable of awe, as
well as of love. The more noble the man is, the more impossible it will
be for him to confine his thoughts to mere loveliness, and that of a low
order. Were his powers and his time unlimited, so that, like Frà
Angelico, he could paint the Seraphim, in that order of beauty he could
find contentment, bringing down heaven to earth. But by the conditions
of his being, by his hard-worked life, by his feeble powers of
execution, by the meanness of his employment and the languor of his
heart, he is bound down to earth. It is the world's work that he is
doing, and world's work is not to be done without fear. And whatever
there is of deep and eternal consciousness within him, thrilling his
mind with the sense of the presence of sin and death around him, must be
expressed in that slight work, and feeble way, come of it what will. He
cannot forget it, among all that he sees of beautiful in nature; he may
not bury himself among the leaves of the violet on the rocks, and of the
lily in the glen, and twine out of them garlands of perpetual gladness.
He sees more in the earth than these,--misery and wrath, and
discordance, and danger, and all the work of the dragon and his angels;
this he sees with too deep feeling ever to forget. And though when he
returns to his idle work,--it may be to gild the letters upon the page,
or to carve the timbers of the chamber, or the stones of the
pinnacle,--he cannot give his strength of thought any more to the woe or
to the danger, there is a shadow of them still present with him: and as
the bright colors mingle beneath his touch, and the fair leaves and
flowers grow at his bidding, strange horrors and phantasms rise by their
side; grisly beasts and venomous serpents, and spectral fiends and
nameless inconsistencies of ghastly life, rising out of things most
beautiful, and fading back into them again, as the harm and the horror
of life do out of its happiness. He has seen these things; he wars with
them daily; he cannot but give them their part in his work, though in a
state of comparative apathy to them at the time. He is but carving and
gilding, and must not turn aside to weep; but he knows that hell is
burning on, for all that, and the smoke of it withers his oak-leaves.

§ XLVII. Now, the feelings which give rise to the false or ignoble
grotesque, are exactly the reverse of these. In the true grotesque, a
man of naturally strong feeling is accidentally or resolutely apathetic;
in the false grotesque, a man naturally apathetic is forcing himself
into temporary excitement. The horror which is expressed by the one,
comes upon him whether he will or not; that which is expressed by the
other, is sought out by him, and elaborated by his art. And therefore,
also, because the fear of the one is true, and of true things, however
fantastic its expression may be, there will be reality in it, and force.
It is not a manufactured terribleness, whose author, when he had
finished it, knew not if it would terrify any one else or not: but it is
a terribleness taken from the life; a spectre which the workman indeed
saw, and which, as it appalled him, will appal us also. But the other
workman never felt any Divine fear; he never shuddered when he heard the
cry from the burning towers of the earth,

  "Venga Medusa; sì lo farem di smalto."

He is stone already, and needs no gentle hand laid upon his eyes to save
him.

§ XLVIII. I do not mean what I say in this place to apply to the
creations of the imagination. It is not as the creating but as the
_seeing_ man, that we are here contemplating the master of the true
grotesque. It is because the dreadfulness of the universe around him
weighs upon his heart, that his work is wild; and therefore through the
whole of it we shall find the evidence of deep insight into nature. His
beasts and birds, however monstrous, will have profound relations with
the true. He may be an ignorant man, and little acquainted with the laws
of nature; he is certainly a busy man, and has not much time to watch
nature; but he never saw a serpent cross his path, nor a bird flit
across the sky, nor a lizard bask upon a stone, without learning so much
of the sublimity and inner nature of each as will not suffer him
thenceforth to conceive them coldly. He may not be able to carve plumes
or scales well; but his creatures will bite and fly, for all that. The
ignoble workman is the very reverse of this. He never felt, never looked
at nature; and if he endeavor to imitate the work of the other, all his
touches will be made at random, and all his extravagances will be
ineffective; he may knit brows, and twist lips, and lengthen beaks, and
sharpen teeth, but it will be all in vain. He may make his creatures
disgusting, but never fearful.

§ XLIX. There is, however, often another cause of difference than this.
The true grotesque being the expression of the _repose_ or play of a
_serious_ mind, there is a false grotesque opposed to it, which is the
result of the _full exertion_ of a _frivolous_ one. There is much
grotesque which is wrought out with exquisite care and pains, and as
much labor given to it as if it were of the noblest subject; so that the
workman is evidently no longer apathetic, and has no excuse for
unconnectedness of thought, or sudden unreasonable fear. If he awakens
horror now, it ought to be in some truly sublime form. His strength is
in his work; and he must not give way to sudden humor, and fits of
erratic fancy. If he does so, it must be because his mind is naturally
frivolous, or is for the time degraded into the deliberate pursuit of
frivolity. And herein lies the real distinction between the base
grotesque of Raphael and the Renaissance, above alluded to, and the true
Gothic grotesque. Those grotesques or arabesques of the Vatican, and
other such work, which have become the patterns of ornamentation in
modern times, are the fruit of great minds degraded to base objects. The
care, skill, and science, applied to the distribution of the leaves, and
the drawing of the figures, are intense, admirable, and accurate;
therefore, they ought to have produced a grand and serious work, not a
tissue of nonsense. If we can draw the human head perfectly, and are
masters of its expression and its beauty, we have no business to cut it
off, and hang it up by the hair at the end of a garland. If we can draw
the human body in the perfection of its grace and movement, we have no
business to take away its limbs, and terminate it with a bunch of
leaves. Or rather our doing so will imply that there is something wrong
with us; that, if we can consent to use our best powers for such base
and vain trifling, there must be something wanting in the powers
themselves; and that, however skilful we may be, or however learned, we
are wanting both in the earnestness which can apprehend a noble truth,
and in the thoughtfulness which can feel a noble fear. No Divine terror
will ever be found in the work of the man who wastes a colossal strength
in elaborating toys; for the first lesson which that terror is sent to
teach us, is the value of the human soul, and the shortness of mortal
time.

§ L. And are we never, then, it will be asked, to possess a refined or
perfect ornamentation? Must all decoration be the work of the ignorant
and the rude? Not so; but exactly in proportion as the ignorance and
rudeness diminish, must the ornamentation become rational, and the
grotesqueness disappear. The noblest lessons may be taught in
ornamentation, the most solemn truths compressed into it. The Book of
Genesis, in all the fulness of its incidents, in all the depth of its
meaning, is bound within the leaf-borders of the gates of Ghiberti. But
Raphael's arabesque is mere elaborate idleness. It has neither meaning
nor heart in it; it is an unnatural and monstrous abortion.

§ LI. Now, this passing of the grotesque into higher art, as the mind of
the workman becomes informed with better knowledge, and capable of more
earnest exertion, takes place in two ways. Either, as his power
increases, he devotes himself more and more to the beauty which he now
feels himself able to express, and so the grotesqueness expands, and
softens into the beautiful, as in the above-named instance of the gates
of Ghiberti; or else, if the mind of the workman be naturally inclined
to gloomy contemplation, the imperfection or apathy of his work rises
into nobler terribleness, until we reach the point of the grotesque of
Albert Durer, where, every now and then, the playfulness or apathy of
the painter passes into perfect sublime. Take the Adam and Eve, for
instance. When he gave Adam a bough to hold, with a parrot on it, and a
tablet hung to it, with "Albertus Durer Noricus faciebat, 1504,"
thereupon, his mind was not in Paradise. He was half in play, half
apathetic with respect to his subject, thinking how to do his work well,
as a wise master-graver, and how to receive his just reward of fame. But
he rose into the true sublime in the head of Adam, and in the profound
truthfulness of every creature that fills the forest. So again in that
magnificent coat of arms, with the lady and the satyr, as he cast the
fluttering drapery hither and thither around the helmet, and wove the
delicate crown upon the woman's forehead, he was in a kind of play; but
there is none in the dreadful skull upon the shield. And in the "Knight
and Death," and in the dragons of the illustrations to the Apocalypse,
there is neither play nor apathy; but their grotesque is of the ghastly
kind which best illustrates the nature of death and sin. And this leads
us to the consideration of the second state of mind out of which the
noble grotesque is developed; that is to say, the temper of mockery.

§ LII. (B). Mockery, or Satire. In the former part of this chapter, when
I spoke of the kinds of art which were produced in the recreation of the
lower orders, I only spoke of forms of ornament, not of the expression
of satire or humor. But it seems probable, that nothing is so refreshing
to the vulgar mind as some exercise of this faculty, more especially on
the failings of their superiors; and that, wherever the lower orders are
allowed to express themselves freely, we shall find humor, more or less
caustic, becoming a principal feature in their work. The classical and
Renaissance manufacturers of modern times having silenced the
independent language of the operative, his humor and satire pass away in
the word-wit which has of late become the especial study of the group of
authors headed by Charles Dickens; all this power was formerly thrown
into noble art, and became permanently expressed in the sculptures of
the cathedral. It was never thought that there was anything discordant
or improper in such a position: for the builders evidently felt very
deeply a truth of which, in modern times, we are less cognizant; that
folly and sin are, to a certain extent, synonymous, and that it would be
well for mankind in general, if all could be made to feel that
wickedness is as contemptible as it is hateful. So that the vices were
permitted to be represented under the most ridiculous forms, and all the
coarsest wit of the workman to be exhausted in completing the
degradation of the creatures supposed to be subjected to them.

§ LIII. Nor were even the supernatural powers of evil exempt from this
species of satire. For with whatever hatred or horror the evil angels
were regarded, it was one of the conditions of Christianity that they
should also be looked upon as vanquished; and this not merely in their
great combat with the King of Saints, but in daily and hourly combats
with the weakest of His servants. In proportion to the narrowness of the
powers of abstract conception in the workman, the nobleness of the idea
of spiritual nature diminished, and the traditions of the encounters of
men with fiends in daily temptations were imagined with less terrific
circumstances, until the agencies which in such warfare were almost
always represented as vanquished with disgrace, became, at last, as much
the objects of contempt as of terror.

The superstitions which represented the devil as assuming various
contemptible forms of disguises in order to accomplish his purposes
aided this gradual degradation of conception, and directed the study of
the workman to the most strange and ugly conditions of animal form,
until at last, even in the most serious subjects, the fiends are oftener
ludicrous than terrible. Nor, indeed, is this altogether avoidable, for
it is not possible to express intense wickedness without some condition
of degradation. Malice, subtlety, and pride, in their extreme, cannot be
written upon noble forms; and I am aware of no effort to represent the
Satanic mind in the angelic form, which has succeeded in painting.
Milton succeeds only because he separately describes the movements of
the mind, and therefore leaves himself at liberty to make the form
heroic; but that form is never distinct enough to be painted. Dante, who
will not leave even external forms obscure, degrades them before he can
feel them to be demoniacal; so also John Bunyan: both of them, I think,
having firmer faith than Milton's in their own creations, and deeper
insight into the nature of sin. Milton makes his fiends too noble, and
misses the foulness, inconstancy, and fury of wickedness. His Satan
possesses some virtues, not the less virtues for being applied to evil
purpose. Courage, resolution, patience, deliberation in council, this
latter being eminently a wise and holy character, as opposed to the
"Insania" of excessive sin: and all this, if not a shallow and false, is
a smooth and artistical, conception. On the other hand, I have always
felt that there was a peculiar grandeur in the indescribable,
ungovernable fury of Dante's fiends, ever shortening its own powers, and
disappointing its own purposes; the deaf, blind, speechless, unspeakable
rage, fierce as the lightning, but erring from its mark or turning
senselessly against itself, and still further debased by foulness of
form and action. Something is indeed to be allowed for the rude feelings
of the time, but I believe all such men as Dante are sent into the world
at the time when they can do their work best; and that, it being
appointed for him to give to mankind the most vigorous realization
possible both of Hell and Heaven, he was born both in the country and at
the time which furnished the most stern opposition of Horror and Beauty,
and permitted it to be written in the clearest terms. And, therefore,
though there are passages in the "Inferno" which it would be impossible
for any poet now to write, I look upon it as all the more perfect for
them. For there can be no question but that one characteristic of
excessive vice is indecency, a general baseness in its thoughts and acts
concerning the body,[40] and that the full portraiture of it cannot be
given without marking, and that in the strongest lines, this tendency to
corporeal degradation; which, in the time of Dante, could be done
frankly, but cannot now. And, therefore, I think the twenty-first and
twenty-second books of the "Inferno" the most perfect portraitures of
fiendish nature which we possess; and at the same time, in their
mingling of the extreme of horror (for it seems to me that the silent
swiftness of the first demon, "con l'ali aperte e sovra i pie leggiero,"
cannot be surpassed in dreadfulness) with ludicrous actions and images,
they present the most perfect instances with which I am acquainted of
the terrible grotesque. But the whole of the "Inferno" is full of this
grotesque, as well as the "Faërie Queen;" and these two poems, together
with the works of Albert Durer, will enable the reader to study it in
its noblest forms, without reference to Gothic cathedrals.

§ LIV. Now, just as there are base and noble conditions of the apathetic
grotesque, so also are there of this satirical grotesque. The condition
which might be mistaken for it is that above described as resulting from
the malice of men given to pleasure, and in which the grossness and
foulness are in the workman as much as in his subject, so that he
chooses to represent vice and disease rather than virtue and beauty,
having his chief delight in contemplating them; though he still mocks at
them with such dull wit as may be in him, because, as Young has said
most truly,

  "'Tis not in folly not to scorn a fool."

§ LV. Now it is easy to distinguish this grotesque from its noble
counterpart, by merely observing whether any forms of beauty or dignity
are mingled with it or not; for, of course, the noble grotesque is only
employed by its master for good purposes, and to contrast with beauty:
but the base workman cannot conceive anything but what is base; and
there will be no loveliness in any part of his work, or, at the best, a
loveliness measured by line and rule, and dependent on legal shapes of
feature. But, without resorting to this test, and merely by examining
the ugly grotesque itself, it will be found that, if it belongs to the
base school, there will be, first, no Horror in it; secondly, no Nature
in it; and, thirdly, no Mercy in it.

§ LVI. I say, first, no Horror. For the base soul has no fear of sin,
and no hatred of it: and, however it may strive to make its work
terrible, there will be no genuineness in the fear; the utmost it can do
will be to make its work disgusting.

Secondly, there will be no Nature in it. It appears to be one of the
ends proposed by Providence in the appointment of the forms of the brute
creation, that the various vices to which mankind are liable should be
severally expressed in them so distinctly and clearly as that men could
not but understand the lesson; while yet these conditions of vice might,
in the inferior animal, be observed without the disgust and hatred which
the same vices would excite, if seen in men, and might be associated
with features of interest which would otherwise attract and reward
contemplation. Thus, ferocity, cunning, sloth, discontent, gluttony,
uncleanness, and cruelty are seen, each in its extreme, in various
animals; and are so vigorously expressed, that when men desire to
indicate the same vices in connexion with human forms, they can do it no
better than by borrowing here and there the features of animals. And
when the workman is thus led to the contemplation of the animal kingdom,
finding therein the expressions of vice which he needs, associated with
power, and nobleness, and freedom from disease, if his mind be of right
tone he becomes interested in this new study; and all noble grotesque
is, therefore, full of the most admirable rendering of animal character.
But the ignoble workman is capable of no interest of this kind; and,
being too dull to appreciate, and too idle to execute, the subtle and
wonderful lines on which the expression of the lower animal depends, he
contents himself with vulgar exaggeration, and leaves his work as false
as it is monstrous, a mass of blunt malice and obscene ignorance.

§ LVII. Lastly, there will be no Mercy in it. Wherever the satire of the
noble grotesque fixes upon human nature, it does so with much sorrow
mingled amidst its indignation: in its highest forms there is an
infinite tenderness, like that of the fool in Lear; and even in its more
heedless or bitter sarcasm, it never loses sight altogether of the
better nature of what it attacks, nor refuses to acknowledge its
redeeming or pardonable features. But the ignoble grotesque has no pity:
it rejoices in iniquity, and exists only to slander.

§ LVIII. I have not space to follow out the various forms of transition
which exist between the two extremes of great and base in the satirical
grotesque. The reader must always remember, that, although there is an
infinite distance between the best and worst, in this kind the interval
is filled by endless conditions more or less inclining to the evil or
the good; impurity and malice stealing gradually into the nobler forms,
and invention and wit elevating the lower, according to the countless
minglings of the elements of the human soul.

§ LIX. (C). Ungovernableness of the imagination. The reader is always to
keep in mind that if the objects of horror, in which the terrible
grotesque finds its materials, were contemplated in their true light,
and with the entire energy of the soul, they would cease to be
grotesque, and become altogether sublime; and that therefore it is some
shortening of the power, or the will, of contemplation, and some
consequent distortion of the terrible image in which the grotesqueness
consists. Now this distortion takes place, it was above asserted, in
three ways: either through apathy, satire, or ungovernableness of
imagination. It is this last cause of the grotesque which we have
finally to consider; namely, the error and wildness of the mental
impressions, caused by fear operating upon strong powers of imagination,
or by the failure of the human faculties in the endeavor to grasp the
highest truths.

§ LX. The grotesque which comes to all men in a disturbed dream is the
most intelligible example of this kind, but also the most ignoble; the
imagination, in this instance, being entirely deprived of all aid from
reason, and incapable of self-government. I believe, however, that the
noblest forms of imaginative power are also in some sort ungovernable,
and have in them something of the character of dreams; so that the
vision, of whatever kind, comes uncalled, and will not submit itself to
the seer, but conquers him, and forces him to speak as a prophet,
having no power over his words or thoughts.[41] Only, if the whole man
be trained perfectly, and his mind calm, consistent and powerful, the
vision which comes to him is seen as in a perfect mirror, serenely, and
in consistence with the rational powers; but if the mind be imperfect
and ill trained, the vision is seen as in a broken mirror, with strange
distortions and discrepancies, all the passions of the heart breathing
upon it in cross ripples, till hardly a trace of it remains unbroken. So
that, strictly speaking, the imagination is never governed; it is always
the ruling and Divine power: and the rest of the man is to it only as an
instrument which it sounds, or a tablet on which it writes; clearly and
sublimely if the wax be smooth and the strings true, grotesquely and
wildly if they are stained and broken. And thus the "Iliad," the
"Inferno," the "Pilgrim's Progress," the "Faërie Queen," are all of them
true dreams; only the sleep of the men to whom they came was the deep,
living sleep which God sends, with a sacredness in it, as of death, the
revealer of secrets.

§ LXI. Now, observe in this matter, carefully, the difference between a
dim mirror and a distorted one; and do not blame me for pressing the
analogy too far, for it will enable me to explain my meaning every way
more clearly. Most men's minds are dim mirrors, in which all truth is
seen, as St. Paul tells us, darkly: this is the fault most common and
most fatal; dulness of the heart and mistiness of sight, increasing to
utter hardness and blindness; Satan breathing upon the glass, so that if
we do not sweep the mist laboriously away, it will take no image. But,
even so far as we are able to do this, we have still the distortion to
fear, yet not to the same extent, for we can in some sort allow for the
distortion of an image, if only we can see it clearly. And the fallen
human soul, at its best, must be as a diminishing glass, and that a
broken one, to the mighty truths of the universe round it; and the wider
the scope of its glance, and the vaster the truths into which it obtains
an insight, the more fantastic their distortion is likely to be, as the
winds and vapors trouble the field of the telescope most when it reaches
farthest.

§ LXII. Now, so far as the truth is seen by the imagination[42] in its
wholeness and quietness, the vision is sublime; but so far as it is
narrowed and broken by the inconsistencies of the human capacity, it
becomes grotesque; and it would seem to be rare that any very exalted
truth should be impressed on the imagination without some grotesqueness
in its aspect, proportioned to the degree of _diminution of breadth_ in
the grasp which is given of it. Nearly all the dreams recorded in the
Bible,--Jacob's, Joseph's, Pharaoh's, Nebuchadnezzar's,--are grotesques;
and nearly the whole of the accessary scenery in the books of Ezekiel
and the Apocalypse. Thus, Jacob's dream revealed to him the ministry of
angels; but because this ministry could not be seen or understood by him
in its fulness, it was narrowed to him into a ladder between heaven and
earth, which was a grotesque. Joseph's two dreams were evidently
intended to be signs of the steadfastness of the Divine purpose towards
him, by possessing the clearness of special prophecy; yet were couched
in such imagery, as not to inform him prematurely of his destiny, and
only to be understood after their fulfilment. The sun, and moon, and
stars were at the period, and are indeed throughout the Bible, the
symbols of high authority. It was not revealed to Joseph that he should
be lord over all Egypt; but the representation of his family by symbols
of the most magnificent dominion, and yet as subject to him, must have
been afterwards felt by him as a distinctly prophetic indication of his
own supreme power. It was not revealed to him that the occasion of his
brethren's special humiliation before him should be their coming to buy
corn; but when the event took place, must he not have felt that there
was prophetic purpose in the form of the sheaves of wheat which first
imaged forth their subjection to him? And these two images of the sun
doing obeisance, and the sheaves bowing down,--narrowed and imperfect
intimations of great truth which yet could not be otherwise
conveyed,--are both grotesque. The kine of Pharaoh eating each other,
the gold and clay of Nebuchadnezzar's image, the four beasts full of
eyes, and other imagery of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse, are grotesques of
the same kind, on which I need not further insist.

§ LXIII. Such forms, however, ought perhaps to have been arranged under
a separate head, as Symbolical Grotesque; but the element of awe enters
into them so strongly, as to justify, for all our present purposes,
their being classed with the other varieties of terrible grotesque. For
even if the symbolic vision itself be not terrible, the sense of what
may be veiled behind it becomes all the more awful in proportion to the
insignificance or strangeness of the sign itself; and, I believe, this
thrill of mingled doubt, fear, and curiosity lies at the very root of
the delight which mankind take in symbolism. It was not an accidental
necessity for the conveyance of truth by pictures instead of words,
which led to its universal adoption wherever art was on the advance; but
the Divine fear which necessarily follows on the understanding that a
thing is other and greater than it seems; and which, it appears
probable, has been rendered peculiarly attractive to the human heart,
because God would have us understand that this is true not of invented
symbols merely, but of all things amidst which we live; that there is a
deeper meaning within them than eye hath seen, or ear hath heard; and
that the whole visible creation is a mere perishable symbol of things
eternal and true. It cannot but have been sometimes a subject of wonder
with thoughtful men, how fondly, age after age, the Church has cherished
the belief that the four living creatures which surrounded the
Apocalyptic throne were symbols of the four Evangelists, and rejoiced
to use those forms in its picture-teaching; that a calf, a lion, an
eagle, and a beast with a man's face, should in all ages have been
preferred by the Christian world, as expressive of Evangelistic power
and inspiration, to the majesty of human forms; and that quaint
grotesques, awkward and often ludicrous caricatures even of the animals
represented, should have been regarded by all men, not only with
contentment, but with awe, and have superseded all endeavors to
represent the characters and persons of the Evangelistic writers
themselves (except in a few instances, confined principally to works
undertaken without a definite religious purpose);--this, I say, might
appear more than strange to us, were it not that we ourselves share the
awe, and are still satisfied with the symbol, and that justly. For,
whether we are conscious of it or not, there is in our hearts, as we
gaze upon the brutal forms that have so holy a signification, an
acknowledgment that it was not Matthew, nor Mark, nor Luke, nor John, in
whom the Gospel of Christ was unsealed: but that the invisible things of
Him from the beginning of the creation are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made; that the whole world, and all
that is therein, be it low or high, great or small, is a continual
Gospel; and that as the heathen, in their alienation from God, changed
His glory into an image made like unto corruptible man, and to birds,
and four-footed beasts, the Christian, in his approach to God, is to
undo this work, and to change the corruptible things into the image of
His glory; believing that there is nothing so base in creation, but that
our faith may give it wings which shall raise us into companionship with
heaven; and that, on the other hand, there is nothing so great or so
goodly in creation, but that it is a mean symbol of the Gospel of
Christ, and of the things He has prepared for them that love Him.

§ LXIV. And it is easy to understand, if we follow out this thought,
how, when once the symbolic language was familiarized to the mind, and
its solemnity felt in all its fulness, there was no likelihood of
offence being taken at any repulsive or feeble characters in execution
or conception. There was no form so mean, no incident so commonplace,
but, if regarded in this light, it might become sublime; the more
vigorous the fancy and the more faithful the enthusiasm, the greater
would be the likelihood of their delighting in the contemplation of
symbols whose mystery was enhanced by apparent insignificance, or in
which the sanctity and majesty of meaning were contrasted with the
utmost uncouthness of external form: nor with uncouthness merely, but
even with every appearance of malignity or baseness; the beholder not
being revolted even by this, but comprehending that, as the seeming evil
in the framework of creation did not invalidate its Divine authorship,
so neither did the evil or imperfection in the symbol invalidate its
Divine message. And thus, sometimes, the designer at last became wanton
in his appeal to the piety of his interpreter, and recklessly poured out
the impurity and the savageness of his own heart, for the mere pleasure
of seeing them overlaid with the fine gold of the sanctuary, by the
religion of their beholder.

§ LXV. It is not, however, in every symbolical subject that the fearful
grotesque becomes embodied to the full. The element of distortion which
affects the intellect when dealing with subjects above its proper
capacity, is as nothing compared with that which it sustains from the
direct impressions of terror. It is the trembling of the human soul in
the presence of death which most of all disturbs the images on the
intellectual mirror, and invests them with the fitfulness and
ghastliness of dreams. And from the contemplation of death, and of the
pangs which follow his footsteps, arise in men's hearts the troop of
strange and irresistible superstitions which, more or less melancholy or
majestic according to the dignity of the mind they impress, are yet
never without a certain grotesqueness, following on the paralysis of the
reason and over-excitement of the fancy. I do not mean to deny the
actual existence of spiritual manifestations; I have never weighed the
evidence upon the subject; but with these, if such exist, we are not
here concerned. The grotesque which we are examining arises out of that
condition of mind which appears to follow naturally upon the
contemplation of death, and in which the fancy is brought into morbid
action by terror, accompanied by the belief in spiritual presence, and
in the possibility of spiritual apparition. Hence are developed its most
sublime, because its least voluntary, creations, aided by the
fearfulness of the phenomena of nature which are in any wise the
ministers of death, and primarily directed by the peculiar ghastliness
of expression in the skeleton, itself a species of terrible grotesque in
its relation to the perfect human frame.

§ LXVI. Thus, first born from the dusty and dreadful whiteness of the
charnel house, but softened in their forms by the holiest of human
affections, went forth the troop of wild and wonderful images, seen
through tears, that had the mastery over our Northern hearts for so many
ages. The powers of sudden destruction lurking in the woods and waters,
in the rocks and clouds;--kelpie and gnome, Lurlei and Hartz spirits;
the wraith and foreboding phantom; the spectra of second sight; the
various conceptions of avenging or tormented ghost, haunting the
perpetrator of crime, or expiating its commission; and the half
fictitious and contemplative, half visionary and believed images of the
presence of death itself, doing its daily work in the chambers of
sickness and sin, and waiting for its hour in the fortalices of strength
and the high places of pleasure;--these, partly degrading us by the
instinctive and paralyzing terror with which they are attended, and
partly ennobling us by leading our thoughts to dwell in the eternal
world, fill the last and the most important circle in that great kingdom
of dark and distorted power, of which we all must be in some sort the
subjects until mortality shall be swallowed up of life; until the waters
of the last fordless river cease to roll their untransparent volume
between us and the light of heaven, and neither death stand between us
and our brethren, nor symbols between us and our God.

§ LXVII. We have now, I believe, obtained a view approaching to
completeness of the various branches of human feeling which are
concerned in the developement of this peculiar form of art. It remains
for us only to note, as briefly as possible, what facts in the actual
history of the grotesque bear upon our immediate subject.

From what we have seen to be its nature, we must, I think, be led to one
most important conclusion; that wherever the human mind is healthy and
vigorous in all its proportions, great in imagination and emotion no
less than in intellect, and not overborne by an undue or hardened
preëminence of the mere reasoning faculties, there the grotesque will
exist in full energy. And, accordingly, I believe that there is no test
of greatness in periods, nations, or men, more sure than the
developement, among them or in them, of a noble grotesque, and no test
of comparative smallness or limitation, of one kind or another, more
sure than the absence of grotesque invention, or incapability of
understanding it. I think that the central man of all the world, as
representing in perfect balance the imaginative, moral, and intellectual
faculties, all at their highest, is Dante; and in him the grotesque
reaches at once the most distinct and the most noble developement to
which it was ever brought in the human mind. The two other greatest men
whom Italy has produced, Michael Angelo and Tintoret, show the same
element in no less original strength, but oppressed in the one by his
science, and in both by the spirit of the age in which they lived;
never, however, absent even in Michael Angelo, but stealing forth
continually in a strange and spectral way, lurking in folds of raiment
and knots of wild hair, and mountainous confusions of craggy limb and
cloudy drapery; and, in Tintoret, ruling the entire conceptions of his
greatest works to such a degree that they are an enigma or an offence,
even to this day, to all the petty disciples of a formal criticism. Of
the grotesque in our own Shakspeare I need hardly speak, nor of its
intolerableness to his French critics; nor of that of Æschylus and
Homer, as opposed to the lower Greek writers; and so I believe it will
be found, at all periods, in all minds of the first order.

§ LXVIII. As an index of the greatness of nations, it is a less certain
test, or, rather, we are not so well agreed on the meaning of the term
"greatness" respecting them. A nation may produce a great effect, and
take up a high place in the world's history, by the temporary enthusiasm
or fury of its multitudes, without being truly great; or, on the other
hand, the discipline of morality and common sense may extend its
physical power or exalt its well-being, while yet its creative and
imaginative powers are continually diminishing. And again: a people may
take so definite a lead over all the rest of the world in one direction,
as to obtain a respect which is not justly due to them if judged on
universal grounds. Thus the Greeks perfected the sculpture of the human
body; threw their literature into a disciplined form, which has given it
a peculiar power over certain conditions of modern mind; and were the
most carefully educated race that the world has seen; but a few years
hence, I believe, we shall no longer think them a greater people than
either the Egyptians or Assyrians.

§ LXIX. If, then, ridding ourselves as far as possible of prejudices
owing merely to the school-teaching which remains from the system of the
Renaissance, we set ourselves to discover in what races the human soul,
taken all in all, reached its highest magnificence, we shall find, I
believe, two great families of men, one of the East and South, the other
of the West and North: the one including the Egyptians, Jews, Arabians,
Assyrians, and Persians; the other, I know not whence derived, but
seeming to flow forth from Scandinavia, and filling the whole of Europe
with its Norman and Gothic energy. And in both these families, wherever
they are seen in their utmost nobleness, there the grotesque is
developed in its utmost energy; and I hardly know whether most to admire
the winged bulls of Nineveh, or the winged dragons of Verona.

§ LXX. The reader who has not before turned his attention to this
subject may, however, at first have some difficulty in distinguishing
between the noble grotesque of these great nations, and the barbarous
grotesque of mere savages, as seen in the work of the Hindoo and other
Indian nations; or, more grossly still, in that of the complete savage
of the Pacific islands; or if, as is to be hoped, he instinctively
feels the difference, he may yet find difficulty in determining wherein
that difference consists. But he will discover, on consideration, that
the noble grotesque _involves the true appreciation of beauty_, though
the mind may wilfully turn to other images or the hand resolutely stop
short of the perfection which it must fail, if it endeavored, to reach;
while the grotesque of the Sandwich islander involves no perception or
imagination of anything above itself. He will find that in the exact
proportion in which the grotesque results from an incapability of
perceiving beauty, it becomes savage or barbarous; and that there are
many stages of progress to be found in it even in its best times, much
truly savage grotesque occurring in the fine Gothic periods, mingled
with the other forms of the ignoble grotesque resulting from vicious
inclinations or base sportiveness. Nothing is more mysterious in the
history of the human mind, than the manner in which gross and ludicrous
images are mingled with the most solemn subjects in the work of the
middle ages, whether of sculpture or illumination; and although, in
great part, such incongruities are to be accounted for on the various
principles which I have above endeavored to define, in many instances
they are clearly the result of vice and sensuality. The general
greatness of seriousness of an age does not effect the restoration of
human nature; and it would be strange, if, in the midst of the art even
of the best periods, when that art was entrusted to myriads of workmen,
we found no manifestations of impiety, folly, or impurity.

§ LXXI. It needs only to be added that in the noble grotesque, as it is
partly the result of a morbid state of the imaginative power, that power
itself will be always seen in a high degree; and that therefore our
power of judging of the rank of a grotesque work will depend on the
degree in which we are in general sensible of the presence of invention.
The reader may partly test this power in himself by referring to the
Plate given in the opening of this chapter, in which, on the left, is a
piece of noble and inventive grotesque, a head of the lion-symbol of St.
Mark, from the Veronese Gothic; the other is a head introduced as a
boss on the foundation of the Palazzo Corner della Regina at Venice,
utterly devoid of invention, made merely monstrous by exaggerations of
the eyeballs and cheeks, and generally characteristic of that late
Renaissance grotesque of Venice, with which we are at present more
immediately concerned.[43]

§ LXXII. The developement of that grotesque took place under different
laws from those which regulate it in any other European city. For, great
as we have seen the Byzantine mind show itself to be in other
directions, it was marked as that of a declining nation by the absence
of the grotesque element; and, owing to its influence, the early
Venetian Gothic remained inferior to all other schools in this
particular character. Nothing can well be more wonderful than its
instant failure in any attempt at the representation of ludicrous or
fearful images, more especially when it is compared with the magnificent
grotesque of the neighboring city of Verona, in which the Lombard
influence had full sway. Nor was it until the last links of connexion
with Constantinople had been dissolved, that the strength of the
Venetian mind could manifest itself in this direction. But it had then a
new enemy to encounter. The Renaissance laws altogether checked its
imagination in architecture; and it could only obtain permission to
express itself by starting forth in the work of the Venetian painters,
filling them with monkeys and dwarfs, even amidst the most serious
subjects, and leading Veronese and Tintoret to the most unexpected and
wild fantasies of form and color.

§ LXXIII. We may be deeply thankful for this peculiar reserve of the
Gothic grotesque character to the last days of Venice. All over the rest
of Europe it had been strongest in the days of imperfect art;
magnificently powerful throughout the whole of the thirteenth century,
tamed gradually in the fourteenth and fifteenth, and expiring in the
sixteenth amidst anatomy and laws of art. But at Venice, it had not been
received when it was elsewhere in triumph, and it fled to the lagoons
for shelter when elsewhere it was oppressed. And it was arrayed by the
Venetian painters in robes of state, and advanced by them to such honor
as it had never received in its days of widest dominion; while, in
return, it bestowed upon their pictures that fulness, piquancy, decision
of parts, and mosaic-like intermingling of fancies, alternately
brilliant and sublime, which were exactly what was most needed for the
developement of their unapproachable color-power.

§ LXXIV. Yet, observe, it by no means follows that because the grotesque
does not appear in the art of a nation, the sense of it does not exist
in the national mind. Except in the form of caricature, it is hardly
traceable in the English work of the present day; but the minds of our
workmen are full of it, if we would only allow them to give it shape.
They express it daily in gesture and gibe, but are not allowed to do so
where it would be useful. In like manner, though the Byzantine influence
repressed it in the early Venetian architecture, it was always present
in the Venetian mind, and showed itself in various forms of national
custom and festival; _acted_ grotesques, full of wit, feeling, and
good-humor. The ceremony of the hat and the orange, described in the
beginning of this chapter, is one instance out of multitudes. Another,
more rude, and exceedingly characteristic, was that instituted in the
twelfth century in memorial of the submission of Woldaric, the patriarch
of Aquileia, who, having taken up arms against the patriarch of Grado,
and being defeated and taken prisoner by the Venetians, was sentenced,
not to death, but to send every year on "Fat Thursday" sixty-two large
loaves, twelve fat pigs, and a bull, to the Doge; the bull being
understood to represent the patriarch, and the twelve pigs his clergy:
and the ceremonies of the day consisting in the decapitation of these
representatives, and a distribution of their joints among the senators;
together with a symbolic record of the attack upon Aquileia, by the
erection of a wooden castle in the rooms of the Ducal Palace, which the
_Doge and the Senate_ attacked and demolished with clubs. As long as the
Doge and the Senate were truly kingly and noble, they were content to
let this ceremony be continued; but when they became proud and selfish,
and were destroying both themselves and the state by their luxury, they
found it inconsistent with their dignity, and it was abolished, as far
as the Senate was concerned, in 1549.[44]

§ LXXV. By these and other similar manifestations, the grotesque spirit
is traceable through all the strength of the Venetian people. But again:
it is necessary that we should carefully distinguish between it and the
spirit of mere levity. I said, in the fifth chapter, that the Venetians
were distinctively a serious people, serious, that is to say, in the
sense in which the English are a more serious people than the French;
though the habitual intercourse of our lower classes in London has a
tone of humor in it which I believe is untraceable in that of the
Parisian populace. It is one thing to indulge in playful rest, and
another to be devoted to the pursuit of pleasure: and gaiety of heart
during the reaction after hard labor, and quickened by satisfaction in
the accomplished duty or perfected result, is altogether compatible
with, nay, even in some sort arises naturally out of, a deep internal
seriousness of disposition; this latter being exactly the condition of
mind which, as we have seen, leads to the richest developements of the
playful grotesque; while, on the contrary, the continual pursuit of
pleasure deprives the soul of all alacrity and elasticity, and leaves it
incapable of happy jesting, capable only of that which is bitter, base,
and foolish. Thus, throughout the whole of the early career of the
Venetians, though there is much jesting, there is no levity; on the
contrary there is an intense earnestness both in their pursuit of
commercial and political successes, and in their devotion to
religion,[45] which led gradually to the formation of that highly
wrought mingling of immovable resolution with secret thoughtfulness,
which so strangely, sometimes so darkly, distinguishes the Venetian
character at the time of their highest power, when the seriousness was
left, but the conscientiousness destroyed. And if there be any one sign
by which the Venetian countenance, as it is recorded for us, to the very
life, by a school of portraiture which has never been equalled (chiefly
because no portraiture ever had subjects so noble),--I say, if there be
one thing more notable than another in the Venetian features, it is this
deep pensiveness and solemnity. In other districts of Italy, the dignity
of the heads which occur in the most celebrated compositions is clearly
owing to the feeling of the painter. He has visibly raised or idealized
his models, and appears always to be veiling the faults or failings of
the human nature around him, so that the best of his work is that which
has most perfectly taken the color of his own mind; and the least
impressive, if not the least valuable, that which appears to have been
unaffected and unmodified portraiture. But at Venice, all is exactly the
reverse of this. The tone of mind in the painter appears often in some
degree frivolous or sensual; delighting in costume, in domestic and
grotesque incident, and in studies of the naked form. But the moment he
gives himself definitely to portraiture, all is noble and grave; the
more literally true his work, the more majestic; and the same artist who
will produce little beyond what is commonplace in painting a Madonna or
an apostle, will rise into unapproachable sublimity when his subject is
a member of the Forty, or a Master of the Mint.

Such, then, were the general tone and progress of the Venetian mind, up
to the close of the seventeenth century. First, serious, religious, and
sincere; then, though serious still, comparatively deprived of
conscientiousness, and apt to decline into stern and subtle policy: in
the first case, the spirit of the noble grotesque not showing itself in
art at all, but only in speech and action; in the second case,
developing itself in painting, through accessories and vivacities of
composition, while perfect dignity was always preserved in portraiture.
A third phase rapidly developed itself.

§ LXXVI. Once more, and for the last time, let me refer the reader to
the important epoch of the death of the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo in 1423,
long ago indicated as the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power. That commencement is marked, not merely by the words of the dying
Prince, but by a great and clearly legible sign. It is recorded, that on
the accession of his successor, Foscari, to the throne, "SI FESTEGGIO
DALLA CITTA UNO ANNO INTERO:" "The city kept festival for a whole year."
Venice had in her childhood sown, in tears, the harvest she was to reap
in rejoicing. She now sowed in laughter the seeds of death.

Thenceforward, year after year, the nation drank with deeper thirst from
the fountains of forbidden pleasure, and dug for springs, hitherto
unknown, in the dark places of the earth. In the ingenuity of
indulgence, in the varieties of vanity, Venice surpassed the cities of
Christendom, as of old she surpassed them in fortitude and devotion; and
as once the powers of Europe stood before her judgment-seat, to receive
the decisions of her justice, so now the youth of Europe assembled in
the halls of her luxury, to learn from her the arts of delight.

It is as needless, as it is painful, to trace the steps of her final
ruin. That ancient curse was upon her, the curse of the cities of the
plain, "Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness." By the
inner burning of her own passions, as fatal as the fiery reign of
Gomorrah, she was consumed from her place among the nations; and her
ashes are choking the channels of the dead salt sea.


FOOTNOTES:

  [27] Mutinelli, Annali Urbani, lib. i. p. 24; and the Chronicle of
    1738, quoted by Galliciolli: "attrovandosi allora la giesia de Sta.
    Maria Formosa sola giesia del nome della gloriosa Vergine Maria."

  [28] Or from the brightness of the cloud, according to the Padre who
    arranged the "Memorie delle Chiese di Venezia," vol. iii. p. 7.
    Compare Corner, p. 42. This first church was built in 639.

  [29] Perhaps both Corner and the Padre founded their diluted
    information on the short sentence of Sansovino: "Finalmente, l'anno
    1075, fu ridotta a perfezione da Paolo Barbetta, sul modello del
    corpo di mezzo della chiesa di S. Marco." Sansovino, however, gives
    842, instead of 864, as the date of the first rebuilding.

  [30] Or at least for its principal families. Vide Appendix 8, "Early
    Venetian Marriages."

  [31] "Nazionale quasi la ceremonia, perciocche per essa nuovi
    difensori ad acquistar andava la patria, sostegni nuovi le leggi, la
    Liberta."--_Mutinelli._

  [32] "Vestita, _per antico uso_, di bianco, e con chiome sparse giù
    per le spalle, conteste con fila d'oro." "Dressed according to
    ancient usage in white, and with her hair thrown down upon her
    shoulders, interwoven with threads of gold." This was when she was
    first brought out of her chamber to be seen by the guests invited to
    the espousals. "And when the form of the espousal has been gone
    through, she is led, to the sound of pipes and trumpets, and other
    musical instruments, round the room, _dancing serenely all the time,
    and bowing herself before the guests_ (ballando placidamente, e
    facendo inchini ai convitati); and so she returns to her chamber:
    and when other guests have arrived, she again comes forth, and makes
    the circuit of the chamber. And this is repeated for an hour or
    somewhat more; and then, accompanied by many ladies who wait for
    her, she enters a gondola without its felze (canopy), and, seated on
    a somewhat raised seat covered with carpets, with a great number of
    gondolas following her, she goes to visit the monasteries and
    convents, wheresoever she has any relations."

  [33] Sansovino.

  [34] English, "Malmsey." The reader will find a most amusing account
    of the negotiations between the English and Venetians, touching the
    supply of London with this wine, in Mr. Brown's translation of the
    Giustiniani papers. See Appendix IX.

  [35] "XV. diebus et octo diebus ante festum Mariarum omni
    anno."--_Galliciolli._ The same precautions were taken before the
    feast of the Ascension.

  [36] Casa Vittura.

  [37] The keystone of the arch on its western side, facing the canal.

  [38] The inscriptions are as follows:

    To the left of the reader.

      "VINCENTIUS CAPELLUS MARITIMARUM
       RERUM PERITISSIMUS ET ANTIQUORUM
       LAUDIBUS PAR, TRIREMIUM ONERARIA
       RUM PRÆFECTUS, AB HENRICO VII. BRI
       TANNIÆ REGE INSIGNE DONATUS CLAS
       SIS LEGATUS V. IMP. DESIG. TER CLAS
       SEM DEDUXIT, COLLAPSAM NAVALEM DIS
       CIPLINAM RESTITUIT, AD ZACXINTHUM
       AURIÆ CÆSARIS LEGATO PRISCAM
       VENETAM VIRTUTEM OSTENDIT."

    To the right of the reader.

      "IN AMBRACIO SINU BARBARUSSUM OTTHO
       MANICÆ CLASSIS DUCEM INCLUSIT
       POSTRIDIE AD INTERNITIONEM DELETU
       RUS NISI FATA CHRISTIANIS ADVERSA
       VETUISSENT. IN RYZONICO SINU CASTRO NOVO
       EXPUGNATO DIVI MARCI PROCUR
       UNIVERSO REIP CONSENSU CREATUS
       IN PATRIA MORITUR TOTIUS CIVITATIS
       MOERORE, ANNO ÆTATIS LXXIV. MDCXLII. XIV. KAL SEPT."

  [39] The Love of God is, however, always shown by the predominance,
    or greater sum, of good, in the end; but never by the annihilation
    of evil. The modern doubts of eternal punishment are not so much the
    consequence of benevolence as of feeble powers of reasoning. Every
    one admits that God brings finite good out of finite evil. Why not,
    therefore, infinite good out of infinite evil?

  [40] Let the reader examine, with special reference to this subject,
    the general character of the language of Iago.

  [41] This opposition of art to inspiration is long and gracefully
    dwelt upon by Plato, in his "Phædrus," using, in the course of his
    argument, almost the words of St Paul: [Greek: kallion marturousin
    oi palaioi manian sôphrosynês tên ek Theou tês par anthrôpôn
    gignomenês]: "It is the testimony of the ancients, that _the madness
    which is of God is a nobler thing than the wisdom which is of men_;"
    and again, "He who sets himself to any work with which the Muses
    have to do," (i. e. to any of the fine arts,) "without madness,
    thinking that by art alone he can do his work sufficiently, will be
    found vain and incapable, and the work of temperance and rationalism
    will be thrust aside and obscured by that of inspiration." The
    passages to the same effect, relating especially to poetry, are
    innumerable in nearly all ancient writers; but in this of Plato, the
    entire compass of the fine arts is intended to be embraced.

    No one acquainted with other parts of my writings will suppose me to
    be an advocate of idle trust in the imagination. But it is in these
    days just as necessary to allege the supremacy of genius as the
    necessity of labor; for there never was, perhaps, a period in which
    the peculiar gift of the painter was so little discerned, in which
    so many and so vain efforts have been made to replace it by study
    and toil. This has been peculiarly the case with the German school,
    and there are few exhibitions of human error more pitiable than the
    manner in which the inferior members of it, men originally and for
    ever destitute of the painting faculty, force themselves into an
    unnatural, encumbered, learned fructification of tasteless fruit,
    and pass laborious lives in setting obscurely and weakly upon canvas
    the philosophy, if such it be, which ten minutes' work of a strong
    man would have put into healthy practice, or plain words. I know not
    anything more melancholy than the sight of the huge German cartoon,
    with its objective side, and subjective side; and mythological
    division, and symbolical division, and human and Divine division;
    its allegorical sense, and literal sense; and ideal point of view,
    and intellectual point of view; its heroism of well-made armor and
    knitted brows; its heroinism of graceful attitude and braided hair;
    its inwoven web of sentiment, and piety, and philosophy, and
    anatomy, and history, all profound: and twenty innocent dashes of
    the hand of one God-made painter, poor old Bassan or Bonifazio, were
    worth it all, and worth it ten thousand times over.

    Not that the sentiment or the philosophy is base in itself. They
    will make a good man, but they will not make a good painter,--no,
    nor the millionth part of a painter. They would have been good in
    the work and words of daily life; but they are good for nothing in
    the cartoon, if they are there alone. And the worst result of the
    system is the intense conceit into which it cultivates a weak mind.
    Nothing is so hopeless, so intolerable, as the pride of a foolish
    man who has passed through a process of thinking, so as actually to
    have found something out. He believes there is nothing else to be
    found out in the universe. Whereas the truly great man, on whom the
    Revelations rain till they bear him to the earth with their weight,
    lays his head in the dust, and speaks thence--often in broken
    syllables. Vanity is indeed a very equally divided inheritance among
    mankind; but I think that among the first persons, no emphasis is
    altogether so strong as that on the German _Ich_. I was once
    introduced to a German philosopher-painter before Tintoret's
    "Massacre of the Innocents." He looked at it superciliously, and
    said it "wanted to be restored." He had been himself several years
    employed in painting a "Faust" in a red jerkin and blue fire; which
    made Tintoret appear somewhat dull to him.

  [42] I have before stated ("Modern Painters" vol. ii.) that the
    first function of the imagination is the apprehension of ultimate
    truth.

  [43] Note especially, in connexion with what was advanced in Vol. II.
    respecting our English neatness of execution, how the base workman
    has cut the lines of the architecture neatly and precisely round the
    abominable head: but the noble workman has used his chisel like a
    painter's pencil, and sketched the glory with a few irregular lines,
    anything rather than circular; and struck out the whole head in the
    same frank and fearless way, leaving the sharp edges of the stone as
    they first broke, and flinging back the crest of hair from the
    forehead with half a dozen hammer-strokes, while the poor wretch who
    did the other was half a day in smoothing its vapid and vermicular
    curls.

  [44] The decree is quoted by Mutinelli, lib. i. p. 46.

  [45] See Appendix 9.




