CHAPTER III


Now although this elegant ordination of vegetables, hath found
coincidence or imitation in sundry works of Art, yet is it not also
destitute of natural examples, and though overlooked by all, was
elegantly observable, in severall works of nature.

Could we satisfie our selves in the position of the lights above, or
discover the wisedom of that order so invariably maintained in the fixed
Stars of heaven; Could we have any light, why the stellary part of the
first masse, separated into this order, that the Girdle of _Orion_
should ever maintain its line, and the two Stars in _Charles's_ Wain
never leave pointing at the Pole-Starre, we might abate the
_Pythagoricall_ Musick of the Spheres, the sevenfold Pipe of _Pan_; and
the strange Cryptography of _Gaffarell_ in his Starrie Book of Heaven.

But not to look so high as Heaven or the single Quincunx of the
_Hyades_ upon the neck of _Taurus_, the Triangle, and remarkable
_Crusero_ about the foot of the _Centaur_; observable rudiments there
are hereof in subterraneous concretions, and bodies in the Earth; in the
_Gypsum_ or _Talcum Rhomboides_, in the Favaginites or honey-comb-stone,
in the _Asteria_ and _Astroites_, and in the crucigerous stone of S.
_Iago_ of _Gallicia_.

The same is observably effected in the _Julus_, _Catkins_, or pendulous
excrescencies of severall Trees, of Wallnuts, Alders, and Hazels, which
hanging all the Winter, and maintaining their Net-work close, by the
expansion thereof are the early foretellers of the spring, discoverable
also in long Pepper, and elegantly in the _Julus_ of _Calamus
Aromaticus_, so plentifully growing with us in the first palms of
Willowes, and in the flowers of Sycamore, Petasites, Asphodelus, and
_Blattaria_, before explication. After such order stand the flowery
Branches in our best spread _Verbascum_, and the seeds about the spicous
head or torch of _Tapsus Barbatus_, in as fair a regularity as the
circular and wreathed order will admit, which advanceth one side of the
square, and makes the same Rhomboidall.

In the squamous heads of _Scabious_, _Knapweed_, and the elegant _Jacea
Pinea_, and in the Scaly composure of the Oak-Rose,[148] which some
years most aboundeth. After this order hath Nature planted the Leaves in
the Head of the common and prickled Artichoak: wherein the black and
shining Flies do shelter themselves, when they retire from the purple
Flower about it; The same is also found in the pricks, sockets, and
impressions of the seeds, in the pulp or bottome thereof; wherein do
elegantly stick the Fathers of their Mother. To omit the Quincunciall
Specks on the top of the Miscle-berry, especially that which grows upon
the _Tilia_ or Lime-Tree. And the remarkable disposure of those yellow
fringes about the purple Pestill of _Aaron_, and elegant clusters of
Dragons, so peculiarly secured by nature, with an _umbrella_ or
skreening Leaf about them.

  [148] Capitula squammata Quercum Bauhini, _whereof though he saith_
        perraro reperiuntur bis tantum invenimus, _yet we finde them
        commonly with us and in great numbers_.

[Sidenote: _Especially the_ porus cervinus Imperati, Sporosa, Alga
+platykerôs+. Bauhini.]

The Spongy leaves of some Sea-wracks, Fucus, Oaks, in their several
kindes, found about the shoar,[149] with ejectments of the Sea, are
overwrought with Net-work elegantly containing this order, which plainly
declareth the naturality of this texture; And how the needle of nature
delighteth to work, even in low and doubtful vegetations.

  [149] Antho. Græc. inter Epigrammata +griphôdê endon emôn mêtros
        lagonôn echô patera+.

The _Arbustetum_ or Thicket on the head of the Teazell, may be observed
in this order: And he that considereth that fabrick so regularly
palisadoed, and stemm'd with flowers of the royal colour; in the house
of the solitary maggot, may finde the Seraglio of _Solomon_. And
contemplating the calicular shafts, and uncous disposure of their
extremities, so accommodable unto the office of abstersion, not condemn
as wholly improbable the conceit of those who accept it, for the herb
_Borith_.[150] Where by the way, we could with much inquiry never
discover any transfiguration, in this abstemious insect, although we
have kept them long in their proper houses, and boxes. Where some wrapt
up in their webbs, have lived upon their own bowels, from _September_
unto _July_.

  [150] _Jer._ 2, 22.

In such a grove doe walk the little creepers about the head of the
burre. And such an order is observed in the aculeous prickly plantation,
upon the heads of several common thistles, remarkably in the notable
palisados about the flower of the milk-thistle; And he that inquireth
into the little bottome of the globe-thistle, may finde that gallant
bush arise from a scalpe of like disposure.

The white umbrella or medicall bush of Elder, is an Epitome of this
order: arising from five main stemms Quincuncially disposed, and
tollerably maintained in their subdivisions. To omit the lower
observations in the seminal spike of Mercurie weld, and Plantane.

Thus hath nature ranged the flowers of Santfoyne, and French honey
suckle; and somewhat after this manner hath ordered the bush in
_Jupiters_ beard, or house-leek; which old superstition set on the tops
of houses, as a defensative against lightening and thunder. The like in
Fenny Seagreen or the water Souldier;[151] which, though a military name
from Greece, makes out the Roman order.

  [151] Stratiotes.

A like ordination there is in the favaginous Sockets, and Lozenge seeds
of the noble flower of the Sunne. Wherein in Lozenge figured boxes
nature shuts up the seeds, and balsame which is about them.

But the Firre and Pinetree from their fruits doe naturally dictate this
position. The Rhomboidall protuberances in Pineapples maintaining this
Quincuncial order unto each other, and each Rhombus in it self. Thus are
also disposed the triangular foliations, in the conicall fruit of the
firre tree, orderly shadowing and protecting the winged seeds below
them.

The like so often occurreth to the curiosity of observers, especially in
spicated seeds and flowers, that we shall not need to take in the single
Quincunx of Fuchsius in the grouth of the masle fearn, the seedie
disposure of Gramen Ischemon, and the trunck or neat Reticulate work in
the codde of the Sachell palme.

For even in very many round stalk plants, the leaves are set after a
Quintuple ordination, the first leaf answering the fift, in lateral
disposition. Wherein the leaves successively rounding the stalk, in
foure at the furthest the compass is absolved, and the fifth leafe or
sprout, returns to the position of the other fift before it; as in
accounting upward is often observable in furze pellitorye, Ragweed, the
sproutes of Oaks, and thorns upon pollards, and very remarkably in the
regular disposure of the rugged excrescencies in the yearly shoots of
the Pine.

But in square stalked plants, the leaves stand respectively unto each
other, either in crosse or decussation to those above or below them,
arising at crosse positions; whereby they shadow not each other, and
better resist the force of winds, which in a parallel situation, and
upon square stalkes would more forcibly bear upon them.

And to omit, how leaves and sprouts which compasse not the stalk, are
often set in a Rhomboides, and making long and short Diagonals, do stand
like the leggs of Quadrupeds when they goe: Nor to urge the thwart
enclosure and furdling of flowers, and blossomes, before explication, as
in the multiplied leaves of Pionie; And the Chiasmus in five leaved
flowers, while one lies wrapt about the staminous beards, the other
foure obliquely shutting and closing upon each other; and how even
flowers which consist of foure leaves, stand not ordinarily in three and
one, but two, and two crosse wise unto the Stilus; even the Autumnal
budds, which awaite the return of the Sun, doe after the winter solstice
multiply their calicular leaves, making little Rhombuses, and network
figures, as in the Sycamore and Lilac.

The like is discoverable in the original production of plants which
first putting forth two leaves, those which succeed, bear not over each
other, but shoot, obliquely or crossewise, untill the stalk appeareth;
which sendeth not forth its first leaves without all order unto them;
and he that from hence can discover in what position the two first
leaves did arise, is no ordinary observator.

Where by the way, he that observeth the rudimental spring of seeds,
shall finde strict rule, although not after this order. How little is
required unto effectual generation, and in what deminutives the plastick
principle lodgeth, is exemplified in seeds, wherein the greater mass
affords so little comproduction. In beans the leaf and root sprout from
the Germen, the main sides split, and lye by, and in some pull'd up near
the time of blooming, we have found the pulpous sides intire or little
wasted. In Acorns the nebb dilating splitteth the two sides, which
sometimes lye whole, when the Oak is sprouted two handfuls. In Lupins
these pulpy sides do sometimes arise with the stalk in a resemblance of
two fat leaves. Wheat and Rye will grow up, if after they have shot some
tender roots, the adhering pulp be taken from them. Beanes will prosper
though a part be cut away, and so much set as sufficeth to contain and
keep the Germen close. From this superfluous pulp in unkindely, and wet
years, may arise that multiplicity of little insects, which infest the
Roots and Sprouts of tender Graines and pulses.

In the little nebbe or fructifying principle, the motion is regular, and
not transvertible, as to make that ever the leaf, which nature intendeth
the root; observable from their conversion, until they attain their
right position, if seeds be set inversedly.

In vain we expect the production of plants from different parts of the
seed, from the same _corculum_ or little original proceed both
germinations; and in the power of this slender particle lye many Roots
and Spoutings, that though the same be pull'd away, the generative
particle will renew them again, and proceed to a perfect plant; And malt
may be observed to grow, though the Cummes be fallen from it.

The seminal nebbe hath a defined and single place, and not extended unto
both extremes. And therefore many too vulgarly conceive that Barley and
Oats grow at both ends; For they arise from one _punctilio_ or
generative nebbe, and the Speare sliding under the husk, first appeareth
nigh the toppe. But in Wheat and Rye being bare the sprouts are seen
together. If Barley unhulled would grow, both would appear at once. But
in this and Oat-meal the nebbe is broken away, which makes them the
milder food, and lesse apt to raise fermentation in Decoctions.

Men taking notice of what is outwardly visible, conceive a sensible
priority in the Root. But as they begin from one part, so they seem to
start and set out upon one signall of nature. In Beans yet soft, in
Pease while they adhere unto the Cod, the rudimentall Leafe and Root are
discoverable. In the Seeds of Rocket and Mustard, sprouting in Glasses
of water, when the one is manifest the other is also perceptible. In
muddy waters apt to breed _Duckweed_, and Periwinkles, if the first and
rudimentall stroaks of _Duckweed_ be observed, the Leaves and Root
anticipate not each other. But in the Date-stone the first sprout is
neither root nor leaf distinctly, but both together; For the Germination
being to passe through the narrow navel and hole about the midst of the
stone, the generative germ is faine to enlengthen it self, and shooting
out about an inch, at that distance divideth into the ascending and
descending portion.

And though it be generally thought that Seeds will root at that end,
where they adhere to their Originals, and observable it is that the
nebbe sets most often next the stalk, as in Grains, Pulses, and most
small Seeds, yet is it hardly made out in many greater plants. For in
Acornes, Almonds, Pistachios, Wallnuts, and acuminated shells, the germ
puts forth at the remotest part of the pulp. And therefore to set Seeds
in that posture, wherein the Leaf and Roots may shoot right without
contortion, or forced circumvolution, which might render them strongly
rooted, and straighter, were a Criticisme in Agriculture. And nature
seems to have made some provision hereof in many from their figure, that
as they fall from the Tree they may lye in Positions agreeable to such
advantages.

Beside the open and visible Testicles of plants, the seminall powers lie
in great part invisible, while the Sun findes polypody in stone-wals,
the little stinging Nettle, and nightshade in barren sandy High-wayes,
_Scurvy-grasse_ in _Greeneland_, and unknown plants in earth brought
from remote Countries. Beside the known longevity of some Trees, what is
the most lasting herb, or seed, seems not easily determinable. Mandrakes
upon known account have lived near an hundred yeares. Seeds found in
Wilde-Fowls Gizards have sprouted in the earth. The Seeds of Marjorane
and _Stramonium_ carelessly kept, have grown after seven years. Even in
Garden-Plots long fallow, and digged up, the seeds of _Blattaria_ and
yellow henbane, and after twelve years burial have produced themselves
again.

That bodies are first spirits _Paracelsus_ could affirm, which in the
maturation of Seeds and fruits, seems obscurely implied by[152]
_Aristotle_, when he delivereth, that the spirituous parts are
converted into water, and the water into earth, and attested by
observation in the maturative progresse of Seeds, wherein at first may
be discerned a flatuous distention of the husk, afterwards a thin
liquor, which longer time digesteth into a pulp or kernell observable in
Almonds and large Nuts. And some way answered in the progressionall
perfection of animall semination, in its spermaticall maturation, from
crude pubescency unto perfection. And even that seeds themselves in
their rudimentall discoveries, appear in foliaceous surcles, or sprouts
within their coverings, in a diaphanous gellie, before deeper
incrassation, is also visibly verified in Cherries, Acorns, Plums.

  [152] In met. cum Gabeo.

From seminall considerations, either in reference unto one mother, or
distinction from animall production, the holy Scripture describeth the
vegetable creation; And while it divideth plants but into Herb and Tree,
though it seemeth to make but an accidental division, from magnitude, it
tacitely containeth the naturall distinction of vegetables, observed by
Herbarists, and comprehending the four kinds. For since the most
naturall distinction is made from the production of leaf or stalk, and
plants after the two first seminall leaves, do either proceed to send
forth more leaves, or a stalk, and the folious and stalky emission
distinguisheth herbs and trees, in a large acception it compriseth all
Vegetables, for the frutex and suffrutex are under the progression of
trees, and stand Authentically differenced, but from the accidents of
the stalk.

The Æquivocal production of things under undiscerned principles, makes a
large part of generation, though they seem to hold a wide univocacy in
their set and certain Originals, while almost every plant breeds its
peculiar insect, most a Butterfly, moth or fly, wherein the Oak seemes
to contain the largest seminality, while the Julus, Oak, apple, dill,
woolly tuft, foraminous roundles upon the leaf, and grapes under ground
make a Fly with some difference. The great variety of Flyes lyes in the
variety of their Originals, in the Seeds of Caterpillars or Cankers
there lyeth not only a Butterfly or Moth, but if they be sterill or
untimely cast, their production is often a Fly, which we have also
observed from corrupted and mouldred Egges, both of Hens and Fishes; To
omit the generation of Bees out of the bodies of dead Heifers, or what
is strange yet well attested, the production of Eeles[153] in the backs
of living Cods and Perches.

  [153] Schoneveldus de Pisc.

The exiguity and smallnesse of some seeds extending to large productions
is one of the magnalities of nature, somewhat illustrating the work of
the Creation, and vast production from nothing. The true seeds of
Cypresse[154] and Rampions are indistinguishable by old eyes. Of the
seeds of Tobacco a thousand make not one grain, The disputed seeds of
Harts tongue, and Maidenhair, require a greater number. From such
undiscernable seminalities arise spontaneous productions. He that would
discern the rudimentall stroak of a plant, may behold it in the
Originall of Duckweed, at the bignesse of a pins point, from convenient
water in glasses, wherein a watchfull eye may also discover the
puncticular Originals of Periwincles and Gnats.

  [154] Doctissim. Laurenburg horr.

That seeds of some Plants are lesse then any animals, seems of no clear
decision; That the biggest of Vegetables exceedeth the biggest of
Animals, in full bulk, and all dimensions, admits exception in the
Whale, which in length and above ground measure, will also contend with
tall Oakes. That the richest odour of plants surpasseth that of Animals,
may seem of some doubt, since animall-musk, seems to excell the
vegetable, and we finde so noble a scent in the Tulip-Fly, and
Goat-Beetle.[155]

  [155] _The long and tender green_ Capricornus _rarely found, we could
        never meet with but two._

Now whether seminall nebbes hold any sure proportion unto seminall
enclosures, why the form of the germe doth not answer the figure of the
enclosing pulp, why the nebbe is seated upon the solid, and not the
channeld side of the seed as in grains, why since we often meet with two
yolks in one shell, and sometimes one Egge within another, we do not
oftener meet with two nebbes in one distinct seed: why since the Egges
of a Hen laid at one course, do commonly outweigh the bird, and some
moths coming out of their cases, without assistance of food, will lay so
many Egges as to outweigh their bodies, trees rarely bear their fruit,
in that gravity or proportion: Whether in the germination of seeds
according to _Hippocrates_, the lighter part ascendeth, and maketh the
sprout, the heaviest tending downward frameth the root; Since we observe
that the first shoot of seeds in water, will sink or bow down at the
upper and leafing end: Whether it be not more rational Epicurisme to
contrive whole dishes out of the nebbes and spirited particles of
plants, then from the Gallatures and treddles of Egges; since that part
is found to hold no seminall share in Oval Generation, are quæries which
might enlarge but must conclude this digression.

And though not in this order, yet how nature delighteth in this number,
and what consent and coordination there is in the leaves and parts of
flowers, it cannot escape our observation in no small number of plants.
For the calicular or supporting and closing leaves, do answer the number
of the flowers, especially in such as exceed not the number of Swallows
Egges; as in Violets, Stichwort, Blossomes, and flowers of one leaf
have often five divisions, answered by a like number of calicular
leaves; as _Gentianella, Convolvulus_, Bell-flowers. In many the
flowers, blades, or staminous shoots and leaves are all equally five, as
in cockle, mullein and _Blattaria_; Wherein the flowers before
explication are pentagonally wrapped up, with some resemblance of the
_blatta_ or moth from whence it hath its name; But the contrivance of
nature is singular in the opening and shutting of Bindeweeds, performed
by five inflexures, distinguishable by pyramidicall figures, and also
different colours.

The rose at first is thought to have been of five leaves, as it yet
groweth wilde among us; but in the most luxuriant, the calicular leaves
do still maintain that number. But nothing is more admired then the five
Brethren of the Rose, and the strange disposure of the Appendices or
Beards, in the calicular leaves thereof, which in despair of resolution
is tolerably salved from this contrivance, best ordered and suited for
the free closure of them before explication. For those two which are
smooth, and of no beard are contrived to lye undermost, as without
prominent parts, and fit to be smoothly covered, the other two which are
beset with Beards on either side, stand outward and uncovered, but the
fifth or half-bearded leaf is covered on the bare side but on the open
side stands free, and bearded like the other.

Besides a large number of leaves have five divisions, and may be
circumscribed by a _Pentagon_ or figure of five Angles, made by right
lines from the extremity of their leaves, as in Maple, Vine, Figge-Tree:
But five-leaved flowers are commonly disposed circularly about the
_Stylus_; according to the higher Geometry of Nature, dividing a circle
by five _Radii_, which concurre not to make Diameters, as in
Quadrilaterall and sexangular Intersections.

Now the number of five is remarkable in every Circle, not only as the
first sphærical Number, but the measure of sphærical motion. For
sphærical bodies move by fives, and every globular Figure placed upon a
plane, in direct volutation, returns to the first point of contaction in
the fift touch, accounting by the Axes of the Diameters or Cardinall
points of the four quarters thereof. And before it arriveth unto the
same point again, it maketh five circles equall unto it self, in each
progresse from those quarters, absolving an equall circle.

By the same number doth nature divide the circle of the Sea-starre, and
in that order and number disposeth those elegant Semi-circles, or
dentall sockets and egges in the Sea Hedge-hogge. And no mean
Observations hereof there is in the Mathematicks of the neatest Retiary
Spider, which concluding in fourty four Circles, from five Semidiameters
beginneth that elegant texture.

And after this manner doth lay the foundation of the Circular branches
of the Oak, which being five-cornered, in the tender annual sprouts, and
manifesting upon incision the signature of a Starre, is after made
circular, and swel'd into a round body: Which practice of nature is
become a point of art, and makes two Problemes in _Euclide_.[156] But
the Bryar which sends forth shoots and prickles from its angles,
maintains its pentagonall figure, and the unobserved signature of a
handsome porch within it. To omit the five small buttons dividing the
Circle of the Ivy-berry, and the five characters in the Winter stalk of
the Walnut, with many other Observables, which cannot escape the eyes of
signal discerners; Such as know where to finde _Ajax_ his name in
_Gallitricum_, or _Arons_ Mitre in Henbane.

  [156] Elem. _li._ 4.

Quincuncial forms and ordinations are also observable in animal
figurations. For to omit the hioides or throat bone of animals, the
_furcula_ or _merry-thought_ in birds; which supporteth the _scapulæ_,
affording a passage for the winde-pipe and the gullet, the wings of
Flyes, and disposure of their legges in their first formation from
maggots, and the position of their horns, wings and legges, in their
_Aurelian_ cases and swadling clouts: The back of the _Cimex Arboreus_,
found often upon Trees and lesser plants, doth elegantly discover the
_Burgundian_ decussation; And the like is observable in the belly of the
_Notonecton_, or water-Beetle, which swimmeth on its back, and the
handsome Rhombusses of the Sea-poult, or Weazell, on either side the
Spine.

The sexangular Cels in the Honey-combs of Bees are disposed after this
order, much there is not of wonder in the confused Houses of Pismires;
though much in their busie life and actions, more in the edificial
Palaces of Bees and Monarchical spirits; who make their combs
six-corner'd, declining a circle, whereof many stand not close together,
and compleatly fill the _area_ of the place; But rather affecting a
six-sided figure, whereby every cell affords a common side unto six
more, and also a fit receptacle for the Bee it self, which gathering
into a Cylindrical Figure, aptly enters its sexangular house, more
nearly approaching a circular figure, then either doth the Square or
Triangle. And the Combes themselves so regularly contrived, that their
mutual intersections make three Lozenges at the bottom of every Cell;
which severally regarded make three Rows of neat Rhomboidall Figures,
connected at the angles, and so continue three several chaines
throughout the whole comb.

As for the _Favago_ found commonly on the Sea-shoar, though named from
an honey-comb, it but rudely makes out the resemblance, and better
agrees with the round Cels of humble Bees. He that would exactly discern
the shop of a Bees mouth, need observing eyes, and good augmenting
glasses; wherein is discoverable one of the neatest peeces in nature,
and must have a more piercing eye then mine; who findes out the shape of
Buls heads, in the guts of Drones pressed out behinde, according to the
experiment of _Gomesius_[157]; wherein notwithstanding there seemeth
somewhat which might incline a pliant fancy to credulity of similitude.

  [157] Gom. de Sale.

A resemblance hereof there is in the orderly and rarely disposed Cels,
made by Flyes and Insects, which we have often found fastened about
small sprigs, and in those cottonary and woolly pillows, which sometimes
we meet with fastened unto Leaves, there is included an elegant Net-work
Texture, out of which come many small Flies. And some resemblance there
is of this order in the Egges of some Butterflies and moths, as they
stick upon leaves, and other substances; which being dropped from
behinde, nor directed by the eye, doth neatly declare how nature
Geometrizeth, and observeth order in all things.

A like correspondency in figure is found in the skins and outward
teguments of animals, whereof a regardable part are beautiful by this
texture. As the backs of several Snakes and Serpents, elegantly
remarkable in the _Aspis_, and the Dart-snake, in the Chiasmus, and
larger decussations upon the back of the Rattlesnake, and in the close
and finer texture of the _Mater formicarum_, or snake that delights in
Anthils; whereby upon approach of outward injuries, they can raise a
thicker Phalanx on their backs, and handsomely contrive themselves into
all kindes of flexures: Whereas their bellies are commonly covered with
smooth semicircular divisions, as best accommodable unto their quick and
gliding motion.

This way is followed by nature in the peculiar and remarkable tayl of
the Bever, wherein the scaly particles are disposed, somewhat after this
order, which is the plainest resolution of the wonder of _Bellonius_,
while he saith, with incredible Artifice hath Nature framed the tayl or
Oar of the Bever: where by the way we cannot but wish a model of their
houses, so much extolled by some Describers: wherein since they are so
bold as to venture upon three stages, we might examine their Artifice in
the contignations, the rule and order in the compartitions; or whether
that magnified structure be any more then a rude rectangular pyle or
meer hovell-building.

Thus works the hand of nature in the feathery plantation about birds.
Observable in the skins of the breast,[158] legs and Pinions of Turkies,
Geese, and Ducks, and the Oars or finny feet of Water-Fowl: And such a
naturall net is the scaly covering of Fishes, of Mullets, Carps,
Tenches, _etc._ even in such as are excoriable and consist of smaller
scales, as Bretts, Soals, and Flounders. The like Reticulate grain is
observable in some _Russia_ Leather. To omit the ruder Figures of the
ostracion, the triangular or cunny fish, or the pricks of the
Sea-Porcupine.

  [158] _Elegantly conspicuous on the inside of the striped skins of
        Dive-Fowl, of the cormorant, Goshonder, Weasell, Loon_, etc.

The same is also observable in some part of the skin of man, in habits
of neat texture, and therefore not unaptly compared unto a Net: We
shall not affirm that from such grounds, the Ægyptian Embalmers imitated
this texture, yet in their linnen folds the same is still observable
among their neatest Mummies, in the figures of _Isis_ and _Osyris_, and
the Tutelary spirits in the Bembine Table. Nor is it to be over-looked
how _Orus_, the Hieroglyphick of the world is described in a Net-work
covering, from the shoulder to the foot. And (not to enlarge upon the
cruciated Character of _Trismegistus_, or handed crosses, so often
occurring in the Needles of _Pharaoh_, and Obelisks of Antiquity) the
_Statuæ Isiacæ_, Teraphims, and little Idols, found about the Mummies,
do make a decussation or _Jacobs_ Crosse, with their armes, like that on
the head of _Ephraim_ and _Manasses_, and this _decussis_ is also
graphically described between them.

This Reticulate or Net-work was also considerable in the inward parts of
man, not only from the first _subtegmen_ or warp of his formation, but
in the netty _fibres_ of the veines and vessels of life; wherein
according to common Anatomy the right and transverse _fibres_ are
decussated by the oblique _fibres_; and so must frame a Reticulate and
Quincuncial Figure by their Obliquations, Emphatically extending that
Elegant expression of Scripture. Thou hast curiously embroydered me,
thou hast wrought me up after the finest way of texture, and as it were
with a Needle.

Nor is the same observable only in some parts, but in the whole body of
man, which upon the extension of arms and legges, doth make out a
square, whose intersection is at the genitals. To omit the phantastical
Quincunx, in _Plato_ of the first Hermaphrodite or double man, united at
the Loynes, which _Jupiter_ after divided.

A rudimental resemblance hereof there is in the cruciated and rugged
folds of the _Reticulum_, or Net-like Ventricle of ruminating horned
animals, which is the second in order, culinarily called the Honey-comb.
For many divisions there are in the stomack of severall animals; what
number they maintain in the _Scarus_ and ruminating Fish, common
description, or our own experiment hath made no discovery. But in the
Ventricle of _Porpuses_ there are three divisions. In many Birds a crop,
Gizard, and little receptacle before it; but in Cornigerous animals,
which chew the cudd, there are no lesse then four of distinct position
and office.

The _Reticulum_ by these crossed cels, makes a further digestion, in the
dry and exuccous part of the Aliment received from the first Ventricle.
For at the bottome of the gullet there is a double Orifice; What is
first received at the mouth descendeth into the first and greater
stomack, from whence it is returned into the mouth again; and after a
fuller mastication, and salivous mixture, what part thereof descendeth
again, in a moist and succulent body, it slides down the softer and more
permeable Orifice, into the Omasus or third stomack; and from thence
conveyed into the fourth, receives its last digestion. The other dry and
exuccous part after rumination by the larger and stronger Orifice
beareth into the first stomack, from thence into the _Reticulum_, and so
progressively into the other divisions. And therefore in Calves newly
calved, there is little or no use of the two first Ventricles, for the
milk and liquid aliment slippeth down the softer Orifice, into the third
stomack; where making little or no stay, it passeth into the fourth, the
seat of the _Coagulum_, or Runnet, or that division of stomack which
seems to bear the name of the whole, in the Greek translation of the
Priests Fee, in the Sacrifice of Peace-offerings.

As for those Rhomboidal Figures made by the Cartilagineous parts of the
Wezon, in the Lungs of great Fishes, and other animals, as _Rondeletius_
discovered, we have not found them so to answer our Figure as to be
drawn into illustration; Something we expected in the more discernable
texture of the lungs of frogs, which notwithstanding being but two
curious bladders not weighing above a grain, we found interwoven with
veins, not observing any just order. More orderly situated are those
cretaceous and chalky concretions found sometimes in the bignesse of a
small fech on either side their spine; which being not agreeable unto
our order, nor yet observed by any, we shall not here discourse on.

But had we found a better account and tolerable Anatomy of that
prominent jowle of the _Sperma Ceti_ Whale,[159] then questuary
operation, or the stench of the last cast upon our shoar, permitted, we
might have perhaps discovered some handsome order in those Net-like
seases and sockets, made like honey-combs, containing that medicall
matter.

  [159] 1652. _described in our_ Pseudo Epidem. _Edit._ 3.

Lastly, The incession or locall motion of animals is made with analogy
unto this figure, by decussative diametrals, Quincunciall Lines and
angles. For to omit the enquiry how Butterflies and breezes move their
four wings, how birds and fishes in ayre and water move by joynt stroaks
of opposite wings and Finnes, and how salient animals in jumping forward
seem to arise and fall upon a square base; As the station of most
Quadrupeds is made upon a long square, so in their motion they make a
Rhomboides; their common progression being performed Diametrally, by
decussation and crosse advancement of their legges, which not observed
begot that remarkable absurdity in the position of the legges of
_Castors_ horse in the Capitoll. The Snake which moveth circularly makes
his spires in like order, the convex and concave spirals answering each
other at alternate distances; In the motion of man the armes and legges
observe this thwarting position, but the legges alone do move
Quincuncially by single angles with some resemblance of an V measured by
successive advancement from each foot, and the angle of indenture great
or lesse, according to the extent or brevity of the stride.

Studious Observators may discover more analogies in the orderly book of
nature, and cannot escape the Elegancy of her hand in other
correspondencies. The Figures of nails and crucifying appurtenances, are
but precariously made out in the _Granadilla_ or flower of Christs
passion; And we despair to behold in these parts that handsome draught
of crucifixion in the fruit of the _Barbado_ Pine. The seminal Spike of
_Phalaris_, or great shaking grasse, more nearly answers the tayl of a
Rattle-Snake, then many resemblances in Porta: And if the man
_Orchis_[160] of _Culumna_ be well made out, it excelleth all analogies.
In young Wall-nuts cut athwart, it is not hard to apprehend strange
characters; and in those of somewhat elder growth, handsome ornamental
draughts about a plain crosse. In the root of _Osmond_ or Water-fern,
every eye may discern the form of a Half Moon, Rain-bow, or half the
character of _Pisces_. Some finde Hebrew, Arabick, Greek, and Latine
Characters in Plants; In a common one among us we seem to reade _Acaia_,
_Viviu_, _Lilil_.

  [160] Orchis Anthropophora, Fabii Columnæ.

Right lines and circles make out the bulk of plants; In the parts
thereof we finde Helicall or spirall roundles, voluta's, conicall
Sections, circular Pyramids, and frustums of _Archimedes_; And cannot
overlook the orderly hand of nature, in the alternate succession of the
flat and narrower sides in the tender shoots of the Ashe, or the regular
inequality of bignesse in the five leaved flowers of Henbane, and
something like in the calicular leaves of _Tutson_. How the spots of
_Persicaria_ do manifest themselves between the sixth and tenth ribbe.
How the triangular capp in the stemme or _stylus_ of Tuleps doth
constantly point at three outward leaves. That spicated flowers do open
first at the stalk. That white flowers have yellow thrums or knops. That
the nebbe of Beans and Pease do all look downward, and so presse not
upon each other; And how the seeds of many pappous or downy flowers
lockt up in sockets after a gomphosis or _mortis_-articulation, diffuse
themselves circularly into branches of rare order, observable in
_Tragopogan_ or Goats-beard, conformable to the Spiders web, and the
_Radii_ in like manner telarely inter-woven.

And how in animall natures, even colours hold correspondencies, and
mutuall correlations. That the colour of the Caterpillar will shew again
in the Butterfly, with some latitude is allowable. Though the regular
spots in their wings seem but a mealie adhesion, and such as may be
wiped away, yet since they come in this variety, out of their cases,
there must be regular pores in those parts and membranes, defining such
Exudations.

That _Augustus_[161] had native notes on his body and belly, after the
order and number in the Starre of _Charles wayne_, will not seem strange
unto astral Physiognomy, which accordingly considereth moles in the body
of man, or Physicall Observators, who from the position of moles in the
face, reduce them to rule and correspondency in other parts. Whether
after the like method medicall conjecture may not be raised, upon parts
inwardly affected; since parts about the lips are the criticall seats of
Pustules discharged in Agues; And scrophulous tumours about the neck do
so often speak the like about the Mesentery, may also be considered.

  [161] Suet. in vit. Aug.

The russet neck in young Lambs seems but adventitious, and may owe its
tincture to some contaction in the womb; But that if sheep have any
black or deep russet in their faces, they want not the same about their
legges and feet; That black Hounds have mealy months and feet; That
black Cows which have any white in their tayls, should not misse of some
in their bellies; and if all white in their bodies, yet if
black-mouth'd, their ears and feet maintain the same colour, are
correspondent tinctures not ordinarily failing in nature, which easily
unites the accidents of extremities, since in some generations she
transmutes the parts themselves, while in the _Aurelian Metamorphosis_
the head of the canker becomes the Tayl of the Butterfly. Which is in
some way not beyond the contrivance of Art, in submersions and Inlays,
inverting the extremes of the plant, and fetching the root from the top,
and also imitated in handsome columnary work, in the inversion of the
extremes; wherein the Capitel, and the Base, hold such near
correspondency.

In the motive parts of animals may be discovered mutuall proportions;
not only in those of Quadrupeds, but in the thigh-bone, legge,
foot-bone, and claws of Birds. The legs of Spiders are made after a
sesquitertian proportion, and the long legs of some locusts, double unto
some others. But the internodial parts of Vegetables, or spaces between
the joints, are contrived with more uncertainty; though the joints
themselves in many Plants, maintain a regular number.

In vegetable composure, the unition of prominent parts seems most to
answer the _Apophyses_ or processes of Animall bones, whereof they are
the produced parts or prominent explantations. And though in the parts
of plants which are not ordained for motion, we do not expect
correspondent Articulations; yet in the setting on of some flowers, and
seeds in their sockets, and the lineall commissure of the pulp of
severall seeds, may be observed some shadow of the Harmony; some show of
the _Gomphosis_ or _mortis_-articulation.

As for the _Diarthrosis_ or motive Articulation, there is expected
little Analogy, though long-stalked leaves doe move by long lines, and
have observable motions, yet are they made by outward impulsion, like
the motion of pendulous bodies, while the parts themselves are united by
some kinde of _symphysis_ unto the stock.

But standing Vegetables, void of motive-Articulations, are not without
many motions. For beside the motion of vegetation upward, and of
radiation unto all quarters, that of contraction, dilatation,
inclination, and contortion, is discoverable in many plants. To omit the
rose of _Jericho_, the ear of Rye, which moves with change of weather,
and the Magical spit, made of no rare plants, which windes before the
fire, and rosts the bird without turning.

Even Animals near the Classis of plants, seem to have the most restlesse
motions. The Summer-worm of Ponds and plashes makes a long waving
motion; the hair-worm seldome lies still. He that would behold a very
anomalous motion, may observe it in the Tortile and tiring stroaks of
Gnatworms.[162]

  [162] _Found often in some form of redmaggot in the standing waters of
        Cisterns in the Summer._




