CHAPTER IV


As for the delights, commodities, mysteries, with other concernments of
this order, we are unwilling to fly them over, in the short deliveries
of _Virgil_, _Varro_, or others, and shall therefore enlarge with
additionall ampliations.

By this position they had a just proportion of Earth, to supply an
equality of nourishment. The distance being ordered, thick or thin,
according to the magnitude or vigorous attraction of the plant, the
goodnesse, leannesse, or propriety of the soyl, and therefore the rule
of _Solon_, concerning the territory of _Athens_, not extendible unto
all; allowing the distance of six foot unto common Trees, and nine for
the Figge and Olive.

They had a due diffusion of their roots on all or both sides, whereby
they maintained some proportion to their height, in Trees of large
radication. For that they strictly make good their profundeur or depth
unto their height, according to common conceit, and that expression of
_Virgil_,[163] though confirmable from the plane Tree in _Pliny_, and
some few examples, is not to be expected from the generation of Trees
almost in any kinde, either of side-spreading or tap-roots: Except we
measure them by lateral and opposite diffusions; nor commonly to be
found in _minor_ or hearby plants; If we except Sea-holly, Liquorish,
Sea-rush, and some others.

  [163] Quantum vertice ad auras Æthereas, tantum radice ad tartara
        tendit.

They had a commodious radiation in their growth; and a due expansion of
their branches, for shadow or delight. For trees thickly planted, do
runne up in height and branch with no expansion, shooting unequally or
short, and thinne upon the neighbouring side. And therefore Trees are
inwardly bare, and spring, and leaf from the outward and Sunny side of
their branches.

Whereby they also avoided the perill of +synolethrismos+ or one tree
perishing with another, as it happeneth ofttimes from the sick
_effluviums_ or entanglements of the roots, falling foul with each
other. Observable in Elmes set in hedges, where if one dieth the
neighbouring Tree prospereth not long after.

In this situation divided into many intervals and open unto six
passages, they had the advantage of a fair perflation from windes,
brushing and cleansing their surfaces; relaxing and closing their pores
unto due perspiration. For that they afford large _effluviums_
perceptible from odours, diffused at great distances, is observable from
Onyons out of the Earth; which though dry, and kept until the spring, as
they shoot forth large and many leaves, do notably abate of their
weight. And mint growing in glasses of water, until it arriveth unto the
weight of an ounce, in a shady place, will sometimes exhaust a pound of
water.

And as they send forth much, so may they receive somewhat in: For beside
the common way and road of reception by the root, there may be a
refection and imbibition from without; For gentle showrs refresh plants,
though they enter not their roots; And the good and bad _effluviums_ of
Vegetables, promote or debilitate each other. So _Epithymum_ and
_Dodder_, rootlesse and out of the ground, maintain themselves upon
Thyme, Savory, and plants, whereon they hang. And _Ivy_ divided from the
root, we have observed to live some years, by the cirrous parts commonly
conceived but as tenacles and holdfasts unto it. The stalks of mint
cropt from the root stripped from the leaves, and set in _glasses_ with
the root end upward, and out of the water, we have observed to send
forth sprouts and leaves without the aid of roots, and _scordium_ to
grow in like manner, the leaves set downward in water. To omit severall
Sea-plants, which grow on single roots from stones, although in very
many there are side-shoots _fibres_, beside the fastening root.

By this open position they were fairly exposed unto the rayes of Moon
and Sunne, so considerable in the growth of Vegetables. For though
Poplars, Willows, and severall Trees be made to grow about the brinks of
_Acharon_, and dark habitations of the dead; Though some plants are
content to grow in obscure Wells; wherein also old Elme pumps afford
sometimes long bushy sprouts, not observable in any above ground: And
large fields of Vegetables are able to maintain their verdure at the
bottome and shady part of the Sea; yet the greatest number are not
content without the actual rayes of the Sun, but bend, incline, and
follow them; As large lists of solisequious and Sun-following plants.
And some observe the method of its motion in their own growth and
conversion twining towards the West by the South, as Bryony, Hops,
Woodbine, and several kindes of Bindeweed, which we shall more admire;
when any can tell us, they observe another motion, and Twist by the
North at the _Antipodes_. The same plants rooted against an erect
North-wall full of holes, will finde a way through them to look upon the
Sun. And in tender plants from mustard-seed, sown in the winter, and in
a plot of earth placed inwardly against a South-window, the tender
stalks of two leaves arose not erect, but bending towards the window,
nor looking much higher then the Meridian Sun. And if the pot were
turned they would work themselves into their former declinations, making
their conversion by the East. That the Leaves of the Olive and some
other Trees solstitially turn, and precisely tell us, when the Sun is
entred _Cancer_, is scarce expectable in any Climate; and _Theophrastus_
warily observes it; Yet somewhat thereof is observable in our own, in
the leaves of Willows and Sallows, some weeks after the Solstice. But
the great _Convolvulus_ or white-flower'd _Bindweed_ observes both
motions of the Sunne, while the flower twists Æquinoctionally from the
left hand to the right according to the daily revolution; The stalk
twineth ecliptically from the right to the left, according to the annual
conversion.

Some commend the exposure of these orders unto the Western gales, as the
most generative and fructifying breath of heaven. But we applaud the
Husbandry of _Solomon_, whereto agreeth the doctrine of _Theophrastus_.
Arise O North-winde, and blow thou South upon my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out; For the North-winde closing the pores, and
shutting up the _effluviums_, when the South doth after open and relax
them; the Aromatical gummes do drop, and sweet odours fly actively from
them. And if his garden had the same situation, which mapps and charts
afford it, on the East side of _Jerusalem_, and having the wall on the
West; these were the winds, unto which it was well exposed.

By this way of plantation they encreased the number of their trees,
which they lost in _Quaternio's_, and square-orders, which is a
commodity insisted on by _Varro_, and one great intent of nature, in
this position of flowers and seeds in the elegant formation of plants,
and the former Rules observed in naturall and artificiall Figurations.

Whether in this order and one Tree in some measure breaking the cold,
and pinching gusts of windes from the other, trees will not better
maintain their inward circles, and either escape or moderate their
excentricities, may also be considered. For the circles in Trees are
naturally concentricall, parallel unto the bark, and unto each other,
till frost and piercing windes contract and close them on the
weatherside, the opposite semi-circle widely enlarging, and at a comely
distance, which hindreth oftentimes the beauty and roundnesse of Trees,
and makes the Timber lesse serviceable; whiles the ascending juyce not
readily passing, settles in knots and inequalities. And therefore it is
no new course of Agriculture, to observe the native position of Trees
according to North and South in their transplantations.

The same is also observable underground in the circinations and
sphærical rounds of Onyons, wherein the circles of the Orbes are
ofttimes larger, and the meridionall lines stand wider upon one side
then the other. And where the largenesse will make up the number of
planetical Orbes, that of _Luna_, and the lower planets excede the
dimensions of _Saturne_, and the higher: Whether the like be not
verified in the Circles of the large roots of Briony and Mandrake, or
why in the knotts of Deale or Firre the Circles are often eccentrical,
although not in a plane, but vertical and right position, deserves a
further enquiry.

Whether there be not some irregularity of roundnesse in most plants
according to their position? Whether some small compression of pores be
not perceptible in parts which stand against the current of waters, as
in Reeds, Bull-rushes, and other vegetables toward the streaming
quarter, may also be observed, and therefore such as are long and weak,
are commonly contrived into a roundnesse of figure, whereby the water
presseth lesse, and slippeth more smoothly from them, and even in flags
or flat-figured leaves, the greater part obvert their sharper sides unto
the current in ditches.

But whether plants which float upon the surface of the water, be for the
most part of cooling qualities, those which shoot above it of heating
vertues, and why? whether _Sargasso_ for many miles floating upon the
Western Ocean, or Sea-lettuce, and Phasganium at the bottome of our
Seas, make good the like qualities? Why Fenny waters afford the hottest
and sweetest plants, as Calamus, Cyperus, and Crowfoot, and mudd cast
out of ditches most naturally produceth Arsmart? Why plants so greedy of
water so little regard oyl? Why since many seeds contain much oyl within
them, they endure it not well without, either in their growth or
production? Why since Seeds shoot commonly under ground, and out of the
aire, those which are let fall in shallow glasses, upon the surface of
the water, will sooner sprout then those at the bottom? And if the water
be covered with oyle, those at the bottome will hardly sprout at all, we
have not room to conjecture.

Whether Ivy would not lesse offend the Trees in this clean ordination,
and well kept paths, might perhaps deserve the question. But this were a
quæry only unto some habitations, and little concerning _Cyrus_ or the
Babylonian territory; wherein by no industry _Harpalus_ could make Ivy
grow: And _Alexander_ hardly found it about those parts to imitate the
pomp of _Bacchus_. And though in these Northern Regions we are too much
acquainted with one Ivy, we know too little of another, whereby we
apprehend not the expressions of Antiquity, the Splenetick[164] medicine
of _Galen_, and the Emphasis of the Poet, in the beauty of the white
Ivy.[165]

  [164] Galen. de med. secundum loc.

  [165] Hedera formosior alba.

The like concerning the growth of Misseltoe, which dependeth not only
of the _species_, or kinde of Tree, but much also of the Soil. And
therefore common in some places, not readily found in others, frequent
in _France_, not so common in _Spain_, and scarce at all in the
Territory of _Ferrara_: Nor easily to be found where it is most required
upon Oakes, lesse on trees continually verdant. Although in some places
the Olive escapeth it not, requiting its detriment, in the delightful
view of its red Berries; as _Clusius_ observed in _Spain_, and
_Bellonius_ about _Hierusalem_. But this Parasitical plant suffers
nothing to grow upon it, by any way of art; nor could we ever make it
grow where nature had not planted it; as we have in vain attempted by
inocculation and incision, upon its native or forreign stock, and though
there seem nothing improbable in the seed, it hath not succeeded by
sation in any manner of ground, wherein we had no reason to despair
since we reade of vegetable horns [SN: Linschoten.], and how Rams horns
will root about _Goa_.

But besides these rural commodities, it cannot be meanly delectable in
the variety of Figures, which these orders open, and closed do make.
Whilest every inclosure makes a _Rhombus_, the figures obliquely taken a
Rhomboides, the intervals bounded with parallel lines, and each
intersection built upon a square, affording two Triangles or Pyramids
vertically conjoyned; which in the strict Quincuncial order do
oppositely make acute and blunt Angles.

And though therein we meet not with right angles, yet every Rhombus
containing four Angles equal unto two right, it virtually contains two
right in every one. Nor is this strange unto such as observe the natural
lines of Trees, and parts disposed in them. For neither in the root doth
nature affect this angle, which shooting downward for the stability of
the plant, doth best effect the same by Figures of Inclination; Nor in
the Branches and stalky leaves, which grow most at acute angles; as
declining from their head the root, and diminishing their Angles with
their altitude: Verified also in lesser Plants, whereby they better
support themselves, and bear not so heavily upon the stalk: So that
while near the root they often make an Angle of seventy parts, the
sprouts near the top will often come short of thirty. Even in the nerves
and master veines of the leaves the acute angle ruleth; the obtuse but
seldome found, and in the backward part of the leaf, reflecting and
arching about the stalk. But why ofttimes one side of the leaf is
unequal unto the other, as in Hazell and Oaks, why on either side the
master vein the lesser and derivative channels stand not directly
opposite, nor at equal angles, respectively unto the adverse side, but
those of one part do often exceed the other, as the Wallnut and many
more, deserves another enquiry.

Now if for this order we affect coniferous and tapering Trees,
particularly the Cypresse, which grows in a conical figure; we have
found a tree not only of great Ornament, but in its Essentials of
affinity unto this order. A solid Rhombus being made by the conversion
of two Equicrural Cones, as _Archimedes_ hath defined. And these were
the common Trees about _Babylon_, and the East, whereof the Ark was
made; and _Alexander_ found no Trees so accommodable to build his Navy;
And this we rather think to be the tree mentioned in the Canticles,
which stricter Botanology will hardly allow to be Camphire.

And if delight or ornamentall view invite a comely disposure by circular
amputations, as is elegantly performed in Hawthorns; then will they
answer the figures made by the conversion of a Rhombus, which maketh two
concentrical Circles; the greater circumference being made by the lesser
angles, the lesser by the greater.

The Cylindrical figure of trees is virtually contained and latent in
this order. A Cylinder or long round being made by the conversion or
turning of a Parallelogram, and most handsomely by a long square, which
makes an equal, strong, and lasting figure in trees, agreeable unto the
body and motive parts of animals, the greatest number of Plants, and
almost all roots, though their stalks be angular, and of many corners,
which seem not to follow the figure of their Seeds; Since many angular
Seeds send forth round stalks, and sphæricall seeds arise from angular
spindles, and many rather conform unto their roots, as the round stalks
of bulbous Roots, and in tuberous Roots stemmes of like figure. But why
since the largest number of Plants maintain a circular Figure, there are
so few with teretous or long round leaves; why coniferous Trees are
tenuifolious or narrow leafed, why Plants of few or no joynts have
commonly round stalks, why the greatest number of hollow stalks are
round stalks; or why in this variety of angular stalks the quadrangular
most exceedeth, were too long a speculation; Mean while obvious
experience may finde, that in Plants of divided leaves above, nature
often beginneth circularly in the two first leaves below, while in the
singular plant of Ivy, she exerciseth a contrary Geometry, and beginning
with angular leaves below, rounds them in the upper branches.

Nor can the rows in this order want delight, as carrying an aspect
answerable unto the _dipteros hypoethros_, or double order of columns
open above; the opposite ranks of Trees standing like pillars in the
_Cavedia_ of the Courts of famous buildings, and the _Portico's_ of the
_Templa subdialia_ of old; Somewhat imitating the _Peristylia_ or
Cloyster buildings, and the _Exedræ_ of the Ancients, wherein men
discoursed, walked and exercised; For that they derived the rule of
Columnes from trees, especially in their proportionall diminutions, is
illustrated by _Vitruvius_ from the shafts of Firre and Pine. And though
the inter-arboration do imitate the _Areostylos_, or thin order, not
strictly answering the proportion of intercolumniations; yet in many
trees they will not exceed the intermission of the Columnes in the court
of the Tabernacle; which being an hundred cubits long, and made up by
twenty pillars, will afford no lesse then intervals of five cubits.

Beside, in this kinde of aspect the sight being not diffused but
circumscribed between long parallels and the +episkiasmos+ and
adumbration from the branches, it frameth a penthouse over the eye, and
maketh a quiet vision: And therefore in diffused and open aspects, men
hollow their hand above their eye, and make an artificiall brow, whereby
they direct the dispersed rayes of sight, and by this shade preserve a
moderate light in the chamber of the eye; keeping the _pupilla_ plump
and fair, and not contracted or shrunk as in light and vagrant vision.

And therefore providence hath arched and paved the great house of the
world, with colours of mediocrity, that is, blew and green, above and
below the sight, moderately terminating the _acies_ of the eye. For most
plants, though green above-ground, maintain their original white below
it, according to the candour of their seminall pulp, and the rudimental
leaves do first appear in that colour; observable in Seeds sprouting in
water upon their first foliation. Green seeming to be the first
supervenient, or above-ground complexion of Vegetables, separable in
many upon ligature or inhumation, as Succory, Endive, Artichoaks, and
which is also lost upon fading in the Autumn.

And this is also agreeable unto water it self, the alimental vehicle of
plants, which first altereth into this colour; And containing many
vegetable seminalities, revealeth their Seeds by greennesse; and
therefore soonest expected in rain or standing water, not easily found
in distilled or water strongly boiled; wherein the seeds are
extinguished by fire and decoction, and therefore last long and pure
without such alteration, affording neither uliginous coats, gnatworms,
Acari, hairworms, like crude and common water; And therefore most fit
for wholsome beverage, and with malt makes Ale and Beer without boyling.
What large water-drinkers some Plants are, the Canary-tree and Birches
in some Northern Countries, drenching the fields about them do
sufficiently demonstrate. How water it self is able to maintain the
growth of Vegetables, and without extinction of their generative or
medicall vertues; Beside the experiment of _Helmonts_ tree, we have
found in some which have lived six years in glasses. The seeds of
Scurvy-grasse growing in water-pots, have been fruitful in the Land;
and _Asarum_ after a years space, and once casting its leaves in water
in the second leaves, hath handsomely performed its vomiting operation.

Nor are only dark and green colours, but shades and shadows contrived
through the great Volume of nature, and trees ordained not only to
protect and shadow others, but by their shades and shadowing parts, to
preserve and cherish themselves. The whole radiation or branchings
shadowing the stock and the root, the leaves, the branches and fruit,
too much exposed to the windes and scorching Sunne. The calicular leaves
inclose the tender flowers, and the flowers themselves lye wrapt about
the seeds, in their rudiment and first formations, which being advanced
the flowers fall away; and are therefore contrived in variety of
Figures, best satisfying the intention; Handsomely observable in hooded
and gaping flowers, and the Butterfly bloomes of leguminous plants, the
lower leaf closely involving the rudimental Cod, and the alary or wingy
divisions embracing or hanging over it.

But Seeds themselves do lie in perpetual shades, either under the leaf,
or shut up in coverings; and such as lye barest, have their husks,
skins, and pulps about them, wherein the nebbe and generative particle
lyeth moist and secured from the injury of Aire and Sunne. Darknesse and
light hold interchangeable dominions, and alternately rule the seminal
state of things. Light unto _Pluto_[166] is darknesse unto _Jupiter_.
Legions of seminall _Idæa's_ lye in their second Chaos and _Orcus_ of
_Hippocrates_; till putting on the habits of their forms, they shew
themselves upon the stage of the world, and open dominion of _Jove_.
They that held the Stars of heaven were but rayes and flashing glimpses
of the Empyreall light, through holes and perforations of the upper
heaven, took of the natural shadows of stars, while according to better
discovery the poor Inhabitants of the Moon[167] have but a polary life,
and must passe half their dayes in the shadow of that Luminary.

  [166] Lux orco, tenebræ Jovi, tenebræ orco, lux Jovi. _Hippocr._ de
        diæta.

  [167] S. Hevelii Selenographia.

Light that makes things seen, makes some things invisible, were it not
for darknesse and the shadow of the earth, the noblest part of the
Creation had remained unseen, and the Stars in heaven as invisible as on
the fourth day, when they were created above the Horizon, with the Sun,
or there was not an eye to behold them. The greatest mystery of Religion
is expressed by adumbration, and in the noblest part of Jewish Types, we
finde the Cherubims shadowing the Mercy-seat: Life it self is but the
shadow of death, and souls departed but the shadows of the living: All
things fall under this name. The Sunne it self is but the dark
_simulachrum_, and light but the shadow of God.

Lastly, It is no wonder that this Quincunciall order was first and still
affected as gratefull unto the Eye: For all things are seen
Quincuncially; For at the eye the Pyramidal rayes from the object,
receive a decussation, and so strike a second base upon the _Retina_ or
hinder coat, the proper organ of Vision; wherein the pictures from
objects are represented, answerable to the paper, or wall in the dark
chamber; after the decussation of the rayes at the hole of the
hornycoat, and their refraction upon the Christalline humour, answering
the _foramen_ of the window, and the _convex_ or burning-glasses, which
refract the rayes that enter it. And if ancient Anatomy would hold, a
like disposure there was of the optick or visual nerves in the brain,
wherein Antiquity conceived a concurrence by decussation. And this not
only observable in the Laws of direct Vision, but in some part also
verified in the reflected rayes of sight. For making the angle of
incidence equal to that of reflexion, the visuall ray returneth
Quincuncially, and after the form of a V, and the line of reflexion
being continued unto the place of vision, there ariseth a
semi-decussation which makes the object seen in a perpendicular unto it
self, and as farre below the reflectent, as it is from it above,
observable in the Sun and Moon beheld in water.

And this is also the law of reflexion in moved bodies and sounds, which
though not made by decussation, observe the rule of equality between
incidence and reflexion; whereby whispering places are framed by
Elliptical arches laid side-wise; where the voice being delivered at the
_focus_ of one extremity, observing an equality unto the angle of
incidence, it will reflect unto the _focus_ of the other end, and so
escape the ears of the standers in the middle.

A like rule is observed in the reflection of the vocall and sonorous
line in Ecchoes, which cannot therefore be heard in all stations. But
hapning in woody plantations, by waters, and able to return some words;
if reacht by a pleasant and well-dividing voice, there may be heard the
softest notes in nature.

And this not only verified in the way of sense, but in animall and
intellectual receptions. Things entring upon the intellect by a Pyramid
from without, and thence into the memory by another from within, the
common decussation being in the understanding as is delivered by
_Bovillus_.[168] Whether the intellectual and phantastical lines be not
thus rightly disposed, but magnified, diminished, distorted, and ill
placed in the Mathematicks of some brains, whereby they have irregular
apprehensions of things, perverted notions, conceptions, and incurable
hallucinations, were no unpleasant speculation.

  [168] Car. Bovillus de intellectu.

And if Ægyptian Philosophy may obtain, the scale of influences was thus
disposed, and the geniall spirits of both worlds, do trace their way in
ascending and descending Pyramids, mystically apprehended in the Letter
X, and the open Bill and stradling Legges of a Stork, which was imitated
by that Character.

Of this Figure _Plato_ made choice to illustrate the motion of the soul,
both of the world and man; while he delivered that God divided the whole
conjunction length-wise, according to figure of a Greek X, and then
turning it about reflected it into a circle; By the circle implying the
uniform motion of the first Orb, and by the right lines, the planetical
and various motions within it. And this also with application unto the
soul of man, which hath a double aspect, one right, whereby it beholdeth
the body, and objects without; another circular and reciprocal, whereby
it beholdeth it self. The circle declaring the motion of the indivisible
soul, simple, according to the divinity of its nature, and returning
into it self; the right lines respecting the motion pertaining unto
sense, and vegetation, and the central decussation, the wonderous
connexion of the severall faculties conjointly in one substance. And so
conjoyned the unity and duality of the soul, and made out the three
substances so much considered by him; That is, the indivisible or
divine, the divisible or corporeal, and that third, which was the
_Systasis_ or harmony of those two, in the mystical decussation.

And if that were clearly made out which _Justin Martyr_ took for
granted, this figure hath had the honour to characterise and notifie our
blessed Saviour, as he delivereth in that borrowed expression from
_Plato: Decussavit eum in universo_, the hint whereof he would have
_Plato_ derive from the figure of the brazen Serpent, and to have
mistaken the Letter X for T, whereas it is not improbable, he learned
these and other mystical expressions in his Learned Observations of
Ægypt, where he might obviously behold the Mercurial characters, the
handed crosses, and other mysteries not throughly understood in the
sacred Letter X, which being derivative from the Stork, one of the ten
sacred animals, might be originally Ægyptian, and brought into _Greece_
by _Cadmus_ of that Countrey.




