PART III


[Sidenote: SECT. 1]

'Tis hard to find a whole Age to imitate, or what Century to propose for
Example. Some have been far more approveable than others: but Virtue and
Vice, Panegyricks and Satyrs, scatteringly to be found in all. History
sets down not only things laudable, but abominable; things which should
never have been, or never have been known: So that noble patterns must
be fetched here and there from single Persons, rather than whole
Nations, and from all Nations, rather than any one. The World was early
bad, and the first sin the most deplorable of any. The younger World
afforded the oldest Men, and perhaps the Best and the Worst, when length
of days made virtuous habits Heroical and immoveable, vitious,
inveterate, and irreclaimable. And since 'tis said the imaginations of
their hearts were evil, only evil, and continually evil; it may be
feared that their sins held pace with their lives; and their Longevity
swelling their Impieties, the Longanimity of God would no longer endure
such vivacious abominations. Their Impieties were surely of a deep dye,
which required the whole Element of Water to wash them away, and
overwhelmed their memories with themselves; and so shut up the first
Windows of Time, leaving no Histories of those longevous generations,
when Men might have been properly Historians, when _Adam_ might have
read long Lectures unto _Methuselah_, and _Methuselah_ unto _Noah_. For
had we been happy in just Historical accounts of that unparallel'd
World, we might have been acquainted with Wonders; and have understood
not a little of the Acts and undertakings of _Moses_ his mighty Men, and
Men of renown of old; which might have enlarged our Thoughts, and made
the World older unto us. For the unknown part of time shortens the
estimation, if not the compute of it. What hath escaped our Knowledge
falls not under our Consideration, and what is and will be latent is
little better than non existent.


[Sidenote: SECT. 2]

Some things are dictated for our Instruction, some acted for our
Imitation, wherein 'tis best to ascend unto the highest conformity, and
to the honour of the Exemplar. He honours God who imitates him. For what
we virtuously imitate we approve and Admire; and since we delight not to
imitate Inferiors, we aggrandize and magnify those we imitate; since
also we are most apt to imitate those we love, we testify our affection
in our imitation of the Inimitable. To affect to be like may be no
imitation. To act, and not to be what we pretend to imitate, is but a
mimical conformation, and carrieth no Virtue in it. _Lucifer_ imitated
not God, when he said he would be like the Highest, and he imitated not
_Jupiter_, who counterfeited Thunder. Where Imitation can go no farther,
let Admiration step on, whereof there is no end in the wisest form of
Men. Even Angels and Spirits have enough to admire in their sublimer
Natures, Admiration being the act of the Creature and not of God, who
doth not Admire himself. Created Natures allow of swelling Hyperboles;
nothing can be said Hyperbolically of God, nor will his Attributes admit
of expressions above their own Exuperances. _Trismegistus_ his Circle,
whose center is every where, and circumference no where, was no
Hyperbole. Words cannot exceed, where they cannot express enough. Even
the most winged Thoughts fall at the setting out, and reach not the
portal of Divinity.


[Sidenote: SECT. 3]

In Bivious Theorems, and _Janus_-faced Doctrines, let Virtuous
considerations state the determination. Look upon Opinions as thou dost
upon the Moon, and chuse not the dark hemisphere for thy contemplation.
Embrace not the opacous and blind side of Opinions, but that which looks
most Luciferously or influentially unto Goodness. 'Tis better to think
that there are Guardian Spirits, than that there are no Spirits to Guard
us; that vicious Persons are Slaves, than that there is any servitude in
Virtue; that times past have been better than times present, than that
times were always bad, and that to be Men it sufficeth to be no better
than Men in all Ages, and so promiscuously to swim down the turbid
stream, and make up the grand confusion. Sow not thy understanding with
Opinions, which make nothing of Iniquities, and fallaciously extenuate
Transgressions. Look upon Vices and vicious Objects with Hyperbolical
Eyes, and rather enlarge their dimensions, that their unseen Deformities
may not escape thy sense, and their Poysonous parts and stings may
appear massy and monstrous unto thee; for the undiscerned Particles and
Atoms of Evil deceive us, and we are undone by the Invisibles of seeming
Goodness. We are only deceived in what is not discerned, and to Err is
but to be Blind or Dim-sighted as to some Perceptions.


[Sidenote: SECT. 4]

To be Honest in a right Line,[353] and Virtuous by Epitome, be firm unto
such Principles of Goodness, as carry in them Volumes of instruction and
may abridge thy Labour. And since instructions are many, hold close unto
those, whereon the rest depend. So may we have all in a few, and the Law
and the Prophets in a Rule, the Sacred Writ in Stenography, and the
Scripture in a Nut-Shell. To pursue the osseous and solid part of
Goodness, which gives Stability and Rectitude to all the rest; To settle
on fundamental Virtues, and bid early defiance unto Mother-vices, which
carry in their Bowels the seminals of other Iniquities, makes a short
cut in Goodness, and strikes not off an Head but the whole Neck of
_Hydra_. For we are carried into the dark Lake, like the _Ægyptian_
River into the Sea, by seven principal Ostiaries. The Mother-Sins of
that number are the Deadly engins of Evil Spirits that undo us, and even
evil Spirits themselves, and he who is under the Chains thereof is not
without a possession. _Mary Magdalene_ had more than seven Devils, if
these with their Imps were in her, and he who is thus possessed, may
literally be named _Legion_. Where such Plants grow and prosper, look
for no Champain or Region void of Thorns, but productions like the Tree
of _Goa_,[354] and Forrests of abomination.

  [353] _Linea recta brevissima._

  [354] _Arbor Goa de Ruyz_, or _ficus Indica_, whose branches send down
        shoots which root in the ground, from whence there successively
        rise others, till one Tree becomes a wood.


[Sidenote: SECT. 5]

Guide not the Hand of God, nor order the Finger of the Almighty, unto
thy will and pleasure; but sit quiet in the soft showers of Providence,
and Favourable distributions in this World, either to thyself or others.
And since not only Judgments have their Errands, but Mercies their
Commissions; snatch not at every Favour, nor think thy self passed by if
they fall upon thy Neighbour. Rake not up envious displacences at things
successful unto others, which the wise Disposer of all thinks not fit
for thy self. Reconcile the events of things unto both beings, that is,
of this World and the next: So will there not seem so many Riddles in
Providence, nor various inequalities in the dispensation of things
below. If thou dost not anoint thy Face, yet put not on sackcloth at the
felicities of others. Repining at the Good draws on rejoicing at the
evils of others, and so falls into that inhumane Vice,[355] for which so
few Languages have a name. The blessed Spirits above rejoice at our
happiness below: but to be glad at the evils of one another, is beyond
the malignity of Hell, and falls not on evil Spirits, who, though they
rejoice at our unhappiness, take no pleasure at the afflictions of their
own Society or of their fellow Natures. Degenerous Heads! who must be
fain to learn from such Examples, and to be Taught from the School of
Hell.

  [355] +Epichairekakia+.


[Sidenote: SECT. 6]

Grain not thy vicious stains, nor deepen those swart Tinctures, which
Temper, Infirmity, or ill habits have set upon thee; and fix not by
iterated depravations what time might Efface, or Virtuous washes
expunge. He, who thus still advanceth in Iniquity deepneth his deformed
hue; turns a Shadow into Night, and makes himself a _Negro_ in the black
Jaundice; and so becomes one of those Lost ones, the disproportionate
pores of whose Brains afford no entrance unto good Motions, but reflect
and frustrate all Counsels, Deaf unto the Thunder of the Laws, and Rocks
unto the Cries of charitable Commiserators. He who hath had the Patience
of _Diogenes_, to make Orations unto Statues, may more sensibly
apprehend how all Words fall to the Ground, spent upon such a surd and
Earless Generation of Men, stupid unto all Instruction, and rather
requiring an Exorcist, than an Orator for their Conversion.


[Sidenote: SECT. 7]

Burden not the back of _Aries_, _Leo_, or _Taurus,_ with thy faults; nor
make _Saturn_, _Mars_, or _Venus_, guilty of thy Follies. Think not to
fasten thy imperfections on the Stars, and so despairingly conceive thy
self under a fatality of being evil. Calculate thy self within, seek not
thy self in the Moon, but in thine own Orb or Microcosmical
Circumference. Let celestial aspects admonish and advertise, not
conclude and determine thy ways. For since good and bad stars moralize
not our Actions, and neither excuse or commend, acquit or condemn our
Good or Bad Deeds at the present or last Bar, since some are
Astrologically well disposed who are morally highly vicious; not
Celestial Figures, but Virtuous Schemes must denominate and state our
Actions. If we rightly understood the Names whereby God calleth the
Stars, if we knew his Name for the Dog-Star, or by what appellation
_Jupiter_, _Mars_, and _Saturn_ obey his Will; it might be a welcome
accession unto Astrology, which speaks great things, and is fain to make
use of appellations from Greek and Barbarick Systems. Whatever
Influences, Impulsions, or Inclinations there be from the Lights above,
it were a piece of wisdom to make one of those Wise men who overrule
their Stars,[356] and with their own Militia contend with the Host of
Heaven. Unto which attempt there want not Auxiliaries from the whole
strength of Morality, supplies from Christian Ethicks, influences also
and illuminations from above, more powerfull than the Lights of Heaven.

  [356] _Sapiens dominabitur Astris._

[Sidenote: SECT. 8]

Confound not the distinctions of thy Life which Nature hath divided:
that is, Youth, Adolescence, Manhood, and old Age, nor in these divided
Periods, wherein thou art in a manner Four, conceive thyself but One.
Let every division be happy in its proper Virtues, nor one Vice run
through all. Let each distinction have its salutary transition, and
critically deliver thee from the imperfections of the former, so
ordering the whole, that Prudence and Virtue may have the largest
section. Do as a Child but when thou art a Child, and ride not on a Reed
at twenty. He who hath not taken leave of the follies of his Youth, and
in his maturer state scarce got out of that division, disproportionately
divideth his Days, crowds up the latter part of his Life, and leaves too
narrow a corner for the Age of Wisdom, and so hath room to be a Man
scarce longer than he hath been a Youth. Rather than to make this
confusion, anticipate the Virtues of Age, and live long without the
infirmities of it. So may'st thou count up thy Days as some do
_Adams_,[357] that is, by anticipation; so may'st thou be coetaneous
unto thy Elders, and a Father unto thy contemporaries.

  [357] _Adam_ thought to be created in the State of Man, about thirty
        years Old.

[Sidenote: SECT. 9]

While others are curious in the choice of good Air, and chiefly
sollicitous for healthful habitations, Study thou Conversation, and be
critical in thy Consortion. The aspects, conjunctions, and
configurations of the Stars, which mutually diversify, intend, or
qualify their influences, are but the varieties of their nearer or
farther conversation with one another, and like the Consortion of Men,
whereby they become better or worse, and even Exchange their Natures.
Since men live by Examples, and will be imitating something; order thy
imitation to thy Improvement, not thy Ruin. Look not for Roses in
_Attalus_[358] His Garden, or wholesome Flowers in a venemous
Plantation. And since there is scarce any one bad, but some others are
the worse for him; tempt not Contagion by proximity, and hazard not thy
self in the shadow of Corruption. He who hath not early suffered this
Shipwrack, and in his Younger Days escaped this _Charybdis_, may make a
happy Voyage, and not come in with black Sails into the port. Self
conversation, or to be alone, is better than such Consortion. Some
School-men tell us, that he is properly alone, with whom in the same
place there is no other of the same Species. _Nabuchodonozor_ was alone,
though among the Beasts of the field; and a Wise Man may be tolerably
said to be alone though with a Rabble of People, little better than
Beasts about him. Unthinking Heads, who have not learn'd to be alone,
are in a Prison to themselves, if they be not also with others: Whereas
on the contrary, they whose thoughts are in a fair, and hurry within,
are sometimes fain to retire into Company, to be out of the crowd of
themselves. He who must needs have Company, must needs have sometimes
bad Company. Be able to be alone. Loose not the advantage of Solitude,
and the Society of thy self, nor be only content, but delight to be
alone and single with Omnipresency. He who is thus prepared, the Day is
not uneasy nor the Night black unto him. Darkness may bound his Eyes,
not his Imagination. In his Bed he may ly, like _Pompey_[359] and his
Sons, in all quarters of the Earth, may speculate the Universe, and
enjoy the whole World in the Hermitage of himself. Thus the old
_Ascetick_ Christians found a Paradise in a Desert, and with little
converse on Earth held a conversation in Heaven; thus they Astronomiz'd
in Caves, and though they beheld not the Stars, had the Glory of Heaven
before them.

  [358] _Attalus_ made a Garden which contained only venemous plants.

  [359] _Pompeios Juvenes Asia atque Europa, sed ipsum Terra tegit
        Libyes._


[Sidenote: SECT. 10]

Let the Characters of good things stand indelibly in thy Mind, and thy
Thoughts be active on them. Trust not too much unto suggestions from
Reminiscential Amulets, or artificial _Memorandums_. Let the mortifying
_Janus_ of _Covarrubias_[360] be in thy daily Thoughts, not only on thy
Hand and Signets. Rely not alone upon silent and dumb remembrances.
Behold not Death's Heads till thou doest not see them, nor look upon
mortifying Objects till thou overlook'st them. Forget not how
assuefaction unto any thing minorates the passion from it, how constant
Objects loose their hints, and steal an inadvertisement upon us. There
is no excuse to forget what every thing prompts unto us. To thoughtful
Observators the whole World is a Phylactery, and every thing we see an
Item of the Wisdom, Power, or Goodness of God. Happy are they who verify
their Amulets, and make their Phylacteries speak in their Lives and
Actions. To run on in despight of the Revulsions and Pul-backs of such
Remora's aggravates our transgressions. When Death's Heads on our Hands
have no influence upon our Heads, and fleshless Cadavers abate not the
exorbitances of the Flesh; when Crucifixes upon Mens Hearts suppress not
their bad commotions, and his Image who was murdered for us with-holds
not from Blood and Murder; Phylacteries prove but formalities, and their
despised hints sharpen our condemnations.

  [360] _Don Sebastian de Covarrubias_, writ 3 Centuries of moral Emblems
        in _Spanish_. In the 88th of the second Century he sets down two
        Faces averse, and conjoined _Janus_-like; the one a Gallant
        Beautiful Face, the other a Death's-Head Face, with this Motto out
        of _Ovid's Metamorphosis_, _Quid fuerim quid simque vide_.


[Sidenote: SECT. 11]

Look not for _Whales_ in the _Euxine_ Sea, or expect great matters where
they are not to be found. Seek not for Profundity in Shallowness, or
Fertility in a Wilderness. Place not the expectation of great Happiness
here below, or think to find Heaven on Earth; wherein we must be content
with Embryon-felicities, and fruitions of doubtful Faces. For the Circle
of our felicities makes but short Arches. In every clime we are in a
periscian state, and with our Light our Shadow and Darkness walk about
us. Our Contentments stand upon the tops of Pyramids ready to fall off,
and the insecurity of their enjoyments abrupteth our Tranquillities.
What we magnify is Magnificent, but like to the _Colossus_, noble
without, stuft with rubbidge and coarse Metal within. Even the Sun,
whose Glorious outside we behold, may have dark and smoaky Entrails. In
vain we admire the Lustre of any thing seen: that which is truly
glorious is invisible. _Paradise_ was but a part of the Earth, lost not
only to our Fruition but our Knowledge. And if, according to old
Dictates, no Man can be said to be happy before Death, the happiness of
this Life goes for nothing before it be over, and while we think
ourselves happy we do but usurp that Name. Certainly true Beatitude
groweth not on Earth, nor hath this World in it the Expectations we have
of it. He Swims in Oyl, and can hardly avoid sinking, who hath such
light Foundations to support him. 'Tis therefore happy that we have two
Worlds to hold on. To enjoy true happiness we must travel into a very
far Countrey, and even out of our selves; for the Pearl we seek for is
not to be found in the _Indian_, but in the _Empyrean_ Ocean.


[Sidenote: SECT. 12]

Answer not the Spur of Fury, and be not prodigal or prodigious in
Revenge. Make not one in the _Historia Horribilis_;[361] Flay not thy
Servant for a broken Glass, nor pound him in a Mortar who offendeth
thee; supererogate not in the worst sense, and overdo not the
necessities of evil; humour not the injustice of Revenge. Be not
Stoically mistaken in the equality of sins, nor commutatively iniquous
in the valuation of transgressions; but weigh them in the Scales of
Heaven, and by the weights of righteous Reason. Think that Revenge too
high, which is but level with the offence. Let thy Arrows of Revenge fly
short, or be aimed like those of _Jonathan_, to fall beside the mark.
Too many there be to whom a Dead Enemy smells well, and who find Musk
and Amber in Revenge. The ferity of such minds holds no rule in
Retaliations, requiring too often a Head for a Tooth, and the Supreme
revenge for trespasses which a night's rest should obliterate. But
patient Meekness takes injuries like Pills, not chewing but swallowing
them down, Laconically suffering, and silently passing them over, while
angered Pride makes a noise, like _Homerican Mars_[362], at every
scratch of offences. Since Women do most delight in Revenge, it may seem
but feminine manhood to be vindicative. If thou must needs have thy
Revenge of thine Enemy, with a soft Tongue break his Bones,[363] heap
Coals of Fire on his Head, forgive him, and enjoy it. To forgive our
Enemies is a charming way of Revenge, and a short _Cæsarian_ Conquest
overcoming without a blow; laying our Enemies at our Feet, under sorrow,
shame, and repentance; leaving our Foes our Friends, and solicitously
inclined to grateful Retaliations. Thus to Return upon our Adversaries
is a healing way of Revenge, and to do good for evil a soft and melting
ultion, a method Taught from Heaven to keep all smooth on Earth. Common
forceable ways make not an end of Evil, but leave Hatred and Malice
behind them. An Enemy thus reconciled is little to be trusted, as
wanting the foundation of Love and Charity, and but for a time
restrained by disadvantage or inability. If thou hast not Mercy for
others, yet be not Cruel unto thy self. To ruminate upon evils, to make
critical notes upon injuries, and be too acute in their apprehensions,
is to add unto our own Tortures, to feather the Arrows of our Enemies,
to lash our selves with the Scorpions of our Foes, and to resolve to
sleep no more. For injuries long dreamt on take away at last all rest;
and he sleeps but like _Regulus_, who busieth his Head about them.

  [361] A Book so intitled wherein are sundry horrid accounts.

  [362]    _Tu miser exclamas, ut Stentora vincere possis,
           Vel potius quantum Gradivus Homericus._ Juvenal.

  [363] A soft tongue breaketh the bones. _Proverbs_ 25. 15.


[Sidenote: SECT. 13]

Amuse not thyself about the Riddles of future things. Study Prophecies
when they are become Histories, and past hovering in their causes. Eye
well things past and present, and let conjectural sagacity suffice for
things to come. There is a sober Latitude for prescience in contingences
of discoverable Tempers, whereby discerning Heads see sometimes beyond
their Eyes, and Wise Men become Prophetical. Leave Cloudy predictions to
their Periods, and let appointed Seasons have the lot of their
accomplishments. 'Tis too early to study such Prophecies before they
have been long made, before some train of their causes have already
taken Fire, laying open in part what lay obscure and before buryed unto
us. For the voice of Prophecies is like that of Whispering-places: They
who are near or at a little distance hear nothing, those at the farthest
extremity will understand all. But a Retrograde cognition of times past,
and things which have already been, is more satisfactory than a
suspended Knowledge of what is yet unexistent. And the Greatest part of
time being already wrapt up in things behind us; it's now somewhat late
to bait after things before us; for futurity still shortens, and time
present sucks in time to come. What is Prophetical in one Age proves
Historical in another, and so must hold on unto the last of time; when
there will be no room for Prediction, when _Janus_ shall loose one Face,
and the long beard of time shall look like those of _David's_ Servants,
shorn away upon one side, and when, if the expected _Elias_ should
appear, he might say much of what is past, not much of what's to come.


[Sidenote: SECT. 14]

Live unto the Dignity of thy Nature, and leave it not disputable at
last, whether thou hast been a Man, or since thou art a composition of
Man and Beast, how thou hast predominantly passed thy days, to state the
denomination. Un-man not therefore thy self by a Beastial
transformation, nor realize old Fables. Expose not thy self by
four-footed manners unto monstrous draughts, and _Caricatura_
representations. Think not after the old _Pythagorean_ conceit, what
Beast thou may'st be after death. Be not under any Brutal
_metempsychosis_ while thou livest, and walkest about erectly under the
scheme of Man. In thine own circumference, as in that of the Earth, let
the Rational Horizon be larger than the sensible, and the Circle of
Reason than of Sense. Let the Divine part be upward, and the Region of
Beast below. Otherwise, 'tis but to live invertedly, and with thy Head
unto the Heels of thy _Antipodes_. Desert not thy title to a Divine
particle and union with invisibles. Let true Knowledge and Virtue tell
the lower World thou art a part of the higher. Let thy Thoughts be of
things which have not entred into the Hearts of Beasts: Think of things
long past, and long to come: Acquaint thy self with the _Choragium_ of
the Stars, and consider the vast expansion beyond them. Let Intellectual
Tubes give thee a glance of things, which visive Organs reach not. Have
a glimpse of incomprehensibles, and Thoughts of things, which Thoughts
but tenderly touch. Lodge immaterials in thy Head: ascend unto
invisibles: fill thy Spirit with Spirituals, with the mysteries of
Faith, the magnalities of Religion, and thy Life with the Honour of God;
without which, though Giants in Wealth and Dignity, we are but Dwarfs
and Pygmies in Humanity, and may hold a pitiful rank in that triple
division of mankind into Heroes, Men, and Beasts. For though human Souls
are said to be equal, yet is there no small inequality in their
operations; some maintain the allowable Station of Men; many are far
below it; and some have been so divine, as to approach the _Apogeum_ of
their Natures, and to be in the _Confinium_ of Spirits.


[Sidenote: SECT. 15]

Behold thy self by inward Opticks and the Crystalline of thy Soul.
Strange it is that in the most perfect sense there should be so many
fallacies, that we are fain to make a doctrine, and often to see by Art.
But the greatest imperfection is in our inward sight, that is, to be
Ghosts unto our own Eyes, and while we are so sharp sighted as to look
thorough others, to be invisible unto our selves; for the inward Eyes
are more fallacious than the outward. The Vices we scoff at in others
laugh at us within our selves. Avarice, Pride, Falshood lye undiscerned
and blindly in us, even to the Age of blindness: and therefore to see
our selves interiourly, we are fain to borrow other Mens Eyes; wherein
true Friends are good Informers, and Censurers no bad Friends.
Conscience only, that can see without Light, sits in the _Areopagy_ and
dark Tribunal of our Hearts, surveying our Thoughts and condemning their
obliquities. Happy is that State of Vision that can see without Light,
though all should look as before the Creation, when there was not an Eye
to see, or Light to actuate a Vision: wherein notwithstanding obscurity
is only imaginable respectively unto Eyes; for unto God there was none,
Eternal Light was ever, created Light was for the creation, not himself,
and as he saw before the Sun, may still also see without it. In the City
of the new _Jerusalem_ there is neither Sun nor Moon; where glorifyed
Eyes must see by the _Archetypal_ Sun, or the Light of God, able to
illuminate Intellectual Eyes, and make unknown Visions. Intuitive
perceptions in Spiritual beings may perhaps hold some Analogy unto
Vision: but yet how they see us, or one another, what Eye, what Light,
or what perception is required unto their intuition, is yet dark unto
our apprehension; and even how they see God, or how unto our glorified
Eyes the Beatifical Vision will be celebrated, another World must tell
us, when perceptions will be new, and we may hope to behold invisibles.


[Sidenote: SECT. 16]

When all looks fair about, and thou seest not a cloud so big as a Hand
to threaten thee, forget not the Wheel of things: Think of sullen
vicissitudes, but beat not thy brains to fore-know them. Be armed
against such obscurities, rather by submission than fore-knowledge. The
Knowledge of future evils mortifies present felicities, and there is
more content in the uncertainty or ignorance of them. This favour our
Saviour vouchsafed unto _Peter_, when he fore-told not his Death in
plain terms, and so by an ambiguous and cloudy delivery dampt not the
Spirit of his Disciples. But in the assured fore-knowledge of the
deluge, _Noah_ lived many Years under the affliction of a Flood; and
_Jerusalem_ was taken unto _Jeremy_, before it was besieged. And
therefore the Wisdom of Astrologers, who speak of future things, hath
wisely softned the severity of their Doctrines; and even in their sad
predictions, while they tell us of inclination not coaction from the
Stars, they Kill us not with _Stygian_ oaths and merciless necessity,
but leave us hopes of evasion.


[Sidenote: SECT. 17]

If thou hast the brow to endure the Name of Traytor, Perjur'd, or
Oppressor, yet cover thy Face when Ingratitude is thrown at thee. If
that degenerous Vice possess thee, hide thy self in the shadow of thy
shame, and pollute not noble society. Grateful Ingenuities are content
to be obliged within some compass of Retribution, and being depressed by
the weight of iterated favours may so labour under their inabilities of
Requital, as to abate the content from Kindnesses. But narrow self-ended
Souls make prescription of good Offices, and obliged by often favours
think others still due unto them: whereas, if they but once fail, they
prove so perversely ungrateful, as to make nothing of common courtesies,
and to bury all that's past. Such tempers pervert the generous course of
things; for they discourage the inclinations of noble minds, and make
Beneficency cool unto acts of obligation, whereby the grateful World
should subsist, and have their consolation. Common gratitude must be
kept alive by the additionary fewel of new courtesies: but generous
Gratitudes, though but once well obliged, without quickening repetitions
or expectation of new Favours, have thankful minds for ever; for they
write not their obligations in sandy but marble memories, which wear not
out but with themselves.


[Sidenote: SECT. 18]

Think not Silence the wisdom of Fools, but, if rightly timed, the honour
of Wise Men, who have not the Infirmity, but the Virtue of Taciturnity,
and speak not out of the abundance, but the well weighted thoughts of
their Hearts. Such silence may be Eloquence, and speak thy worth above
the power of Words. Make such a one thy friend, in whom Princes may be
happy, and great Councels successful. Let him have the Key of thy Heart,
who hath the Lock of his own, which no Temptation can open; where thy
Secrets may lastingly ly, like the lamp in _Olybius_ his Urn,[364]
alive, and light, but close and invisible.

  [364] Which after many hundred years was found burning under ground, and
        went out as soon as the air came to it.


[Sidenote: SECT. 19]

Let thy Oaths be sacred, and Promises be made upon the Altar of thy
Heart. Call not _Jove_[365] to witness with a Stone in one Hand, and a
Straw in another, and so make Chaff and Stubble of thy Vows. Worldly
Spirits, whose interest is their belief, make Cobwebs of Obligations,
and, if they can find ways to elude the Urn of the _Prætor_, will trust
the Thunderbolt of _Jupiter_: And therefore if they should as deeply
swear as _Osman_ to _Bethlem Gabor_:[366] yet whether they would be
bound by those chains, and not find ways to cut such _Gordian_ Knots, we
could have no just assurance. But Honest Mens Words are _Stygian_ Oaths,
and Promises inviolable. These are not the Men for whom the fetters of
Law were first forged: they needed not the solemness of Oaths; by
keeping their Faith they swear,[367] and evacuate such confirmations.

  [365] _Jovem lapidem jurare._

  [366] See the oath of _Sultan Osman_ in his life, in the addition to
        _Knolls_ his Turkish history.

  [367] _Colendo fidem jurant._--Curtius.


[Sidenote: SECT. 20]

Though the World be Histrionical, and most Men live Ironically, yet be
thou what thou singly art, and personate only thy self. Swim smoothly in
the stream of thy Nature, and live but one Man. To single Hearts
doubling is discruciating: such tempers must sweat to dissemble, and
prove but hypocritical Hypocrites. Simulation must be short: Men do not
easily continue a counterfeiting Life, or dissemble unto Death. He who
counterfeiteth, acts a part; and is as it were out of himself: which, if
long, proves so irksome, that Men are glad to pull of their Vizards, and
resume themselves again; no practice being able to naturalize such
unnaturals, or make a Man rest content not to be himself. And therefore
since Sincerity is thy Temper, let veracity be thy Virtue in Words,
Manners, and Actions. To offer at iniquities, which have so little
foundations in thee, were to be vitious up hill, and strain for thy
condemnation. Persons vitiously inclined, want no Wheels to make them
actively vitious, as having the Elater and Spring of their own Natures
to facilitate their Iniquities. And therefore so many, who are
sinistrous unto Good Actions, are Ambi-dexterous unto bad; and _Vulcans_
in virtuous paths, _Achilleses_ in vitious motions.


[Sidenote: SECT. 21]

Rest not in the high strain'd Paradoxes of old Philosophy supported by
naked Reason, and the reward of mortal Felicity, but labour in the
Ethicks of Faith, built upon Heavenly assistance, and the happiness of
both beings. Understand the Rules, but swear not unto the doctrines of
_Zeno_ or _Epicurus_. Look beyond _Antoninus_, and terminate not thy
morals in _Seneca_ or _Epictetus_. Let not the twelve, but the two
Tables be thy Law: Let _Pythagoras_ be thy Remembrancer, not thy
textuary and final Instructer; and learn the Vanity of the World rather
from _Solomon_ than _Phocylides_. Sleep not in the Dogma's of the
_Peripatus_, Academy, or _Porticus_. Be a moralist of the Mount, an
_Epictetus_ in the _Faith_, and christianize thy Notions.


[Sidenote: SECT. 22]

In seventy or eighty years a Man may have a deep Gust of the World, Know
what it is, what it can afford, and what 'tis to have been a Man. Such a
latitude of years may hold a considerable corner in the general Map of
Time; and a Man may have a curt Epitome of the whole course thereof in
the days of his own life, may clearly see he hath but acted over his
Fore-fathers; what it was to live in Ages past, and what living will be
in all ages to come.

He is like to be the best judge of Time who hath lived to see about the
sixtieth part thereof. Persons of short times may Know what 'tis to
live, but not the life of Man, who, having little behind them, are but
_Januses_ of one face, and Know not singularities enough to raise Axioms
of this World: but such a compass of Years will shew new Examples of old
Things, Parallelisms of occurrences through the whole course of Time,
and nothing be monstrous unto him; who may in that time understand not
only the varieties of Men, but the variation of himself, and how many
Men he hath been in that extent of time.

He may have a close apprehension what it is to be forgotten, while he
hath lived to find none who could remember his Father, or scarce the
friends of his youth, and may sensibly see with what a face in no long
time oblivion will look upon himself. His Progeny may never be his
Posterity; he may go out of the World less related than he came into it;
and considering the frequent mortality in Friends and Relations, in such
a Term of Time, he may pass away divers years in sorrow and black
habits, and leave none to mourn for himself; Orbity may be his
inheritance, and Riches his Repentance.

In such a thred of Time, and long observation of Men, he may acquire a
_Physiognomical_ intuitive Knowledge, Judge the interiors by the
outside, and raise conjectures at first sight; and knowing what Men have
been, what they are, what Children probably will be, may in the present
Age behold a good part, and the temper of the next; and since so many
live by the Rules of Constitution, and so few overcome their
temperamental Inclinations, make no improbable predictions.

Such a portion of Time will afford a large prospect backward, and
Authentick Reflections how far he hath performed the great intention of
his Being, in the Honour of his Maker; whether he hath made good the
Principles of his Nature, and what he was made to be; what
Characteristick and special Mark he hath left, to be observable in his
Generation; whether he hath Lived to purpose or in vain, and what he
hath added, acted, or performed, that might considerably speak him a
Man.

In such an Age Delights will be undelightful and Pleasures grow stale
unto him; Antiquated Theorems will revive, and _Solomon's_ Maxims be
Demonstrations unto him; Hopes or presumptions be over, and despair grow
up of any satisfaction below. And having been long tossed in the Ocean
of this World, he will by that time feel the In-draught of another, unto
which this seems but preparatory, and without it of no high value. He
will experimentally find the Emptiness of all things, and the nothing of
what is past; and wisely grounding upon true Christian Expectations,
finding so much past, will wholly fix upon what is to come. He will long
for Perpetuity, and live as though he made haste to be happy. The last
may prove the prime part of his Life, and those his best days which he
lived nearest Heaven.


[Sidenote: SECT. 23]

Live happy in the _Elizium_ of a virtuously composed Mind, and let
Intellectual Contents exceed the Delights wherein mere Pleasurists place
their Paradise. Bear not too slack reins upon Pleasure, nor let
complexion or contagion betray thee unto the exorbitancy of Delight.
Make Pleasure thy Recreation or intermissive Relaxation, not thy
_Diana_, Life and Profession. Voluptuousness is as insatiable as
Covetousness. Tranquillity is better than Jollity, and to appease pain
than to invent pleasure. Our hard entrance into the world, our miserable
going out of it, our sicknesses, disturbances, and sad Rencounters in
it, do clamorously tell us we come not into the World to run a Race of
Delight, but to perform the sober Acts and serious purposes of Man;
which to omit were foully to miscarry in the advantage of humanity, to
play away an uniterable Life, and to have lived in vain. Forget not the
capital end, and frustrate not the opportunity of once Living. Dream not
of any kind of _Metempsychosis_ or transanimation, but into thine own
body, and that after a long time, and then also unto wail or bliss,
according to thy first and fundamental Life. Upon a curricle in this
World depends a long course of the next, and upon a narrow Scene here an
endless expansion hereafter. In vain some think to have an end of their
Beings with their Lives. Things cannot get out of their natures, or be
or not be in despite of their constitutions. Rational existences in
Heaven perish not at all, and but partially on Earth: That which is thus
once will in some way be always: The first Living human Soul is still
alive, and all _Adam_ hath found no Period.


[Sidenote: SECT. 24]

Since the Stars of Heaven do differ in Glory; since it hath pleased the
Almighty hand to honour the North Pole with Lights above the South;
since there are some Stars so bright that they can hardly be looked on,
some so dim that they can scarce be seen, and vast numbers not to be
seen at all even by Artificial Eyes; Read thou the Earth in Heaven, and
things below from above. Look contentedly upon the scattered difference
of things, and expect not equality in lustre, dignity, or perfection,
in Regions or Persons below; where numerous numbers must be content to
stand like _Lacteous_ or _Nebulous_ Stars, little taken notice of, or
dim in their generations. All which may be contentedly allowable in the
affairs and ends of this World, and in suspension unto what will be in
the order of things hereafter, and the new Systeme of Mankind which will
be in the World to come; when the last may be the first and the first
the last; when _Lazarus_ may sit above _Cæsar_, and the just obscure on
Earth shall shine like the Sun in Heaven; when personations shall cease,
and Histrionism of happiness be over; when Reality shall rule, and all
shall be as they shall be for ever.


[Sidenote: SECT. 25]

When the _Stoick_ said that life would not be accepted if it were
offered unto such as knew it,[368] he spoke too meanly of that state of
being which placeth us in the form of Men. It more depreciates the value
of this life, that Men would not live it over again; for although they
would still live on, yet few or none can endure to think of being twice
the same Men upon Earth, and some had rather never have lived than to
tread over their days once more. _Cicero_ in a prosperous state had not
the patience to think of beginning in a cradle again. _Job_ would not
only curse the day of his Nativity, but also of his Renascency, if he
were to act over his Disasters, and the miseries of the Dunghil. But the
greatest under-weening of this Life is to undervalue that, unto which
this is but Exordial or a Passage leading unto it. The great advantage
of this mean life is thereby to stand in a capacity of a better; for
the Colonies of Heaven must be drawn from Earth, and the Sons of the
first _Adam_ are only heirs unto the second. Thus _Adam_ came into this
World with the power also of another, nor only to replenish the Earth,
but the everlasting Mansions of Heaven. Where we were when the
foundations of the earth were lay'd, when the morning Stars sang
together,[369] and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy, He must answer
who asked it; who understands Entities of preordination, and beings yet
unbeing; who hath in his Intellect the Ideal Existences of things, and
Entities before their Extances. Though it looks but like an imaginary
kind of existency to be before we are; yet since we are under the decree
or prescience of a sure and Omnipotent Power, it may be somewhat more
than a non-entity to be in that mind, unto which all things are present.

  [368] _Vitam nemo acciperet si daretur scientibus._--Seneca.

  [369] Job 38.


[Sidenote: SECT. 26]

If the end of the World shall have the same foregoing Signs, as the
period of Empires, States, and Dominions in it, that is, Corruption of
Manners, inhuman degenerations, and deluge of iniquities; it may be
doubted whether that final time be so far of, of whose day and hour
there can be no prescience. But while all men doubt, and none can
determine how long the World shall last, some may wonder that it hath
spun out so long and unto our days. For if the Almighty had not
determin'd a fixed duration unto it, according to his mighty and
merciful designments in it, if he had not said unto it, as he did unto a
part of it, hitherto shalt thou go and no farther; if we consider the
incessant and cutting provocations from the Earth, it is not without
amazement how his patience hath permitted so long a continuance unto
it, how he, who cursed the Earth in the first days of the first Man, and
drowned it in the tenth Generation after, should thus lastingly contend
with Flesh and yet defer the last flames. For since he is sharply
provoked every moment, yet punisheth to pardon, and forgives to forgive
again; what patience could be content to act over such vicissitudes, or
accept of repentances which must have after penitences, his goodness can
only tell us. And surely if the patience of Heaven were not
proportionable unto the provocations from Earth; there needed an
Intercessor not only for the sins, but the duration of this World, and
to lead it up unto the present computation. Without such a merciful
Longanimity, the Heavens would never be so aged as to grow old like a
Garment; it were in vain to infer from the Doctrine of the Sphere, that
the time might come when _Capella_, a noble Northern Star, would have
its motion in the _Æquator_, that the Northern _Zodiacal_ Signs would at
length be the Southern, the Southern the Northern, and _Capricorn_
become our _Cancer_. However therefore the Wisdom of the Creator hath
ordered the duration of the World, yet since the end thereof brings the
accomplishment of our happiness, since some would be content that it
should have no end, since Evil Men and Spirits do fear it may be too
short, since Good Men hope it may not be too long; the prayer of the
Saints under the Altar will be the supplication of the Righteous World.
That his mercy would abridge their languishing Expectation and hasten
the accomplishment of their happy state to come.


[Sidenote: SECT. 27]

Though Good Men are often taken away from the Evil to come, though some
in evil days have been glad that they were old, nor long to behold the
iniquities of a wicked World, or Judgments threatened by them; yet is it
no small satisfaction unto honest minds to leave the World in virtuous
well temper'd times, under a prospect of good to come, and continuation
of worthy ways acceptable unto God and Man. Men who dye in deplorable
days, which they regretfully behold, have not their Eyes closed with the
like content; while they cannot avoid the thoughts of proceeding or
growing enormities, displeasing unto that Spirit unto whom they are then
going, whose honour they desire in all times and throughout all
generations. If _Lucifer_ could be freed from his dismal place, he would
little care though the rest were left behind. Too many there may be of
_Nero's_ mind, who, if their own turn were served, would not regard what
became of others, and, when they dye themselves, care not if all perish.
But good Mens wishes extend beyond their lives, for the happiness of
times to come, and never to be known unto them. And therefore while so
many question prayers for the dead, they charitably pray for those who
are not yet alive; they are not so enviously ambitious to go to Heaven
by themselves: they cannot but humbly wish, that the little Flock might
be greater, the narrow Gate wider, and that, as many are called, so not
a few might be chosen.


[Sidenote: SECT. 28]

That a greater number of Angels remained in Heaven, than fell from it,
the School-men will tell us; that the number of blessed Souls will not
come short of that vast number of fallen Spirits, we have the favorable
calculation of others. What Age or Century hath sent most Souls unto
Heaven, he can tell who vouchsafeth that honour unto them. Though the
Number of the blessed must be compleat before the World can pass away,
yet since the World it self seems in the wane, and we have no such
comfortable prognosticks of Latter times, since a greater part of time
is spun than is to come, and the blessed Roll already much replenished;
happy are those pieties, which solicitously look about, and hasten to
make one of that already much filled and abbreviated List to come.


[Sidenote: SECT. 29]

Think not thy time short in this World since the World it self is not
long. The created World is but a small _Parenthesis_ in Eternity; and a
short interposition for a time between such a state of duration, as was
before it and may be after it. And if we should allow of the old
Tradition that the world should last Six Thousand years, it could scarce
have the name of old, since the first Man lived near a sixth part
thereof, and seven _Methusela's_ would exceed its whole duration.
However, to palliate the shortness of our Lives, and somewhat to
compensate our brief term in this World, it's good to know as much as we
can of it; and also, so far as possibly in us lieth, to hold such a
_Theory_ of times past, as though we had seen the same. He who hath thus
considered the World, as also how therein things long past have been
answered by things present, how matters in one Age have been acted over
in another, and how there is nothing new under the Sun, may conceive
himself in some manner to have lived from the beginning, and to be as
old as the World; and if he should still live on 'twould be but the same
thing.


[Sidenote: SECT. 30]

Lastly, if length of Days be thy Portion, make it not thy Expectation.
Reckon not upon long Life: think every day the last, and live always
beyond thy account. He that so often surviveth his Expectation lives
many Lives, and will scarce complain of the shortness of his days. Time
past is gone like a Shadow; make time to come present. Approximate thy
latter times by present apprehensions of them: be like a neighbour unto
the Grave, and think there is but little to come. And since there is
something of us that will still live on, join both lives together, and
live in one but for the other. He who thus ordereth the purposes of this
Life will never be far from the next, and is in some manner already in
it, by a happy conformity, and close apprehension of it. And if, as we
have elsewhere declared, any have been so happy as personally to
understand Christian Annihilation, Extasy, Exolution, Transformation,
the Kiss of the Spouse, and Ingression into the Divine Shadow, according
to Mystical Theology, they have already had an handsome Anticipation of
Heaven; the World is in a manner over, and the Earth in Ashes unto them.




                    NOTES ON CERTAIN BIRDS
                     AND FISHES FOUND IN
                          NORFOLK




