NOTES ON CERTAIN BIRDS FOUND IN NORFOLK.


I willingly obey your commands in setting down such birds fishes and
other animals which for many years I have observed in Norfolk.

Beside the ordinarie birds which keep constantly in the country many are
discouerable both in winter and summer which are of a migrant nature and
exchange their seats according to the season. Those which come in the
spring coming for the most part from the southward those which come in
the Autumn or winter from the northward. So that they are obserued to
come in great flocks with a north east wind and to depart with a south
west. Nor to come only in flocks of one kind butt teals woodcocks
felfars thrushes and small birds to come and light together, for the
most part some hawkes and birds of pray attending them.

The great and noble kind of Agle calld Aquila Gesneri I have not seen in
this country but one I met with in this country brought from Ireland
which I kept 2 yeares, feeding it with whelpes cattes ratts and the
like, in all that while not giving it any water which I afterwards
presented unto my worthy friend Dr Scarburgh.

Of other sorts of Agles there are severall kinds especially of the
Halyætus or fenne Agles some of 3 yards and a quarter from the
extremitie of the wings, whereof one being taken aliue grewe so tame
that it went about the yard feeding on fish redherrings flesh and any
offells without the least trouble.

There is also a lesser sort of Agle called an ospray which houers about
the fennes and broads and will dippe his claws and take up a fish
oftimes for which his foote is made of an extraordinarie roughnesse for
the better fastening and holding of it and the like they will do unto
cootes.

Aldrovandus takes particular notice of the great number of Kites about
London and about the Thames. Wee are not without them heare though not
in such numbers. There are also the gray and bald Buzzard of all which
the great number of broad waters and warrens makes no small number and
more than in woodland counties.

Cranes are often seen here in hard winters especially about the champian
and feildie part it seems they have been more plentifull for in a bill
of fare when the maior entertaind the duke of norfolk I meet with
Cranes in a dish.

In hard winters elkes a kind of wild swan are seen in no small numbers,
in whom and not in common swans is remarkable that strange recurvation
of the windpipe through the sternon, and the same is also obseruable in
cranes. Tis probable they come very farre for all the northern
discouerers have obserued them in the remotest parts and like diuers
other northern birds if the winter bee mild they commonly come no
further southward then Scotland; if very hard they go lower and seeke
more southern places. Which is the cause that sometimes wee see them not
before christmas or the hardest time of winter.

A white large and strong billd fowle called a Ganet which seemes to bee
the greater sort of Larus, whereof I met with one kild by a greyhound
neere Swaffam another in marshland while it fought and would not bee
forced to take wing, another intangled in an herring net which taken
aliue was fed with herrings for a while. It may be named Larus maior
Leucophæopterus as being white and the top of the wings browne.

In hard winters I have also met with that large and strong billd fowle
which Clusius describeth by the name of Skua Hoyeri sent him from the
Faro Island by Hoierus a physitian, one whereof was shot at Hickling
while 2 thereof were feeding upon a dead horse.

As also that large and strong billd fowle spotted like a starling which
Clusius nameth Mergus maior farroensis as frequently the Faro islands
seated above Shetland, one whereof I sent unto my worthy friend Dr
Scarburgh.

Here is also the pica marina or seapye, many sorts of Lari, seamewes and
cobs; the Larus maior in great abundance in herring time about Yarmouth.

Larus alba or puets in such plentie about Horsey that they sometimes
bring them in carts to Norwich and sell them at small rates, and the
country people make use of their egges in puddings and otherwise. Great
plentie thereof haue bred about Scoulton meere, and from thence sent to
London.

Larus cinereus greater and smaller, butt a coars meat; commonly called
sternes.

Hirundo marina or sea swallowe a neat white and forked tayle bird butt
longer then a swallowe.

The ciconia or stork I have seen in the fennes and some haue been shot
in the marshes between this and Yarmouth.

The platea or shouelard, which build upon the topps of high trees. They
haue formerly built in the Hernerie at Claxton and Reedham now at
Trimley in Suffolk. They come in March and are shot by fowlers not for
their meat butt the handsomenesse of the same, remarkable in their white
colour copped crowne and spoone or spatule like bill.

Corvus marinus, cormorants, building at Reedham upon trees from whence
King Charles the first was wont to bee supplyed. Beside the Rock
cormorant which breedeth in the rocks in northerne countries and cometh
to us in the winter, somewhat differing from the other in largenesse and
whitenesse under the wings.

A sea fowl called a shearwater, somewhat billed like a cormorant butt
much lesser a strong and feirce fowle houering about shipps when they
cleanse their fish. 2 were kept 6 weekes cramming them with fish which
they would not feed on of themselues. The seamen told mee they had kept
them 3 weekes without meat, and I giuing ouer to feed them found they
liued 16 dayes without taking any thing.

Barnacles Brants Branta are common sheldrakes sheledracus jonstoni.

Barganders a noble coloured fowle vulpanser which breed in cunny
burrowes about Norrold and other places.

Wild geese Anser ferus.

Scoch goose Anser scoticus.

Goshander. merganser.

Mergus acutirostris speciosus or Loone an handsome and specious fowle
cristated and with diuided finne feet placed very backward and after the
manner of all such which the Duch call Arsvoote. They haue a peculiar
formation in the leggebone which hath a long and sharpe processe
extending aboue the thigh bone. They come about April and breed in the
broad waters so making their nest on the water that their egges are
seldom drye while they are sett on.

Mergus acutarostris cinereus which seemeth to bee a difference of the
former.

Mergus minor the smaller diuers or dabchicks in riuers and broade
waters.

Mergus serratus the saw billd diuer bigger and longer than a duck
distinguished from other diuers by a notable sawe bill to retaine its
slipperie pray as liuing much upon eeles whereof we haue seldome fayled
to find some in their bellies.

Diuers other sorts of diuefowle more remarkable the mustela fusca and
mustela variegata the graye dunne and the variegated or partie coloured
wesell so called from the resemblance it beareth vnto a wesell in the
head.

Many sorts of wild ducks which passe under names well knowne unto the
fowlers though of no great signification as smee widgeon Arts ankers
noblets.

The most remarkable are Anas platyrinchos a remarkably broad bild duck.

And the sea phaysant holding some resemblance unto that bird in some
fethers in the tayle.

Teale Querquedula, wherein scarce any place more abounding, the
condition of the country and the very many decoys especially between
Norwich and the sea making this place very much to abound in wild fowle.

Fulicæ cottæ cootes in very great flocks upon the broad waters. Upon the
appearance of a Kite or buzzard I have seen them vnite from all parts of
the shoare in strange numbers when if the Kite stoopes neare them they
will fling up spred such a flash of water up with there wings that they
will endanger the Kite, and so keepe him of agayne and agayne in open
opposition, and an handsome prouision they make about their nest agaynst
the same bird of praye by bending and twining the rushes and reedes so
about them that they cannot stoope at their yong ones or the damme while
she setteth.

Gallinula aquatica more hens.

And a kind of Ralla aquatica or water Rayle.

An onocrotalus or pelican shott upon Horsey fenne 1663 May 22 which
stuffed and cleansed I yet retaine. It was 3 yards and half between the
extremities of the wings the chowle and beake answering the vsuall
description the extremities of the wings for a spanne deepe browne the
rest of the body white, a fowle which none could remember upon this
coast. About the same time I heard one of the kings pellicans was lost
at St James', perhaps this might bee the same.

Anas Arctica clusii which though hee placeth about the Faro Islands is
the same wee call a puffin common about Anglisea in Wales and sometimes
taken upon our seas not sufficiently described by the name of puffinus
the bill being so remarkably differing from other ducks and not
horizontally butt meridionally formed to feed in the clefts of the rocks
of insecks, shell-fish and others.

The great number of riuers riuulets and plashes of water makes hernes
and herneries to abound in these parts, yong hensies being esteemed a
festiuall dish and much desired by some palates.

The Ardea stellaris botaurus, or bitour is also common and esteemed the
better dish. In the belly of one I found a frog in an hard frost at
christmas. another I kept in a garden 2 yeares feeding it with fish mice
and frogges, in defect whereof making a scrape for sparrowes and small
birds, the bitour made shifft to maintaine herself upon them.

Bistardæ or Bustards are not vnfrequent in the champain and feildie part
of this country a large Bird accounted a dayntie dish, obseruable in the
strength of the brest bone and short heele layes an egge much larger
then a Turkey.

Morinellus or Dotterell about Thetford and the champain which comes vnto
us in September and March staying not long, and is an excellent dish.

There is also a sea dotterell somewhat lesse butt better coloured then
the former.

Godwyts taken chiefly in marshland, though other parts not without them
accounted the dayntiest dish in England and I think for the bignesse, of
the biggest price.

Gnats or Knots a small bird which taken with netts grow excessively
fatt. If being mewed and fed with corne a candle lighted in the roome
they feed day and night, and when they are at their hight of fattnesse
they beginne to grow lame and are then killed or as at their prime and
apt to decline.

Erythropus or Redshanck a bird common in the marshes and of common food
butt no dayntie dish.

A may chitt a small dark gray bird litle bigger then a stint of fatnesse
beyond any. It comes in May into marshland and other parts and abides
not aboue a moneth or 6 weekes.

Another small bird somewhat larger than a stint called a churre and is
commonly taken amongst them.

Stints in great numbers about the seashore and marshes about Stifkey
Burnham and other parts.

Pluuialis or plouer green and graye in great plentie about Thetford and
many other heaths. They breed not with us butt in some parts of
Scotland, and plentifully in Island [Iceland].

The lapwing or vannellus common ouer all the heaths.

Cuccowes of 2 sorts the one farre exceeding the other in bignesse. Some
have attempted to keepe them in warme roomes all the winter butt it hath
not succeeded. In their migration they range very farre northward for in
the summer they are to bee found as high as Island.

Avis pugnax. Ruffes a marsh bird of the greatest varietie of colours
euery one therein somewhat varying from other. The female is called a
Reeve without any ruffe about the neck, lesser then the other and hardly
to bee got. They are almost all cocks and putt together fight and
destroy each other, and prepare themselues to fight like cocks though
they seeme to haue no other offensive part butt the bill. They loose
theire Ruffes about the Autumne or beginning of winter as wee haue
obserued keeping them in a garden from may till the next spring. They
most abound in Marshland butt are also in good number in the marshes
between Norwich and Yarmouth.

Of picus martius or woodspeck many kinds. The green the Red the
Leucomelanus or neatly marked black and white and the cinereus or dunne
calld little [bird calld] a nuthack, remarkable in the larger are the
hardnesse of the bill and skull and the long nerues which tend vnto the
tongue whereby it strecheth out the tongue aboue an inch out of the
mouth and so licks up insecks. They make the holes in trees without any
consideration of the winds or quarters of heauen butt as the rottenesse
thereof best affordeth conuenience.

Black heron black on both sides the bottom of the neck white gray on the
outside spotted all along with black on the inside a black coppe of
small feathers some a spanne long, bill poynted and yallowe 3 inches
long.

Back heron coloured intermixed with long white fethers.

The flying fethers black.

The brest black and white most black.

The legges and feet not green but an ordinarie dark cork colour.

The number of riuulets becks and streames whose banks are beset with
willowes and Alders which giue occasion of easier fishing and slooping
to the water makes that handsome coulered bird abound which is calld
Alcedo Ispida or the King fisher. They bild in holes about grauell pitts
wherein is to bee found great quantitie of small fish bones. and lay
very handsome round and as it were polished egges.

An Hobby bird so calld becaus it comes in ether with or a litle before
the Hobbies in the spring, of the bignesse of a Thrush coloured and
paned like an hawke maruellously subiet to the vertigo and are
sometimes taken in those fitts.

Upupa or Hoopebird so named from its note a gallant marked bird which I
have often seen and tis not hard to shoote them.

Ringlestones a small white and black bird like a wagtayle and seemes to
bee some kind of motacilla marina common about Yarmouth sands. They lay
their egges in the sand and shingle about June and as the eryngo diggers
tell mee not sett them flat butt upright like egges in salt.

The Arcuata or curlewe frequent about the sea coast.

There is also an handsome tall bird Remarkably eyed and with a bill not
aboue 2 inches long commonly calld a stone curlewe butt the note thereof
more resembleth that of a green plouer and breeds about Thetford about
the stones and shingle of the Riuers.

Auoseta calld shoohinghorne a tall black and white bird with a bill
semicircularly reclining or bowed upward so that it is not easie to
conceiue how it can feed answerable vnto the Auoseta Italorum in
Aldrovandus a summer marsh bird and not unfrequent in Marshland.

A yarwhelp so thought to bee named from its note a gray bird
intermingled with some whitish fethers somewhat long legged and the bill
about an inch and half. Esteemed a dayntie dish.

Loxias or curuirostra a bird a litle bigger than a Thrush of fine
colours and prittie note differently from other birds, the upper and
lower bill crossing each other, of a very tame nature, comes about the
beginning of summer. I have known them kept in cages butt not to outliue
the winter.

A kind of coccothraustes calld a coble bird bigger than a Thrush,
finely coloured and shaped like a Bunting it is chiefly seen in su[=m]er
about cherrie time.

A small bird of prey calld a birdcatcher about the bignesse of a Thrush
and linnet coloured with a longish white bill and sharpe of a very
feirce and wild nature though kept in a cage and fed with flesh. A kind
of Lanius.

A Dorhawke or kind of Accipiter muscarius conceiued to haue its name
from feeding upon flies and beetles, of a woodcock colour but paned like
an Hawke a very litle poynted bill, large throat, breedeth with us and
layes a maruellous handsome spotted egge. Though I haue opened many I
could neuer find anything considerable in their mawes. Caprimulgus.

Auis Trogloditica or Chock a small bird mixed of black and white and
breeding in cony borrouges whereof the warrens are full from April to
September, at which time they leaue the country. They are taken with an
Hobby and a net and are a very good dish.

Spermologus. Rookes which by reason of the great quantitie of corn
feilds and Rooke groues are in great plentie the yong ones are commonly
eaten sometimes sold in Norwich market and many are killd for their
Liuers in order to cure of the Rickets.

Crowes as euerywhere and also the coruus variegatus or pyed crowe with
dunne and black interchangeably, they come in the winter and depart in
the summer and seeme to bee the same which Clusius discribeth in the
Faro Islands from whence perhaps these come, and I have seen them very
common in Ireland, butt not known in many parts of England.

Coruus maior Rauens in good plentie about the citty which makes so few
Kites to bee seen hereabout, they build in woods very early and lay
egges in Februarie.

Among the many monedulas or Jackdawes I could neuer in these parts
obserue the pyrrhocorax or cornish chough with red leggs and bill to bee
commonly seen in Cornwall, and though there bee heere very great store
of partridges yet the french Red legged partridge is not to bee met
with. The Ralla or Rayle wee haue counted a dayntie dish, as also no
small number of Quayles. The Heathpoult common in the north is vnknown
heere as also the Grous, though I haue heard some haue been seen about
Lynne. The calandrier or great great crested lark Galerita I haue not
met with heere though with 3 other sorts of Larkes the ground lark
woodlark and titlark.

Stares or starlings in great numbers, most remarkable in their numerous
flocks which I haue obserued about the Autumne when they roost at night
in the marshes in safe places upon reeds and alders, which to obserue I
went to the marshes about sunne set, where standing by their vsuall
place of resort I obserued very many flocks flying from all quarters,
which in lesse than an howers space came all in and settled in
innumerable numbers in a small compasse.

Great varietie of finches and other small birds whereof one very small
calld a whinne bird marked with fine yellow spotts and lesser than a
wren. There is also a small bird called a chipper somewhat resembling
the former which comes in the spring and feeds upon the first buddings
of birches and other early trees.

A kind of Anthus Goldfinch or fooles coat commonly calld a drawe water,
finely marked with red and yellowe and a white bill, which they take
with trap cages in Norwich gardens and fastning a chaine about them
tyed to a box of water it makes a shift with bill and legge to draw up
the water unto it from the litle pot hanging by the chaine about a foote
belowe.

On the xiiii of May 1664 a very rare bird was sent mee kild about
Crostwick which seemed to bee some kind of Jay. The bill was black
strong and bigger then a Jayes somewhat yellowe clawes tippd black, 3
before and one clawe behind the whole bird not so bigge as a Jaye.

The head neck and throat of a violet colour the back upper parts of the
wing of a russet yellowe the fore and part of the wing azure succeeded
downward by a greenish blewe then on the flying feathers bright blewe
the lower parts of the wing outwardly of a browne inwardly of a merry
blewe the belly a light faynt blewe the back toward the tayle of a
purple blewe the tayle eleuen fethers of a greenish coulour the
extremities of the outward fethers thereof white wth an eye of greene.
Garrulus Argentoratensis.




