CHAPTER XIV

Of the Wish of _Philoxenus_.


That Relation of _Aristotle_, and conceit generally received concerning
_Philoxenus_, who wished the neck of a Crane, that thereby he might take
more pleasure in his meat, although it pass without exception, upon
enquiry I find not only doubtful in the story, but absurd in the desire
or reason alledged for it. For though his Wish were such as is
delivered, yet had it not perhaps that end, to delight his gust in
eating; but rather to obtain advantage thereby in singing, as is
declared by _Mirandula_. _Aristotle_ (saith he) in his Ethicks and
Problems, accuseth _Philoxenus_ of sensuality, for the greater pleasure
of gust desiring the neck of a Crane; which desire of his, assenting
unto _Aristotle_, I have formerly condemned: But since I perceive that
_Aristotle_ for this accusation hath been accused by divers Writers. For
_Philoxenus_ was an excellent Musician, and desired the neck of a Crane,
not for any pleasure at meat; but fancying thereby an advantage in
singing or warbling, and dividing the notes in musick. And many Writers
there are which mention a Musician of that name, as _Plutarch_ in his
book against usury, and _Aristotle_ himself in the eighth of his
Politicks, speaks of one _Philoxenus_ a Musician, that went off from the
Dorick Dithyrambicks unto the Phrygian Harmony.

Again, Be the story true or false, rightly applied or not, the intention
is not reasonable, and that perhaps neither one way nor the other. For
if we rightly consider the Organ of tast, we shall find the length of
the neck to conduce but little unto it. For the tongue being the
instrument of tast, and the tip thereof the most exact distinguisher, it
will not advantage the gust to have the neck extended; Wherein the
Gullet and conveying parts are only seated, which partake not of the
nerves of gustation, or appertaining unto sapor, but receive them only
from the sixth pair; whereas the nerves of tast descend from the third
and fourth propagations, and so diffuse themselves into the tongue. And
therefore Cranes, Herns and Swans have no advantage in taste beyond
Hawks, Kites, and others of shorter necks.

Nor, if we consider it, had Nature respect unto the taste in the
different contrivance of necks, but rather unto the parts contained, the
composure of the rest of the body, and the manner whereby they feed.
Thus animals of long legs, have generally long necks; that is, for the
conveniency of feeding, as having a necessity to apply their mouths unto
the earth. So have Horses, Camels, Dromedaries long necks, and all tall
animals, except the Elephant, who in defect thereof is furnished with a
Trunk, without which he could not attain the ground. So have Cranes,
Herns, Storks and Shovelards long necks: and so even in Man, whose
figure is erect, the length of the neck followeth the proportion of
other parts: and such as have round faces or broad chests and shoulders,
have very seldom long necks. For, the length of the face twice exceedeth
that of the neck, and the space betwixt the throat-pit and the navell,
is equall unto the circumference thereof. Again, animals are framed with
long necks, according unto the course of their life or feeding: so many
with short legs have long necks, because they feed in the water, as
Swans, Geese, Pelicans, and other fin-footed animals. But Hawks and
birds of prey have short necks and trussed leggs; for that which is long
is weak and flexible, and a shorter figure is best accomodated unto
that intention. Lastly, the necks of animals do vary, according to the
parts that are contained in them, which are the weazon and the gullet.
Such as have no weazon and breath not, have scarce any neck, as most
sorts of fishes; and some none at all, as all sorts of pectinals, Soals,
Thornback, Flounders; and all crustaceous animals, as Crevises, Crabs
and Lobsters.

All which considered, the Wish of _Philoxenus_ will hardly consist with
reason. More excusable had it been to have wished himself an Ape, which
if common conceit speak true, is exacter in taste then any. Rather some
kind of granivorous bird then a Crane, for in this sense they are so
exquisite that upon the first peck of their bill, they can distinguish
the qualities of hard bodies; which the sense of man discerns not
without mastication. Rather some ruminating animal, that he might have
eat his meat twice over; or rather, as _Theophilus_ observed in
_Athenæus_, his desire had been more reasonable, had he wished himself
an Elephant, or an Horse; for in these animals the appetite is more
vehement, and they receive their viands in large and plenteous manner.
And this indeed had been more sutable, if this were the same
_Philoxenus_ whereof _Plutarch_ speaketh who was so uncivilly greedy,
that to engross the mess, he would preventively deliver his nostrils in
the dish.

As for the musical advantage, although it seem more reasonable, yet do
we not observe that Cranes and birds of long necks have any musical, but
harsh and clangous throats. But birds that are canorous, and whose notes
we most commend, are of little throats and short necks, as Nightingales,
Finches, Linnets, Canary birds and Larks. And truly, although the
weazon, throtle and tongue be the instruments of voice, and by their
agitations do chiefly concurr unto these delightfull modulations, yet
cannot we distinctly and peculiarly assign the cause unto any
particular formation; and I perceive the best thereof, the nightingale,
hath some disadvantage in the tongue; which is not accuminate and
pointed as in the rest, but seemeth as it were cut off, which perhaps
might give the hint unto the fable of _Philomela_, and the cutting off
her tongue by _Tereus_.




CHAPTER XV

Of the Lake Asphaltites.


Concerning the Lake _Asphaltites_, the Lake of _Sodom_, or the dead Sea,
that heavy bodies cast therein sink not, but by reason of a salt and
bituminous thickness in the water float and swim above, narrations
already made are of that variety, we can hardly from thence deduce a
satisfactory determination; and that not only in the story it self, but
in the cause alledged. As for the story, men deliver it variously: some
I fear too largely, as _Pliny_, who affirmeth that bricks will swim
therein. _Mandevil_ goeth farther, that Iron swimmeth, and feathers
sink. _Munster_ in his Cosmography hath another relation, although
perhaps derived from the Poem of _Tertullian,_ that a candle Burning
swimmeth, but if extinguished sinketh. Some more moderately, as
_Josephus_, and many others: affirming only that living bodies float,
nor peremptorily averring they cannot sink, but that indeed they do not
easily descend. Most traditionally, as _Galen_, _Pliny_, _Solinus_ and
_Strabo_, who seems to mistake the Lake _Serbonis_ for it. Few
experimentally, most contenting themselves in the experiment of
_Vespasian_, by whose command some captives bound were cast therein, and
found to float as though they could have swimmed: divers
contradictorily, or contrarily, quite overthrowing the point.
_Aristotle_ in the second of his Meteors speaks lightly thereof, +hôsper
mythologousi+, which word is variously rendred, by some as a fabulous
account, by some as a common talk. _Biddulphus_ divideth the common
accounts of _Judea_ in three parts, the one saith he, are apparent
Truths, the second apparent falshoods, the third are dubious or between
both; in which form he ranketh the relation of this Lake.[SN: Biddulphi
intinerarium Anglice.] But _Andrew Thevet_ in his Cosmography doth
ocularly overthrow it; for he affirmeth, he saw an Ass with his Saddle
cast therein and drowned. Now of these relations so different or
contrary unto each other, the second is most moderate and safest to be
embraced, which saith, that living bodies swim therein, that is, they do
not easily sink: and this, untill exact experiment further determine,
may be allowed, as best consistent with this quality, and the reasons
alledged for it.

As for the cause of this effect, common opinion conceives it to be the
salt and bituminous thickness of the water. This indeed is probable, and
may be admitted as far as the second opinion concedeth. For certain it
is that salt water will support a greater burden then fresh; and we see
an egg will descend in salt water, which will swim in brine. But that
Iron should float therein, from this cause is hardly granted; for heavy
bodies will only swim in that liquor, wherein the weight of their bulk
exceedeth not the weight of so much water as it occupieth or taketh up.
But surely no water is heavy enough to answer the ponderosity of Iron,
and therefore that metal will sink in any kind thereof, and it was a
perfect Miracle which was wrought this way by _Elisha_. Thus we perceive
that bodies do swim or sink in different liquors, according unto the
tenuity or gravity of those liquors which are to support them. So salt
water beareth that weight which will sink in vineger, vineger that which
will fall in fresh water, fresh water that which will sink in spirits of
Wine, and that will swim in spirits of Wine which will sink in clear
oyl; as we made experiment in globes of wax pierced with light sticks to
support them. So that although it be conceived an hard matter to sink in
oyl, I believe a man should find it very difficult, and next to flying,
to swim therein. And thus will Gold sink in Quick-silver, wherein Iron
and other metals swim; for the bulk of Gold is only heavier then that
space of Quick-silver which it containeth: and thus also in a solution
of one ounce of Quick-silver in two of _Aqua fortis_, the liquor will
bear Amber, Horn, and the softer kinds of stones, as we have made triall
in each.

But a private opinion there is which crosseth the common conceit,
maintained by some of late, and alleadged of old by _Strabo_, that the
floating of bodies in this Lake proceeds not from the thickness of the
water, but a bituminous ebullition from the bottom, whereby it wafts up
bodies injected, and suffereth them not easily to sink. The verity
thereof would be enquired by ocular exploration, for this way is also
probable. So we observe, it is hard to wade deep in baths where springs
arise; and thus sometime are bals made to play upon a spouting stream.

And therefore, until judicious and ocular experiment confirm or
distinguish the assertion, that bodies do not sink herein at all, we do
not yet believe; that they not easily, or with more difficulty descend
in this than other water, we shall readily assent. But to conclude an
impossibility from a difficulty, or affirm whereas things not easily
sink, they do not drown at all; beside the fallacy, is a frequent
addition in humane expression, and an amplification not unusual as well
in opinions as relations; which oftentimes give indistinct accounts of
proximities, and without restraint transcend from one another. Thus,
forasmuch as the torrid Zone was conceived exceeding hot, and of
difficult habitation, the opinions of men so advanced its constitution,
as to conceive the same unhabitable, and beyond possibility for man to
live therein. Thus, because there are no Wolves in _England_, nor have
been observed for divers generations, common people have proceeded into
opinions, and some wise men into affirmations, they will not live
therein, although brought from other Countries. Thus most men affirm,
and few here will believe the contrary, that there be no Spiders in
_Ireland_; but we have beheld some in that Country; and though but few,
some Cob-webs we behold in Irish wood in _England_. Thus the Crocodile
from an egg growing up to an exceeding magnitude, common conceit, and
divers Writers deliver, it hath no period of encrease, but groweth as
long as it liveth. And thus in brief, in most apprehensions the conceits
of men extend the considerations of things, and dilate their notions
beyond the propriety of their natures.

In the Mapps of the dead Sea or Lake of _Sodom_, we meet with the
destroyed Cities, and in divers the City of _Sodom_ placed about the
middle, or far from the shore of it; but that it could not be far from
_Segor_, which was seated under the mountains neer the side of the Lake,
seems inferrible from the sudden arrival of _Lot_, who coming from
_Sodom_ at day break, attained _Segor_ at Sun rising; and therefore
_Sodom_ to be placed not many miles from it, and not in the middle of
the Lake, which is accounted about eighteen miles over; and so will
leave about nine miles to be passed in too small a space of time.




