CHAPTER IV

That there was no Rain-bow before the Flood.


That there shall no Rain-bow appear forty years before the end of the
world, and that the preceding drought unto that great flame shall
exhaust the materials of this Meteor, was an assertion grounded upon no
solid reason: but that there was not any in sixteen hundred years, that
is, before the flood, seems deduceable from holy Scripture, _Gen._ 9. I
do set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be for a token of a Covenant
between me and the earth. From whence notwithstanding we cannot conclude
the nonexistence of the Rain-bow; nor is that Chronology naturally
established, which computeth the antiquity of effects arising from
physical and setled causes, by additionall impositions from voluntary
determinators. Now by the decree of reason and Philosophy, the Rain-bow
hath its ground in Nature, as caused by the rays of the Sun, falling
upon a roride and opposite cloud: whereof some reflected, others
refracted, beget that semi-circular variety we generally call the
Rain-bow; which must succeed upon concurrence of causes and subjects
aptly predisposed. And therefore, to conceive there was no Rain-bow
before, because God chose this out as a token of the Covenant, is to
conclude the existence of things from their signalities, or of what is
objected unto the sense, a coexistence with that which is internally
presented unto the understanding. With equall reason we may infer there
was no water before the institution of Baptism, nor bread and wine
before the holy Eucharist.

[Sidenote: _That there is a Rain-bow of the Moon._]

Again, while men deny the antiquity of one Rain-bow, they anciently
concede another. For, beside the solary Iris which God shewed unto
_Noah_, there is another Lunary, whose efficient is the Moon, visible
only in the night, most commonly at full Moon, and some degrees above
the Horizon. Now the existence hereof men do not controvert, although
effected by a different Luminary in the same way with the other. And
probably appeared later, as being of rare appearance and rarer
observation, and many there are which think there is no such thing in
Nature. And therefore by casual spectators they are lookt upon like
prodigies, and significations made, not signified by their natures.

Lastly, We shall not need to conceive God made the Rain-bow at this
time, if we consider that in its created and predisposed nature, it was
more proper for this signification then any other Meteor or celestial
appearancy whatsoever. Thunder and lightning had too much terrour to
have been tokens of mercy; Comets or blazing Stars appear too seldom to
put us in mind of a Covenant to be remembred often: and might rather
signifie the world should be once destroyed by fire, then never again by
water. The Galaxia or milky Circle had been more probable; for (beside
that unto the latitude of thirty, it becomes their Horizon twice in four
and twenty hours, and unto such as live under the Æquator, in that space
the whole Circle appeareth) part thereof is visible unto any situation;
but being only discoverable in the night, and when the ayr is clear, it
becomes of unfrequent and comfortless signification. A fixed Star had
not been visible unto all the Globe, and so of too narrow a signality in
a Covenant concerning all. But Rain-bows are seen unto all the world,
and every position of sphere. Unto our own elevation they may appear in
the morning, while the Sun hath attained about forty five degrees above
the Horizon (which is conceived the largest semi-diameter of any Iris)
and so in the afternoon when it hath declined unto that altitude again;
which height the Sun not attaining in winter, rain-bows may happen with
us at noon or any time. Unto a right position of sphere they may appear
three hours after the rising of the Sun, and three before its setting;
for the Sun ascending fifteen degrees an hour, in three attaineth forty
five of altitude. Even unto a parallel sphere, and such as live under
the pole, for half a year some segments may appear at any time and
under any quarter, the Sun not setting, but walking round about them.

[Sidenote: _The natural signification of the rain-bow._]

But the propriety of its Election most properly appeareth in the natural
signification and prognostick of it self; as containing a mixt signality
of rain and fair weather. For being in a roride cloud and ready to drop,
it declareth a pluvious disposure in the air; but because when it
appears the Sun must also shine, there can be no universal showrs, and
consequently no Deluge. Thus when the windows of the great deep were
open, in vain men lookt for the Rain-bow: for at that time it could not
be seen, which after appeared unto _Noah_. It might be therefore
existent before the flood, and had in nature some ground of its
addition. Unto that of nature God superadded an assurance of his
Promise, that is, never to hinder its appearance, or so to replenish the
heavens again, as that we should behold it no more. And thus without
disparaging the promise, it might rain at the same time when God shewed
it unto _Noah_; thus was there more therein then the heathens
understood, when they called it the _Nuncia_ of the gods, and the laugh
of weeping Heaven [SN: Risus plorantis Olympi.]; and thus may it be
elegantly said; I put my bow, not my arrow in the clouds, that is, in
the menace of rain the mercy of fair weather.

Cabalistical heads, who from that expression in _Esay_ [SN: _Isa._ 34.
4.], do make a book of heaven, and read therein the great concernments
of earth, do literally play on this, and from its semicircular figure,
resembling the Hebrew letter +C+ Caph, whereby is signified
the uncomfortable number of twenty, at which years _Joseph_ was sold,
which _Jacob_ lived under _Laban_, and at which men were to go to war:
do note a propriety in its signification; as thereby declaring the
dismal Time of the Deluge. And Christian conceits do seem to strain as
high, while from the irradiation of the Sun upon a cloud, they apprehend
the mysterie of the Sun of Righteousness in the obscurity of flesh; by
the colours green and red, the two destructions of the world by fire and
water; or by the colours of blood and water, the mysteries of Baptism,
and the holy Eucharist.

Laudable therefore is the custom of the _Jews_, who upon the appearance
of the Rain-bow, do magnifie the fidelity of God in the memory of his
Covenant; according to that of _Syracides_, look upon the Rain-bow, and
praise him that made it. And though some pious and Christian pens have
only symbolized the same from the mysterie of its colours, yet are there
other affections which might admit of Theological allusions. Nor would
he find a more improper subject, that should consider that the colours
are made by refraction of Light, and the shadows that limit that light;
that the Center of the Sun, the Rain-bow, and the eye of the Beholder
must be in one right line, that the spectator must be between the Sun
and the Rain-bow; that sometime there appear, sometime one reversed.
With many others, considerable in Meteorological Divinity, which would
more sensibly make out the Epithite of the Heathens [SN: Thaumancias.];
and the expression of the son of _Syrach_. Very beautifull is the
Rain-bow, it compasseth the heaven about with a glorious circle, and the
hands of the most High have bended it.




