CHAPTER XIII.

    SOME LESS COMMON TYPES OF TELEPATHIC HALLUCINATION      297

    Reciprocal cases, Rev. C. L. Evans and Miss ---- --A misinterpreted
    message, Miss C. L. Hawkins-Dempster--Heteroplastic hallucination,
    Mrs. G----, Frances Reddell, Mr. John Husbands, Mr. J----
    --"Haunted houses," Mrs. Knott and others, Surgeon-Major W. and
    others.


CHAPTER XIV.

    ON CLAIRVOYANCE IN TRANCE      326

    Definition of clairvoyance--Accounts of phenomena observed
    with Mrs. Piper, by Professor Lodge, Professor W. James, and
    others--Accounts of experiments by Mr. A. W. Dobbie, Dr. Wiltse,
    Mr. W. Boyd, Dr. F----, Dr. Backman.


CHAPTER XV.

    ON CLAIRVOYANCE IN THE NORMAL STATE      351

    Observations of M. Keulemans--Crystal-visions, Miss X., Dr.
    Backman, Miss A. and Sir Joseph Barnby--Spontaneous clairvoyance,
    Mrs. Paquet, Mr. F. A. Marks, Mrs. L. Z.--Clairvoyance in dream,
    Mrs. Freese--Clairvoyant perceptivity in an experiment, Dr.
    Gibotteau.


CHAPTER XVI.

    THEORIES AND CONCLUSIONS      371

    _Resumé_, the proof apparent--The proof presumptive--The
    alleged influence of magnets and metals--The alleged marvels of
    spiritualism--Usage of the word telepathy--On various theories
    of telepathy--Difficulties of a physical explanation--Value of
    theory as a guide to investigation--Is telepathy a rudimentary or a
    vestigial faculty?--Our ignorance stands in the way of a conclusive
    answer--Imperative need for more facts.




    PREFACE.


    The following pages aim at presenting in brief compass a selection
    of the evidence upon which the hypothesis of thought-transference,
    or telepathy, is based. It is now more than twelve years since
    the Society for Psychical Research was founded, and nearly eight
    since the publication of _Phantasms of the Living_. Both in the
    periodical _Proceedings_ of the Society and in the pages of Edmund
    Gurney's book,[1] a large mass of evidence has been laid before
    the public. But the papers included in the _Proceedings_ are
    interspersed with other matter, some of it too technical for the
    taste of the general reader; whilst the two volumes of _Phantasms
    of the Living_, which have for some time been out of print, were
    too costly for the purse of some, and too bulky for the patience of
    others. The attention which, notwithstanding these drawbacks, that
    work excited on its first appearance, the friendly reception which
    it met with in many quarters, and the fact that a considerable
    edition has been disposed of, encouraged the hope that a book on
    somewhat similar lines, but on a smaller scale, might be of service
    to those--and their number has probably increased within the last
    few years--who take a genuine interest in this inquiry. Accordingly
    in the autumn of 1892 I obtained permission from the Council of the
    Society for Psychical Research to make full use, in the compilation
    of the present work, not merely of the evidence already published
    by us, but of the not inconsiderable mass of unpublished records in
    the possession of the Society.

    It will be seen that the present book has little claim to novelty
    of design; but it is not merely an abridged edition of the larger
    work referred to. On the one hand it has a somewhat wider scope,
    and includes accounts of telepathic clairvoyance and other
    phenomena which did not enter into the scheme of Mr. Gurney's book.
    On the other hand, the bulk of the illustrative cases here quoted
    have been taken from more recent records; and, in particular,
    certain branches of the experimental work have assumed a quite
    new importance within the last few years. Thus the experiments
    conducted by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick at Brighton have strengthened
    the demonstration of thought-transference, and have gone far to
    solve one or two of the problems connected with the subject; and
    the evidence for the experimental production of telepathic effects
    at a distance has been greatly enlarged by the work of MM. Janet
    and Gibert,[2] Richet, Gibotteau, Schrenck-Notzing, and in this
    country by Mr. Kirk and others.[3] It may be added that some of
    the criticisms called forth by _Phantasms of the Living_, and our
    own further researches, have led us to modify our estimate of
    the evidence in some directions, and to strengthen generally the
    precautions taken against the unconscious warping of testimony.

    To say, however, that the following pages owe much to Edmund
    Gurney is but to acknowledge the obligation which all students
    of the subject must recognise to his keen and vigorous intellect
    and his colossal industry. My own debt is a more personal one. To
    have worked under his guidance, and to have been stimulated by his
    example, was an invaluable schooling in the qualities demanded by
    an inquiry of this nature. Of the living, I owe grateful thanks,
    in the first instance, to Professor and Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, who
    have read through the whole of the book in typescript, and have
    given help and counsel throughout. Miss Alice Johnson, Mr. F. W.
    H. Myers, the late Dr. A. T. Myers, Miss Porter, and others have
    also given me welcome help in various directions. In acknowledging
    this assistance, however, it is right to add that, though I trust
    in my estimate of the evidence presented, and in the general tenour
    of the conclusions suggested, to find myself, with few exceptions,
    in substantial agreement with my colleagues, yet I have no claim to
    represent the Society for Psychical Research, nor right to cloak my
    own shortcomings with the authority of others.

    One word more needs to be said. The evidence, of which samples are
    presented in the following pages, is as yet hardly adequate for the
    establishment of telepathy as a fact in nature, and leaves much to
    be desired for the elucidation of the laws under which it operates.
    Any contributions to the problem, in the shape either of accounts
    of experiments, or of recent records of telepathic visions and
    similar experiences, will be gladly received by me on behalf of the
    Society for Psychical Research, at 19 Buckingham Street, Adelphi,
    W.C.

    FRANK PODMORE.

    _August 1894._

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: The book actually bore on the title-page the names of
Edmund Gurney, F. W. H. Myers, and the present writer. But the division
of authorship, as explained in the Preface, was as follows:--"As
regards the writing and the views expressed, Mr. Myers is solely
responsible for the Introduction, and for the 'Note on a Suggested
Mode of Psychical Interaction;' and Mr. Gurney is solely responsible
for the remainder of the book.... But the collection, examination, and
appraisal of evidence has been a joint labour."]

[Footnote 2: Some account of the earlier experiments by MM. Janet and
Gibert was included in the supplementary chapter at the end of the
second volume of _Phantasms_.]

[Footnote 3: See Chapters V. and X. of the present book.]




APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.




