CHAPTER IV.

EXPERIMENTAL PRODUCTION OF MOVEMENTS AND OTHER EFFECTS.


In the two preceding chapters we have discussed experiments where the
impression received by the percipient may be interpreted as having
been a more or less accurate reproduction of the sensation experienced
by the agent, or at most a translation of it into some other simple
sensation. There have now to be considered various cases in which
the transmission of thought is productive of other results in the
percipient than the simple duplication or translation of a sensation.
The most usual case is where the telepathic impulse leads to some
action on the part of the percipient. It was frequently stated by the
older mesmerists[43] that the operator, by a silent act of will, could
induce a good subject to do or refrain from doing some prescribed or
customary action. Isolated observations on such a point are little
likely to compel belief; the vanity or the credulity of the recorder
may be supposed to have led to his overlooking the negative instances,
and attributing to his own peculiar gifts a result in reality due
to chance. But, following on the clue thus obtained, the Committee
on Mesmerism appointed by the S.P.R. in 1882, to some of whose work
reference has already been made (Chapter III., p. 60), succeeded in
obtaining results less open to question.


_Inhibition of Action by Silent Willing._

The first experiments of the kind were conducted on our friend Mr.
Sidney Beard, who was for some time an Associate of the Society
and took an active interest in its work. Mr. Beard, who was easily
hypnotised, would be entranced by Mr. Smith, and sit in a chair with
closed eyes. Then, to quote the account of a single experiment, a
list of twelve _Yeses_ and _Noes_ in arbitrary order was written by
one of ourselves and put into Mr. Smith's hand, with directions that
he should successively will the subject to respond or not to respond,
in accordance with the list. A tuning-fork was then struck and held
at Mr. Beard's ear, and the question, "Do you hear?" was asked by one
of ourselves. This was done twelve times in succession, Mr. Beard
answering or failing to answer on each occasion in accordance with the
"yes" or "no" of the written list--that is to say, with the silent
will of the agent. Similar trials on other occasions with Mr. Beard
were equally successful. The percipient's own account of the matter is
as follows: "During the experiments of January 1st [1883], when Mr.
Smith mesmerised me, I did not lose consciousness at any time, but
only experienced a sensation of total numbness in my limbs. When the
trial as to whether I could hear sounds was made I heard the sounds
distinctly each time, but in a large number of instances I felt totally
unable to acknowledge that I heard them. I seemed to know each time
whether Mr. Smith wished me to say that I heard them; and as I had
surrendered my will to his at the commencement of the experiment, I was
unable to reassert my power of volition whilst under his influence."
(_Proceedings of the Soc. Psych. Research_, vol. i. p. 256.)


No. 21.--By PROFESSOR BARRETT.

Further trials of the same kind were carried on in November 1883 by
Professor Barrett, at his own house in Dublin. The hypnotist and agent
was again Mr. G. A. Smith, the percipient a youth named Fearnley, a
stranger to Mr. Smith. In the first series of trials Professor Barrett
asked Fearnley, "Now will you open your hand?" at the same time
pointing to "Yes" or "No," written on a card, and held in sight of Mr.
Smith, but out of view from the percipient. Mr. Smith, who was not in
contact with the subject, directed his silent will in accordance with
the written indication. In twenty experiments conducted under these
conditions there were only three failures. Later, to quote Professor
Barrett,

    "The experiment was varied as follows:--The word 'Yes' was written
    on one, and the word 'No' on the other, of two precisely similar
    pieces of card. One or other of these cards was handed to Mr.
    Smith at my arbitrary pleasure, care of course being taken that
    the 'subject' had no opportunity of seeing the card, even had he
    been awake. When 'Yes' was handed Mr. Smith was silently to will
    the 'subject' to answer aloud in response to the question asked by
    me, 'Do you hear me?' When 'No' was handed Mr. Smith was to will
    that no response should be made in reply to the same question. The
    object of this series of experiments was to note the effect of
    increasing the distance between the willer and the willed,--the
    agent and the percipient. In the first instance Mr. Smith was
    placed _three feet_ from the 'subject,' who remained throughout
    apparently asleep in an arm-chair in one corner of my study.

    "At three feet apart, 25 trials were successively made, and _in
    every case_ the 'subject' responded or did not respond in exact
    accordance with the silent will of Mr. Smith, as directed by me.

    "At 6 feet apart six similar trials were made without a single
    failure.

    "At 12 feet apart six more trials were made without a single
    failure.

    "At 17 feet apart six more trials were made without a single
    failure.

    "In this last case Mr. Smith had to be placed outside the study
    door, which was then closed with the exception of a narrow chink
    just wide enough to admit of passing a card in or out, whilst
    I remained in the study observing the 'subject.' To avoid any
    possible indication from the tone in which I asked the question, in
    all cases except the first dozen experiments, I shuffled the cards
    face downwards, and then handed the unknown 'Yes' or 'No' to Mr.
    Smith, who looked at the card and willed accordingly. I noted down
    the result, and then, and not till then, looked at the card.

    "A final experiment was made when Mr. Smith was taken across the
    hall and placed in the dining-room, at a distance of about 30 feet
    from the 'subject,' two doors, both quite closed, intervening.
    Under these conditions, three trials were made with success, the
    'Yes' response being, however, very faint and hardly audible to me,
    who returned to the study to ask the usual question after handing
    the card to the distant operator. At this point, the 'subject' fell
    into a deep sleep, and made no further replies to the questions
    addressed to him."

Further trials were made under different conditions, the results being
almost uniformly successful.

In interpreting these results there is no justification for assuming
direct control by the agent over the organism of the percipient. Nor
does the current phrase, endorsed as it is in the first case by the
percipient himself, that the operator's will dominated the will of
the subject, give an adequate account of the matter. When, as in the
case of experiments previously described, the percipient's impression
reproduces the sensation of the agent, there is nothing to indicate
that the impulse transferred directly affects the external organs, or
even the intermediate sensory centres. In the absence of any direct
evidence it is at least equally probable that the higher brain centres
only are concerned in the transmission in the first instance, and
that the transmitted idea is reflected downwards, until it actually
assumes, as in some of the experiments recorded with P. and Miss B.,
the form of a sensory hallucination. Upon this view no fundamental
distinction need be drawn between the results before described and
those now under discussion. In the latter case the question is not one
of transference of will or of a motor or inhibitory impulse. What is
actually transferred from the agent is probably only a simple idea. Its
subsequent translation into action, or the inhibition of action, is
as much the work of the percipient's mind as, in the other case, the
transformation of the idea of a number into a visual hallucination.
As regards the particular effect produced, it must be remembered that
the prime characteristic of the hypnotic state is its openness to
suggestion, and especially to suggestion coming through a particular
channel. It is the establishment of this suggestible state, which
consists essentially in the suppression of the controlling faculties
which normally pass judgment on the suggestions received from without,
and select those which are to find response in action, that Mr. Beard
describes as the surrender of his will. So that when Mr. Beard answered
our questions he did what his natural courtesy led him to do; when
he maintained silence his tendency to respond to the stimulus of
our questions was momentarily overcome by the stronger stimulus of
the idea received from the agent. But the superior efficacy of the
idea so transferred resulted not from any impulsive quality in the
idea itself, but from the previously established relations between
agent and percipient. The fact that experiments of this kind have
rarely succeeded in the waking state is no doubt due to the inferior
suggestibility of that state.


_Actions originated by Silent Willing._

In the paper already referred to (_supra_, p. 31) Dr. Blair Thaw
records some experiments which present us with a modification of the
Willing Game, but without contact. In most of the experiments the
person who was willed to perform a certain action--the nature of
which had been previously communicated to the other experimenters in
writing--was in the same room as the agents. But the agents did not
follow the percipient about the room, nor did the percipient look at
the agents for guidance. The percipient appears to have been awake
throughout the experiments, but it seems probable that her condition
was not that of complete normal wakefulness.

Of 26 experiments conducted under such conditions, 10 were completely
and 12 partially successful. When, however, as in this case, there are
several agents, all of whom are actually watching the movements of the
percipient, it is impossible to feel convinced that no indication by
the movements of the eyes or by breathing was given to the percipient
to show her whether or not she was moving in the right direction. In
the last four trials of the series, however, the percipient was willed
to fetch an object from another room which was out of sight from the
agents, and it is difficult to conceive that any indication could have
been given to her of the object selected.


No. 22.--By DR. BLAIR THAW.

    _April 7th_, 1892.

    Mrs. Thaw, Percipient. Mr. M. H. Wyatt and Dr. Thaw, Agents. In the
    next four experiments an object was selected in another room, and
    then the percipient sent in for it. No clue was given as to what
    part of the room.

    _1st Object Selected._ A WOODEN CUPID, from a corner-piece in room
    with eight other objects on it.--Percipient first brought a photo
    from the lower shelf of corner-piece, then said: "It's the wooden
    Cupid."

    _2nd Object._ MATCH-BOX on mantel.--Percipient seemed confused at
    first and brought two photos, then said: "It's the brass match-box
    on mantel."

    _3rd Object._ A VELLUM BOOK on table, among twenty other
    books, chosen; but a bag under one window was thought of
    first.--Percipient went to table, put her hand on the book, then
    went to the bag and took it up, then back to the table and took the
    vellum book and then the bag, and appeared with both. Percipient
    was in sight of agents during this time, but did not see them.

    _4th Object._ BOOK on small table, among ten others.--Missed.

In commenting on these experiments, Dr. Thaw is himself inclined to
attribute some of the results to "an indistinct motor impulse of some
kind, leading the percipient near the object." But in the experiments
above recorded, at any rate, it is sufficient, probably, to suppose the
transference of the idea of the object.

Experiments of a somewhat similar nature are recorded by Dr. Ochorowicz
(_La Suggestion mentale_, pp. 84-117). The subject in this case,
Madame M., was sunk in the deep hypnotic state (_l'état aidéique_), a
condition in which she would usually remain motionless until aroused by
the doctor. Under these circumstances Dr. Ochorowicz conducted upwards
of forty experiments in conveying mental commands, a large proportion
of which were executed by the subject with more or less exactness.
These trials have the drawback above indicated, common to all
experiments of the kind with the agent in the same room; moreover, each
experiment appears to have extended over a considerable period, and
the command--_e.g._, to rise from the chair and hand a cake from the
table to Dr. Ochorowicz--was frequently executed in stages. In judging
of the results, however, it should be remembered that Dr. Ochorowicz
has elsewhere shown himself to be acute in criticism and accurate in
observation.

Some experiments made by Dr. Gibert on Madame B., and recorded by
Professor Pierre Janet,[44] seem open to a similar objection. Dr.
Gibert communicated the mental command by touching Madame B.'s
forehead with his own whilst concentrating his thoughts on the ideas
to be conveyed. It is difficult to feel sure that the success of the
experiment under such conditions was not due to the command having
been unconsciously muttered by Dr. Gibert within the hearing of the
percipient. In the following account, however, thought-transference
would seem to be the simplest explanation of the results. The narrator,
unfortunately, remains anonymous; he is, however, personally known to
Dr. Dariex, the editor of the periodical from which the account is
extracted, and the experiments were obviously conducted with care.[45]
In this case it seems clear, since the command, though understood,
was on more than one occasion disobeyed, that the idea telepathically
intruded into the percipient's mind was not necessarily associated with
an impulse to action.


No. 23.--By J. H. P.

    [On the 6th December 1887], having placed M. in a deep trance,
    I turned my back upon her, and, without any gesture or sound
    whatever, gave her the following mental order:--

    "When you wake up you are to go and fetch a glass, put a few drops
    of Eau de Cologne into it, and bring it to me."

    On waking up, M. was visibly preoccupied; she could not keep still,
    and at last came and placed herself in front of me, exclaiming--

    "What an idea to put in my head!"

    "Why do you speak so to me?"

    "Because the idea that I have got can only come from you, and I
    don't wish to obey."

    "Don't obey unless you like; but I wish you to tell me at once what
    you are thinking of."

    "Well, then, I was to go and look for a glass, put some water in it
    with some drops of Eau de Cologne, and take it to you; it is really
    ridiculous."

    My order had then been perfectly understood for the first time.
    From that moment, December 6th, 1887, till to-day, with only two or
    three exceptions, the mental transmission, whether in the waking
    or sleeping state, has been most vivid. It is only disturbed at
    certain times, or when M. is feeling very anxious.

    On the 10th of December 1887, unknown to M., I hid a watch, that
    was not going, behind some books in my bookcase. When she arrived I
    put her to sleep, and gave her the following mental command:--

    "Go and fetch me the watch that is hidden behind some books in the
    bookcase."

    I sat in my armchair with M. behind me, and was careful not to look
    in the direction where the object was hidden.

    M. suddenly got up from her armchair and went straight to the
    bookcase, but could not open it; making energetic movements the
    while, whenever she touched the door, and especially the glass.

    "It is there! It is there! I am certain; but this glass burns me!"

    I decided to open it myself; she rushed at my books, took them out,
    and seized the watch, delighted to have found it.

    Similar trials have been made with commands that one of my friends
    passed to me, written beforehand, and not in the presence of the
    subject, and the success has been complete; but if the person who
    passes me the order is unknown to her, she refuses to obey, saying
    that the command is not mine.

       *       *       *       *       *

    M. N., who was convinced that mental transmission is a fraud,
    assured me that I should never be able to transmit an order from
    him to M.

    I invited him to come to my house, at five o'clock in the evening,
    with a command written, which he was to give me only when M. was
    asleep, and outside my study.

    At 5.10 N. arrived and we went out, leaving M. in a trance; when we
    were separated from my study by the two intervening rooms, with all
    the doors shut, N. pulled out a small paper and said--

    "You will read this command, we will both come back to M., and
    without any gestures, you will communicate it to her."

    "Certainly."

    In the note was written, "Give the mental command to M. to count
    out loud from 5 to 1; 5, 4, 3, 2, 1."

    We came back to my study; I sat at my desk as usual--I am in the
    habit of making notes during the progress of the experiments, so
    as to report them with scrupulous accuracy--and I sent N.'s mental
    command, while pretending to write. M. suddenly exclaimed--

    "Doubtless, you imagine that I cannot count! I can count from 1 to
    50,000, if I wish."

    Mental command--"Count from 5 to 1."

    "No, I will not obey a strange command; it is not a command of
    yours."

    All my efforts were useless; we had to abandon the experiment. The
    command was certainly understood; but M. N. retired, convinced that
    it had not been understood, and that even the trance was a sham!


_Automatic Writing._

Sometimes the working of the telepathic impulse is of a more apparently
mysterious kind. We have seen that Mr. Beard was fully conscious of the
action of a restraining force; and Mrs. Thaw, who was in a condition
little if at all removed from the normal, appears also to have been
aware of what she was doing, if perhaps without explicit recognition
of her motives at the time of performing the prescribed actions. But
in the various cases now to be described the telepathic impulse seems
never to have affected the normal consciousness of the percipient at
all; and the results produced through the agency of his organism were
due to no recognised volition on his part. The intelligence directing
his hand was an intelligence working below and apart from his ordinary
life.

Now this subterranean intelligence presents many points of analogy with
the secondary consciousness of the hypnotic subject; in both states
we find indications of thought and will distinct from those of waking
life, and of a memory not shared with that life. Moreover, it has
been shown experimentally, by Mr. Edmund Gurney,[46] Professor Pierre
Janet,[47] and others, that the consciousness which makes itself known
through planchette is, in certain persons at any rate, identical with
the consciousness found in the hypnotic trance, so far as the test of
a common memory can be relied upon to prove identity. The superior
susceptibility to telepathic influences, already referred to, of the
hypnotic subject, may perhaps, therefore, in the light of these later
experiments, be found to indicate a superior susceptibility of those
parts of the brain whose workings lie below the ordinary consciousness,
and reveal themselves only in the activities of trance and automatism.

The following is an illustrative case. The account is derived from
contemporary notes, made by the late Mr. P. H. Newnham, Vicar of Maker,
Devonport, of a series of experiments conducted by himself and his
wife during eight months in 1871.[48] Mr. Newnham would write, in a
book kept for the purpose, a question of the purport of which Mrs.
Newnham was in ignorance; and Mrs. Newnham, holding her hand on a
planchette, would write an answer to the question. The conditions of
the experiments are described by Mr. Newnham, in an account written in
1884, as follows:--


No. 24.

    "My wife always sat at a small low table, in a low chair, leaning
    backwards. I sat about eight feet distant, at a rather higher
    table, and with my back towards her while writing down the
    questions. It was absolutely impossible that any gesture, or play
    of features, on my part, could have been visible or intelligible
    to her. As a rule she kept her eyes shut; but never became in the
    slightest degree hypnotic, or even naturally drowsy."

In all 309 questions with their answers were recorded under these
conditions, before the experiments were finally abandoned on account of
their prejudicial effect on Mrs. Newnham's health. The extracts from
Mr. Newnham's note-book given below show that Mrs. Newnham throughout
had some kind of knowledge, not always apparently complete, of the
terms of the question.[49] But she was not herself consciously aware of
the purport either of the question or of the answer written through her
hand.

    _January 29th._

    13. Is it the operator's brain, or some external force, that moves
    the Planchette? Answer "brain" or "force." A. Will.

    14. Is it the will of a living person, or of an immaterial spirit,
    distinct from that person? Answer "person" or "spirit." A. Wife.

    15. Give first the wife's Christian name; then, my favourite name
    for her. (This was accurately done.)

    27. What is your own name? A. Only you.

    28. We are not quite sure of the meaning of the answer. Explain. A.
    Wife.

    Failing to get more than this at the outset, we returned to the
    same thought after question 114; when, having been closely pressed
    on another subject, we received the curt reply--"Told all I know."

    _February 18th._

    117. Who are you that writes, and has told all you know? A. Wife.

    118. But does no one tell wife what to write? If so, who? A. Spirit.

    119. Whose spirit? A. Wife's brain.

    120. But how does wife's brain know (certain) secrets? A. Wife's
    spirit unconsciously guides.

    121. But how does wife's spirit know things it has never been told?
    A. No external influence.

    122. But by what _internal_ influence does it know (these) secrets?
    A. You cannot know.

Mr. Newnham, who was a Mason, took the opportunity on several occasions
of questioning the planchette on details of the Masonic ritual and
archæology--of which Mrs. Newnham was of course ignorant--with very
surprising results. It will be seen from the extracts which follow
that Mrs. Newnham's answers showed not only an acquaintance with the
terms of the question, but even a fragmentary knowledge of the correct
answer--knowledge which under the circumstances could hardly have been
derived elsewhere than from the questioner's brain.

    _March 26th._

    166. Of what language is the first syllable of the Great Triple
    R.A. Word?[50] A. Don't know.

    167. Yes, you do. What are the three languages of which the word
    is composed? A. Greek, Egyptian, Syriac first syllable (_correctly
    given_), rest unknown.

    168. Write the syllable which is Syriac. A. (First syllable
    correctly written.)

    169. Write the syllable which is Egyptian. A. Second.

    170. Can you not write the syllable itself? A. Third Greek.

    174. Write down the word itself. A. First three and last two
    letters were written correctly, but four incorrect letters, _partly
    borrowed from another word of the same degree_, came in the middle.

    176. Why do you write a word of which I know nothing? A. Wife tried
    hard to tell the word, but could not quite catch it.

    177. Catch it from whom? A. Not quite sure.

    178. Not quite sure of what? A. I know nothing. Wife doesn't quite
    know.

    182. Write out the prayer used at the advancement of a Mark Master
    Mason. A. Almighty Ruler of the Universe and Architect of all
    worlds, we beseech Thee to accept this, our brother, whom we have
    this day received into our most honourable Company of Mark Master
    Masons. Grant him to be a worthy member of our brotherhood; and may
    he be in his own person a perfect mirror of all Masonic virtues.
    Grant that all our doings may be to Thy honour and glory, and to
    the welfare of all mankind.

    This prayer was written off instantaneously and very rapidly. It
    is a very remarkable production indeed. For the benefit of those
    who are not members of the craft, I may say that no prayer in the
    slightest degree resembling it is made use of in the Ritual of any
    Masonic degree; and yet it contains more than one strictly accurate
    technicality connected with the degree of Mark Mason. My wife has
    never seen any Masonic prayers, whether in "Carlile," or any other
    real or spurious Ritual of the Masonic Order.

    183. I do not know this prayer. Where is it to be found? A. Old
    American Ritual.

    184. Where can I get one? A. Most likely none in England.

    185. Can you not write the prayer that I make use of in my own
    Lodge? A. No, I don't know it.

We have to remark here not merely the exhibition of a will and an
intelligence differing from the writer's normal self, but the display
of a yet more alien disingenuousness. Similar evasions and inventions
occur more than once in the course of these experiments. Indeed,
a certain degree of moral perversity is a frequent and notorious
characteristic of automatic expression.

Some interesting experiments of the same kind were conducted, in
the winter of 1892-93, by Mr. R. H. Buttemer, of Emanuel College,
Cambridge, and Mr. H. T. Green. Throughout the series the questions
were, as in the preceding case, written down, so that the percipient
was completely ignorant of their purport. The following is the record
of the last experiments of the series.


No. 25.--By MR. R. H. BUTTEMER.

    February 18th, 1893, 8 P.M. Mrs. H., Miss B., Mr. and Miss M.
    present, in addition to Mr. Green, and Messrs. S., W., and Buttemer.

    Mr. Green, as usual, operated Planchette, and on this occasion sat
    with his back to all the other persons present.

    _Q._ (from Mr. M.): What was I doing this afternoon?

    _A._ i. ---- the sun ---- (all else illegible). ii. Enjoying the
    fresh air of heaven.

    _Q._ What was Mr. Rogers doing in Cambridge?

    _A._ i. (Irrelevant, or possibly connected vaguely with the
    question.) ii. Ask another, but Mr. Rogers came up on important
    business connected with the Lodge. (Correct.)

    _Q._ Where has Mrs. M. gone?

    _A._ i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Far, far away, but more next time. iii.
    Her mother has gone to--oh, what a happy place is London! iv.
    All change here for Bletchley. (Mrs. M. had possibly passed this
    station on her journey.)

    _Q._ Who has won the Association Match to-day?

    _A._ i. (Illegible.) ii. O ye simple ones, how long will ye love
    simplicity? Why, Oxford, of course. [This fact was known to some
    persons in the room, but not to Mr. Green.]

    One of the company then suggested the attempt to get the name on
    a visiting card transmitted, and the question was written, "Write
    name on card." Mr. Green did not know that this experiment was
    about to be tried, and the card was picked from a pile at random.
    The name was John B. Bourne. A sentence was written by Mr. Green,
    which proved to be, "Think of one letter at a time and then see
    what will happen." We did so.

    _A._ i. J for Jerusalem, O for Omri, H for Honey, and N for
    Nothing. ii. B for Benjamin, O for Olive, U for Unicorn. (The
    remaining letters were given incorrectly.)

    _Q._ How many of the Society's books are here? (There were two
    volumes of _Proceedings_ on the table.)

    _A._ i. (Irrelevant.) ii. The answer is 100-98.

    _Q._ What is 2 × 3?

    Two irrelevant answers were given, possibly owing to a slight
    disturbance in the room. The third answer was--"When that noise has
    ceased and S. has finished knocking the lamp over, I say 6."

    A trial shortly after this, February 19th, gave no results, and the
    power of automatic writing appears to have entirely left Mr. Green
    for the present. (_Proc. Soc. Psych. Research_, vol. ix. pp. 61-64.)

In this, as in Mr. Newnham's case, the mode of expression is again
characteristic of the automatic consciousness. It is explained by Mr.
Buttemer that when two or more answers are given, the operator had been
simply told to write again, after the first irrelevant answer, without
being shown the question.


_Table Tilting._

No. 26.--By the AUTHOR.

We pass on to experiments in which the ideas transmitted from the
agent find other subterranean channels in the percipient's organism
for their expression. Of all forms of intelligent automatism writing,
next to speaking, is probably in an educated percipient the easiest,
because in normal life the commonest. In the cases, therefore, recorded
below the actual movements involved, though of a relatively simple
kind, as being unaccustomed called possibly for the exercise of a
degree of mental activity as high as would have been the case had
writing been the vehicle of expression. In the preceding chapter it was
recorded, in the experiments with numbers, that some of the answers
were given through the movements of a table on which the percipient's
hands rested (p. 73). A series of experiments of this nature was made
by the writer in November and December 1873, with the assistance of a
few friends, amongst whom were Mr. F. H. Colson, now Head Master of
Plymouth College, and the Rev. W. E. Smith, of Corton, near Lowestoft.
The following is a description of the methods adopted. Three or four of
us would sit round a small centre-legged table, cane-bottomed chair,
waste-paper basket, or metal tripod, with our hands resting on it. We
found that in a few minutes the table (or other instrument) would tilt
on one side, or move round and round, with considerable freedom. When
these motions had once been fairly established, one or two of those
present in the room would retire to a distance, keeping their backs to
the table, and think of a letter of the alphabet. The table would move
freely up and down, under the varying pressure of the hands laid on
it, in a succession of small tilts. Those sitting at the table would
count the tilts--one tilt standing for A, two for B, three for C, and
so on. Excluding second trials, there were 70 experiments conducted
under these conditions. The right letter was tilted in 27 cases, and in
two others the next succeeding letter was given. On some occasions the
proportion of successes was much higher; thus, on the 28th November,
out of a total of 16 trials, 10 were correct. On the 1st December, on
the other hand, 10 trials were made without any success. It was the
rule throughout that the agents should stand with their backs to the
table at some distance from it, and after the first few experiments we
found, or thought we found, that the thought-transference succeeded
best with a single agent. In order that the letter might not be
guessed from the context, we generally took the initial or initial
and final letters only of a word; in four cases only did the agent
select as many as three consecutive letters of a word. If the letters
had been arbitrarily chosen, the chances against the right letters
being indicated would be 25 to 1. But as the letters actually selected
were in most cases constituent parts of a word, generally the initial
letter, and as in some cases two or three consecutive letters were
selected, the adverse chances would be reduced, roughly speaking,
to something like 15 to 1. But even so the results attained are
sufficiently striking.[51]

In these experiments the percipient or percipients themselves counted
the tilts; and it is probable that occasionally one or other of those
seated at the table half-consciously guided its movements in conformity
with his own ideas of what the letter would be. But in a modified form
of the experiment, introduced by Professor Richet, the percipients, two
or three in number, were seated at one table and a printed alphabet
was placed on another table behind the percipients and out of their
range of vision. When the first table tilted,[52] under the automatic
movements of the hands resting on it, it caused a bell to ring. M.
Richet or some other experimenter sat at the second table and drew
a pen slowly backwards and forwards over the printed alphabet. The
letters to which the pen was pointing when the bell rang were noted,
and it was found that they made up intelligible words and sentences,
provided that in some cases the next letter or the next but one were
substituted for that actually given.[53] All necessary precautions were
taken that the alphabet should be out of sight of the "mediums," who
were in most cases personal friends of M. Richet, and whose good faith
was, he believes, in all cases unimpeachable. Subjoined is an account
of the results obtained on one evening. M. Richet appears from the
account to have been one of those seated at the tilting table.


No. 27.--By PROFESSOR RICHET.

    "On the 9th of November we took the same precautions, but used
    an ordinary alphabet, not the circular one.[54] The name of the
    'spirit' who came to the table was given as V I L L O N. Then we
    made a great noise, we repeated poetry, sang, and counted to such
    good purpose that P., who was at the alphabet, could hardly follow
    the ringing of the bell. We asked for some French poetry. The reply
    was--

    Q U S N N T K F S N E I G D R D A M S A M
    _O U, S O N T, L E S, N E I G E S, D A N T A N_

That is, "Ou sont les neiges d'Antan?"--a verse of Villon's, obviously
known to us all.

We then asked, what were the relations of Villon with the kings of
France?

    K O U H T L E C R U E L
    _L O U I S, L E, C R U E L_

Louis le cruel.

What book ought we to read?

    E S S A Y S U R D A D M O N I N M A N H P
    _E S S A Y, S U R, D A E M O N I O M A N I E_

The reader will understand that if I mention these experiments, it is
not because the answers are interesting in themselves, but because the
precautions taken seemed sufficient to prevent the medium from gaining
any knowledge of the movements of the operator at the alphabet.... I
add a few more replies; but the number and intrinsic significance of
these replies is a matter of but little importance.

    F E S T I N A L E N T E
    L O F A M D T M R E I I N A J U B R
    _I N F A N D U M, R E J I N A, J U B E S_
    R E N O V A R E D O L O R E M
    _R E N O V A R E, D O L O R E M_

    The old spelling of the word "Rejina" should be noticed." (_Proc.
    Soc. Psych. Research_, vol. v. pp. 142, 143.)

In this case it will be observed that P. alone was in possession of
the knowledge, without which all the efforts of those at the table
could have produced only a meaningless sequence of letters. In some
other experiments of the series the procedure was more complicated. M.
Richet, standing apart from both tables, asked a question, the answer
to which was given by the percipients with a certain approximation to
correctness. The results, though less striking than those already
quoted, are yet such as to suggest that they were not due to chance.[55]


_Production of Local Anæsthesia._

We now pass to experiments of another kind, resembling those last
quoted, inasmuch as the effects were produced without the consciousness
of the percipient, but differing in the important particular that no
deliberate and conscious effort on his part could have enabled him
to produce them. In experiments carried on with various subjects at
intervals through the years 1883-87, at some of which the present
writer assisted, Mr. Edmund Gurney had shown that it was possible by
means of the unexpressed will of the agent to produce local anæsthesia
in certain persons. (_S.P.R._, vol. i. pp. 257-260; ii. 201-205; iii.
453-459; v. 14-17.) In these experiments the subject was placed at a
table, and his hands were passed through holes in a large brown paper
screen, so that they were completely concealed from his view. Mr. G. A.
Smith then held his hand at a distance of two or three inches from the
finger indicated by Mr. Gurney, at the same time willing that it should
become rigid and insensible. On subsequently applying appropriate tests
it was found, as a rule, that the finger selected had actually become
rigid and was insensible to pain. In the last series of 160 experiments
Mr. Gurney, as well as Mr. Smith, held his hand over a particular
finger. In 124 cases the finger over which Mr. Smith's hand had been
held was alone affected; in 16 cases Mr. Gurney and Mr. Smith were
both successful; in 13 cases Mr. Gurney was successful and Mr. Smith
failed. In the remaining 7 cases no effect at all was produced. It is
noteworthy that in a series of 41 similar trials, in which Mr. Smith,
while holding his hand in the same position, willed that no effect
should be produced, there was actually no effect in 36 cases; in 4
cases the finger over which his hand was held, and in the remaining
case another finger, were affected. The rigidity was tested by asking
the subject, at the end of the experiment, to close his hands. When he
complied with the request the finger operated on--if the experiment
had succeeded--would remain rigid. The insensibility was proved by
pricking, burning, or by a current from an induction coil. In the
majority of the successful trials the insensibility was shown to be
proof against all assaults, however severe.

In these earlier experiments it seemed essential to success that Mr.
Smith's hand should be in close proximity to that of the subject,
without any intervening barrier. These conditions made it difficult
to exclude the possibility of the subject learning by variations in
temperature, or by air currents, which finger was actually being
operated on; though it is hard to conceive that the percipient could
by any such means have discriminated between Mr. Gurney's hand and
Mr. Smith's. On the other hand, even if this source of error was held
to be excluded, the interpretation of the results remained ambiguous.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Gurney himself was inclined to attribute the
effects produced, not to telepathy, as ordinarily understood, but to
a specific vital effluence, or, as he phrased it, a kind of nervous
induction, operating directly on the affected part of the percipient's
organism. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. pp. 254-259.)

With a view to test this hypothesis further experiments of the same
kind were made by Mrs. Sidgwick during the years 1890 and 1892, the
subjects being P. and Miss B. already mentioned. The percipient was
throughout in a normal condition. As before, he sat at a table with
his hands passed through holes in a large screen, which extended
sufficiently far in all directions to prevent him from seeing either
the operator or his own hands. Mr. Smith, as before, willed to produce
the desired effect in the finger which had been intimated to him,
either by signs or writing, by one of the experimenters. Passing over
the trials, very generally successful, made under the same conditions
as Mr. Gurney's experiments--_i.e._, with the agent's hand held at
a short distance without any intervening screen from the finger
selected--we will quote Mrs. Sidgwick's account of the later series
performed under varied conditions. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. viii. pp.
577-596.)


No. 28.--By MRS. H. SIDGWICK.

    In the second division, (_b_), of our experiments come those in
    which a glass screen was placed over the subject's hands. For the
    first four of these we used a framed window pane which happened
    to be handy. Then we obtained and used a sheet of 32 oz. glass,
    measuring 22 by 10 inches and 1/6 inch in thickness. This was
    supported on two large books placed beyond the subject's hands on
    each side, and in this position the upper surface of the glass
    was 2-1/4 inches above the surface of the table, so that there
    was ample room for the hands to rest underneath without touching
    the glass. Mr. Smith held his hand in the usual position over
    the selected finger, above the glass and not touching it. Under
    these conditions we tried 21 experiments with P., of which 18 were
    successful, and 6 with Miss B., all successful. In the case of the
    3 failures with P., no effect was produced on any finger. In one
    successful case, the time taken was long, and we interrupted the
    experiment by premature testing in the way explained above.

    Division (_c_) includes those experiments in which Mr. Smith did
    not approximate his hand to that of the subject at all, but merely
    looked at the selected finger from some place in the same room as
    the subject, but out of his sight. The distances between him and
    the subject varied from about 2-1/2 to about 12 feet. Under these
    conditions we tried 37 experiments with P., 18 in 1890, of which
    6 were failures, and 2 only partially successful, and 19 in 1892,
    of which 10 were failures. The proportion of success was, it thus
    appears, much less than under the previously described conditions,
    but still much beyond what chance would produce. Of the 6 failures
    in 1890, one was a case in which Mr. Smith made a mistake as to
    which finger we had selected, but succeeded with the one he thought
    of. In another case the left thumb instead of the right thumb
    became insensitive. In the other 4 cases no finger at all was
    affected.

    Of the 10 failures in 1892, no effect was produced in 4 cases;
    in another the right (viz., the little) finger of the wrong
    hand became insensitive;[56] in 4 cases an adjoining finger was
    affected--once only slightly--instead of that selected, and in the
    remaining case a finger distant from the selected one was slightly
    affected.

Six experiments were made with Mr. Smith looking at the finger through
the opera-glass at a distance of from 22 to 25 feet; in three cases
the experiment succeeded, in three another finger was affected instead
of that selected. Fourteen experiments were made with a closed door
intervening between percipient and agent; 2 only succeeded, and in 8
a wrong finger was affected, no effect at all being produced in the
remaining 4 cases. In a further series of 4 trials Mr. Smith held his
hand near the percipient, and willed to produce no effect. The trials
were successful. In all these experiments P. was the percipient.

The rigidity was tested, as before, by asking the subject to close his
hands; the anæsthesia, as a rule, by touches or the induction coil.
Tested by the latter means it was found, as the current was gradually
increased to the maximum, that the insensibility was not always
complete. Flexibility and sensation were usually restored, for economy
of time, by means of upward passes; but a few trials made later in the
series served to show that the finger could be restored to its normal
condition by a mere effort of will on the part of the agent. In some
cases when their attention was specially directed to their sensations
the subjects were able to indicate beforehand the finger operated on,
by reason of the feeling of cold in it. But as a rule they appeared to
be unaware which finger was affected. It is perhaps needless to point
out that no conscious effort on their part could have produced the
results described.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 43: Cases are recorded in the _Zoist_ and other publications
of the period. See the instances, quoted in _Phantasms of the Living_,
vol. i. pp. 89-91, of the Rev. J. Lawson Sisson, Mr. Barth, Mr. N.
Dunscombe, and Mr. H. S. Thompson. Traditions of the marvels wrought by
the last-named gentleman still linger in Yorkshire society, and will no
doubt demand the serious attention of future students of folk-lore.]

[Footnote 44: _Bulletin de la Soc. de Psychologie Physiologique_, 1885.]

[Footnote 45: _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, vol. iii. pp. 130-133.]

[Footnote 46: See the account of his experiments on "Peculiarities of
certain Post-hypnotic States," _Proc. S. P. R._, vol. iv. pp. 268-323.]

[Footnote 47: "L'Automatisme Psychologique."]

[Footnote 48: _Proc. Soc. Psych. Research_, vol. iii. pp. 6-23.]

[Footnote 49: Mr. Newnham explains that "five or six questions were
often asked consecutively without her being told of the subject that
was being pursued."]

[Footnote 50: Previous questions had been asked on the same subject,
and the first syllable had already been correctly written. On a
subsequent occasion the same question was repeated and a wholly
incorrect answer was given.]

[Footnote 51: There were nine sittings in all, but the records of one
were imperfectly kept, and have not been preserved. In two cases the
details given are insufficient; in the notes of the first evening it is
stated that the person seated at the table "failed three or four times,
succeeded once in giving word of (_i.e._, selected from) newspaper
(which agent) held in his hand." These trials have been omitted
altogether from the results given in the text. On the third evening
there is a record, "gave S H but got wrong afterwards." The word
thought of was _Sherry_. I have counted this trial as two successes and
two failures, judging from the other experiments recorded that not more
than four consecutive letters at most would have been attempted.]

[Footnote 52: In this case it will be observed the table tilted
only once for each letter. The method adopted (after trial of the
alternative) in my own experiments, though slower and more cumbrous,
was apparently productive of more accurate results. It will be readily
understood that it might be easier for the transmitted impulse to check
a movement, at once uncertain and spasmodic, which had been already
initiated, than to overcome, in a short space of time, the resistance
of inertia and generate a new movement. The distinction may perhaps
be illustrated by the difference between the amount of force required
to start a railway truck at rest on the level, and that which would
suffice to arrest one actually in gentle motion.]

[Footnote 53: Of course substitutions of this kind considerably reduce
the value of the results obtained, but it will be found that when
full deduction has been made on this score, the coincidences remain
overwhelmingly in excess of anything which could have been produced by
chance.]

[Footnote 54: In some previous experiments a circular alphabet had
been used, with a view of preventing any of those seated at the first
table from learning by the movements of the operator's hand what
point of the alphabet he had reached. The other precautions described
seemed, however, as M. Richet points out, sufficient to exclude all
considerations of this kind.]

[Footnote 55: _Rev. Phil._, Dec. 1884; see also _S.P.R._, vol. ii. pp.
247 _et seq._]

[Footnote 56: It happened on another occasion under these conditions
that the right little finger was slightly affected when the left little
finger, which had been selected, was so in a more decided manner.]




