CHAPTER VI.

GENERAL CRITICISM OF THE EVIDENCE FOR SPONTANEOUS THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.


If the reader has been able to accept my estimate of the evidence
brought forward in the preceding chapters, the possibility of the
transmission of ideas and sensations, otherwise than through the known
channels of the senses, must be held to be proved by the experiments
there recorded. That proof can be impugned only on the ground that the
precautions taken against communication between agent and percipient
by normal means were insufficient. For if the precautions are admitted
to have been sufficient, there can be no question that the results
were not due to chance. It is not necessary here to enter into nice
calculations of the probabilities. If, for instance, the odds in favour
of some other cause than chance for the results recorded on pp. 66-69
were to be expressed in figures, the total sum would compete with or
outstrip the stupendous ciphers employed by the astronomer to denote
the distance of Sirius, or the weight of the Sun. But the kind of
evidence now to be considered--the coincidence of some spontaneous
affection of the percipient with some event in the life-history of the
person presumed to be the agent, as when one sees the apparition of a
friend at the time of his death--is of inferior cogency in two ways.
The coincidences are neither so numerous nor so exact; and the risk
of error in the record is far greater. On the one hand, therefore,
there is a greater probability that the percipient's affection,
even if correctly described, was unconnected with the state of the
person supposed to be the agent; on the other hand we have, in most
cases, less assurance that the description given of his experience
is in its essential features accurate. The part played by coincident
hallucination in the question of telepathy may be illustrated from
another branch of scientific inquiry. For some years the "Germ
Theory" rested mainly on observations of the distribution of certain
diseases, their periodic character and their mode of propagation and
development; phenomena which, though sufficiently striking, are not in
themselves susceptible of exact interpretation. It was not until the
minute organisms, whose existence had been so long suspected, had been
actually isolated in the laboratory, and had been proved capable of
reproducing the disease, that the connection of certain maladies with
the presence of certain microbes in the body became, from a plausible
hypothesis, an accepted conclusion of Science. So here it is important
to bear in mind that dreams, visions, and apparitions, however
captivating to the imagination, do not form the main argument for
believing in some new mode of communication between human minds. If all
the cases of the kind hitherto recorded could be shown one by one to be
explicable by more familiar causes,--though the result would indeed be
to add a remarkable chapter to the history of human error; though it
would be a singular paradox that so many intelligent witnesses should
have been so mistaken, and with such undesigned unanimity; and that
a whole class of alleged phenomena should have sprung up without any
substantial basis,--the grounds for the belief in telepathy would not
be seriously affected; we should merely have to modify our conceptions
of its nature, and restrict its boundaries. But in fact there is no
reason to anticipate so lame a conclusion. The incidents, of which
examples will be adduced in the succeeding chapters, though their value
will be differently estimated by different minds, are yet in their
aggregate not such as can plausibly be attributed to misrepresentation
or chance coincidence. And, first, it is important to note that the
cases must be considered in the aggregate. Separately, no doubt, each
particular case is susceptible of more or less adequate explanation by
some well-known cause; and in the last resort it would be unreasonable
to stake the credit of any single witness, however eminent, against
what Hume would call the uniform experience of mankind. But as a
matter of fact the experience of mankind is not uniform in this
matter; and when we are forced by the mere accumulation of testimony
to go on adding one strained and improbable explanation to another,
and to assume at last an epidemic of misrepresentation, perhaps even
an organised conspiracy of falsehood, a point is at length reached
in which the sum of improbabilities involved in the negation of
thought-transference must outweigh the single improbability of a new
mode of mental affection. If to any reader that point should seem not
yet to have been reached--and the position could scarcely be held an
unreasonable one--I would remind him that the cases quoted in this
book form but a small part of the evidence so far accumulated; and I
would ask that he should reserve his judgment until he has studied
the whole of the evidence recorded in _Phantasms of the Living_, in
the _Proceedings_ of the American Society for Psychical Research, the
scattered cases appearing from time to time in the pages of various
English and Continental periodicals dealing with this subject, and
the ever-growing mass of testimony printed in the _Proceedings_ and
_Journal_ of the Society for Psychical Research in this country.[71] He
will then perhaps be prepared to endorse the verdict of a shrewd and
genial critic on the evidence presented in _Phantasms of the Living_,
viz., that it "can only be rejected as a whole by one who is prepared
to repeat at his leisure what David is reported to have said in his
haste."[72]

It is of course not possible with our present knowledge to estimate
with any precision the probabilities for the coincidence by chance of
such a vision as that recorded by Dr. Dupré (No. 47), or such a dream
as Mr. Hamilton's (No. 58), with the event represented. Neither the
nature of the percipient's impression in these and similar cases, nor
the event to which the impression corresponds, are sufficiently well
defined to admit of any numerical argument being based upon them. We
can only recognise that whilst dreams and mind's-eye pictures are not
very uncommon experiences, dreams and visions which faithfully reflect
external events of an unlikely kind occur, if rarely, with sufficient
frequency to give us pause. The common sense which in such cases leads
us to infer a connection between the event and the corresponding
mental experience is our only guide. But one large class of our
spontaneous evidences is susceptible of more exact treatment. Sensory
hallucinations are affections at once well marked and unusual. If we
can ascertain their relative frequency it is possible to calculate with
more or less exactness the probabilities of the coincidence by chance
with some definite event. Such a calculation has been attempted in
