CHAPTER XI.

SPONTANEOUS TELEPATHIC HALLUCINATIONS.


In the last chapter we gave illustrations of telepathic hallucinations
induced by an act of voluntary concentration on the part of the agent.
The hallucinatory effects now to be described were produced without
design, and in some cases, it would appear, without the conscious
direction of the agent's thoughts to the person affected. They purport,
in fact, to have been the spontaneous outcome of some emotional stress
on the part of the person whom the hallucination represented.


_Auditory Hallucinations._

We will begin by quoting two examples of auditory hallucination.


No. 68.--From MISS C. CLARK.

    "1889.

    "I heard some one sobbing one evening last August (1888) about 10
    P.M. It was in the house in Dunbar, Scotland, as I was preparing
    to go to bed. Feeling convinced that it was my youngest sister, I
    advised another sister not to go into the next room, whence the
    sounds seemed to proceed. After waiting with me a few minutes this
    sister went into the dining-room, and returned to me saying that
    our youngest sister was in the dining-room, and not crying at all.
    Then I at once thought there must be something the matter with
    my greatest friend, a girl of twenty-four, then in Lincolnshire.
    I wrote to her next day, asking her if, and at what hour on the
    previous night, she had been crying. In her next letter she said,
    'Yes, she was suffering great pain with toothache just at the
    time, and was unable to restrain a few sobs.' ... This has been the
    only similar experience I have had."

I have seen the letter referred to, together with three others,
extracts from which are given below. It will be seen that Miss Clark
was mistaken in supposing that she wrote _next day_. The letter was
actually begun three days after--on the Wednesday--and completed on
the subsequent day, after the receipt of Miss Maughan's letter written
on the Tuesday evening. In view, however, of the fact that Miss Clark
wrote of her impression before the receipt of her friend's letter, the
mistake seems not material.

    From MISS CLARK.

    "DUNBAR,
    "Wednesday, _August_ 22_nd_, 1888, 9 P.M.

    "Were you crying on Sunday night near eleven o'clock? Because I
    _distinctly_ heard some one crying, and supposed it was H. in the
    next room, but she was not there at all.

    "Then I thought it must be something 'occult,' and that it might be
    you, and I felt so horrid."

    "Thursday, _August_ 23_rd_, 1888, 4.45 P.M.

    "Thank you very much for your letter just come. I am so sorry your
    face was sore. Did it make you cry on Sunday night?"


From MISS MAUGHAN.

(The cover of this letter has been preserved, and bears the postmark,
"Spilsby, Aug. 22nd, 1888.")

    "Tuesday Evening, _Aug._ 21_st_, 1888.

    "On Sunday we went to see Wroxham Broad. We had an immense amount
    of walking to do altogether, and I think I got a little cold in my
    face in the morning, and all night I suffered with it, and my face
    is swelled still."

In a second letter Miss Maughan writes:--

    "Thursday, _August_ 23_rd_, 11 P.M.

    "I am putting poultices on my gums. I have never had such a
    huge swelling before, and it _won't_ go down. It is so horribly
    uncomfortable."

    "Saturday Afternoon.

    "Thanks for letter. Yes, I was crying on Sunday night; only on
    account of the pain. It was awful, but I only cried quietly, as
    Edith was asleep...."

From MISS CLARK.

    "Monday, _August_ 27_th_, 1888, 10.30 A.M.

    "Thanks for your letter. I am sorry it was you crying. You don't
    seem at all struck. I was very much so. It was a subdued sort
    (_sic_) I heard, and thought H. was trying not to let it be heard.
    I shall always be afraid now of hearing things."

The sound here was of an inarticulate kind, nor was it immediately
referred to the actual agent, and both these facts must be held to
detract from the evidential value of the coincidence. In the next case,
however, the voice, it will be seen, was at once recognised. The voice
in this case awoke the percipient, and the impression should therefore
be classed as a hallucination rather than as a dream, but it was of
the "borderland" type. The uneasiness caused to the percipient, as
attested by the letter and telegram sent, is sufficient proof that the
impression was of a kind unusual in his experience.


No. 69.--From MR. WILLIAM TUDOR.

    "AUBURNDALE, MASS., _July_ 11_th_, 1890.

    "Your favour[115] of the 30th ult., addressed to Mrs. Tudor, I will
    answer, as the incident more directly concerned me.

    "Late in the evening of Monday, March 17th, near midnight, my
    nephew, Frederic Tudor, Jun., fell in front of an electric car
    going to Cambridge, was dragged some distance and so badly injured
    that for a time his life was in doubt, though he recovered with the
    loss of a foot. My wife heard of the accident on Tuesday afternoon
    and was much distressed all the night of Tuesday, and quite
    restless and wakeful.

    "At this time I was in Gainesville, Florida, having important
    business there in connection with land purchases. On the night of
    Tuesday I went to bed rather early in a calm state of mind. I
    slept soundly, as I usually do. About midnight, as I should judge,
    I heard my wife call my name quite distinctly and waked instantly
    broad awake. I sat up in bed, but soon remembering where I was,
    fell asleep again and waked no more until morning. The next day
    the incident of the night made me quite uneasy, also during the
    following day, and as I was obliged to leave on the afternoon of
    Friday for a rough journey in the country I telegraphed to my wife
    to know what was the matter. I usually receive a letter from home
    every day, and on these days no letter arrived, which added to
    my uneasiness. No answer was received to my first telegram, for
    the very good reason that it was never delivered. I was obliged
    to start, however, in the afternoon of this day, Friday the 21st,
    and in the morning of the 22nd, from a small town called New
    Branford, sent another telegram, of which the following is the
    substance:--'Shall be gone three days; what has happened? Answer
    Branford.' I had a strong impression that something serious had
    occurred, that my wife was possibly ill, or some of the children
    were ill, or that some accident or death had occurred to a near
    relation, not however involving my immediate family. The following
    extracts from my letters will illustrate this feeling:--

    "Letter of March 19th:

    "'I thought you called me last night. I waked up and was much
    worried; I hope you are not ill.'

    "Letter of March 22nd, from New Branford:

    "'No answer comes to my telegram, although I left word to have
    it forwarded here. Surely some one would telegraph if you were
    ill. Surely you would let me know if anything had happened. I
    do not _feel_ that anything serious has happened, and yet I
    cannot understand such a combination of circumstances. I have
    no confidence in these telegraph people, and daresay you never
    received my message.'

    "Letter of March 24th, from Gainesville, after telegram giving
    account of accident was finally received:

    "'I had a feeling that something was wrong but that you were all
    right.'

    "Such I give as the substance of the facts in this case, which I
    trust may be interesting to the Society.

    "WILLIAM TUDOR."

Mrs. W. Tudor writes:--

    "AUBURNDALE, _July_ 29_th_, 1890.

    "My nephew's accident occurred on Monday night. Being out of town
    I heard of it on Tuesday afternoon. I immediately went to Boston
    and returned the same evening about nine o'clock, feeling greatly
    distressed. I wrote a letter to my husband after my return
    describing the accident and retired to bed rather late and passed
    a restless night. The telegram received from my husband rather
    surprised me, as he is not usually anxious when away from home. I
    believe this is all I know connected with this incident.

    ELIZABETH TUDOR."

An account of a similar experience was sent to us in 1889 by the late
Sir John Drummond Hay, K.C.B. He wrote that about 1 A.M. on some day
in February 1879 he heard distinctly the voice of his daughter-in-law
saying, "Oh, I wish papa only knew that Robert was ill." Sir John awoke
Lady Drummond Hay to tell her what he had heard, and made a note of the
incident in his diary. It was shortly ascertained that Mr. R. D. Hay
had been taken seriously ill on that night, and that Mrs. Hay had used
the words heard. Sir John's account is confirmed by Lady Hay and Mrs.
R. D. Hay.


_Visual Hallucinations._

The comparative frequency of auditory hallucinations, and especially
the ease with which auditory illusions can be built up on a basis of
real sound, render coincidences of the kind, even the best attested, of
less service to support, however valuable as illustrating, the theory
of telepathy. Visual hallucinations, however, present us with a much
rarer type of impression, and one in which explanation by illusion
is comparatively seldom possible. Telepathic hallucinations, like
ordinary non-coincidental hallucinations, may assume various forms, and
instances of grotesque and partially developed visual impressions are
not wanting. Thus we have a case in which the face of a dying relative
was recognised in the middle of a large ball of light like a firework
(_Journal_, October 1891); and Mr. Sherer, of Amble, Northumberland,
tells us that he saw reflected in a ship's compass the face of a young
lady to whom he was engaged, at about the time of her death. In the
following case the hallucination, though still far from complete,
appears to have been more realistic and more fully developed.


No. 70.--From COUNTESS EUGENIE KAPNIST.

    [Writing on June 24th, 1891, the percipient explains that in
    February 1889 she and her sister made the acquaintance at Talta of
    a Mr. P., who was at that time in an advanced stage of consumption.
    On one occasion, in the course of conversation, Mr. P. promised
    Countess Ina Kapnist, in the presence of the narrator, that should
    he die before her he would endeavour to appear to her. The Countess
    and her sister met Mr. P. occasionally after this conversation, and
    frequently saw him walking about in a nut-brown overcoat, which
    caused them some amusement. They left Talta, however, in May 1889,
    and in the course of a few months had completely forgotten Mr. P.
    and his wife, whom they regarded merely in the light of ordinary
    acquaintances. On the 12th March 1890 the two ladies, on their way
    home from the theatre, drove to the railway station with a friend
    who was to return at 1 A.M. to Tsarskoé.]

    "On leaving the station," the Countess writes, "our servant went
    on before to find the carriage, so that on reaching the steps we
    found it had driven up and was waiting for us. My sister was the
    first to take her seat; I kept her waiting, as I descended the
    steps more slowly; the servant held the door of the landau open.
    With one foot on the step I suddenly stood still, arrested in the
    act of entering the carriage, and stunned with surprise. It was
    dark inside the carriage, and nevertheless, facing my sister and
    looking at her, I saw in a faint grey light which seemed unnatural,
    and which was clearest at the point on which my eyes were fixed, a
    face in profile, not so much vague as soft and transparent. This
    vision only lasted an instant, during which, however, my eyes noted
    the smallest details of the face, which seemed familiar to me;
    the rather sharp features, the hair parted a little on one side,
    the prominent nose, the sharp chin with its sparse, light brown
    beard. What strikes me when I think of it now is the fact that I
    could distinguish the different colours, though the greyish light
    which scarcely revealed the stranger would have been insufficient
    to enable me to distinguish them in ordinary circumstances. He
    had no hat, but wore a top-coat, such as is worn in the South, in
    colour a rather light nut-brown. His whole person had an air of
    great weariness and emaciation. The servant, much surprised that
    I did not enter the carriage but remained petrified on the step,
    thought I had trodden on my gown, and helped me to seat myself,
    while I asked my sister, as I took my place beside her, if it was
    really our carriage, so much was I confused and stupefied by seeing
    a stranger seated opposite her. It had not occurred to me that
    if a real person had been sitting there, neither my sister nor
    the footman would have remained so quietly face to face with him.
    When I was seated I no longer saw anything, and I asked my sister,
    'Did you see nothing opposite you?' 'Nothing whatever, and what
    possessed you to ask as you got in if it was really our carriage?'
    she answered laughing. Then I told her what I have related above,
    describing my vision minutely. 'That familiar face,' said she, 'the
    hair parted at the side, the nut-brown coat, where have we seen
    it? Certainly nothing here answers to your description,' and we
    racked our brains without finding any clue. After we got home we
    related the incident to our mother; my description made her also
    remember vaguely a similar face. The next evening (March 12th) a
    young man of our acquaintance, Mr. Solovovo, came to see us. I told
    him also what had just occurred. We discussed it at some length,
    but fruitlessly. I still could not find the right name for the
    man of my vision, though I remembered quite well having seen a
    face exactly similar among my numerous acquaintances, but when and
    where? I could remember nothing, with my bad memory, which often
    fails me in this fashion. Some days later we were calling on Mr.
    Solovovo's grandmother. 'Do you know,' she said, 'what sad news I
    have just received from Talta? Mr. P. has just died, but I have
    heard no details.' My sister and I looked at each other. At the
    mention of this name the pointed face and the nut-brown top-coat
    found their possessor. My sister recognised him at the same time as
    myself, thanks to my minute description. When Mr. Solovovo entered
    I begged him to find the exact date of the death in the newspapers.
    The date of the death was given as the 14th of March, that is to
    say two days after my vision. I wrote to Talta for information, and
    learned that Mr. P. was confined to bed from the 24th November, and
    that from that time he was in a very feeble state, but sleep never
    left him. He slept so long and so profoundly, even during the last
    night of his life, that hopes were entertained of his improvement.

    "We were much astonished that it was I who saw Mr. P., although
    he had promised to appear to my sister; but here I ought to add
    that before the occurrence mentioned above I had been clairvoyante
    a certain number of times; but this vision is certainly the one
    in which I distinguished details most clearly, even down to the
    colours of the face and dress.

    "COMTESSE EUGENIE KAPNIST.
    COMTESSE INA KAPNIST."

The second signature is that of the sister who was present at the time.
The account above given, it should be explained, is a translation from
the original French.

Our friend, Mr. Petrovo-Solovovo, through whom we obtained the account,
writes:--

    "I have much pleasure in certifying that the fact of Countess
    Kapnist's vision was mentioned, among others, to myself before the
    news of Mr. P.'s death came to St. Petersburg. I well remember
    seeing an announcement of his demise in the papers."

The narrative presents several points of interest. The deferred
recognition is by no means without parallel (see case 68 and cases 26,
191, etc., in _Phantasms_), but in this case the interval which elapsed
before the identification of the phantasm was unusually prolonged.
Of course the fact that the vision was not identified beforehand is
an element of weakness in the case, but as the deep impression left
on the percipient by her vision seems well established, we have some
warrant for assuming that the details have been accurately remembered.
And if we may accept these details the case throws light upon the
genesis of such hallucinations. That a dying man, whilst failing to
impress the idea of his own personality upon the mind of a distant
acquaintance, should succeed in calling up the image--to himself of
quite secondary importance--of the clothes which he habitually wore,
would seem at first sight a paradox. But the difficulty disappears if
we recognise that the telepathic impression in such cases is probably
received and the hallucination elaborated by a subconscious stratum
of the intelligence, and that the picture is in due time flashed up
thence fully formed to the ordinary consciousness. The image of the
clothes worn by the agent, trivial and unessential to himself, would
not improbably bulk more largely in the conception formed of him by
an acquaintance, and might even find an echo in the percipient's
consciousness when the image of the man himself had been obliterated
by more recent memories. It is possible that the arrested development
of the hallucination may have some connection with the imperfect
recognition.

In the following case also the hallucination, though recognised,
appears to have fallen short of complete embodiment.


No. 71.--From MISS L. CALDECOTT.

    "_February_ 11_th_, 1890.

    "A sensation of faint glowing light in the darkest corner of the
    room made me first look in that direction (which happened to be
    next the door), and I then became aware of some one standing
    there, holding her hands outstretched as if in appeal. My first
    impression was that it was my sister, and I said, 'What's the
    matter?' but instantly saw who it was--a friend, who was at that
    time in Scotland. I felt completely riveted, but though my heart
    and pulses were beating unnaturally fast, neither much frightened
    nor surprised, only with a sort of impulse to get up and go after
    the figure, which I could not move to do. The form seemed to melt
    away into the soft glow, which then also died out. It was about
    half-past ten at night. I was at my home in ----. The date I am
    unable to fix nearer than that it was either August or September
    1887.

    "I was perfectly well. I was reading Carlyle's _Sartor Resartus_
    at the time. I was in no trouble or anxiety of any kind. Age about
    twenty-six.

    "I had not seen my friend for about a year. I wrote to her the day
    after this happened, but, before my letter reached her, received
    one in which she told me of a great family trouble that was causing
    her much suffering, and saying that she had been longing for me to
    help her. Another letter in answer to mine then told me that her
    previous letter was written about 10.30 on the night I saw her, and
    that she had been wishing for my presence then most intensely. My
    friend died very shortly afterwards.

    "No other persons were present at the time."

One of the agent's letters, written in reply to a letter from Miss
Caldecott describing the apparition, has fortunately been preserved.
The letter is dated August 16th, 1888. The following extracts were
written down by Mrs. Sidgwick from Miss Caldecott's dictation:--

    "'Your account is very strange, and I cannot quite make up my mind
    what to think of it. If it had not been that on that very Tuesday
    night I really was thinking of you very much, and wishing from the
    bottom of my heart that I could get at you, I should be inclined
    to say that your apparition was entirely subjective, and that you
    imagined you saw me. But if there is any connection between mind
    and mind, why should it not be so, and that it really was because
    I was wishing so hard I could be with you. You know that was the
    night I got back. I unpacked some of my things, and then began to
    write to you. It was then somewhere between eleven and twelve.
    At all events, I remember it struck twelve some time after I got
    into bed.... Tell me anything you can of my general appearance,
    and so forth. If you saw me as I was at the time it seems fairly
    conclusive it was my thinking of you caused you to see me, and not
    indigestion on your part, and entirely independent of me.'"

In conversation Mrs. Sidgwick learnt that the face and hands of the
figure were seen most clearly. The hands appeared as if held out, palms
upward. The dress was "rather indefinite. She looked as Miss Caldecott
was accustomed to see her, but Miss Caldecott did not notice the dress
particularly, and did not see the figure clearly at all below the
knees." Miss Caldecott has had a visual hallucination on two other
occasions, when she was in bed recovering from an illness. At the
time of the vision above described she was in perfect health. It will
be observed that the phantasm developed gradually, the percipient's
attention having been first arrested by noticing the glow in the corner
of the room. (Compare No. 84, Chapter XII., and the cases given in
_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i., chap. xii.) It will be seen that
the percipient's recollection was at fault, both as to the date and
the hour of the incident. But a discrepancy of this kind cannot be
regarded as serious. Persons whose lives are not marked off--_e.g._, by
changes of residence or occupation--into distinct periods, frequently
experience a difficulty in assigning to the right year even an event
of importance. But in this case the incident in itself was trivial,
and there was no landmark by which to determine its relation, in
point of time, to external events. A mistake in the date under such
circumstances can scarcely be held to reflect upon the narrator's
general accuracy.

In the next case also the apparition was preceded and accompanied by
a luminous effect. In this instance, however, the percipient appears
to have been in bed, and the hallucination should be classed as a
"borderland" case. It will be seen that the apparition preceded the
actual death by several hours, but apparently coincided with a period
of severe illness.


No. 72.--From DR. CARAT.[116]

    "25-bis RUE VICTOR-HUGO, MALAKOFF,
    PARIS, _July_ 20_th_, 1891.

    "My mother, from the time she was twenty-five years old, had
    suffered from an affection of the lungs, but she had kept her
    health, although she had gone through many troubles. There was
    nothing to indicate what happened on the 11th June 1877--she
    succumbed in a few hours to an attack of inflammation of the lungs;
    indeed, I had two days before that date received a letter from her
    in which she showed no anxiety about her health.

    "On the night of the 10th June 1877 I had what might be called a
    telepathic hallucination. I cannot state the hour with absolute
    precision, but it was between ten o'clock and midnight. About that
    time, 'between sleeping and waking,' I saw the end of my room
    lighted up, the darkness was illuminated by a silvery light (it is
    the only word I can think of), and I saw my mother gazing fixedly
    at me, with a sort of troubled expression. After a few seconds it
    all disappeared.

    "Next day one of my friends--M. Laroche, now sub-director of
    the _Conservateur_ Co., 18 Rue Lafayette--was breakfasting with
    me. I told him about my experience, and he too regarded it as a
    hallucination. At parting I said to him, 'Remember, Laroche, if
    anything happens, that I have told you this to-day.'

    "Next day I received news of my mother's death.

    "I have never on any other occasion experienced a hallucination, or
    anything approaching to it."

    From M. LAROCHE.
    [TO PROFESSOR RICHET.]

    "SIR,--After an absence from home I have just returned and found
    awaiting me the letter which you did me the honour to write on the
    7th inst., on the subject of a vision which my friend Dr. Carat had
    on the eve of his mother's death, at a time when he believed her
    to be in good health at Dunkirk. The circumstance was told me by
    Dr. Carat immediately after it occurred. You can make any use of my
    testimony you think fit.

    "LAROCHE."

From the last case we pass, by an easy transition, to those completely
externalised apparitions which cheat the senses by the life-like
presentment of a human figure.


No. 73.--From MISS BERTA HURLY, Waterbeach Vicarage, Cambridge.

    "_February_ 1890.

    "In the spring and summer of 1886 I often visited a poor woman
    called Evans, who lived in our parish, Caynham. She was very ill
    with a painful disease, and it was, as she said, a great pleasure
    when I went to see her; and I frequently sat with her and read
    to her. Towards the middle of October she was evidently growing
    weaker, but there seemed no immediate danger. I had not called
    on her for several days, and one evening I was standing in the
    dining-room after dinner with the rest of the family, when I saw
    the figure of a woman dressed like Mrs. Evans, in large apron and
    muslin cap, pass across the room from one door to the other, where
    she disappeared. I said, 'Who is that?' My mother said, 'What do
    you mean?' and I said, 'That woman who has just come in and walked
    over to the other door.' They all laughed at me, and said I was
    dreaming, but I felt sure it was Mrs. Evans, and next morning we
    heard she was dead.

    "BERTA HURLY."

Miss Hurly's mother writes:--

    "On referring to my diary for the month of October 1886, I find the
    following entry:--'19th. Berta startled us all after dinner, about
    8.30 last evening, by saying she saw the figure of a woman pass
    across the dining-room, and that it was Mrs. Evans. This morning we
    hear the poor woman is dead.' On inquiring at the cottage we found
    she had become wandering in her mind, and at times unconscious,
    about the time she appeared to Berta, and died towards the morning.

    "ANNIE ROSS.
    "_February_ 25_th_, 1890."

In this case the apparition, it will have been observed, was mistaken
for a real person. We should not be justified, however, in concluding
that the sensory effect produced was comparable in intensity to that
which would have been caused had a real figure walked across the room.
Perception is so largely a psychical process that it is difficult in
any particular case to assign a definite value to the sensory element.
And in a case of this kind, where, as appears to be generally the case
with telepathic hallucinations, the vision is of brief duration, the
difficulty is, of course, increased.

The hallucination in this, as in the previous case, occurred some
hours before the death, and the evidential value of the coincidence is
so far lessened. But it is perhaps worth while pointing out that we
have no warrant in theory for concluding that in a case of death after
prolonged illness the actual moment of dissolution is more favourable
for the initiation of a telepathic impulse than any moment in the
hours or days of illness preceding death; nor, if due allowance be
made for the tendency to exaggerate the closeness of coincidence, is
it clear that there is sufficient evidence at present to support any
such conclusion. On the other hand, in cases of accident or momentary
illness, we have more than one case where the impression is shown, on
good evidence, to have occurred within, at most, an hour of death.[117]
In the narrative which follows, the vision, it will be seen, took place
some days before the actual death, during the crisis of a serious
illness, of which the percipient was not at the time aware.


No. 74.--From MRS. MCALPINE, Garscadden, Bearsden, Glasgow.

The following account was enclosed in a letter, dated April 12th, 1892.
We had previously received a somewhat briefer account, dated May 7th,
1891, which agrees in all essential particulars with the one printed
below:--

    "On the 25th March 1891 my husband and I were staying at Furness
    Abbey Hotel, Barrow-in-Furness, with a friend of ours, the late Mr.
    A. D. Bryce Douglas, of Seafield Tower, Ardrossan. He was managing
    director of the 'Naval Construction Armament Company,' and had
    resided at Furness Abbey Hotel for some eighteen months or more. He
    had invited us, along with a number of other friends, to the launch
    of the _Empress of China_. We breakfasted with Mr. Bryce Douglas on
    the day of the launch, the 25th, and afterwards saw the launch, had
    luncheon at the shipyard, and returned to the hotel. He appeared
    to be in his usual health and spirits (he was a powerfully-built
    man, and justly proud of his fine constitution). The following
    day (Thursday) he left with a party of gentlemen, to sail from
    Liverpool to Ardrossan, on the trial trip of the _Empress of Japan_
    (another large steamer which had been built at his yard).

    "We remained on at the hotel for some days with our son Bob, aged
    twenty-three, who was staying there, superintending work which Mr.
    McAlpine was carrying on at Barrow.

    "On the Monday night, the 30th, I went upstairs after dinner. On
    my way down again I saw Mr. Bryce Douglas standing in the doorway
    of his sitting-room. I saw him quite distinctly. He looked at me
    with a sad expression. He was wearing a cap which I had never seen
    him wear. I walked on and left him standing there. It was then
    about ten minutes to eight. I told my husband and Bob. We all felt
    alarmed, and we immediately sent the following telegram, 'How
    is Mr. Bryce Douglas?' to Miss Caldwell, his sister-in-law, who
    kept house for him at Seafield. It was too late for a reply that
    night. On Tuesday morning we received a wire from her; it ran thus:
    'Mr. Bryce Douglas dangerously ill.' That telegram was the first
    intimation of his illness which reached Barrow. As will be seen in
    the account of his illness and death in the _Barrow News_, he died
    on the following Sunday, and we afterwards ascertained from Miss
    Caldwell that he was unconscious on Monday evening, at the time I
    saw him.

    "My husband and son can corroborate this, and I have also letters
    which bear out my statements."

Mrs. McAlpine enclosed a copy of the _Barrow News_ for April 11th,
1891, containing a memoir of Mr. Bryce Douglas, and a full account
of his last illness and death. It appears from this account that he
left Barrow on Thursday, March 26th, to join the steamer _Empress of
Japan_. He was noticed by his friends to be far from well on Wednesday,
the previous day, on the occasion of the launch of the _Empress of
China_, and was advised to go home. He did not do so, however, until
the Sunday, when he was put ashore at Ardrossan, and walked home to
Seafield--a distance of nearly two miles. His medical man was sent for
the same day, and the case was considered serious from the first, and
on the following Thursday the doctors pronounced it hopeless. He died
on April 5th, at about 5 A.M.

From the evidence which follows it seems clear that if any anxiety
as to his health was felt before he left Barrow, as suggested in the
newspaper report, Mrs. McAlpine knew nothing of it.

Mr. Myers writes:--

    "I discussed the incident connected with the death of Mr. Bryce
    Douglas with Mr. and Mrs. McAlpine and Mr. McAlpine, Jun., on
    February 24th, 1892. I believe that their evidence has been very
    carefully given. Mr. McAlpine knew Mr. Bryce Douglas intimately.
    Mr. Bryce Douglas was a robust and vigorous man, and disliked
    ever to be supposed to be ill. Mr. McAlpine therefore felt great
    unwillingness to telegraph to him about his health, but from his
    previous knowledge of phenomena occurring to Mrs. McAlpine, he felt
    sure that her vision must be in some sense veridical."

Mrs. McAlpine's husband and his son corroborate as follows:--

    "_April_ 1892.

    "I was at Barrow on the 25th of March of last year (1891), and
    distinctly remember the incident of the following Monday night. I
    can bear testimony to the statements made by my wife and son.

    "ROBERT MCALPINE."

    "GARSCADDEN HOUSE, _April_ 4_th_, 1892.

    "I was living for several months in the Furness Abbey Hotel, at
    Barrow-in-Furness, and I remember father and mother coming for
    a few days in order to see the launch of the _Empress of China_
    on the 25th of March 1891, and on the following day (Thursday)
    Mr. Bryce Douglas (who was then in his usual health) left with a
    party of friends on the trial trip of the _Empress of Japan_. I
    also distinctly remember that the following Monday night (30th) my
    father and I were sitting at the drawing-room fire after dinner,
    and mother came in looking very pale and startled, and said she
    had been upstairs and had seen Mr. Bryce Douglas standing at the
    door of his sitting-room (he had used this sitting-room for nearly
    two years). Both my father and I felt anxious, and after some
    discussion we sent a telegram to Mr. Bryce Douglas's residence at
    Ardrossan asking how he was, and the following morning had the
    reply, 'Keeping better, but not out of danger,' or words to that
    effect. I can assert positively that no one in Barrow knew of his
    illness until after the receipt of that telegram.

    "ROBERT MCALPINE, JUN."

Letters corroborating the above account have also been received from
Miss Caldwell, sister-in-law to Mr. Bryce Douglas, to whom the telegram
was sent, and who writes: "I was very much surprised at receiving it;"
from Mrs. Scarlett, the wife of the proprietor of the Furness Abbey
Hotel, and from Miss Charlton, of Barrow-in-Furness, both of whom were
cognisant of the circumstances at the time.[118]

Mrs. McAlpine has had several other apparently telepathic experiences,
one of them a vision coinciding with the death of the infant child of
her brother.

In the next case the vision occurred about two hours after the actual
death.


No. 75.--From MISS MABEL GORE BOOTH.

    "LISSADELL, SLIGO, _February_ 1891.

    "On the 10th of April 1889, at about half-past nine o'clock A.M.,
    my youngest brother and I were going down a short flight of stairs
    leading to the kitchen, to fetch food for my chickens, as usual. We
    were about half-way down, my brother a few steps in advance of me,
    when he suddenly said, 'Why, there's John Blaney; I didn't know he
    was in the house!' John Blaney was a boy who lived not far from us,
    and he had been employed in the house as hall-boy not long before.
    I said that I was sure it was not he (for I knew he had left some
    months previously on account of ill-health), and looked down into
    the passage, but saw no one. The passage was a long one, with a
    rather sharp turn in it, so we ran quickly down the last few steps
    and looked round the corner, but nobody was there, and the only
    door he could have gone through was shut. As we went upstairs my
    brother said, 'How pale and ill John looked, and why did he stare
    so?' I asked what he was doing. My brother answered that he had his
    sleeves turned up, and was wearing a large green apron, such as
    the footmen always wear at their work. An hour or two afterwards
    I asked my maid how long John Blaney had been back in the house?
    She seemed much surprised, and said, 'Didn't you hear, miss, that
    he died this morning?' On inquiry we found he had died about two
    hours before my brother saw him. My mother did not wish that my
    brother should be told this, but he heard of it somehow, and at
    once declared that he must have seen his ghost.

    "MABEL OLIVE GORE BOOTH."

The percipient's independent account is as follows:--

    "_March_ 1891.

    "We were going downstairs to get food for Mabel's fowl, when I saw
    John Blaney walking round the corner. I said to Mabel, 'That's John
    Blaney!' but she could not see him. When we came up afterwards we
    found he was dead. He seemed to me to look rather ill. He looked
    yellow; his eyes looked hollow, and he had a green apron on.

    "MORDAUNT GORE BOOTH."

We have received the following confirmation of the date of death:--

    "I certify from the parish register of deaths that John Blaney
    (Dunfore) was interred on the 12th day of April 1889, having died
    on the 10th day of April 1889.

    "P. J. SHEMAGHS, C.C.
    "The Presbytery, Ballingal, Sligo,
    "10_th_ February_ 1891."

Mr. Myers originally received an account of the incident _viva voce_
from Lady Gore Booth, and subsequently at his request the percipient
and his sister, aged at the time ten and fifteen respectively, wrote
the accounts given above.

Lady Gore Booth writes:--

    "_May_ 31_st_, 1890.

    "When my little boy came upstairs and told us he had seen John
    Blaney, we thought nothing of it till some hours after, when we
    heard that he was dead. Then, for fear of frightening the children,
    I avoided any allusion to what he had told us, and asked every one
    else to do the same. Probably by now he has forgotten all about
    it, but it certainly was very remarkable, especially as only one
    child saw him, and they were standing together. The place where
    he seems to have appeared was in the passage outside the pantry
    door, where John Blaney's work always took him. My boy is a very
    matter-of-fact sort of boy, and I never heard of his having any
    other hallucination."

The interval in this case between the death and the vision may probably
be explained as due to the telepathic influence received from the
dying boy having remained latent in the percipient's mind, awaiting
a favourable opportunity for emerging to consciousness. But it seems
possible that the message may have come, not from the dying boy, but
from some member of the household who was aware of the death. It is to
be noted that Miss Gore Booth did not share her brother's experience.


_Hallucinations Affecting Two Senses._

So far we have dealt with hallucinations of one sense only. In the next
two cases, it will be seen, both sight and hearing appear to have been
affected.


No. 76.--From the REV. MATTHEW FROST.

    "BOWERS GIFFORD, ESSEX, _January_ 30_th_, 1891.

    "The first Thursday in April 1881, while sitting at tea with my
    back to the window and talking with my wife in the usual way, I
    plainly heard a rap at the window, and looking round I said to
    my wife, 'Why, there's my grandmother,' and went to the door,
    but could not see any one; and still feeling sure it was my
    grandmother, and knowing, though eighty-three years of age, she was
    very active and fond of a joke, I went round the house, but could
    not see any one. My wife did not hear it. On the following Saturday
    I had news my grandmother died in Yorkshire about half-an-hour
    before the time I heard the rapping. The last time I saw her alive
    I promised, if well, I would attend her funeral; that [was] some
    two years before. I was in good health [and] had no trouble, [age]
    twenty-six years. I did not know that my grandmother was ill."

Mrs. Frost writes:--

    "_January_ 30_th_, 1891.

    "I beg to certify that I perfectly remember all the circumstances
    my husband has named, but I heard and saw nothing myself."

The house (seen by Mrs. Sidgwick) in which Mr. Frost was living when
the event occurred stands some way back from the road in a garden, and
the door into the garden opens out of the sitting-room, so that he must
have got to the door much too quickly, if he went at once, for any one
to have got away unseen by him.

Professor Sidgwick called on Mr. Frost in June 1892, and learned from
him that he had last seen his grandmother in 1878, on which occasion
she had promised, if possible, to appear to him at her death. On first
seeing the figure Mr. Frost thought that his grandmother had actually
come in the flesh to surprise him. It was full daylight, and had there
been a real knock and a real presence Mrs. Frost must have both heard
and seen. Mr. Frost had no cause for anxiety about his grandmother, and
has had no other experience of this kind. News of the death came by
letter, and Mrs. Frost remembers the letter, and that she noticed the
coincidence at the time.

In the next case the order of perception is reversed; the visual
preceded the auditory image. The narrative was procured for us by M.
Aksakof, of 6 Nevsky Prospect, St. Petersburg, who also translated the
original Russian into French, from which we have translated it into
English.


No. 77.--From M. A----.

    "It was at Milan, on the 10th (22nd) of October 1888. I was staying
    at the Hotel Ancora. After dinner, at about seven o'clock, I was
    seated on the sofa, reading a newspaper. My wife was resting in the
    same room on a couch, behind a curtain. The room was lighted by a
    lamp upon the table near which I was sitting reading. Suddenly I
    saw against the background of the door, which was opposite me, my
    father's face. He wore as usual a black surtout, and was deadly
    pale. At that moment I heard quite close to my ear a voice which
    said to me, 'A telegram is coming to say your father is dead.'
    All this only took a few seconds. I started up and rushed towards
    my wife, but not to startle her I said nothing to her about it.
    To explain my sudden movement I exclaimed 'Look, do you not see
    that the kettle is boiling over!'... On the evening of the same
    day, about eleven o'clock, we were taking tea in the company of
    several other people, among whom were Madame Y., her daughter E.
    Y., formerly an actress at the Court Theatre, and Mademoiselle M.,
    who is now living in Florence. All at once there was a knock at the
    door, and the _concierge_ presented a telegram. Pale with emotion I
    immediately exclaimed, 'I know my father is dead; I have seen....'
    The telegram contained these words, 'Papa dead suddenly.--Olga.' It
    was a telegram from my sister living at St. Petersburg. I learned
    later that my father had committed suicide on the morning of the
    same day.

    "(Signed) E. A."

Madame A. writes:--

    "I was present at the time, and I testify to the accuracy of the
    account."

M. Aksakof wrote to us that he had seen the original telegram, which
ran--

    "Ricevuto il 22,[1] 1888. Milano, Petersbourg, data 22,[119] ore e
    minute, 8.40. 'Papa mort subitement.--Olga.'"

Another case, in which the senses affected were those of touch and
hearing, has been given to us by Mr. Malleson. In 1874 or 1875 he went
for a short sea voyage, taking with him his young son. On the night of
his departure, while in a dreamy, half-conscious state, he imagined
that his son had fallen overboard, and that he himself was bringing
the sad news to his wife. On his return home he learned that on that
night Mrs. Malleson had been awakened by feeling some one leaning over
her. She put out her arm and, as she thought, touched her husband's
coat. She had no doubt that it was her husband's bodily presence,
spoke to him, and heard him answer, "Yes, I have come back." But on
her continuing, "Where is Eddy?" she received no reply, and felt much
alarmed. There are several instances recorded of tactile hallucinations
accompanying visual and auditory phantasms.[120]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 115: Mr. Tudor wrote to Dr. Hodgson in answer to a letter
received from him.]

[Footnote 116: _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, July-August 1893, pp.
196, 197.]

[Footnote 117: See, for instance, _Phantasms of the Living_, cases 28,
79, etc.]

[Footnote 118: These letters will be found in full in the account of
the case published in _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. x., part xxvi.]

[Footnote 119: M. Aksakof explains that the name of the month (October)
was omitted, through a mistake on the part of the telegraph clerk.]

[Footnote 120: _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. pp. 434-445; vol. ii.
p. 134, etc.; and _Proc. S.P.R._, etc.]




