CHAPTER XIII.

SOME LESS COMMON TYPES OF TELEPATHIC HALLUCINATION.


The hallucinations so far dealt with belong to classes numerically
strong, and the narratives quoted could be paralleled over and over
again from our records by other narratives equally well attested. And
this fact furnishes in itself a strong presumption of the substantial
accuracy of the accounts given. For as there is little in the kind
of incident described--the bare occurrence of a hallucination
coincidentally with an external event or with another hallucination--to
suggest the work of the imagination, there is little warrant for
ascribing this consensus of testimony among the narratives to any other
cause than a common foundation in fact. The episodes consist, indeed,
of such simple elements as to leave small room for embellishment.
Moreover, by those who accept the theory of telepathy an additional
argument for the authenticity of these narratives may be found in the
consideration that in that theory they receive a simple and sufficient
explanation. But we meet occasionally with accounts of hallucinatory
experiences which do not fall readily under any of the comparatively
simple categories already discussed. The mere difficulty of explaining
the genesis of hallucinations of such aberrant types would not, in
the present stage of our knowledge, be an argument against their
authenticity. But it serves to rob them of the support which they
might otherwise have received from their affiliation with better
known forms of hallucination; whilst the recent first-hand evidence
actually available is not sufficient in itself to substantiate
them. Whilst, therefore, such cases should be duly recorded and may
legitimately be discussed, it seems best to await the receipt of
further evidence before a final judgment is passed upon them. But in
some instances there is a further reason why the question should at
most be held unproven. Some of the features which distinguish these
cases from ordinary telepathic hallucinations, whilst occurring rarely
in well-attested recent narratives, are to be found more commonly in
remote, uncorroborated, and traditional stories. This circumstance is,
of course, a strong argument against their genuineness, since it proves
that the imagination tends to create such features. But it is not a
conclusive argument. The imagination may itself have been inspired in
the first instance by fact; it may have copied, not bettered, nature.
That the legendary epics of the older world have invented winged
dragons is clearly not an argument that can weigh against positive
evidence for the existence in a still more remote past of pterodactyls.


_Reciprocal Cases._

These considerations apply with full force to the first of the
dubious types here to be considered. In publishing seven first-hand
"reciprocal" cases in 1886 (_Phantasms_, vol. ii. p. 167) Mr. Gurney
pointed out that the evidence then available was "so small that the
genuineness of the type might fairly be called in question." Still,
regarding it as probably genuine, he anticipated that we should
ultimately obtain more well-attested specimens of it. In the eight
years which have elapsed since Mr. Gurney wrote this anticipation has
met with only partial fulfilment. We have met with but two recent
well-attested cases which clearly fall under the same category as those
already given. One of these cases has already been quoted (No. 63),
and was indeed included in the supplementary chapter of _Phantasms of
the Living_; the other is as follows:--


No. 88.--From the REV. C. L. EVANS.

    "FORTON, GARSTANG.
    (_Received on the_ 18_th of September_ 1889.)

    "Two years ago I had occasion to undergo a course of magnetism,
    under the treatment of Miss ----. I was under her treatment for six
    weeks, and derived considerable benefit from her treatment. A warm
    friendship sprang up between us, as she had wonderfully improved my
    sight. I went up to St. Edmund Hall, Oxford, at the commencement of
    the October term, as my eyes were so much stronger. One afternoon,
    as I had just come in from the river, being rather tired, I sat
    down for a minute before I changed, when, to my great surprise, the
    door opened, and Miss ---- appeared to walk in.

    "She was looking rather pale at the time, and looked intently
    at me for about a minute, then left the room as slowly as she
    had walked in. I was much alarmed, as I fancied that something
    must have happened to her, and I immediately sat down and wrote
    off two letters, one to Miss ----, asking if she was well, and
    another to my mother, telling her of the strange occurrence. The
    next day I had back the two replies. My mother said that on that
    very afternoon she had called on Miss ----, and naturally they
    had been discussing my case. She said that my description of Miss
    ----'s dress, etc., was perfectly accurate. I then read Miss ----'s
    note. She stated that my mother had called, and had left at about
    half-past four, she then had lain down for a few minutes, and was
    thinking and wishing to see me. She had a distinct impression that
    she saw me during this sleep, or trance, but when she awoke the
    impression was not very vivid. The time exactly coincided, and she
    said that my description of her was very accurate. At the time that
    she appeared to me I was not thinking in the least of her.

    "CHARLES LLOYD EVANS."

I called on Mr. Evans on the 20th April 1892, and had a long
conversation with him. The following notes of my interview were made at
the time and written out a few days later:--

    "The occurrence took place in November 1887. It would be about 4.15
    P.M. He was resting in his chair--in boating clothes--with the
    door ajar. Heard a knock or sound as of some one entering; turned
    round and saw Miss ---- come into the room and walk towards him.
    She was dressed in red bodice and dark silk skirt (a not unfamiliar
    dress), but with a silver filigree cross hanging from a chain round
    her neck which he had never seen before. Learnt afterwards that the
    cross had been given by General ---- only a few days before the
    incident.

    "The figure looked him straight in the face, then seemed to fade
    away bit by bit.

    "He was himself perfectly well and not a bit sleepy.

    "He has had no other hallucinations. His age at the time was
    twenty."

Mr. Evans's mother writes:--

    "_April_ 27_th_, 1892.

    "In reply to the questions you asked me about the apparition
    of Miss ---- to my son, when at Oxford, I can fully verify his
    statement. He wrote to me the same afternoon, begging me to call
    upon Miss ---- and see if she was ill, detailing me the account
    of what he had seen, and also describing her dress minutely and
    the cross she was wearing. I called upon Miss ---- the following
    day, and read her my son's letter, giving the hour at which she
    had appeared to him. She told me that she had not been feeling
    well, and was lying down on the couch thinking, too, of my son,
    and that she went off into a sort of trance, and she saw him
    distinctly looking at her and he was very pale. This made a deep
    impression upon me, for I must own myself that I hardly believed
    it to be possible. However, Miss ---- told me that my son had at
    once written to her, fearing that she must be ill, and told her
    the circumstances under which she appeared to him. When I saw Miss
    ---- she was then wearing the same dress and filigree cross which
    Charlie had described to me in his letter, and which he had never
    seen her wearing before. I fear that I cannot now find my son's
    letter, but should I come across it I will forward it to you. Miss
    ----, however, can corroborate all that I have said.

    "MARY E. EVANS."

Afterwards I saw Miss ----. The following, notes of the interview were
made the same day:--

    "_July_ 17_th_, 1892.

    "Her account of the matter is that Mrs. Evans (percipient's mother)
    called on her on the afternoon of the vision and talked much about
    her son. After Mrs. Evans left--probably about 5.30 P.M.--Miss
    ----, as usual, lay down to sleep for a few minutes; woke about 6
    P.M. with the recollection of having seen Mr. C. L. Evans. Can
    recall no details of appearance--merely the recollection of having
    been in the same room with him.

    "The next day she received a letter from Mr. C. L. Evans telling of
    his vision, and on the same day another visit from his mother.

    "Miss ---- was wearing the dress and filigree cross described. The
    cross, as stated, had been given to her only a few days before.

    "Miss ---- has kept Mr. Evans's letter.[128] She has had many
    visions and dreams in her life, but she cannot recall another
    relating to Mr. Evans.

    "She is not sure of the time at which her vision or dream occurred.
    It may have been earlier than 6 P.M., her hours being very
    irregular.

    "She had compared notes with Mr. Evans, and was under the
    impression that their experiences coincided. But I think that her
    first statement--6 P.M.--is probably correct. If so, her dream
    would have come one and a half to two hours after Mr. Evans's
    vision."

If the above account correctly describes what took place--and I know
of no ground for doubting either the accuracy or the good faith of
the narrators--it seems clear either that Mr. Evans and Miss ----
reciprocally affected each other, or that Mr. Evans, whilst impressing
Miss ---- with the idea of his presence, was able himself to attain
to a supernormal perception of her surroundings. For the latter
explanation, however, we have no support in analogy, and it seems less
unwarrantable provisionally to regard this case and others like it as
being reciprocally telepathic. It should, perhaps, be pointed out, as
bearing upon the extreme rarity of cases of the kind, that there may
be instances of reciprocal affection of which, from the very nature
of the case, we could not hope to obtain evidence. It is conceivable,
for instance, that in the ordinary case of an apparition at death,
the dying man may himself have been a percipient as well as an agent,
since circumstances rarely permit of his side of the experience
being recorded. It is conceivable also that in cases of collective
hallucination the effect may really be a reciprocal one, the two
persons concerned simultaneously affecting and being affected by each
other, until the force so generated explodes into hallucination. But in
the present state of our knowledge it would be premature to speculate
further.


_A Misinterpreted Message._

The next case also seems susceptible of more than one explanation. The
account which follows was written in 1890.


No. 89.--From MISS C. L. HAWKINS-DEMPSTER, 24 Portman Square, W.

    "I ran downstairs and entered the drawing-room at 7.30 P.M.,
    believing I had kept my two sisters waiting for dinner. They had
    gone to dinner, the room was empty. Behind a long sofa I saw Mr.
    H. standing. He moved three steps nearer. I heard nothing. I was
    not at all afraid or surprised, only felt concern as [to] what he
    wanted, as he was in South America. I learnt next morning that at
    that moment his mother was breathing her last. I went and arranged
    her for burial, my picture still hanging above the bed, between the
    portraits of her two absent sons.

    "I was in the habit of hearing often from [Mr. H.], and was not at
    that moment anxious about Mrs. H.'s health, though she was aged.
    I had had twenty-five days before the grief of losing an only
    brother. No other persons were present at the time."[129]

In answer to further inquiries, we learnt from Miss Hawkins-Dempster
that the above incident occurred on New Year's Eve, 1876-77; the room
was lighted by "one bright lamp and a fire," and the figure did not
seem to go away, she merely "ceased to see it." She used to see Mrs. H.
often, and was in no anxiety as to her health at the time. Mrs. H. was
very old, but not definitely ill. Miss Hawkins-Dempster corrected her
first statement as to the exactness of the coincidence by informing
us that Mrs. H. died in the morning of the same day on which the
apparition was seen.

Miss Hawkins-Dempster mentioned what she had seen to her sister, who
thus corroborates:--

    "_July_ 15_th_, 1892.

    "I heard of my sister Miss C. L. Hawkins-Dempster's vision of Mr.
    H. in the drawing-room at 7.30 P.M. on New Year's Eve, 1876-77,
    immediately after it happened, and before hearing that Mrs. H. died
    the same day, the news of which reached us later that evening.

    "H. H. DEMPSTER."

We have verified the date of death at Somerset House.

Miss Hawkins-Dempster has had one other experience--an apparition seen
also by her sister and their governess. They were children at the time,
aged about fourteen and twelve respectively.

Mr. Myers had an interview with the Misses Hawkins-Dempster on July
16th, 1892, and writes as follows the next day:--

    "Miss C. Hawkins-Dempster's veridical experience is well remembered
    by both sisters. The decedent was a very old lady, who was on very
    intimate terms with them, and had special reasons for thinking of
    Miss C. Hawkins-Dempster in connection with the son whose figure
    appeared. He was at the other side of the world, and most certainly
    had not heard of his mother's death at the time.

    "The figure was absolutely life-like. Miss Hawkins-Dempster noticed
    the slight cast of the eye and the delicate hands. The figure
    rested one hand on the back of a chair and held the other out. Miss
    Hawkins-Dempster called out, 'What can I do for you?' forgetting
    for the moment the impossibility that it could be the real man.
    Then she simply ceased to see the figure.

    "She was in good health at the time, and her thoughts were occupied
    with business matters."

We have a parallel case amongst our records. Miss V. saw in church
the hallucinatory figure of an acquaintance looking at her, and
subsequently learned that he was at the time at the deathbed of his
mother. A few other cases are given in _Phantasms of the Living_. I
should be disposed to explain these narratives as instances of the
misinterpretation of a telepathic message. I should conjecture, that
is, that the impulse received from the dying woman, instead of giving
rise, as in an ordinary case, to a hallucination of herself, called up
in the percipient's mind, whether through the operation of associated
ideas or from some other cause, the image of a near relative. Indeed,
seeing how potent is the influence of associated ideas, it is perhaps
a matter for wonder that such miscarriages do not more often occur. It
should be stated that, beyond their rarity, there is no special reason
to mistrust stories of this type. Their distinguishing feature is not
apparently of a kind which appeals readily to the imagination. Indeed,
by most persons the want of precise correspondence would probably be
regarded as a serious blemish in the story. Certainly cases of the kind
occur rarely, if at all, among second-hand and traditional narratives.


_Heteroplastic Hallucinations._

But another possible explanation of the incident suggests itself. It
has already been conjectured that in some cases of hallucination or
other impression, the percipient's vision may have originated not
in the mind of the person primarily concerned, but in that of some
bystander.[130] Conversely, the image seen in the narrative just cited
may have been flashed directly from the dying woman's mind. In the case
which follows a picture of the past preserved in the memory of one of
two friends appears to have been spontaneously transferred to the mind
of the other.

The case was sent to Dr. Hodgson on the 18th May 1888, and was
published in the _Arena_ for February 1889.


No. 90.--From MRS. G----.

    "... For nearly two weeks I have had a lady friend visiting us from
    Chicago, and last Sunday we tried the cards and in every instance I
    told the colour and kind; but only two or three times was enabled
    to give the exact number....

    "I must write you of something that occurred last night. After
    this lady, whom I have mentioned above, had retired, and almost
    immediately after we had extinguished the light, there suddenly
    appeared before me a beautiful lawn and coming toward me a chubby,
    yellow-haired little boy, and by his side a brown dog which closely
    resembled a fox. The dog had on a brass collar and the child's
    hand was under the collar just as if he was leading or pulling the
    dog. The vision was like a flash, came and went in an instant. I
    immediately told my friend, and she said, 'Do you know where there
    are any matches?' and began to hurriedly clamber out of bed. I
    struck a light, she plunged into her trunk, brought out a book, and
    pasted in the front was a picture of her little boy and his dog.
    They were not in the same position that I saw them, but the dog
    looked exceedingly familiar. Her little boy passed into the beyond
    about four years ago...."

Mrs. F. corroborates as follows:--

    "_May_ 18_th_, 1888.

    "I wish to corroborate the statements of Mrs. N. G. relative to ...
    and her wonderful vision of my little boy, and my old home. Mrs.
    G. never saw the place, or the little child, and never even heard
    of the peculiar-looking dog, which was my little son's constant
    companion out of doors. She never saw the photograph, which was
    pasted in the back of my Bible and packed away.

    "(Signed) I. F."

In this case, it will be noted, the vision was the direct sequel of
some partially successful experiments in thought-transference; and
the transferred impression fell short of actual hallucination. In the
following case there is no evidence of any special rapport between
the percipient and the person who, on this hypothesis, acted as the
agent; and the percipient's impression took the form of a completely
externalised hallucination.


No. 91.--From FRANCES REDDELL.

    "ANTONY, TORPOINT,
    _December_ 14_th_, 1882.

    "Helen Alexander (maid to Lady Waldegrave) was lying here very
    ill with typhoid fever, and was attended by me. I was standing
    at the table by her bedside, pouring out her medicine, at about
    four o'clock in the morning of the 4th October 1880. I heard
    the call-bell ring (this had been heard twice before during the
    night in that same week), and was attracted by the door of the
    room opening, and by seeing a person entering the room whom I
    instantly felt to be the mother of the sick woman. She had a brass
    candlestick in her hand, a red shawl over her shoulders, and a
    flannel petticoat on which had a hole in the front. I looked at
    her as much as to say, 'I am glad you have come,' but the woman
    looked at me sternly, as much as to say, 'Why wasn't I sent for
    before?' I gave the medicine to Helen Alexander, and then turned
    round to speak to the vision, but no one was there. She had gone.
    She was a short, dark person, and very stout. At about six o'clock
    that morning Helen Alexander died. Two days after, her parents and
    a sister came to Antony, and arrived between one and two o'clock
    in the morning; I and another maid let them in, and it gave me a
    great turn when I saw the living likeness of the vision I had seen
    two nights before. I told the sister about the vision, and she said
    that the description of the dress exactly answered to her mother's,
    and that they had brass candlesticks at home exactly like the one
    described. There was not the slightest resemblance between the
    mother and daughter.

    "FRANCES REDDELL.

Frances Reddell fortunately described her vision to her mistress, Mrs.
Pole-Carew, of Antony, Torpoint, Devonport, within a few hours of its
occurrence, and before her encounter with the original. Mrs. Pole-Carew
writes as follows:--

    "31_st December_ 1883.

    "In October 1880, Lord and Lady Waldegrave came with their Scotch
    maid, Helen Alexander, to stay with us. [The account then describes
    how Helen was discovered to have caught typhoid fever, and pending
    the arrival of a regular nurse, was nursed for several days by
    Frances Reddell. On the Sunday week, Mrs. Pole-Carew continues],
    I allowed Reddell to sit up with Helen again that night, to give
    her the medicine and food, which were to be taken constantly. At
    about 4.30 that night, or rather Monday morning, Reddell looked
    at her watch, poured out the medicine, and was bending over the
    bed to give it to Helen when the call-bell in the passage rang.
    She said to herself, 'There's that tiresome bell with the wire
    caught again.' (It seems it did occasionally ring of itself in
    this manner.) At that moment, however, she heard the door open,
    and looking round, saw a very stout old woman walk in. She was
    dressed in a nightgown and red flannel petticoat, and carried an
    old-fashioned brass candlestick in her hand. The petticoat had a
    hole rubbed in it. She walked into the room and appeared to be
    going towards the dressing-table to put her candle down. She was a
    perfect stranger to Reddell, who, however, merely thought, 'This
    is her mother come to see after her,' and she felt quite glad it
    was so, accepting the idea without reasoning upon it, as one would
    in a dream. She thought the mother looked annoyed, possibly at not
    having been sent for before. She then gave Helen the medicine, and
    turning round, found that the apparition had disappeared, and that
    the door was shut. A great change, meanwhile, had taken place in
    Helen, and Reddell fetched me, who sent off for the doctor, and
    meanwhile applied hot poultices, etc., but Helen died a little
    before the doctor came. She was quite conscious up to about
    half-an-hour before she died, when she seemed to be going to sleep.

    "During the early days of her illness Helen had written to a
    sister, mentioning her being unwell, but making nothing of it, and
    as she never mentioned any one but this sister, it was supposed by
    the household, to whom she was a perfect stranger, that she had no
    other relation alive. Reddell was always offering to write for her,
    but she always declined, saying there was no need, she would write
    herself in a day or two. No one at home, therefore, knew anything
    of her being so ill, and it is, therefore, remarkable that her
    mother, a far from nervous person, should have said that evening
    going up to bed, 'I am sure Helen is very ill.'

    "Reddell told me and my daughter of the apparition, about an hour
    after Helen's death, prefacing with, 'I am not superstitious
    or nervous, and I wasn't the least frightened, but her mother
    came last night,' and she then told the story, giving a careful
    description of the figure she had seen. The relations were asked
    to come to the funeral, and the father, mother, and sister came,
    and in the mother Reddell recognised the apparition, as I did
    also, for Reddell's description had been most accurate, even to
    the expression, which she had ascribed to annoyance, but which
    was due to deafness. It was judged best not to speak about it to
    the mother, but Reddell told the sister, who said the description
    of the figure corresponded exactly with the probable appearance
    of her mother if roused in the night; that they had exactly such
    a candlestick at home, and that there was a hole in her mother's
    petticoat produced by the way she always wore it. It seems curious
    that neither Helen nor her mother appeared to be aware of the
    visit. Neither of them, at any rate, ever spoke of having seen the
    other, nor even of having dreamt of having done so.

    "F. A. POLE-CAREW."

    [Frances Reddell states that she has never had any hallucination,
    or any odd experience of any kind, except on this one occasion.
    The Hon. Mrs. Lyttelton, of Selwyn College, Cambridge, who knows
    her, tells us that "she appears to be a most matter-of-fact person,
    and was apparently most impressed by the fact that she saw a hole
    in the mother's flannel petticoat, made by the busk of her stays,
    reproduced in the apparition."]

The simplest explanation of this incident, and that which involves
the least departure from known forms of telepathy, is that the figure
seen by Frances Reddell was due to thought-transference from the mind
of the dying girl. And this explanation has some direct evidence in
its favour. There is, of course, abundant proof of the transference
from agent to percipient of a real or imaginary scene. (See the cases
described in Chapters II., III., XIV., and XV.) But in these cases
the percipient's impressions appear rarely to have risen to the level
of hallucination, and in the absence of direct evidence it would not
perhaps have been safe to assume that a detailed impression, such
as a scene or a human figure, transferred from another mind, would
be capable of taking complete sensory embodiment in the mind of the
percipient. The frequency, however, of collective hallucinations of
an apparently casual character seems to require such an assumption
(see _ante_, p. 273). Moreover, a case has been recorded (_Proc.
S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 434, 435) in which a hypnotically induced
hallucination appears to have been reproduced in another hypnotised
subject by telepathic suggestion from the original percipient. In the
experiments recorded by Dr. Gibotteau (pp. 368, 369) the ideas mentally
suggested by him appear in some cases to have assumed a hallucinatory
form in the subject; and, finally, Wesermann (Chapter X., p. 233),
in his fifth experiment succeeded in calling up a recognisable
hallucination of a lady personally unknown to the percipients. We have,
therefore, experimental parallels for our suggested interpretation
of Frances Reddell's experience; and when once the possibility of
thought-transference in this form is recognised, many so-called
"ghosts" or phantasms of the dead find a simple and satisfactory
explanation. The following case may be instanced:--


No. 92.--From MR. JOHN E. HUSBANDS, Melbourne House, Town Hall Square,
Grimsby.

    "_September_ 15_th_, 1886.

    "The facts are simply these. I was sleeping in a hotel in Madeira
    in January 1885. It was a bright moonlight night. The windows
    were open and the blinds up. I felt some one was in my room. On
    opening my eyes, I saw a young fellow about twenty-five, dressed
    in flannels, standing at the side of my bed and pointing with the
    first finger of his right hand to the place I was lying in. I
    lay for some seconds to convince myself of some one being really
    there. I then sat up and looked at him. I saw his features so
    plainly that I recognised them in a photograph which was shown me
    some days after. I asked him what he wanted; he did not speak, but
    his eyes and hand seemed to tell me I was in his place. As he did
    not answer, I struck out at him with my fist as I sat up, but did
    not reach him, and as I was going to spring out of bed he slowly
    vanished through the door, which was shut, keeping his eyes upon me
    all the time.

    "Upon inquiry I found that the young fellow who appeared to me died
    in that room I was occupying.

    "If I can tell you anything more I shall be glad to, if it
    interests you.

    "JOHN E. HUSBANDS."

The following letters are from Miss Falkner, of Church Terrace,
Wisbech, who was resident at the hotel when the above incident
happened:--

    "_October_ 8_th_, 1886.

    "The figure that Mr. Husbands saw while in Madeira was that of a
    young fellow who died unexpectedly months previously, in the room
    which Mr. Husbands was occupying. Curiously enough, Mr. H. had
    never heard of him or his death. He told me the story the morning
    after he had seen the figure, and I recognised the young fellow
    from the description. It impressed me very much, but I did not
    mention it to him or any one. I loitered about until I heard Mr.
    Husbands tell the same tale to my brother; we left Mr. H. and said
    simultaneously, 'He has seen Mr. D.'

    "No more was said on the subject for days; then I abruptly showed
    the photograph.

    "Mr. Husbands said at once, 'This is the young fellow who appeared
    to me the other night, but he was dressed differently'--describing
    a dress he often wore--'cricket suit (or tennis) fastened at the
    neck with sailor knot.' I must say that Mr. Husbands is a most
    practical man, and the very last one would expect 'a spirit' to
    visit.

    "K. FALKNER."

    "_October_ 20_th_, 1886.

    "I enclose you photograph and an extract from my sister-in-law's
    letter, which I received this morning, as it will verify my
    statement. Mr. Husbands saw the figure either the 3rd or 4th of
    February 1885.

    "The people who had occupied the rooms had never told us if they
    had seen anything, so we may conclude they had not.

    "K. FALKNER."

The following is Miss Falkner's copy of the passage in the letter:--

    "You will see at back of Mr. du F----'s photo the date of his
    decease [January 29th, 1884]; and if you recollect 'the Motta
    Marques' had his rooms from the February till the May or June of
    1884, then Major Money at the commencement of 1885 season. Mr.
    Husbands had to take the room on February 2nd, 1885, as his was
    wanted.

    "I am clear on all this, and remember his telling me the incident
    when he came to see my baby."

At a personal interview Mr. Gurney learnt that Mr. Husbands had never
had any other hallucination of the senses. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. p.
416.)

It is, of course, conceivable that before his experience Mr.
Husbands may have heard of the death of Mr. D. and have forgotten
the circumstance. But this supposition will hardly account for the
recognition of the photograph. In any case, however, there can be no
justification for invoking other than terrestrial agencies to explain
the vision. Until such agencies are proved inadequate to account for
the facts a narrative of this kind can scarcely be held to raise a
presumption, much less to afford a proof, of the action of the dead.
Miss Falkner and her brother had known the dead man; no fact about him
was communicated which was not within their knowledge; and there is
nothing to negative the supposition that some echo of their thoughts or
dreams may have given rise to the vision. A very similar case is quoted
in the same volume (_Proc_., vol. v. p. 418). Mr. D. M. Tyre, of St.
Andrews Road, Pollokshields, Glasgow, stayed for some time in a lonely
house in Dumbartonshire. On several occasions during their occupancy
of the house Miss L. Tyre saw the figure of an old woman lying on the
bed in the kitchen. The figure lay with the face turned to the wall,
and the legs drawn up as if from cold. On her head was a "sow-backed
mutch," _i.e._, a white frilled cap of a peculiar shape common in the
Highlands. The others who were present did not see the figure. It was
subsequently ascertained from a neighbour that the description given
correctly represented the dress and attitude of a former occupant
of the house, who had died there some years before under painful
circumstances. M. Richet (_Proc._, vol. v. p. 148) gives an account
of some spiritualist séances at which the promise was given that his
grandfather, M. Charles Renouard, would appear. A figure resembling M.
Charles Renouard was actually seen some days later, not by any of those
present at the séance, but by an English lady staying in the house, who
was believed to know nothing of the expected apparition.

A similar explanation may perhaps apply to the following account, which
was communicated verbally to Mr. Myers on the 12th October 1888 by the
percipient, Mr. J., a gentleman well known in the scientific world. Mr.
Myers explains that the account which follows was written out by him
from his notes of the conversation, and was subsequently revised and
corrected by Mr. J. himself.


No. 93.--From MR. J.

    "In 1880 I succeeded a Mr. Q. as librarian of the X. Library. I
    had never seen Mr. Q., nor any photograph or likeness of him,
    when the following incidents occurred. I may, of course, have
    heard the library assistants describe his appearance, though I
    have no recollection of this. I was sitting alone in the library
    one evening late in March 1884, finishing some work after hours,
    when it suddenly occurred to me that I should miss the last train
    to H., where I was then living, if I did not make haste. It was
    then 10.55, and the last train left X. at 11.5. I gathered up some
    books in one hand, took the lamp in the other, and prepared to
    leave the librarian's room, which communicated by a passage with
    the main room of the library. As my lamp illumined this passage, I
    saw apparently at the further end of it a man's face. I instantly
    thought a thief had got into the library. This was by no means
    impossible, and the probability of it had occurred to me before. I
    turned back into my room, put down the books, and took a revolver
    from the safe, and, holding the lamp cautiously behind me, I made
    my way along the passage--which had a corner, behind which I
    thought my thief might be lying in wait--into the main room. Here I
    saw no one, but the room was large and encumbered with bookcases.
    I called out loudly to the intruder to show himself several times,
    more with the hope of attracting a passing policeman than of
    drawing the intruder. Then I saw a face looking round one of the
    bookcases. I say looking _round_, but it had an odd appearance as
    if the _body_ were _in_ the bookcase, as the face came so closely
    to the edge and I could see no body. The face was pallid and
    hairless, and the orbits of the eyes were very deep. I advanced
    towards it, and as I did so I saw an old man with high shoulders
    seem to _rotate_ out of the end of the bookcase, and with his back
    towards me and with a shuffling gait walk rather quickly from the
    bookcase to the door of a small lavatory, which opened from the
    library and had no other access. I heard no noise. I followed the
    man at once into the lavatory; and to my extreme surprise found no
    one there. I examined the window (about 14 in. x 12 in.), and found
    it closed and fastened. I opened it and looked out. It opened into
    a well, the bottom of which, 10 feet below, was a sky-light, and
    the top open to the sky some 20 feet above. It was in the middle
    of the building, and no one could have dropped into it without
    smashing the glass nor climbed out of it without a ladder--but
    no one was there. Nor had there been anything like time for a man
    to get out of the window, as I followed the intruder instantly.
    Completely mystified, I even looked into the little cupboard
    under the fixed basin. There was nowhere hiding for a child, and
    I confess I began to experience for the first time what novelists
    describe as an 'eerie' feeling.

    "I left the library, and found I had missed my train.

    "Next morning I mentioned what I had seen to a local clergyman,
    who, on hearing my description, said, 'Why, that's old Q.!'
    Soon after I saw a photograph (from a drawing) of Q., and the
    resemblance was certainly striking. Q. had lost all his hair,
    eyebrows and all, from (I believe) a gunpowder accident. His walk
    was a peculiar, rapid, high-shouldered shuffle.

    "Later inquiry proved he had died at about the time of year at
    which I saw the figure." (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. p. 57.)

Mr. J. states that he has seen but one other hallucination, a figure
representing his mother, which appeared to him at the time of the birth
of one of his sisters.

A hallucination of another kind was seen independently in the same
library by Mr. R., the principal assistant, and a clerk, Mr. P. Mr. R.
writes in 1889:--

    "A few years ago I was engaged in a large building in the ----, and
    during the busy times was often there till late in the evening. On
    one particular night I was at work along with a junior clerk till
    about 11 P.M., in the room marked A on the annexed sketch. All the
    lights in the place had been out for hours except those in the room
    which we occupied. Before leaving, we turned out the gas. We then
    looked into the fireplace, but not a spark was to be seen. The
    night was very dark, but being thoroughly accustomed to the place
    we carried no light. On reaching the bottom of the staircase (B),
    I happened to look up; when, to my surprise, the room which we had
    just left appeared to be lighted. I turned to my companion and
    pointed out the light, and sent him back to see what was wrong. He
    went at once and I stood looking through the open door, but I was
    not a little astonished to see that as soon as he got within a few
    yards of the room the light went out quite suddenly. My companion,
    from the position he was in at the moment, could not see the light
    go out, but on his reaching the door everything was in total
    darkness. He entered, however, and when he returned, reported that
    both gas and fire were completely out. The light in the daytime was
    got by means of a glass roof, there being no windows on the sides
    of the room, and the night in question was so dark that the moon
    shining through the roof was out of the question. Although I have
    often been in the same room till long after dark, both before and
    since, I have never seen anything unusual at any other time."

Mr. P. endorses this:--

    "I confirm the foregoing statement."

In subsequent letters Mr. R. says:--

    "The bare facts are as stated, being neither more nor less than
    what took place. I have never on any other occasion had any
    hallucination of the senses, and I think you will find the same to
    be the case with Mr. P."

This incident took place after Mr. J.'s vision, but Mr. J. had
mentioned his own experience only to his wife and one other friend, and
no hint of it appears to have reached the assistants in the library, so
that the two visions would appear to have been independent.

To extend the theory of thought-transference from living minds to cover
a case such as that just quoted may seem to some extravagant. But if
there is anything beyond chance in the occurrence--and it would be a
very remarkable coincidence that three persons should independently
be the subject of hallucination in the same house, and that one of
the hallucinations should resemble a former occupant of the house,
unknown to the percipient--some explanation is required, and an
explanation which involves no novel or unproved agency is, _ceteris
paribus_, to be preferred. As regards the apparently local character
of the visitation, Mr. Gurney has suggested, with regard to some cases
quoted in _Phantasms of the Living_ (vol. ii. pp. 267-269), where the
link between agent and percipient appears to have been of a local and
not of a personal character, that a similarity of immediate mental
content between the percipient and agent may have been the condition
of the telepathic action. In the ordinary case of an apparition,
_e.g._, of a dying mother to her son, the condition of the appearance
to that particular percipient rather than to the man in the street
should on this hypothesis be sought in the community of intellectual
and emotional experiences which may be presumed to exist between near
relatives who have passed a large part of their lives in the same
environment. In the cases now under consideration the substitute for
such far-reaching community is to be found in the transitory occupation
of both percipient and agent--the one in present sensation, the other
in memory--with the same scene. Such partial community of perception,
by a kind of extended association of ideas, tends under the hypothesis
towards more complete community, and the agent thus imports into the
sensorium of the percipient the image of his own or some other's
presence in the scene which forms part of the present content of both
minds. On this view Mr. J. saw the figure of Mr. Q. in the library,
because some friend of Mr. Q.'s was at that moment vividly picturing to
himself the late librarian in his old haunts.

Cases, such as the three last quoted, of the solitary appearance of a
phantasmal figure, subsequently identified by description, photograph,
or--as in Frances Reddell's case--actual encounter with the original,
are rare; and experience shows how easy it may be for the somewhat
vague image preserved in the memory to take on definite form and colour
during the process, occasionally prolonged, of "recognition." The type
cannot, therefore, be regarded as well established. As, however, such
narratives have in some instances been regarded as affording evidence
of the action of disembodied spirits, it seemed well to suggest
that, if the facts are accepted, they are susceptible of another
interpretation.


_Haunted Houses._

But there are numerous cases to which the hypothesis of telepathic
infection may be applied with perhaps less hesitation. The form which
so-called "ghost stories" most commonly assume is the appearance
of an unrecognised phantasmal figure. When the appearance is to
one person only, or when, in the intervals of its appearance to
others, the matter has been freely discussed amongst the members of
the household, and the details of the figure described, we should
probably be justified, on the analogy of hypnotic and epidemic
religious hallucinations, in regarding the original appearance as
purely subjective and the later ones as due to verbal suggestion and
expectancy. But there are cases where, from the definite statements
of the witnesses and the surrounding circumstances, it appears at all
events extremely improbable that any mention was made of the original
hallucination. In such cases it seems permissible to conjecture
that the later apparitions, or some of them, may have been due to
telepathic suggestion from the original percipient, to whom his
solitary experience would naturally be a subject of frequent and vivid
reflection.

       *       *       *       *       *

I received the following account from the ladies concerned after a
personal interview with one of them on February 27th, 1889, in the
course of which I examined the scene of the apparition, the landing
of a moderate-sized London house. The landing, though narrow, is well
lighted, and it seems impossible that the appearance could have been
a real person. The first experience, it will be seen, is a collective
hallucination, of a type discussed in the preceding chapter.


No. 94.--From MRS. KNOTT.

    "LONDON, S.W.,
    _March_ 5_th_, 1889.

    "The incident I relate occurred at this address early in February
    1889. I have lived in this house four years, and constantly _felt_
    another presence was in the drawing-room besides myself, but never
    _saw_ any form until last month. My cousin Mrs. R. and myself
    returned from a walk at 1.30 P.M. The front door was opened for
    us by my housekeeper, Mrs. E. I passed upstairs before my cousin,
    and on turning to my bedroom, the door of which is beside the
    drawing-room door [_i.e._, at right angles to it], I saw, as I
    thought, Mrs. E. go into the drawing-room. I put a parcel into my
    room and then followed her to give some order, and found the room
    empty! My cousin was going up the second flight of stairs to her
    room, and I called out, 'Did you open the drawing-room door as you
    passed?' 'No,' she replied, 'Mrs. E. has gone in.' Mrs. R. had seen
    the figure more distinctly than I; it seemed to pass her at the
    top of the stairs, and she thought, 'How quietly Mrs. E. moves! "I
    inquired of Mrs. E. what she did after opening the door for us, and
    she said, 'Went to the kitchen to hasten luncheon, as you were in
    a hurry for it.' The day was bright, and there is nothing on the
    stairs that could cast a shadow. I quite hope some day I may see
    the face of the figure."

From MRS. R., Malpas, Cheshire.

    "_March_ 1_st_, 1889.

    "In answer to your letter on the subject of the figure seen at
    C. Terrace, Mrs. K. and I had just come in at about half-past
    one o'clock. Mrs. E. (the housekeeper) had opened the door. We
    went upstairs, and on the first landing are two rooms, one the
    drawing-room, the other Mrs. K.'s bedroom. She went into her room
    while I stood a minute or two talking to her. Just as I turned
    to go up the next flight of stairs I thought I saw Mrs. E. pass
    me quickly and go into the drawing-room. Beyond seeing a slight
    figure in a dark dress I saw nothing more, for I did not look at
    it, but just saw it pass me. Before I got upstairs Mrs. K. called
    out, 'Did you leave the drawing-room door open?' I answered, 'I
    did not go in; I saw Mrs. E. go in.' Mrs. K. answered, 'There is
    nobody there.' We asked Mrs. E. if she had been up; she, on the
    contrary, had gone straight down. Also, as she said, she would
    not have passed me on the landing, but have waited until I had
    gone upstairs; and as it struck me _afterwards_, she could not
    have passed me on such a small landing without touching me, but I
    never noticed that at the time. I do not know if a thought ever
    embodies itself, but my idea was, and is, that as Mrs. E. ran
    downstairs her thought went up, wondering if the drawing-room fire
    was burning brightly. The figure I saw went into the room as if it
    had a purpose of some sort. I have never seen anything of the sort
    before."

In a later letter Mrs. R. adds:--

    "_March_ 10_th_, 1889.

    "I am afraid I cannot give any very definite reply to your
    questions.

    "(1) 'Had I any idea of the house being haunted?' No; and I do not
    think it is supposed to be haunted. Mrs. K. has said that at times
    it has seemed to her as if there was some one else in the room
    beside herself, but I think that is a feeling that has come to most
    people some time or other.

    "(2) 'Did we see it simultaneously?' That I cannot exactly say, but
    I should think yes, for we neither of us said anything until Mrs.
    K. called out to me to know if I had been in the drawing-room."

In commenting on the story in November 1889 (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi.
p. 250), I wrote, "Here we may almost see the story of a haunted house
in the making. The essential elements are there. We have the visionary
figure seen by two persons at once, and the mysterious feeling of
an alien presence in the room. It is quite possible that the latter
circumstance would have passed unrecorded, and even unnoticed, but
for the subsequent phantasm, through which it gained a retrospective
importance." My comments have met with unexpected justification. On
April 7th, 1893, Mrs. Knott again wrote to me as follows:--

    "On Saturday, the 18th March, at 1.50 P.M., Mrs. H. and I were
    going upstairs to the drawing-room, she first, I following with
    some flowers, _not looking up_. I heard her say, 'Mrs. E., don't
    go down until you have seen my screen.' (Mrs. H. had just finished
    painting one.) I said, 'Mrs. E. isn't here.' Mrs. H. replied, 'Yes,
    she is in the drawing-room.' Then I heard her say, 'Where _has_ the
    woman gone?' for no one was visible in the room, and Mrs. H. said
    she _distinctly_ saw a figure go in, and felt sure it was Mrs. E.
    This is exactly the same impression that Mrs. R. and I had when we
    each saw the figure go into the drawing-room four years ago, in
    February, and it was about the same hour of the day."

In a later letter Mrs. Knott explains that Mrs. H. had heard of the
earlier apparition on the same spot, but adds that the story "most
certainly did not stay in her mind." We shall probably be justified in
assuming, however, that Mrs. H.'s hallucinatory experience was due to a
subconscious reminiscence of her friend's ghost-story.

In the case which follows, however, there is strong evidence that the
phantasms were seen independently by each percipient. The narrators
are unwilling that their names or that of the house should appear.
Mr. Gurney, however, fully discussed the circumstances with them at a
personal interview.


No. 95.--From MRS. W.

    "_February_ 19_th_, 1885.

[Illustration: SKETCH PLAN OF THE GROUND-FLOOR OF THE HOUSE.

=A= Piano. =B= First position of figure. =C= Second position of figure.
=D= Garden door. =E= Baize door. =F= Front door and porch. =G= Front
gate.]

    "In June 1881 we went to live in a detached villa just out of the
    town of C----. Our household consisted of my husband and myself,
    my step-daughter, and two little boys, aged nine and six, and two
    female servants. The house was between ten and twenty years old.
    We had been there about three weeks, when, about 11 o'clock one
    morning, as I was playing the piano in the drawing-room, I had the
    following experience:--I was suddenly aware of a figure peeping
    round the corner of the folding-doors to my left; thinking it must
    be a visitor, I jumped up and went into the passage, but no one was
    there, and the hall door, which was half glass, was shut. I only
    saw the upper half of the figure, which was that of a tall man,
    with a very pale face and dark hair and moustache. The impression
    lasted only a second or two, but I saw the face so distinctly that
    to this day I should recognise it if I met it in a crowd. It had a
    sorrowful expression. It was impossible for any one to come into
    the house without being seen or heard. I was startled, but not the
    least frightened. I had heard no report whatever as to the house
    being haunted; and am certainly not given to superstitious fancies.
    I did not mention my experience to any one at the time, and formed
    no theory about it. In the following August, one evening about
    8.30, I had occasion to go into the drawing-room to get something
    out of the cupboard, when, on turning round, I saw the same face
    in the bay-window, in front of the shutters, which were closed. I
    again saw only the upper part of the figure, which seemed to be in
    a somewhat crouching posture. The light on this occasion came from
    the hall and the dining-room, and did not shine directly on the
    window; but I was able perfectly to distinguish the face and the
    expression of the eyes. This time I _was_ frightened, and mentioned
    the matter to my husband the same evening. I then also told him of
    my first experience. On each of these occasions I was from 8 to 10
    feet distant from the figure.

    "Later in the same month I was playing cricket in the garden with
    my little boys. From my position at the wickets I could see right
    into the house through an open door, down a passage, and through
    the hall as far as the front door. The kitchen door opened into the
    passage. I distinctly saw the same face peeping round at me out of
    the kitchen door. I again only saw the upper half of the figure.
    I threw down the bat and ran in. No one was in the kitchen. One
    servant was out, and I found that the other was up in her bedroom.
    I mentioned this incident at once to my husband, who also examined
    the kitchen without any result.

    "A little later in the year, about 8 o'clock one evening, I was
    coming downstairs alone, when I heard a voice from the direction,
    apparently, of my little boys' bedroom, the door of which was open.
    It distinctly said, in a deep sorrowful tone, 'I can't find it.' I
    called out to my little boys, but they did not reply, and I have
    not the slightest doubt that they were asleep; they always called
    out if they heard me upstairs. My step-daughter, who was downstairs
    in the dining-room with the door open, also heard the voice, and
    thinking it was me calling, cried out, 'What are you looking for?'
    We were extremely puzzled. The voice could not by any possibility
    have belonged to any member of the household. The servants were in
    the kitchen, and my husband was out.

    "A short time after I was again coming downstairs after dark in the
    evening when I felt a sharp slap on the back. It startled but did
    not hurt me. There was no one near me, and I ran downstairs and
    told my husband and my step-daughter.

    "I have never in my life, on any other occasion, had any
    hallucination of sight, hearing, or touch."

The following is Miss W.'s account:--

    "_February_ 19_th_, 1885.

    "In July, 1881, I was sitting playing the piano in our house
    in C----, about 11.30 in the morning, when I saw the head and
    shoulders of a man peeping round the folding-doors, in just the
    same way as they had appeared to my mother, but I had not at that
    time heard of her experience. I jumped up, and advanced, thinking
    it was an acquaintance from a few yards off. This impression,
    however, only lasted for a second; the face disappeared, but
    recalling it, I perceived at once that it was certainly not that of
    the gentleman whom I had for a second thought of. The resemblance
    was only that they were both dark. The face was pale and
    melancholy, and the hair very dark. I at once went to Mrs. W. in
    the dining-room, and asked if any one had called. She said, 'No';
    and I then told her what I had seen. I then for the first time
    heard from her what _she_ had seen, and our descriptions completely
    agreed. We had even both noticed that the hair was parted in the
    middle, and that a good deal of shirt-front showed.

    "A few weeks later, about 11 P.M., Mrs. W. and I were playing
    bézique in the dining-room. Mr. W. was out, and the servants had
    gone to bed. The door of the room was open, and I was facing it.
    I suddenly had an impression that some one was looking at me, and
    I looked up. There was the same face, and the upper half of the
    figure, peeping round into the room from the hall. I said, 'There's
    the man again!' Mrs. W. rushed to the door, but there was no one in
    the hall or passage; the front door was locked, and the green baize
    door which communicated with the back part of the house was shut.
    The figure had been on the side of the dining-room door nearest
    to the front door, and could not have got to the green baize door
    without passing well in our sight. We were a good deal frightened,
    and we mentioned the occurrence to Mr. W. on his return. He went
    all over the house as usual before going to bed, and all windows
    were fastened, and everything in order.

    "A few weeks after this, about 11.30 A.M., I was upstairs playing
    battledore and shuttlecock with my eldest brother in his bedroom.
    The door was open. Stepping back in the course of the game, I got
    out on to the landing; I looked sideways over my shoulder, in
    order to strike the shuttlecock, and suddenly saw the same face
    as before, and my brother called out at the same moment, 'There's
    a man on the landing.' I was startled myself, but to reassure the
    child I said there was no one--that he had made a mistake--and shut
    the door and went on with the game. I told my father and Mrs. W. of
    this as soon as I saw them.

    "Later in the autumn I was sitting alone in the dining-room one
    evening, with the door open. Mrs. W. had been upstairs, and I heard
    her coming down. Suddenly I heard a deep, melancholy voice say, 'I
    can't find it.' I called out, 'What are you looking for?' At the
    same time the voice was not the least like Mrs. W.'s. She then came
    in and told me she had heard exactly the same thing. My father was
    out at the time, but we told him of the circumstance on his return.

    "In September of 1882 I was for a week in the house with only
    the two children and the servants. It was about 7.30 on Sunday
    evening, and nearly dark. The others were all out in the garden. I
    was standing at the dining-room window, when I caught a glimpse of
    a tall man's figure slipping into the porch. I must have seen if
    anybody had approached the porch by the path from the front gate,
    and I should certainly have heard the latch of the gate, which
    used to make a considerable noise, and I should also have heard
    footsteps on the gravel-path. The figure appeared quite suddenly;
    it had on a tall hat. I was very much astonished, but ran to the
    door, thinking it might possibly be my father. No one was there; I
    went to the gate, and looked up and down the road. No one was in
    sight, and there was no possibility that anybody could have got so
    suddenly out of view.

    "I have never at any other time in my life had any hallucination
    whatever, either of sight or hearing.

    "I remember Mrs. W. telling me of her experience of the slap as
    soon as she came downstairs.

    "I ought to add that at the time when we were negotiating about
    the house, the landlady of the lodgings where my father and I were
    staying told me that all the villas of the row in which our house
    was situated, ten in number, were haunted. I was with my father
    when I heard this. Mrs. W. was not with us. I am certain that the
    remark made no impression whatever on me, and that it did not even
    recur to my mind till I saw what I have described. I did not even
    mention the remark to Mrs. W."

Mrs. W. adds--

    "I distinctly remember my step-daughter coming to me immediately
    after her first sight of the figure, and telling me about it.
    I then told her for the first time of my own experience (I had
    then only had one), and our descriptions completely tallied. I
    distinctly remember our agreeing about the parting of the hair
    in the middle, and about the amount of white shirt-front. We
    could neither of us remember whether his tie was white or black.
    We agreed that we should know the face if we ever met it. And
    subsequently, at an evening party, we both pitched on the same
    individual as more like our strange visitor than any one else we
    knew. The resemblance, however, was not extremely close.

    "I distinctly remember, also, my step-daughter exclaiming, 'There's
    that man again!' when we were playing bézique. I rushed at once
    into the hall and found the door closed as she has described.

    "I also remember her telling me at once about what she had seen,
    and what her brother had exclaimed when they were playing at
    battledore and shuttlecock.

    "She told me about what she had seen in the porch when Mr. W. and I
    returned from town on the next (Monday) morning."

The following is Surgeon-Major W.'s confirmation:--

    "I was told of these various occurrences by my wife and daughter at
    the times which they have specified. I only heard from my wife of
    her _first_ experience after she had told me of her _second_. After
    she had seen the figure during the game of cricket, I went into the
    kitchen, but found everything as usual. On my return home, after my
    daughter's seeing the figure peeping round the dining-room door,
    I went all over the premises as my custom was, and found windows
    secured and everything in order.

    "My wife and daughter are as unlikely as any one I know to suffer
    from causeless frights. They are completely free from nervousness,
    and though these experiences were startling and bewildering to
    them, they did not in the least worry themselves in consequence.

    "It seems possible that the voice may have been that of one of the
    children talking in sleep, and the slap some effect of imagination,
    but it is not easy to account for the apparitions by any such known
    causes."

In this case it seems unlikely that Mrs. W., the original percipient,
was mistaken in supposing that she had not mentioned her first
experience, and that Miss W. was also mistaken in her statement that
she had not heard of what Mrs. W. had seen until after the apparition
to herself. And it is still more unlikely that either lady would have
allowed any hint of the matter to reach the ears of the children.
Whilst, therefore, in the absence of contemporary notes, or of any
identification of the figure, the degree of resemblance between the
apparitions seen by the two ladies may have been exaggerated, we
are still confronted with the problem that three persons living in
the same house are credibly reported to have seen independently the
hallucinatory figure of a man, and that in the two instances in which
the apparitions were compared they were found to exhibit certain
resemblances. That the first figure was a subjective hallucination, and
that the later apparitions were reproductions of that hallucination
by means of telepathic suggestion, is a solution which is, at any
rate, worthy of consideration. We have in our records many cases of
the kind, in which hallucinatory figures, in some cases presenting
strong resemblances, are alleged to have been seen by two or more
independent witnesses in the same house or locality. Thus we have
accounts from Miss Kathleen Leigh Hunt, Miss Laurence, and Mr. Paul
Bird, of a woman's figure seen independently by each of them in 1881
(_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. iii. pp. 106 _et seq._). In another case (_Proc.
S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 270 _et seq._) a doctor in a provincial town,
his two daughters, and a young lady visitor saw the figure of a young
child. In other cases different hallucinatory figures have been seen
independently by successive occupants of the same house, the later
percipients appearing not to have heard of the earlier apparitions.
Thus we have accounts of figures seen during the period from 1861 to
1875 by three different families in an old Elizabethan manor-house
(_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. iii. p. 118); and in a quite modern house in the
South of England various phantasmal figures were seen between 1882 and
1888 by two successive sets of occupants. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp.
256 _et seq._[131])

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 128: She was, however, unable to find it.]

[Footnote 129: It should be explained that this account was written
on a "census" form, in the limited space provided for answers to our
printed questions.]

[Footnote 130: See, for instance, Nos. 47, 75, 87, etc.]

[Footnote 131: Those desiring to study further the evidence on
this subject are referred to the paper on "Phantasms of the Dead,"
_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. iii., by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, and the papers on
"Recognised Apparitions occurring after Death," and on "Phantasms
of the Dead," by Messrs. Gurney, Myers, and the present writer
respectively, in Proc. v. and vi., and the "Record of a Haunted House,"
in Proc. viii. Many cases of the kind are also printed in the monthly
journal of the Society; and there are one or two striking cases in the
_Annales des Sciences Psychiques_.]




