CHAPTER X.

INDUCED TELEPATHIC HALLUCINATIONS.


In the present chapter we revert once more to experimental evidence.
The cases now to be discussed should, in the logical order, have
been included in Chapter V., and for a proper appreciation of their
theoretic bearings and evidential value they ought to be considered in
connection with the instances of thought-transference at a distance
there recorded. It seemed best, however, to separate these instances
of the experimental production of hallucinations at a distance, and
reserve them for subsequent treatment, with the view of anticipating
as far as possible the misconceptions to which this class of evidence
is peculiarly open. In brief, until some attempt had been made to
elucidate the nature of sensory hallucination in general, it seemed
unwise to introduce matter so controvertible as apparitions of
the human figure. For we are here assailing the last fortress of
superstition; in discussing such matters even educated persons find it
difficult to free themselves from the fetters of traditional modes of
thought and speech. Men who would be ashamed to think of earth, air,
fire, and water as elements, because they were so held a century ago
and are now so styled in the language of the market-place, will often
see no middle course between rejecting altogether evidence of the kind
here dealt with, and accepting the existence of "ghosts." But those
who have followed the argument of the preceding chapters will see, if
the possibility of thought-transference is granted, that the narratives
now to be presented fall naturally into place as illustrating one of
its modes of manifestation. That A. by taking thought should cause an
image of himself to appear to B. need provoke no more surprise than
that by the same means he should cause B. to see No. 27, or the Queen
of Hearts. No one demands a spiritual entity corresponding to the
Queen of Hearts, why then should any one believe in the other case
that A.'s spirit had left its fleshly tabernacle to interview B.? The
hallucinatory figure induced post-hypnotically in certain subjects
presents an even closer parallel. It is recognised by all in such a
case that the figure seen is a _thought_ fashioned by the subject's
mind, with no more substance than any other thought. It is only the
influence of an unrecognised animism which leads us to demand such a
substantial basis when the figure seen represents a dying man. The
impulse which led to the projection of the hallucination was in the one
case conveyed by word of mouth, in the other by some process as yet
not understood. But the mystery lies in the process rather than in the
result.

The present chapter, then, will contain instances of the action of
thought-transference in which the transmitted idea was translated
in the percipient's mind, not, as in most of the cases described in
previous chapters, into a simple feeling, or sensation, or dream,
but into a hallucination representing the human figure. Readers of
_Phantasms of the Living_ will remember the accounts there given (vol.
i. pp. 104-109) of some experiments made by a friend of ours, Mr. S.
H. B. On several occasions Mr. B. succeeded by an effort of will in
causing a phantom of himself to appear to acquaintances who were not
aware of his intention to try the experiment. On one occasion the
figure was seen by two persons simultaneously. As at that time results
of the kind were almost unprecedented, we felt, notwithstanding our
full confidence in Mr. B., some reluctance in publishing an account
of his experiments, lest isolated marvels of the kind might prejudice
our whole case. But fortunately, while _Phantasms of the Living_ was
actually passing through the press, we received from an independent
source an account of successful experiments of the same kind (see
below, case 63), and within a few weeks of its publication a friend of
the present writer was induced by a perusal of Mr. B.'s narrative to
make on his own account a similar trial, which completely succeeded.
This gentleman wrote to me on 16th November 1886 as follows:--


No. 61.--From the REV. CLARENCE GODFREY.

    "I was so impressed by the account on p. 105 that I determined to
    put the matter to an experiment.

    "Retiring at 10.45 [on the 15th November 1886] I determined to
    appear, if possible, to a friend, and accordingly I set myself
    to work with all the volitional and determinative energy which I
    possess, to stand at the foot of her bed. I need not say that I
    never dropped the slightest hint beforehand as to my intention,
    such as could mar the experiment, nor had I mentioned the subject
    to her. As the 'agent' I may describe my own experiences.

    "Undoubtedly the imaginative faculty was brought extensively into
    play, as well as the volitional, for I endeavoured to _translate
    myself_, spiritually, into her room, and to attract her attention,
    as it were, while standing there. My effort was sustained for
    perhaps eight minutes, after which I felt tired, and was soon
    asleep.

    "The next thing I was conscious of was meeting the lady next
    morning (_i.e._, in a dream, I suppose?) and asking her at once
    if she had seen me last night. The reply came, 'Yes.' 'How?' I
    inquired. Then in words strangely clear and low, like a well
    audible whisper, came the answer, 'I was sitting beside you.'
    These words, so clear, awoke me instantly, and I felt I must have
    been dreaming; but on reflection I remembered what I had been
    'willing' before I fell asleep, and it struck me, 'This must be a
    _reflex_ action from the percipient.' My watch showed 3.40 A.M.
    The following is what I wrote immediately in pencil, standing
    in my night-dress:--'As I reflected upon those clear words, they
    struck me as being quite _intuitive_, I mean _subjective_, and to
    have proceeded _from within, as my own conviction_, rather than a
    communication from any one else. And yet I can't remember her face
    at all, as one can after a vivid dream!'

    "But the words were uttered in a clear, quick tone, which was most
    remarkable, and awoke me at once.

    "My friend in the note with which she sent me the enclosed account
    of _her own_ experience, says:--'I remember the man put all the
    lamps out soon after I came upstairs, and that is only done about a
    quarter to four.'"

Mr. Godfrey received from the percipient on the 16th November an
account of her side of the experience, and at his request she wrote it
down as follows:--

    "Yesterday--viz., the morning of November 16th, 1886--about
    half-past three o'clock, I woke up with a start and an idea
    that some one had come into the room. I heard a curious sound,
    but fancied it might be the birds in the ivy outside. Next I
    experienced a strange restless longing to leave the room and go
    downstairs. This feeling became so overpowering that at last I rose
    and lit a candle, and went down, thinking if I could get some soda
    water it might have a quieting effect. On returning to my room I
    saw Mr. Godfrey standing under the large window on the staircase.
    He was dressed in his usual style, and with an expression on his
    face that I have noticed when he has been looking very earnestly at
    anything. He stood there, and I held up the candle and gazed at him
    for three or four seconds in utter amazement, and then, as I passed
    up the staircase, he disappeared. The impression left on my mind
    was so vivid that I fully intended waking a friend who occupied the
    same room as myself, but remembering that I should only be laughed
    at as romantic and imaginative, refrained from doing so.

    "I was not frightened at the appearance of Mr. Godfrey, but felt
    much excited, and could not sleep afterwards."

On the 21st of the same month I heard a full account of the incident
given above from Mr. Godfrey, and on the day following from Mrs. ----.
Mrs. ---- told me that the figure appeared quite distinct and life-like
at first, though she could not remember to have noticed more than the
upper part of the body. As she looked it grew more and more shadowy,
and finally faded away. Mrs. ----, it should be added, told me that
she had previously seen two phantasmal figures, representing a parent
whom she had recently lost.[110]

Mr. Godfrey at our request made two other trials, without, of course,
letting Mrs. ---- know his intention. The first of these attempts was
without result, owing perhaps to the date chosen, as he was aware at
the time, being unsuitable. But a trial made on the 7th December 1886
succeeded completely. Mrs. ----, writing on December 8th, states that
she was awakened by hearing a voice cry, "Wake," and by feeling a hand
rest on the left side of her head. She then saw stooping over her a
figure which she recognised as Mr. Godfrey's.

In this last case the dress of the figure does not seem to have been
seen distinctly. But in the apparition of the 16th November, it will
be observed that the dress was that ordinarily worn in the daytime
by Mr. Godfrey, and that in which the percipient would be accustomed
to see him, _not_ the dress which he was actually wearing at the
time. If the apparition is in truth nothing more than an expression
of the percipient's thought this is what we should expect to find,
and as a matter of fact in the majority of well evidenced narratives
of telepathic hallucination this is what we actually do find. The
dress and surroundings of the phantasm represent, not the dress and
surroundings of the agent at the moment, but those with which the
percipient is familiar. If other proof were wanting, this fact would in
itself seem a sufficient argument that we have to deal, not with ghosts
but with hallucinations. It is to be regretted, however, that most
recent experimenters in this direction have succeeded only in producing
apparitions of themselves. But a crucial experiment of the kind desired
is to be found in an account published in 1822 by H. M. Wesermann,
Government Assessor and Chief Inspector of Roads at Düsseldorf. He
records five successful trials with different percipients, of which the
fifth seems worth quoting in full.[111]


No. 62.--From H. M. WESERMANN.

    "A lady, who had been dead five years, was to appear to Lieutenant
    ----n in a dream at 10.30 P.M. and incite him to good deeds. At
    half-past ten, contrary to expectation, Herr ----n had not gone
    to bed, but was discussing the French campaign with his friend
    Lieutenant S---- in the ante-room. Suddenly the door of the room
    opened, the lady entered dressed in white, with a black kerchief
    and uncovered head, greeted S---- with her hand three times in a
    friendly manner; then turned to ----n, nodded to him, and returned
    again through the doorway.

    "As this story, related to me by Lieutenant ----n, seemed to be too
    remarkable from a psychological point of view for the truth of it
    not to be duly established, I wrote to Lieutenant S----, who was
    living six[112] miles away, and asked him to give me his account of
    it. He sent me the following reply:--

    "'... On the 13th of March, 1817, Herr ----n came to pay me a visit
    at my lodgings about a league from A----. He stayed the night with
    me. After supper, and when we were both undressed, I was sitting on
    my bed and Herr ----n was standing by the door of the next room on
    the point also of going to bed. This was about half-past ten. We
    were speaking partly about indifferent subjects and partly about
    the events of the French campaign. Suddenly the door out of the
    kitchen opened without a sound, and a lady entered, very pale,
    taller than Herr ----n, about five feet four inches in height,
    strong and broad of figure, dressed in white, but with a large
    black kerchief which reached to below the waist. She entered with
    bare head, greeted me with the hand three times in complimentary
    fashion, turned round to the left towards Herr ----n, and waved her
    hand to him three times; after which the figure quietly, and again
    without any creaking of the door, went out. We followed at once
    in order to discover whether there were any deception, but found
    nothing. The strangest thing was this, that our night-watch of two
    men whom I had shortly before found on the watch were now asleep,
    though at my first call they were on the alert, and that the door
    of the room, which always opens with a good deal of noise, did not
    make the slightest sound when opened by the figure.

    "'S.

    "'D----n, January 11th, 1818.'

    "From this story (Wesermann continues) the following conclusions
    may be drawn:--

    "(1) That waking persons, as well as sleeping, are capable of
    perceiving the ideas [_Gedankenbilder_] of distant friends through
    the inner sense as dream images. For not only the opening and
    shutting of the door, but the figure itself--which, moreover,
    exactly resembled that of the dead lady--was incontestably only a
    dream in the waking state, since the door would have creaked as
    usual had the figure really opened and shut it.

    "(2) That many apparitions and supposed effects of witchcraft were
    very probably produced in the same way.

    "(3) That clairvoyants are not mistaken when they state that a
    stream of light proceeds from the magnetiser to the distant friend,
    which visibly presents the scene thought of, if the magnetiser
    thinks of it strongly and without distraction."

More philosophic or more successful than recent investigators,
Wesermann, it will be seen, varied the form of his experiment. In the
first he caused his own figure to appear, but in each of the subsequent
trials he chose a fresh image, meeting on each occasion with equal
success. It should be observed, however, that though Wesermann seems
to have been a careful as well as a philosophic investigator, he
has omitted to record how often he made trials of this kind without
producing any result, and it cannot fairly be assumed that there were
no failures. But in comparing such cases as those here recorded with
the experiments at close quarters described in Chapters II., III., and
IV., it should be remembered that a failure which consists merely, as
in Mr. Godfrey's second trial, in the absence of any unusual impression
on the part of the percipient, detracts far less from the value of
occasional success than failures attested by the production of wrong
impressions; and further, that a sensory hallucination being a much
rarer phenomenon than an idea, the improbability of chance-coincidence
between a hallucination and the attempt (unknown to the percipient) to
produce it is greater in the same proportion.

Later experience has not confirmed Wesermann's third inference, as to
the stream of light proceeding from the agent; there are no grounds
for regarding such an appearance as other than subjective, due to the
percipient's preconceived ideas of what he ought to see. But another
feature in the narrative is more significant. One is led to infer both
from Herr S.'s description and from Wesermann's remarks in (1) that
the figure seen resembled a deceased lady who was not known to either
of the percipients. If this interpretation is correct, the figure seen
cannot have been subjective in the same sense as the hallucinations
described in Chapter IX. and Mr. Godfrey's apparition may be supposed
to have been. The latter were, _ex hypothesi_, _autoplastic_--_i.e._,
they were hallucinations built up in the percipient's own mind on
a nucleus supplied from without. But what Herren S. and ----n saw
was a _heteroplastic_ image, a picture like that of a diagram or a
card transferred ready-made from the agent's mind. We should not of
course be justified, on the evidence of a single narrative of somewhat
doubtful import, in concluding that such an origin for a hallucination
is possible. But there are a few narratives to be cited later (Chapter
XIII.) which also suggest such an interpretation.

In Mr. Godfrey's trials, as also in those made by Mr. S. H. B., the
agent was asleep at the time of the experiment.[113] In the two cases
which follow the agent was in a hypnotic trance. In the first instance,
it will be seen, there appears to have been a reciprocal effect,
the agent himself becoming aware at the time of the percipient's
surroundings, and of the effect produced on her by his influence. The
account was sent to us in January 1886.


No. 63.--From MR. H. P. SPARKS.

After describing various hypnotic experiments on a fellow-student, Mr.
A. H. W. Cleave, Mr. Sparks continues:--

    "Last Friday evening (January 15th, 1886) he expressed his wish to
    see a young lady living in Wandsworth, and he also said he would
    try to make himself seen by her. I accordingly mesmerised him, and
    continued the long passes for about 20 minutes, concentrating my
    will on his idea. When he came round (I brought him round by just
    touching his hand and willing him, after 1 hour and 20 minutes'
    trance) he said he had seen her in the dining-room, and that after
    a time she grew restless, and then suddenly looked straight at him
    and then covered her eyes with her hands. Just after this he came
    round. Last Monday evening (January 18th, 1886) we did the same
    thing, and this time he said he thought he had frightened her, as
    after she had looked at him for a few minutes she fell back in her
    chair in a sort of faint. Her little brother was in the room at
    the time. Of course, after this we expected a letter if the vision
    was real; and on Wednesday morning he received a letter from this
    young lady asking whether anything had happened to him, as on
    Friday evening she was startled by seeing him standing at the door
    of the room. After a minute he disappeared, and she thought that it
    might have been fancy; but on the Monday evening she was still more
    startled by seeing him again, and this time much clearer, and it so
    frightened her that she nearly fainted.

    "This account I send you is perfectly true, I will vouch, for I
    have two independent witnesses who were in the dormitory at the
    time when he was mesmerised, and when he came round. My patient's
    name is Arthur H. W. Cleave, and his age is 18 years. A. C. Darley
    and A. S. Thurgood, fellow-students, are the two witnesses I
    mentioned.

    "H. PERCY SPARKS."

Mr. Cleave writes, on March 15th, 1886:--

    "H.M.S. _Marlborough_, PORTSMOUTH.

    "Sparks and myself have, for the past eighteen months, been in the
    habit of holding mesmeric séances in our dormitories. For the first
    month or two we got no very satisfactory results, but after that we
    succeeded in sending one another to sleep. I could never get Sparks
    further than the sleeping state, but he could make me do anything
    he liked whilst I was under the influence; so I gave up trying
    to send him off, and all our efforts were made towards my being
    mesmerised. After a short time we got on so well that Sparks had
    three or four other fellows in the dormitory to witness what I did.
    I was quite insensible to all pain, as the fellows have repeatedly
    pinched my hands and legs without my feeling it. About six months
    ago I tried my power of will, in order, while under the influence,
    to see persons to whom I was strongly attached. For some time I
    was entirely unsuccessful, although I once thought that I saw my
    brother (who is in Australia), but had no opportunity of verifying
    the vision.

    "A short time ago I tried to see a young lady whom I know very
    well, and was perfectly surprised at my success. I could see her as
    plainly as I can see now, but I could not make myself seen by her,
    although I had often tried to. After I had done this several times
    I determined to try and make myself seen by her, and told Sparks
    of my idea, which he approved. Well, we tried this for five nights
    running without any more success. We then suspended our endeavours
    for a night or two, as I was rather over-exerted by the continued
    efforts and got severe headaches. We then tried again (on, I
    think it was, a Friday, but am not certain), and were, I thought,
    successful; but as the young lady did not write to me about it, I
    thought I must have been mistaken, so I told Sparks that we had
    better give up trying. But he begged me to try once more, which
    we did on the following Monday, when we were successful to such
    an extent that I felt rather alarmed. (I must tell you that I am
    in the habit of writing to the young lady every Sunday, but I did
    not write that week, in order to make her think about me.) This
    took place between 9.30 P.M. and 10 P.M. Monday night, and on the
    following Wednesday morning I got the letter which I have enclosed.
    I, of course, then knew I had been successful. I went home about a
    fortnight after this, when I saw the young lady, who seemed very
    frightened in spite of my explanations, and begged me never to try
    it again, and I promised her that I would not."

The two witnesses of the experiment last described write as follows:--

    "I have seen Mr. Cleave's account of his mesmeric experiment, and
    can fully vouch for the truth thereof.

    "A. C. DARLEY."

    "I have read Mr. Cleave's statement, and can vouch for the truth of
    it, as I was present when he was mesmerised and heard his statement
    after he revived.

    "A. E. S. THURGOOD."

The following is a copy, made by Mr. Gurney, of the letter in which the
young lady, Miss A----, described her side of the affair. The envelope
bore the postmarks, "Wandsworth, Jan. 19, 1886," "Portsmouth, Jan. 20,
1886," and the address, "Mr. A. H. W. Cleave, H.M.S. _Marlborough_,
Portsmouth."

    "WANDSWORTH, _Tuesday morning_.

    "DEAR ARTHUR,--Has anything happened to you? Please write and let
    me know at once, for I have been so frightened.

    "Last Tuesday evening I was sitting in the dining [room] reading,
    when I happened to look up, and could have declared I saw you
    standing at the door looking at me. I put my handkerchief to my
    eyes, and when I looked again you were gone. I thought it must have
    been only my fancy, but last night (Monday), while I was at supper,
    I saw you again, just as before, and was so frightened that I
    nearly fainted. Luckily only my brother was there, or it would have
    attracted attention. Now do write at once and tell me how you are.
    I really cannot write any more now."

It will be seen that Miss A---- fixes the date of her first
hallucination on _Tuesday_, whereas Mr. Sparks and Mr. Cleave speak of
it as _Friday_. Mr. Gurney, in conversation with the experimenters,
was unable to fix the actual date with any certainty, but there can
be little doubt that if Tuesday was the day, it fell within the five
days on which Mr. Cleave attempted to see Miss A----. Of the second
coincidence there can be no doubt.

The next case is recorded by Mr. F. W. H. Myers (_Journal S.P.R._,
March 1891), who writes:--


No. 64.

    "In 1888 a gentleman, whom I will call Mr. A., who has occupied a
    high public position in India, and whom I have known a long time,
    informed me verbally that he had had a remarkable experience. He
    awoke one morning, in India, very early, and in the dawning light
    saw a lady, whom I will call Mrs. B., standing at the foot of his
    bed. At the same time he received an impression that she needed
    him. This was his sole experience of a hallucination; and it so
    much impressed him that he wrote to the lady, who was in England at
    the time, and mentioned the circumstance. He afterwards heard from
    her that she had been in a trance-condition at the time, and had
    endeavoured to appear to him by way of an experiment.

    "Mr. A. did not give me the lady's name, supposing that she did not
    desire the incident to be spoken of; nor did he find an opportunity
    of himself inquiring as to her willingness to mention the matter."

Subsequently, on July 13th, 1890, the agent, Mrs. B., wrote of her own
accord to Mr. Myers. Mrs. B. began by stating that she had submitted
herself to be experimented upon by a lady friend, with the view of
acquiring clairvoyant faculties. She then described how in the course
of one experiment in 1886 she lost consciousness of outward things, and
saw the figure of a tall woman, whom she recognised as a friend of her
mother's, standing by her. Then she goes on:--

    "I find myself seriously debating within myself what I should do to
    prove to myself, and for my own satisfaction, if I am indeed the
    victim of hallucination or not. I decided in a flash on a man whom
    I knew to be possessed of the most work-a-day world common-sense;
    his views and mine regarding most things were at the antipodes,
    very unreceptive, who would be entirely out of sympathy with me in
    my present experiment and experiences, at which I knew he would
    only laugh, while regarding me as a simple tool in tricky hands.
    Such a man was, I decided, the most satisfactory for my trial. The
    grey lady here impressed me with a desire to will; in her anxiety
    she appeared to move towards me. I felt her will one with mine,
    and I willed with a concentrated strength of mind and body, which
    finally prostrated me, thus: I will that [Mr. A.] may feel I am
    near him and want his help; and that, without any suggestion from
    me, he write to tell me I have influenced him to-night.

    "The grey lady disappeared. I was seated in the chair, weary, but
    feeling naturally, and back in common-place life. We put down the
    date and the appearance of the grey lady, and I spoke to none of
    what had happened. Some weeks passed, when I received a letter from
    [Mr. A.], asking how had I been employed on a certain July evening
    at such and such an hour, mentioning to what hour it would answer
    in London--day, date, and hour were those on which I had made my
    proof trial--saying that he was asleep, and had dreamed something
    he would tell me, but that he awoke from the dream feeling I wanted
    something of him, and asking me to let him know if at the time he
    so carefully mentioned I had been doing anything which had any
    reference to him. I then, and then only, told him what I have here
    related."

Unfortunately Mr. A., on being again appealed to, refused to write
an account of his own experience, on the ground that his memory for
details might by lapse of time have become untrustworthy. The case is
therefore defective, not merely by the length of time which passed
between the incident and the agent's record of it, but by the absence
of any direct testimony from the percipient. It will be seen that Mrs.
B. writes of Mr. A.'s impression as a _dream_. It seems clear, however,
that Mr. A. did not himself regard his experience as a dream.

An interesting account is given by Miss Edith Maughan (_Journal
S.P.R._) of a similar experiment made by her in the summer of 1888.
She was reading in bed when the idea occurred to her of "willing" to
appear to her friend, Miss Ethel Thompson, who occupied the adjoining
room. After concentrating her attention strongly for a few minutes she
"felt dizzy and only half-conscious." On recovering full consciousness
she heard Miss Thompson's voice speaking in the next room. The time was
about 2 A.M. As a matter of fact, Miss Thompson, who was fully awake,
was disturbed between 2 and 3 A.M. by seeing at the bedside the figure
of Miss Maughan, which disappeared instantly on a light being struck.
It is not perhaps possible under the circumstances, in view of Miss
Maughan's own statement that she was only semi-conscious during part of
the experiment, absolutely to exclude the hypothesis that the figure
seen was that of Miss Maughan in some state analogous to somnambulism,
and the case is not therefore given in full; but it is important to
note that both ladies--and we have reason to know that they are good
observers--are convinced that the figure seen was not that of Miss
Maughan in the flesh, and the rapidity of the disappearance is a
further argument against such a supposition.

In the cases so far dealt with the agent, when his state is recorded,
was asleep or entranced at the time of the experiment, whilst the
percipient appears as a rule to have been awake. In the cases which
follow the agent was awake, but the percipient, in two of the cases--if
not also in the third--seems to have seen the hallucinatory figure
in the borderland state on awaking from sleep. In two of the cases
the agent, no doubt intentionally, chose a time when he had reason
to believe that the percipient would be asleep; in the third case,
whilst the experiments at night failed, success was obtained when the
percipient had fallen asleep unexpectedly in the daytime. In view
of the absence of any well-attested cases in which both agent and
percipient are shown to have been fully awake immediately before and at
the time of the experiment,--in case 62 (Wesermann) the state of the
agent, and in case 66 (Wiltse) that of the percipient, is not clearly
shown,--it is difficult to resist the conclusion that the condition of
sleep or trance in one or both parties to the experiment is favourable
to transference of this kind. That sleep, or rather the borderland
which lies on either side of sleep, is peculiarly favourable to the
production in the _percipient_, not only of hallucinations in general,
but of telepathic hallucinations in particular, has already been
shown. But the instances cited in the present chapter would seem to
indicate that in the agent also sleep and trance (or possibly a trance
self-induced in sleep or in waking) may facilitate such transmissions.


No. 65.--From DR. VON SCHRENCK-NOTZING.

We received the following case from Baron von Schrenck-Notzing, some
of whose experiments have been already quoted (No. 9, p. 54). Dr. von
Schrenck-Notzing first gave an account of the incident verbally to
Professor Sidgwick at Munich, and subsequently, at his request, sent
in June 1888 the following written narrative:--

    "In the winter of 1886-87, I think it was in the month of February,
    as I was going along the Barerstrasse one evening at half-past 11,
    it occurred to me to make an attempt at influencing at a distance,
    through mental concentration. As I had had, for some time, the
    honour of being acquainted with the family of Herr ----, and thus
    had had the opportunity of learning that his daughter, Fräulein
    ----, was sensitive to psychical influences, I decided to try to
    influence her, especially as the family lived at the corner of the
    Barerstrasse and Karlstrasse. The windows of the dwelling were dark
    as I passed by, from which I concluded that the ladies had already
    gone to rest. I then stationed myself by the wall of the houses on
    the opposite side of the road, and for about five minutes firmly
    concentrated my thoughts on the following desire:--Fräulein ----
    shall wake and think of me. Then I went home. The next day when I
    met Fräulein ----'s friend on the ice, I learned from her (they
    shared a bedroom between them) that something strange had happened
    to the ladies during the preceding night. I remarked thereupon
    to Fräulein Prieger (such was the friend's name) that the time
    when the occurrence took place was between half-past 11 and 12;
    whereat she was greatly astonished. Then I obtained from the lady
    an account of the circumstance, as she herself has written it out
    on the accompanying sheet of paper. For me the success of this
    experiment was a proof that under certain circumstances one person
    can influence another at a distance.

    "ALBERT FREIHERR VON SCHRENCK-NOTZING."

The percipient, Miss ----, writes on May 11th, 1888:--

    "There is not much to tell concerning the incident of which you
    ask me to give an account. It happened thus:--Baron Schrenck was
    returning home one night in March 1887 (or April, I am not sure
    as to the date), about 11.30, and stood for some time outside my
    bedroom window, which looked onto the street. I was in bed at the
    time, lying with closed eyes, nearly asleep. It seemed to me as if
    the part of the room where my bed was had become suddenly light,
    and I felt compelled to open my eyes, seeing at the same time, as
    it appeared to me, the face of Baron Schrenck. It was gone again
    as quick as lightning. The next day I told my friend Fräulein
    Prieger of this occurrence; she went skating that same day, and
    met Baron Schrenck on the ice. They had scarcely conversed
    together five minutes before he asked Fräulein Prieger if I had
    seen anything last night. Fräulein Prieger repeated what I had told
    her, whereupon Baron Schrenck said that, at the time of my seeing
    him, he was standing outside my window, trying hard to impress his
    presence upon me. This never occurred again, and I believe Baron
    Schrenck did not have occasion to repeat the experiment."

In a further letter Miss ---- adds (1) that the blinds of her room were
drawn down, (2) that she has experienced no other hallucination of any
kind.

Fräulein Prieger, whose account was enclosed in Dr. von
Schrenck-Notzing's letter of June 1888, writes:--

    "The winter before last, shortly after Christmas, I was suddenly
    awakened in the night, between 11 and 12 o'clock, by my friend
    ----, who asked me in an excited manner if I _also_ saw Baron
    von Schrenck, who was close by her bed. On my objecting that she
    had been dreaming, and should now quietly go to sleep again, she
    repeated that she had been completely awake, and had seen Baron von
    Schrenck so close to her that she could have caught hold of his
    beard. By degrees she quieted herself, and we both went to sleep.

    "The following day, on my way home from the ice, I told Baron von
    Schrenck of this exciting nocturnal scene, and noticed to my not
    slight astonishment that he seemed greatly rejoiced, as though over
    a successful experiment which had received its completion in what I
    communicated to him.

    "LINA PRIEGER.
    "Gubelsbergerstrasse, 15 I."

It is much to be regretted that none of the persons concerned thought
it worth while to write down an account of the incident at the time. It
will be observed that even in the comparatively short interval--little
more than a year--which elapsed before this was done, one slight
discrepancy, as to the time at which Fräulein Prieger was told of the
impression, has crept into the narrative. But it seems clear that
Miss ---- told her experience before Fräulein Prieger met Baron von
Schrenck-Notzing.

In the next two cases also the result here recorded is one of many
successful experiments in thought-transference made by the agent (see
