CHAPTER VIII.

COINCIDENT DREAMS.


Seeing that so large a part of our lives is spent in sleep, we should
perhaps be warranted in looking amongst dreams for evidence of the
transference of thought from one mind to another; especially as the
quiescence and the absence of outward impressions characteristic of
sleep are precisely the conditions indicated by our researches as
favourable to such transmission. Nor do the actual results in this
direction at all fall short of any reasonable expectation. Long before
scientific attention was directed to the subject the coincidences
reported between dreams and external events had won the special
consideration of the superstitious, and had given to the dreamer of
dreams high rank in the company of the prophets and soothsayers.
And such coincidences appear to be not less frequent at the present
time. My chief difficulty in writing this chapter has been the task
of selection from the super-abundant material at hand, much of it
accumulated within the last five or six years; and this material
is itself the carefully-sifted residuum of a much larger mass of
testimony, inferior, if at all, by slight and various degrees. But
notwithstanding this great accumulation, it cannot be contended
that the proof of telepathy derived from a consideration of dream
coincidences is at all comparable in cogency with that furnished by
impressions received during waking life. That some at least of the
dreams quoted below owed their origin to ideas transmitted to the
sleeper from another mind will no doubt be admitted as probable, but
the probability depends perhaps not more on their intrinsic value than
on the analogy of similar testimony from waking percipients. When (as
in some of the cases to be given later, in Chapters X.-XIII.) a witness
of integrity asserts that he saw in broad daylight a figure where no
such figure was, resembling a friend, and coincident with that friend's
death, we are justified in attaching great weight to the coincidence.
But if the same witness had dreamt of the figure, instead of seeing
it, the coincidence would deserve far less consideration. And yet the
cerebral mechanism involved in both processes is no doubt very similar.
A dream is a hallucination in sleep, and a hallucination is only a
waking dream; though it is probable that the waking impression, seeing
that it can contend on equal terms with the impressions derived from
external objects, is more vivid than the common run of dreams. But
the evidence of dream coincidence is defective, primarily, from the
frequency of dreams; it is only a small proportion of educated persons,
at any rate, who ever experience a hallucination, but everybody dreams
occasionally, and some persons dream every night. Clearly there must be
here a wide scope for coincidence. Secondly, whilst dream impressions
are probably less vivid at the time, they are certainly more elusive
in the memory. There is a serious risk, therefore, that after the
event is known detailed correspondences may be read back into the
indistinct picture preserved in the memory; or that a dream which at
the time made but a slight impression may be charged retrospectively
with emotional significance. Finally, as the dream does not enter into
any organic series of impressions, and has no landmarks of its own,
either in space or time, it becomes after the lapse of a few days, or
even hours, a matter of difficulty to determine its date. Against
the last two sources of error it is indeed possible to guard. Under
ordinary circumstances no dream should be regarded as having evidential
value which has not been either recorded in writing or mentioned to
some other person before the coincidence is known. Mention of the
dream immediately after the receipt of the news, even with persons of
proved accuracy, can by no means be regarded as equivalent to mention
of it beforehand. For it is possible, as already pointed out (p.
155), that some alleged coincident and prophetic dreams may be due to
hallucination of memory, or still more probably to the embellishment
and amplification of vague pre-existent memories.

But however carefully dreams are noted and described, the objection
still holds good that with impressions of such frequent occurrence
chance alone will account for a considerable number of coincidences. It
is easy, however, on a superficial view to exaggerate the probabilities
of chance coincidence. The great majority of dreams, vague at the time
and fugitive in the retrospect, are like footsteps in the sand. Yet as,
here and there, one set of footprints out of the millions impressed
upon the shore of a long-forgotten sea has been preserved for us in
sand now turned to stone, so now and then one dream stands out from
all the rest, and leaves on the memory an imprint which the daily
reflux of the tide of consciousness cannot efface. If we strike out of
the account all the dreams which are too vague to leave any permanent
impress on waking, all those which are purely inconsequent and
fantastic, and all which can be readily traced to some physical cause,
we shall find that the number which we have to deal with,--the number,
that is, of vivid and passably realistic dreams,--though no doubt
large, is perhaps not beyond the range of definite calculation. It
could not, for instance, be plausibly contended that the correspondence
of a dream such as that of Captain Campbell's, recorded below,
with the death of the person portrayed, is on the same level as the
prophetic vision of the City clerk, who, dreaming every other night
of the success of some horse which he has backed, happens on some one
occasion to dream of the future winner.

It will be observed that of the nine dreams which are given in full in
this chapter, no less than four are concerned with death. Of the much
larger number--149--of coincident dreams published in _Phantasms of the
Living_, no less than 79 relate to a death. Now, as dreams of death or
suggesting death do not form a large proportion of dreams in general,
their startling preponderance amongst coincident dreams constitutes
in itself an argument for ascribing such dreams to telepathy; for
if any power exists whereby one mind can affect another, it would
appear _à priori_ probable that such a power would be exercised most
frequently and effectually at times of exceptional crisis. As has been
pointed out by Mr. Gurney (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. p. 303),
the preponderance amongst "true" dreams of dreams relating to death
may indeed be explained on the assumption that such dreams are more
frequently remembered than other "true" dreams. This assumption is no
doubt in a measure justified, but the consequences of admitting its
truth must not be overlooked; for it of course follows that a large
number of coincident dreams are forgotten, _i.e._, that the grounds
furnished by dreams for believing in telepathy are much stronger than
would at first sight appear.

Again, the frequency of coincident dreams of death offers a favourable
opportunity for estimating the probabilities of their occurrence by
chance. The problem is simplified in one direction by the consideration
that death is at all events a unique event in the history of the agent.
If we can ascertain the proportion which "true" bear to "not-true"
dreams of death, we can calculate by means of the tables of mortality
the probabilities for some other cause than chance. The problem was
actually attempted by Mr. Gurney, who found that coincident dreams of
death in the collection published in _Phantasms of the Living_ were
twenty-four times as numerous as chance would allow.[89]

Theoretically, dreams are of considerable interest as throwing light
upon the nature of waking impressions; for it should be observed
that dreams are of many kinds and of many degrees of vividness. Some
in the vagueness and ideality of the impressions resemble closely
the waking experiences recorded in the preceding chapter. Others in
their extreme clearness and semi-externalisation approach nearly to
the level of hallucinations. But whilst few persons above the level
of the savage believe that their dream percepts correspond to actual
external objects visibly present, there are some who think that the
hallucinatory image of a dying friend which they see with their eyes
open, and taking a place in the external order of things, must, just
because they see it with open eyes, form a part of that external order.
And if the percipient himself is not under any such misconception,
the journalist who sneers at him for believing in "ghosts" is so, by
his own confession. If once it is recognised that between dreams and
hallucinations there is no essential difference, the chief obstacle
to the acceptance, by two different classes of minds, of telepathy as
the explanation of coincident hallucinations will have disappeared. It
will become clear, on the one hand, that a belief in the significance
of such hallucinations does not necessarily carry with it a belief in
"ghosts"; and on the other, that the fact of an apparition taking its
place as a fully externalised percept does not imply any substantial
basis for the percept.

In dealing with dreams we will discuss first those which resemble most
closely the experimental results and the cases considered in the last
chapter, and proceed from these to dreams which include a definite
representation of the agent. Finally, cases of somewhat aberrant type
and clairvoyant dreams will be considered.


_Simultaneous Dreams._

No. 52.--From MISS INA BIDDER.

    "RAVENSBURY PARK, MITCHAM,
    _June_ 10_th_, 1890.

    "The night before last a curious case of what I cannot but call
    telepathy occurred between myself and my sister. (We sleep in the
    same room.) For the last two years the whole family have been very
    much interested in some skeletons and flint instruments found in
    a gravel pit in one of the fields. They have never been properly
    excavated, and about ten days ago my sister and I had been amusing
    ourselves pulling out, bone by bone, one of these 'palæolithic
    men,' as we pleased to call them. He was a particularly interesting
    one, as we found a flint arrow-head in his hip-bone, but we only
    got to his ribs. On the night in question I dreamt that my father
    was excavating in a more approved method, taking off the top mould
    and leaving the bones in their original position in the brown
    earth, so that you could see the form of the man to whom they
    had belonged. In this way we lifted out the rest of the skeleton
    at which my sister and I had been working, and behold! when we
    got to the skull it had a snout. We were delighted to be able to
    prove this extraordinary fact respecting palæolithic man, and
    the doctors crowded down from town to see the creature; but my
    sister was nowhere about, and in my anxiety to tell her of our
    discovery I woke myself and nearly woke her. I stopped myself just
    in time, thinking what a shame it was to spoil her night's rest
    for a dream. Still wishing she were awake to hear, and thinking
    again of the curious effect of the black, earth-filled skull, with
    its projecting snout, and dreaming of my dream, I turned over
    and dropped into another. Before I had got well started in this,
    however, I was awakened by my sister trying to light the candle.
    'What is it?' I said, 'what's the matter?' 'I've just had such a
    horrid dream,' she answered; 'it haunts me still.' But I do not
    think I need repeat her dream, which I believe she has written."

Miss M. Bidder writes as follows:--

    "_June_ 9_th_, 1890.

    "I was sleeping last night with my sister, with whom I have shared
    a room all my life. I was sleeping soundly, and my dreams, of which
    I now retain only the vaguest recollection, took their most usual
    form of a confused repetition of all the events of the past day
    jumbled together without meaning or sequence, and without even much
    distinctness. The whole scene of the dream was hazy and confused,
    until I became suddenly conscious of the figure of a skeleton in
    the foreground, as it were, which disturbed me in my dream with
    a sense of incongruity. I first made a half-conscious effort to
    banish the figure--which struck me with great horror--from my
    dream, but instead of disappearing it grew more and more prominent
    and distinct, while all the rest of the scene and the people in
    it seemed fading away. The figure of the skeleton, which I can
    perfectly recall, presented one of the most vivid impressions I
    ever remember to have received in a dream. It appeared to stand
    upright before me, with what seemed to be a dark cloak hanging
    about its limbs and forming a kind of background as of a black
    hood behind the skull, which showed against it with extreme
    distinctness. It was on the skull, which was facing me full, that
    my attention was chiefly concentrated, and as I stared at it it
    slowly turned sideways, showing, to my horror, the profile of a
    very long, sharp nose in place of the hollow socket. The feeling
    of terror with which I perceived this (for the first time) was so
    intense as to awaken me, nor could I even then entirely banish it.
    So unpleasantly strong, indeed, was the impression of some horrible
    presence which still remained, that it was with difficulty that I
    resisted the desire to rouse my sister that she might help me to
    shake it off. Some movement of mine did in fact presently awake
    her, and I at once began to tell her of my horrible dream. Before,
    however, I had described it to her, she interrupted me to tell me
    of a dream which she had had."

Here it is perhaps permissible to conjecture that some common
experience of their waking life might have suggested to both sisters
the idea of a primeval skeleton with a snout. But it is remarkable,
if such is the true explanation, that the common idea was elaborated
into a dream by the two percipients almost simultaneously. It must be
admitted, however, that such dreams, which have hitherto been reported
only as occurring between persons whose lives are spent for the most
part in the same surroundings, have little value as evidence. It is
only those who believe, on evidence derived from other sources, in the
reality of telepathy, who will be inclined to regard such cases as
possibly due to its action, rather than to the spontaneous association
of ideas in minds sharing the same experiences and moving to some
extent in similar grooves.


_Dreams coinciding with external events._

In the cases which follow the coincidence is of a more definite kind,
and the question is now no longer of the correspondence of thought in
closely associated minds, but of the correspondence of thought with an
outward event--with something done or suffered by the person whose mind
apparently affects that of the dreamer.


_Transference of Sensation in Dreams._

The following case, quoted from the _Proc. of the Am. S.P.R._ (pp. 226,
227), offers a curious parallel to some of the cases recorded at the
beginning of Chapter II. The narrator is a lady of Boston, whose good
faith is vouched for by Professor Royce. She wrote from Hamburg on the
23rd of June 1887 to her sister, who was at that time in Boston, U.S.A.
The following is an extract from this letter:--


No. 53.

    "I very nearly wrote from the Hague to say that I should be very
    thankful when we had a letter from you of the 18th of June saying
    that you were well and happy.... In the night of the 17th I had
    what I suppose to be a nightmare, but it all seemed to belong
    to you ... and to be a horrid pain in your head, as if it were
    being forcibly jammed into an iron casque, or some such pleasant
    instrument of torture. The queer part of it was my own dissociation
    from the pain, and conviction that it was yours. I suppose it was
    some slight painful sensation magnified into something quite severe
    by a half-asleep condition. It will be a fine example of what the
    Society for Psychical Research ought to be well supplied with--an
    _Ahnung_ which came to nothing."

As a matter of fact the lady in Boston to whom this letter was
addressed is shown, on the evidence of a dentist's bill, to have spent
on the 17th June an hour and three-quarters in the operating chair,
while a painful tooth was being stopped. The discomfort consequent on
the operation, as was learnt from the patient herself, "continued as
a dull pain for some hours, in such wise that during the afternoon of
the 17th June the patient could not forget the difficulty at all. She
slept, however, as usual at night. The nightmare in Europe followed the
operation in Boston by a good many hours, but the pain of the tooth
returned daily for some three weeks." As the letter was written from
Europe six days after the nightmare there was of course no possibility
of any communication having passed in the interval except by telegram.

In the next case also the coincidence was of a trivial nature, but
appears to have been exact in point of time. The narrative is quoted
here because the impression, though not described beforehand, was of
a quite unusual kind, being in part, if not altogether, a _waking_
experience. It is doubtful, indeed, whether it should be classed as a
dream, and not rather as a "borderland" hallucination.


No. 54.--From MRS. HARRISON.

    "_February_ 7_th_, 1891.

    "I reside with my husband at 15 Lupton Street, N.W. This
    afternoon I was lying on the sofa, sound asleep, when I suddenly
    awoke, thinking I heard my husband sigh as if in pain. I arose
    immediately, expecting to find him in the room. He was not there,
    and looking at my watch I found it was half-past three. At six
    o'clock my husband came in. He called my attention to a bruise on
    his forehead, which was caused by his having knocked it against
    the stone steps in a Turkish bath. I said to him, 'I know when it
    happened--it was at half-past three, for I heard you sigh as if in
    pain at that time.' He replied, 'Yes, that was the exact time, for
    I remember noticing the clock directly after.'

    "The gentleman who appends his name as witness was present when
    this conversation took place.

    "LOUISA E. HARRISON.

    "Witness: Henry Hooton, 23 Bunhill Row, E.C."

This account was sent to the S.P.R. by Mr. Harrison on the day of the
occurrence described. In an accompanying letter he writes: "Everything
happened exactly as stated."

In the cases which follow, with one exception, the dream impression
was of a well-marked visual nature. In the first three narratives the
dream had reference to the death of the person represented. The mode
of representation, however, it will be seen, differed in each case. In
the first, the associated imagery was in part of a fantastic nature,
and the dream, though sufficiently exceptional to leave a feeling of
fatigue on the following morning, and to induce the percipient to write
an account of it to his friends, resembled in other respects the motley
crowd which throng through the gate of ivory. In the second case the
surroundings of the central figure were such as the waking imagination
of the dreamer would naturally have conjured up in picturing the
deathbed of his friend.


No. 55.--From MR. J. T.

    This case is recorded at some length in the _Proceedings of the
    Am. S.P.R._ (pp. 394-397) by Professor Royce. Professor Royce
    explains that Mr. E., the agent, died after a short illness in
    New York City, on Tuesday, February 23rd, 1886. Mr. J. T., who,
    though an acquaintance of Mr. E., had heard nothing of him for some
    time, and, as indeed appears from the letters quoted, knew of no
    special cause for anxiety, was on the day of the death, and for
    some time afterwards, in St. John, New Brunswick. In consequence of
    severe snowstorms, no mails had been received in St. John from the
    South for some days, and at the time when the letter, an extract
    from which we give below, was written, it was not possible for
    the writer to have known of Mr. E.'s death. The original letter,
    written by Mr. J. T. to his wife, and dated Wednesday, March 3rd,
    1886, on paper headed Hotel Dufferin, St. John, N.B., has been seen
    by Professor Royce:--

    "I have not heard of you for an age. The train that should have
    been here on Friday last has not arrived yet. I had a very strange
    dream on Tuesday night. I have never been in Ottawa in my life,
    and yet I was there, in Mr. E.'s house. Mrs. E., Miss E., and the
    little girls were in great trouble because Mr. E. was ill. I had to
    go and tell my brother [Mr. E.'s son-in-law], and, strange to say,
    he was down a coal-mine.

    "When I got down to him I told him that Mr. E. was dead. But in
    trying to get out we could not do it. We climbed and climbed, but
    always fell back. I felt tired out when I awoke next morning, and I
    cannot account for the dream in any way."

Though the letter leaves it doubtful whether the dream actually
occurred on the night of the death, or a week later, it appears from
further correspondence that the percipient believes the dream to have
taken place on the night of the 23rd February, the night of the death,
and this is the most natural interpretation of the letter.[90] In any
case, the dream preceded the news of the death.

In the next case, again, the dream is of a not uncommon type, but the
impression made, it will be seen, was such as to wake the dreamer at
the time, and to induce him in the morning to take the unusual course
of noting the dream in his diary.


No. 56.--From MR. R. V. BOYLE.

    "3 STANHOPE TERRACE, W.,
    _July_ 30_th_, 1884.

    "In India, early on the morning of November 2nd, 1868 (which would
    be about 10 to 11 P.M. of November 1st in England), I had so clear
    and striking a dream or vision (repeated a second time after a
    short waking interval) that, on rising as usual between 6 and 7
    o'clock, I felt impelled at once to write an entry in my diary,
    which is now before me.

    "At the time referred to my wife and I were in Simla, in the
    Himalayas, the summer seat of the Governor-General, and my
    father-in-law and mother-in-law were living in Brighton. We had not
    heard of or from either of them for weeks, nor had I been recently
    speaking or thinking of them, for there was no reason for anxiety
    regarding them. It is right, however, to say that my wife's father
    had gone to Brighton some months before on account of his health,
    though he was not more delicate than his elder brother, who is
    (1884) still living.

    "It seemed in my dream that I stood at the open door of a bedroom
    in a house in Brighton, and that before me, by candle-light, I saw
    my father-in-law lying pale upon his bed, while my mother-in-law
    passed silently across the room in attendance on him. The vision
    soon passed away, and I slept on for some time. On waking, however,
    the nature of the impression left upon me unmistakably was that
    my father-in-law was dead. I at once noted down the dream, after
    which I broke the news of what I felt to be a revelation to my
    wife, when we thought over again and again all that could bear
    upon the matter, without being able to assign any reason for my
    being so strongly and thoroughly impressed. The telegraph from
    England to Simla had been open for some time, but now there was an
    interruption, which lasted for about a fortnight longer, and on
    the 17th (fifteen days after my dream) I was neither unprepared
    nor surprised to receive a telegram from England, saying that my
    father-in-law had died in Brighton on November 1st. Subsequent
    letters showed that the death occurred on the _night_ of the 1st.

    "Dreams, as a rule, leave little impression on me, and the one
    above referred to is the only one I ever thought of making a note
    of, or of looking expectantly for its fulfilment.

    "R. VICARY BOYLE."

Mrs. Boyle writes as follows:--

    "6_th August_ 1887.

    "I well remember my husband telling me one morning, early in
    November 1868, when at Simla, in India, that he had had a striking
    dream (repeated) in which my father, then at Brighton, seemed to be
    dying. We were both deeply impressed, and then anxiously awaited
    news from home. A telegram first reached us, in about a fortnight,
    which was afterwards confirmed by letters telling of my father's
    death having occurred on the same night when my husband had the
    dream.

    "ELÉONORE A. BOYLE.

Mr. Gurney adds the following notes on the case:--

    "The following entries were copied by me from Mr. Boyle's diary:--

    "'Nov. 2. Dreamed of E.'s F[ather] early this morning.

    "'Written before dressing.

    "'Nov. 17. Got telegram from L[ouis] H[ack] this morning of his
    father's death on 1st Nov. inst.'

    "The following notice of the decease of Mr. Boyle's father-in-law
    occurred in the _Times_ for 4th November 1868:--

      "'On 1st Nov., at Brighton, William Hack, late of Dieppe, aged 72.'

    "Mr. Boyle informed me that he is a 'particularly sound sleeper,
    and very rarely dreams.' This dream was a very unique and
    impressive experience, apart from the coincidence.

    "There was a regular correspondence between Mrs. Boyle and her
    mother, but for several mails the letters had contained no mention
    of her father, on whose account absolutely no anxiety was felt.

    "E. G."

It appears that the death actually occurred at about 2 P.M. in England,
which was, allowing for the difference in longitude, about nine hours
before the dream.

In the next case the dream is of a more unusual character. The figure
of the agent appears to have stood alone, whilst the impression
made was such that the percipient is uncertain whether to class
his experience as a dream or a vision. Indeed, in the absence of
dream-background, and in the life-like appearance of the figure, the
dream bears a striking resemblance to a waking hallucination.


No. 57.--From CAPTAIN R. E. W. CAMPBELL

(2nd Royal Irish Fusiliers).

    "ARMY AND NAVY CLUB, PALL MALL, S.W.,
    _February_ 21_st_, 1888.

    "I have much pleasure in enclosing you an account of a remarkable
    dream which occurred to me in the year 1886, together with three
    other accounts of the same, written by officers to whom the facts
    of the case are known. You are at liberty, in the interests of
    science, to make such use of them as you please.

    "I was stationed at the Depôt Barracks, Armagh, Ireland, on the
    30th November 1886, and on the night of the same date, or early
    in the morning of the 1st December (I cannot tell which, as I
    did not refer to my watch), I was in bed in my room, when I was
    awakened by a most vivid and remarkable dream or vision, in which
    I seemed to see a certain Major Hubbersty, late of my regiment,
    the 2nd Battalion Royal Irish Fusiliers, looking ghastly pale, and
    falling forward as if dying. He seemed to be saying something to
    me, but the words I could not make out, although I tried hard to
    understand him. The clothes he had on at the time appeared to me
    to have a thin red thread running through the pattern. I was very
    deeply impressed by my dream, and so much did I feel that there
    was something significant in it that on the 1st December, when
    at luncheon in the mess, I related it to three brother-officers,
    telling them at the same time that I felt sure we should soon hear
    something bad about Major Hubbersty. I had almost forgotten all
    about it when, on taking up the _Times_ newspaper of the following
    Saturday on the Sunday morning following, the first thing that
    caught my eyes was the announcement of Major Hubbersty's death at
    Penzance, in Cornwall, on the 30th November, the very date on which
    I had the remarkable dream concerning him.

    "My feelings on seeing such a remarkable fulfilment of my dream can
    be better imagined than described. Suffice it to say that on the
    return from church of Messrs. Kaye and Scott I asked them to try
    and recollect anything peculiar which had happened at luncheon on
    the 1st December, when, after a few moments' deliberation, they at
    once recounted to me the whole circumstances of my dream, as they
    had heard them from my lips on the 1st December 1886. On seeing Mr.
    Leeper a few days afterwards at his father's house, Loughgall, Co.
    Armagh, he at once remembered all I had told him about the dream
    on the 1st December, on my questioning him about it. I, of course,
    can assign no possible cause for the remarkable facts related, as
    apart from the difference of our standing in the service, the late
    Major Hubbersty and I were in no wise particularly friendly to one
    other, nor had we seen very much of each other. I had not seen him
    for eighteen months previously. A very curious fact in connection
    with the dream is that it occurred to me in the very same room in
    the barracks as Major Hubbersty used to occupy when stationed at
    Armagh, several years previously."

In answer to an inquiry, Captain Campbell writes, on February 29th,
1888:--

    "I do not dream much, as a rule, and cannot recall to my mind ever
    before having had a dream of a similar nature to that dreamt by me
    about the late Major Hubbersty."

Mr. A. B. R. Kaye, Lieutenant Third Royal Irish Fusiliers, writes on
August 20th, 1887, from 62 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin:--

    "I was stationed in the barracks, Armagh Depôt, Royal Irish
    Fusiliers, in November and December 1886. On the 1st of December at
    lunch there were present Lieutenant R. E. W. Campbell (2nd R.I.F.),
    Lieutenant R. W. Leeper (2nd R.I.F.), Lieutenant T. E. Scott (4th
    R.I.F.), and myself. During our conversation Major Hubbersty's
    name was mentioned, and Campbell told us that he had a dream about
    him the night before, how he had seen a vision of Major Hubbersty
    looking very pale and seeming to be falling forward, and saying
    something to him which he could not hear; also, he (Campbell) told
    us he was sure we would hear something about Major Hubbersty very
    soon.

    "On the following Sunday, when Scott and I returned from church and
    went into the ante-room, Campbell, who was there, asked us both
    to try and remember anything peculiar that he had told us on the
    1st. After a little time, we remembered about the dream, and he
    (Campbell) then showed us the _Times_ newspaper of the day before,
    containing the notice of Major Hubbersty's death, at Penzance, on
    November 30th, 1886, the same date as that on which he had the
    dream; also, I remember, he (Campbell) told us that in his vision
    he seemed to see the clothes which Major Hubbersty had on, and that
    there was a red thread running through the pattern of the trousers."

The two other friends mentioned by Captain Campbell, Messrs. Leeper and
Scott, have written letters to the same effect.[91]

From these letters there can be no doubt that the coincidence made a
marked impression on each of those to whom the dream was related, and
this fact, perhaps even more than Captain Campbell's own narrative, is
a striking proof of the exceptional nature of the experience.

There is no reason in this case for supposing that the dream conveyed
any other information than the fact of the agent's death. There is
no evidence that the manner of death or the clothes worn by Major
Hubbersty resembled what was seen in the dream. The clothes in which
the figure appeared may have been a reminiscence of clothes which the
percipient had actually seen worn on some occasion by the agent. But
this explanation will hardly apply to the following case, where the
dream included a representation, accurate in more than one particular,
of the agent as he actually appeared at the time. It is true that
we have to rely upon the percipient's memory after the interval of
a fortnight for the details of the dream, but since the dream was
sufficiently impressive to cause a note to be taken of it by a person
not in the habit of making such notes, it seems not unreasonable to
trust the memory to that extent.


No, 58.--From MR. E. W. HAMILTON, C.B.

    "PARK LANE CHAMBERS, PARK LANE, W.,
    _April_ 6_th_, 1888.

    "On Wednesday morning, March 21st, 1888, I woke up with the
    impression of a very vivid dream. I had dreamt that my brother,
    who had long been in Australia, and of whom I had heard nothing
    for several months, had come home; that after an absence of twelve
    years and a half he was very little altered in appearance, but that
    he had something wrong with one of his arms; it looked horribly red
    near the wrist, his hand being bent back.

    "When I got up that morning the dream recurred constantly to
    my thoughts, and I at last determined to take a note of it,
    notwithstanding my natural prejudices against attaching any
    importance to dreams, to which, indeed, I am not much subject.
    Accordingly, in the course of the day, I made in my little Letts'
    diary a mark thus: X, with my brother's name after it.

    "On the following Monday morning, the 26th March, I received a
    letter from my brother, which bore the date of the 21st March, and
    which had been posted at Naples (where the Orient steamers touch),
    informing me that he was on his way home, and that he hoped to
    reach London on or about the 30th March, and adding that he was
    suffering from a very severe attack of gout in the left arm.

    "The next day I related to some one this curious incident, and I
    commented on the extraordinary coincidence of facts with the dream
    except in one detail, and that was, that the arm which I had seen
    in my dream did not look as if it were merely affected with gout:
    the appearance it had presented to me was more like extremely bad
    eczema.

    "My brother duly reached England on the 29th, having disembarked
    at Plymouth owing to the painful condition of his arm. It turned
    out that the doctor on board ship had mistaken the case; it was
    not gout, but a case of blood poisoning, resulting in a very bad
    carbuncle or abscess over the wrist joint.

    "Since my brother's return, I have endeavoured to ascertain from
    him the exact hour at which he wrote to me on March 21st. He is not
    certain whether the letter to me was written before noon or after
    noon of that day. He remembers writing four short letters in the
    course of that day--two before luncheon and two after luncheon.
    Had the note addressed to me been written in the forenoon, it
    might nearly have coincided in time with my dream, if allowance
    be made for the difference of time between Greenwich and Naples;
    for, having no recollection of the dream when I woke, according to
    custom, at an early hour on the morning of the 21st, I presume I
    must have dreamt it very little before eight o'clock, the hour at
    which I was called.

    "I may add that, notwithstanding an absence of twelve years and a
    half, my brother has altered very little in appearance; and that I
    have not to my knowledge ever noted a dream before in my life."

On April 12th, 1888, Mr. Gurney inspected the diary with the entry
(X, Clem) under Tuesday, March 20th, 1888, though, as Mr. Hamilton
explained, "it was early the next morning that I had the dream, for I
generally consider all that appertains to bed relates to the day on
which one gets into it".

Mr. Gurney also saw the letter signed Clement E. Hamilton, and dated
Naples, March 21st, 1888, which says "am suffering from very severe
attack of gout in left arm."

The next case presents several points of interest. In part, at least,
it seems to have been a waking experience, possibly the prolongation
of a dream. In this respect it resembles Mrs. Harrison's case, already
cited (No. 54), and if correctly described, the incident possesses
therefore a higher evidential value than a mere dream, however vivid.
I have here classed it as a dream, however, because the percipient
himself so describes it in his letter written a few days after the
experience. The utterance of words by the percipient finds a parallel
in the case of Archdeacon Bruce (Chapter VII., No. 51). But in the
present case there is the additional feature that the percipient is
conscious not only of the sound of his own voice, but of another voice
in reply. The incident, it will be seen, though remote, is attested by
letters written immediately after the event, and by the percipient's
recollection of action taken in consequence of the dream-warning.


No. 59.--From MR. EDWARD A. GOODALL, of the Royal Society of Painters
in Water-Colours.

    "_May_, 1888.

    "At Midsummer, 1869, I left London for Naples. The heat being
    excessive, people were leaving for Ischia, and I thought it best to
    go there myself.

    "Crossing by steamer, I slept one night at Casamicciola, on the
    coast, and walked next morning into the town of Ischia [Mr. Goodall
    then describes an accident to his hand, which prevented him from
    sketching.]

    "It must have been on my third or fourth night, and about the
    middle of it, when I awoke, as it seemed, at the sound of my own
    voice, saying: 'I know I have lost my dearest little May.' Another
    voice, which I in no way recognised, answered: '_No_, not May, but
    your _youngest boy_.'

    "The distinctness and solemnity of the voice made such a
    distressing impression upon me that I slept no more. I got up at
    daybreak, and went out, noticing for the first time telegraph-poles
    and wires.

    "Without delay I communicated with the postmaster at Naples, and by
    next boat received two letters from home. I opened them according
    to dates outside. The first told me that my youngest boy was taken
    suddenly ill; the second, that he was dead.

    "Neither on his account nor on that of any of my family had I any
    cause for uneasiness. All were quite well on my taking leave of
    them so lately. My impression ever since has been that the time of
    the death coincided as nearly as we could judge with the time of my
    accident.

    "In writing to Mrs. Goodall, I called the incident of the voice a
    dream, as less likely perhaps to disturb her than the details which
    I gave on reaching home, and which I have now repeated.

    "My letters happen to have been preserved.

    "I have never had any hallucination of any kind, nor am I in the
    habit of talking in my sleep. I do remember once waking with some
    words of mere nonsense upon my lips, but the experience of the
    voice speaking to me was absolutely unique.

    "EDWARD A. GOODALL."

Extracts from letters to Mrs. E. A. Goodall from Ischia:--

    "WEDNESDAY, _August_ 11_th_, 1869.

    "The postman brought me two letters containing sad news indeed.
    Poor little Percy! I dreamt some nights since the poor little
    fellow was taken from us...."

    "_August_ 14_th_.

    "I did not tell you, dear, the particulars of my dream about poor
    little Percy.

    "I had been for several days very fidgety and wretched at getting
    no letters from home, and had gone to bed in worse spirits than
    usual, and in my dream I fancied I said: 'I have lost my dearest
    little May.' A strange voice seemed to say: 'No, _not_ May, but
    your youngest boy,' not mentioning his name."

Mr. Myers adds:--

    "Mr. Goodall has given me verbally a concordant account of the
    affair, and several members of his family, who were present at our
    interview, recollected the strong impression made on him and them
    at the time."[92]

In the case which follows the agency is difficult to elucidate. The
persons who were spectators of the scene represented in the dream can
hardly be supposed to have been acquainted with the dreamer, and
assuredly would not willingly have revealed the secret. The dream
appears to have been of a clairvoyant character. The account is taken
from the _Proceedings of the Am. S.P.R._, pp. 454 _et seq_.


No. 60.--From MRS. E. J.

    "CAMBRIDGE (U.S.A.), _Nov._ 30, 1886.

    "The dream I will endeavour to relate as clearly as possible.

    "It occurred during the month of August, last summer, while we were
    boarding with Mrs. H., in Lunenburg, where I first met the Misses
    W. I am a perfectly healthy woman, and have always been sceptical
    as to hallucinations in any one, always before having felt the
    cause of the experience might be traced.

    "In my dream I arrived unexpectedly at the house of the Misses
    W., in Cambridge, where I found everything in confusion, drawers
    emptied and their contents scattered about the floor, bundles
    unrolled, and dresses taken down from the closets. Then, as I
    stepped into one room, I saw some boys in bed,--three or four,
    I cannot distinctly remember. I saw their faces distinctly, as
    they sat up in bed at my approach, but the recollection of their
    faces has faded from me now. I could not reach the boys, for they
    disappeared suddenly, and I could not find them; but I thought,
    These cannot be the people whom the Misses W. trusted to care for
    their house in their absence; and I was troubled to know whether it
    was best to tell them when I should return to Lunenburg. This is
    all there was in the dream.

    "Thinking only to amuse them, I related my dream at the
    breakfast-table the following morning, and I regretted doing so
    immediately, for anxiety showed itself in their faces, and the
    elder Miss W. remarked that she hoped my dream was not a forerunner
    of bad tidings from home. I laughed at the idea, but that morning
    the mail brought a letter telling them that their house had been
    entered, and when they went down they found almost the same
    confusion of which I had been a witness the night before--with
    everything strewn about the floor. It was a singular coincidence,
    surely."

Miss W. writes:--

    "7 ---- STREET, _Dec._ 4.

    "I am not quite sure whether the incident to which you allude in
    your note is worthy your attention or not, but I will give you the
    facts, that you may judge for yourself of its value.

    "The burglary, we suppose, took place on the night of the 17th or
    18th of August, I being at the time, for the summer, in the town of
    Lunenburg, Mass.

    "Coming down to breakfast on the morning of the 17th, a lady said
    to me that she had had a strange dream. She thought she went to
    our house, finding it in the greatest confusion, everything turned
    upside-down. As she entered one of the sleeping-rooms she saw two
    boys lying in the bed; but she could not see their faces, for as
    soon as they saw her they jumped up and ran off. I said, 'I hope
    that does not mean that we have been visited by burglars.'

    "I thought no more about it, till the eleven o'clock mail brought
    a note from the woman in charge of the house saying that it had
    been entered,--that everything was in great confusion, many things
    carried off, and she wished we would come home at once. The
    policeman who went over the house with her said he had never seen a
    house more thoroughly ransacked.

    "We found that in the upper attic room the bed had evidently been
    used, and there was, perhaps, more confusion in this room than in
    any other.

    "The lady who had the dream was Mrs. E. J., of Cambridgeport. I
    was told that she had been suffering for about a year from nervous
    prostration, and she was evidently in a condition of great nervous
    excitement.

    "I forbore to speak to her of the occurrence, as one of the ladies
    in the house told me that it had made an unpleasant impression on
    her mind.

    "The whole thing seems rather curious to me, but I do not know that
    you will find it of any value in your investigations."

A dream presenting similar features is recorded in the _Journal of the
S.P.R._ for June 1890. Mr. William Bass, farm bailiff to Mrs. Palmer,
of Turnours Hall, Chigwell, on Good Friday, 1884, "awoke in violent
agitation and profuse perspiration" from a dream that something was
wrong at the stables. He was at first dissuaded by his wife from
paying any attention to the dream, but subsequently, at about 2 A.M.,
dressed and proceeded to the stables (a third of a mile off) to find
that a mare had been stolen. The case has been investigated by Mr. T.
Barkworth, of West Hatch, Chigwell, and by Mr. J. B. Surgey, of 22
Holland Street, Kensington. In a dream recorded in _Phantasms of the
Living_ (vol. i. p. 369), Miss Busk, of 16 Montagu Street, W., dreamt
that in a spot in Kent well known to her she stumbled over "the heads,
left protruding, of some ducks buried in the sand, under some firs."
The dream was mentioned at breakfast to Miss Busk's sister, Mrs. Pitt
Byrne, and an hour later the ladies learnt from their bailiff that some
stolen ducks had accidentally been found buried on the spot and in the
manner described.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 89: _Phantasms_, vol. i. pp. 303-310. The statement in the
text must not be regarded as having more weight than its author himself
would have assigned to it. Mr. Gurney certainly regarded his estimate
as little more than a guess--a guess indeed made by one who had
carefully studied and weighed the facts, so far as they could be known,
but because of our inevitable ignorance a guess still, rather than an
estimate on the approximate accuracy of which it would be safe to rely.
The calculation depends on several assumptions, one or two of which,
at least, are highly controvertible; for instance, the accuracy of the
5187 persons who asserted that they had not within a given period of
twelve years had an exceptionally vivid and distressing dream relating
to the death of a friend; and the accuracy of the twenty-four persons
who described themselves as having had within the same period a similar
dream actually occurring within twelve hours of the death of the person
represented. Probably the estimate given requires modification by large
allowances being made in both directions for defects of memory. But
even when thus discounted the coincidences will, it is thought, by any
one who carefully studies the subject be found to be more numerous than
can plausibly be attributed to chance.]

[Footnote 90: A man writing on Wednesday would almost certainly say
"last night" if he meant to indicate the preceding night, whereas,
having just before written of "Friday last," it was natural to describe
the Tuesday in the previous week as simply "Tuesday."]

[Footnote 91: These letters are omitted for want of space. They are
given in full in the _Journal of the S.P.R._ for April 1888, pp. 255,
256.]

[Footnote 92: _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. pp. 453-455.]




