CHAPTER XIV.

ON CLAIRVOYANCE IN TRANCE.


The word "clairvoyance" was used by the older mesmerists to denote
somewhat heterogeneous phenomena. It was applied in the first place
to a supposed faculty by which the subject was enabled to ascertain
facts not within human knowledge,[132] and in the second place to a
power of discerning facts within the knowledge of some living mind.
Of "clairvoyance" in the first sense there is not at present so much
evidence as need cause hesitation in appropriating the name for other
uses; and it is obvious that if such a faculty could be shown to exist,
a discussion of it would find no place in a work which treats only
of the affection of one human mind by another. But we have abundant
evidence of clairvoyance in the second sense, that is, of a form of
telepathy in which the transmitted idea seems to reach the mind of
the percipient no longer as the meagre result of a serious crisis,
or of a direct and often prolonged effort of attention on the part
of the agent, but spontaneously, with great fulness of detail, and
often with remarkable ease and rapidity, as the outcome of a special
receptivity on the part of the percipient. Such clairvoyance--and the
word must be understood to include the impressions of other senses than
sight--occurs in its most striking form with hypnotised percipients;
and in the present chapter I propose to deal with results obtained in
hypnotism and analogous states, reserving for the following chapter
instances of what appears to be the same faculty occurring in the
normal state.[133]


MRS. PIPER.

The phenomena of clairvoyance, as thus defined, have been observed with
great care in the case of an American lady, Mrs. Piper. Mrs. Piper had
been known for some years in the United States as a clairvoyante and
spirit medium, and her trance utterances had been carefully studied by
Professor James and Dr. Hodgson. In the winter of 1888-89 she spent
two months and a half in this country, at the invitation of certain
members of the S.P.R. She came to England as a complete stranger, and
was met on her landing at Liverpool by Professor Lodge, and during the
whole period she stayed either in the houses of Professor Sidgwick
or Mr. Myers at Cambridge, in Professor Lodge's house at Liverpool,
or in rooms in London selected by Dr. Leaf. Neither at Cambridge nor
Liverpool were there any opportunities of her acquiring knowledge of
the histories and circumstances of the persons who visited her for
experiments, other than those afforded during the actual progress
of the experiment, or by inquiries of servants and children, the
examination of books and photograph albums, or from the newspapers and
private correspondence. Practically she was under close and almost
continuous surveillance during the whole period, and, independently
of the special precautions taken to guard against the acquisition of
knowledge by any of the means above indicated (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi.
pp. 438-440, 446-447, etc.), it is important to note that the sitters
were in almost every instance introduced to Mrs. Piper under an assumed
name; that some of them, and those not the least successful, were
persons in no way connected with the S.P.R., whose admission was due to
circumstances more or less accidental; and that on several occasions
she stated facts which were not within the conscious knowledge of any
person present, and which could not conceivably have been discovered by
any process of private inquiry.[134]

The actual method of experiment was as follows: Mrs. Piper would sit
in a room partially darkened, holding the hands of the sitter, whilst
some other person (generally Mr. Myers, Dr. Leaf, Professor Lodge, or
a shorthand writer) would be present to take notes. Mrs. Piper would
presently go off into a trance, attended at its outset by slight
convulsive movements resembling those of an epileptic attack, and would
after a brief interval assume the voice, gestures, and phraseology
of a man. In this guise she gave herself out as one "Dr. Phinuit," a
medical man who had studied medicine in Paris in the first quarter of
the present century. In the impersonation of this character Mrs. Piper
used occasionally broken English, pronounced some words, proper names
especially, with a French accent, and was admittedly sometimes very
successful in diagnosing and prescribing for the complaints of her
sitters and their friends. "Dr. Phinuit" would then pour out a more or
less coherent flood of conversation, questions, and remarks about the
relatives and friends of those present, their past history and personal
affairs generally, some of which was apparently mere padding, some
obviously chance shots, or "fishing" for further information; whilst,
in the midst of all the irrelevancy and incoherence, there would
occasionally be clear, detailed statements on intimate matters of which
it is inconceivable that Mrs. Piper could have attained any knowledge
by normal means; just as, to quote the apt metaphor of Professor Lodge,
in listening at a telephone "you hear the dim and meaningless fragments
of a city's gossip, till back again comes the voice obviously addressed
to you, and speaking with firmness and decision." In regard to the
trance itself, it has no doubt close analogy with the hypnotic trance,
though Mrs. Piper is not readily amenable to hypnotism by ordinary
means, and when hypnotised her condition is described by Professor
James as very different from that of the "medium trance." (_Proc._,
vol. vi. p. 653; viii. p. 56.) In the latter state Mrs. Piper is,
occasionally at least, anæsthetic in certain senses, and analgesic in
various parts of the body (viii. pp. 4-6), and her eyes are closed,
with the eyeballs turned upwards.

There is no reason to suppose that the simulacrum of "Dr. Phinuit"
is anything else than an impersonation assumed by Mrs. Piper's
subconsciousness. Such impersonations are very common amongst "spirit
mediums" everywhere, and in all forms of spontaneously induced
trance.[135] Nor is "Dr. Phinuit" the only form assumed by Mrs. Piper's
secondary consciousness. It frequently happened in the trance that "Dr.
Phinuit" gave place to an impersonation, often recognised as life-like
and characteristic, of some deceased relative of the sitter's, as in
the case of "Uncle Jerry," mentioned below.[136] Probably in many
cases the basis of these representations was supplied by unguarded
remarks of the sitters themselves, or by skilful guesses on the part
of "Phinuit," sometimes possibly eked out by telepathic drafts on the
sitters' memories. As regards Mrs. Piper's conscious share in the
matter, the persons who have observed her most closely, both in this
country and in America, agree in believing that she is a woman of
transparent simplicity, and with a marked absence of inquisitiveness or
even ordinary interest in matters outside her domestic concerns, and
that she is incapable, morally and intellectually, of carrying on a
prolonged and systematic deception, and must by all impartial persons
be fully acquitted of responsibility for "Dr. Phinuit's" proceedings.
As is almost invariably the case with entranced persons, in the normal
state she appears to know nothing of what goes on in the trance, and to
share none of the information supernormally acquired by her secondary
consciousness. As to whether "Dr. Phinuit" is equally ignorant of
Mrs. Piper's thoughts and of knowledge acquired normally by her, it
is impossible to speak with equal confidence. There can be little
doubt either that he is, or that he wishes, for the sake of effect,
to produce the impression that he is. But, as is not infrequently
the case, the second personality is markedly inferior in its moral
character to the normal consciousness. Its ruling motive in this case
appears to be a prodigious vanity, which drives "Dr. Phinuit," when
telepathy fails, into shuffling, equivocation, and all manner of
contemptible devices for eliciting information, and passing it off as
supernormally acquired. Like the Strong Man of the music-halls, to make
good his bragging he is forced continually to eke out what is genuinely
abnormal by artifices at once disingenuous and transparent.[137]

The following is a summary of the proceedings at two of the more
successful sittings. Mrs. Piper was at the time staying in Liverpool,
with Professor Lodge, who introduced to her on the morning of December
23rd, 1888, under the pseudonym of Dr. Jones,[138] a medical man
practising in the city. Notes were taken throughout by Professor
Lodge, who was himself ignorant of nearly all the details given. The
conversation was practically a monologue, as Dr. C. himself remained
almost entirely silent, assenting, "with a grunt, to wrong quite
as much as to right statements." It will be observed that here, as
throughout, "Dr. Phinuit" appears to gain his information in an
auditory form.


No. 96.

    _Sitting No._ 42. _Monday morning, December_ 23rd.

    Present: Dr. C. (introduced as Dr. Jones) and O. J. L.

    [The following is an abstract of the correct, or subsequently
    corrected or otherwise noteworthy, statements.]

    "You have a little lame girl, lame in the thigh, aged thirteen;
    either second or third. She's a little daisy. I do like her. Dark
    eyes, the gentlest of the lot; good deal of talent for music.
    She will be a brilliant woman; don't forget it. She has more
    sympathy, more mind, more--quite a little daisy. She's got a mark,
    a curious little mark, when you look closely, over eye, a scar
    through forehead over left eye. The boy's erratic; a little thing,
    but a little devil. Pretty good when you know him. He'll make an
    architect likely. Let him go to school. His mother's too nervous.
    It will do him good. [This was a subject in dispute.] You have a
    boy and two girls and a baby; four in the body. It's the little
    lame one I care for. There are two mothers connected with you, one
    named Mary. Your aunt passed out with cancer. You have indigestion,
    and take hot water for it. You have had a bad experience. You
    nearly slipped out once on the water." [Dangerous yacht accident
    last summer. Above statements are correct except the lameness. See
    next sitting.]


_Sitting No._ 43. _Monday evening, December_ 23_rd_.

Present: Dr. and Mrs. C. and O. J. L. [Statements correct when not
otherwise noted.]

    "How's little Daisy? She will get over her cold. But there's
    something the matter with her head. There's somebody round you
    lame and somebody hard of hearing. That little girl has got music
    in her. This lady is fidgety. There are four of you, four going
    to stop with you, one gone out of the body. One got irons on his
    foot. Mrs. Allen, in her surroundings, is the one with iron on
    leg. [Allen was maiden name of mother of lame one.] There's about
    400 of your family. There's Kate; you call her Kitty. She's the one
    that's kind of a crank. Trustworthy, but cranky. She will fly off
    and get married, she will. Thinks she knows everything, she does.
    [This is the nurse-girl, Kitty, about whom they seem to have a joke
    that she is a walking compendium of information.] (An envelope with
    letters written inside, N--H--P--O--Q, was here handed in, and
    Phinuit wrote down B--J--R--O--I--S, not in the best of tempers.)
    A second cousin of your mother's drinks. The little dark-eyed one
    is Daisy. I like her. She can't hear very well. The lame one is a
    sister's child. [A cousin's child, the one _née_ Allen, really.]
    The one that's deaf in her head is the one that's got the music
    in her. That's Daisy, and she's going to have the paints I told
    you of. [Fond of painting.] She's growing up to be a beautiful
    woman. She ought to have a paper ear. [An artificial drum had been
    contemplated.] You have an Aunt Eliza. There are three Maries, Mary
    the mother, Mary the mother, Mary the mother. [Grandmother, aunt,
    and granddaughter.] Three brothers and two sisters your lady has.
    Three in the body. There were eleven in your family, two passed out
    small. [Only know of nine.] Fred is going to pass out suddenly. He
    married a cousin. He writes. He has shining things. _Lorgnettes._
    He is away. He's got a catchy trouble with heart and kidneys, and
    will pass out suddenly." [Not the least likely.]

    NOTES.--The most striking part of this sitting is the prominence
    given to Dr. C.'s favourite little daughter, Daisy, a child very
    intelligent and of a very sweet disposition, but quite deaf;
    although her training enables her to go to school and receive
    ordinary lessons with other children. At the first sitting she is
    supposed erroneously to be lame, but at the second sitting this
    is corrected and explained, and all said about her is practically
    correct, including the cold she then had. Mrs. Piper had had no
    opportunity whatever of knowing or hearing of the C. children by
    ordinary social means. We barely know them ourselves. Phinuit
    grasped the child's name gradually, using it at first as a mere
    description. I did not know it myself.

    The following is a summary of the false assertions:--


    ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS.

    _At Sitting_ 42:--

    "Your lady's Fanny; well, there is a Fanny. [No.] Fred has light
    hair, brownish moustache, prominent nose. [No.] Your thesis was
    some special thing. I should say about lungs." [No.]

    _At Sitting_ 43:--

    "Your mother's name was Elizabeth. [No.] Her father's lame. [No.]
    Of your children there's Eddie and Willie and Fannie or Annie and
    a sister that faints, and Willie and Katie (no, Katie don't count)
    [being the nurse], and Harry and the little dark-eyed one, Daisy.
    [All wrong except Daisy.] One passed out with sore throat. [No.]
    The boy looks about 8. [No, 4.] Your wife's father had something
    wrong with leg; one named William. [No.] Your grandmother had a
    sister who married a Howe--Henry Howe. [Unknown.] There's a Thomson
    connected with you [no], and if you look you will find a Howe too.
    Your brother the captain [correct], with a lovely wife, who has
    brown hair [correct], has had trouble in head [no], and has two
    girls and a boy." [No, three girls.]

In this case it will be seen that no details were given which could not
have been derived from the conscious knowledge of the sitter. Apart
from the fact that the agent made no effort to impress his thought, it
resembles a case of ordinary telepathy. Of much the same character are
the following details, quoted from Professor James's account of his
interviews with Mrs. Piper (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 658, 659):--


No. 97.--From Professor W. JAMES.

    "The most convincing things said about my own immediate household
    were either very intimate or very trivial. Unfortunately the former
    things cannot well be published. Of the trivial things, I have
    forgotten the greater number, but the following, _raræ nantes_, may
    serve as samples of their class: She said that we had lost recently
    a rug, and I a waistcoat. [She wrongly accused a person of stealing
    the rug, which was afterwards found in the house.] She told of my
    killing a grey-and-white cat, with ether, and described how it had
    'spun round and round' before dying. She told how my New York aunt
    had written a letter to my wife, warning her against all mediums,
    and then went off on a most amusing criticism, full of _traits
    vifs_, of the excellent woman's character. [Of course no one but
    my wife and I knew the existence of the letter in question.] She
    was strong on the events in our nursery, and gave striking advice
    during our first visit to her about the way to deal with certain
    'tantrums' of our second child, 'little Billy-boy,' as she called
    him, reproducing his nursery name. She told how the crib creaked
    at night, how a certain rocking-chair creaked mysteriously, how my
    wife had heard footsteps on the stairs, etc., etc. Insignificant as
    these things sound when read, the accumulation of a large number
    of them has an irresistible effect. And I repeat again what I
    said before, that taking everything that I know of Mrs. P. into
    account, the result is to make me feel as absolutely certain as I
    am of any personal fact in the world that she knows things in her
    trances which she cannot possibly have heard in her waking state,
    and that the definitive philosophy of her trances is yet to be
    found. The limitations of her trance-information, its discontinuity
    and fitfulness, and its apparent inability to develop beyond a
    certain point, although they end by rousing one's moral and human
    impatience with the phenomenon, yet are, from a scientific point
    of view, amongst its most interesting peculiarities, since where
    there are limits there are conditions, and the discovery of these
    is always the beginning of an explanation.

    "This is all that I can tell you of Mrs. Piper. I wish it were more
    'scientific.' But, _valeat quantum!_ it is the best I can do."

But there are many cases (Professor Lodge enumerates forty-one
instances, _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 649, 650) in which details were
faithfully given by "Phinuit," which had either been forgotten by the
sitters, or could not at any time have been within their knowledge.
The instances clearly falling under the last head are perhaps too
few to justify any inference being founded on them, although in view
of some of the cases to be quoted later, telepathy from persons at a
distance from the percipient seems a not impossible explanation. The
following case, given by Professor Lodge, which at first sight seems
to involve some such hypothesis, may perhaps be explained by the
telepathic filching from his mind of the memories of incidents heard
in his boyhood and long forgotten. It is right to say that Professor
Lodge has no recollection of ever having heard of these incidents, and
regards this explanation (or indeed any other which has been suggested)
as extremely improbable. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 458-460.)


No. 98.--From PROFESSOR LODGE, F.R.S.

    "It happens that an uncle of mine in London, now quite an old man,
    and one of a surviving three out of a very large family, had a twin
    brother who died some twenty or more years ago. I interested him
    generally in the subject, and wrote to ask if he would lend me some
    relic of this brother. By morning post on a certain day I received
    a curious old gold watch, which this brother had worn and been
    fond of; and that same morning, no one in the house having seen it
    or knowing anything about it, I handed it to Mrs. Piper when in a
    state of trance.

    "I was told almost immediately that it had belonged to one of my
    uncles--one that had been mentioned before as having died from the
    effects of a fall--one that had been very fond of Uncle Robert,
    the name of the survivor--that the watch was now in possession of
    this same Uncle Robert, with whom he was anxious to communicate.
    After some difficulty and many wrong attempts Dr. Phinuit caught
    the name, Jerry, short for Jeremiah, and said emphatically, as if
    a third person was speaking, 'This is my watch, and Robert is my
    brother, and I am here. Uncle Jerry, my watch.' All this at the
    first sitting on the very morning the watch had arrived by post,
    no one but myself and a shorthand clerk who happened to have been
    introduced for the first time at this sitting by me, and whose
    antecedents are well known to me, being present.

    "Having thus ostensibly got into communication through some means
    or other with what purported to be a deceased relative, whom I had
    indeed known slightly in his later years of blindness, but of whose
    early life I knew nothing, I pointed out to him that to make Uncle
    Robert aware of his presence it would be well to recall trivial
    details of their boyhood, all of which I would faithfully report.

    "He quite caught the idea, and proceeded during several successive
    sittings ostensibly to instruct Dr. Phinuit to mention a number of
    little things such as would enable his brother to recognise him.

    "References to his blindness, illness, and main facts of his life
    were comparatively useless from my point of view; but these details
    of boyhood, two-thirds of a century ago, were utterly and entirely
    out of my ken. My father was one of the younger members of the
    family, and only knew these brothers as men.

    "'Uncle Jerry' recalled episodes such as swimming the creek when
    they were boys together, and running some risk of getting drowned;
    killing a cat in Smith's field; the possession of a small rifle,
    and of a long peculiar skin, like a snake-skin, which he thought
    was now in the possession of Uncle Robert.

    "All these facts have been more or less completely verified. But
    the interesting thing is that his twin brother, from whom I got
    the watch, and with whom I was thus in a sort of communication,
    could not remember them all. He recollected something about
    swimming the creek, though he himself had merely looked on. He had
    a distinct recollection of having had the snake-skin, and of the
    box in which it was kept, though he does not know where it is now.
    But he altogether denied killing the cat, and could not recall
    Smith's field.

    "His memory, however, is decidedly failing him, and he was good
    enough to write to another brother, Frank, living in Cornwall,
    an old sea captain, and ask if he had any better remembrance of
    certain facts--of course not giving any inexplicable reasons for
    asking. The result of this inquiry was triumphantly to vindicate
    the existence of Smith's field as a place near their home, where
    they used to play, in Barking, Essex; and the killing of a cat by
    another brother was also recollected; while of the swimming of the
    creek, near a mill-race, full details were given, Frank and Jerry
    being the heroes of that foolhardy episode.

    "Some of the other facts given I have not yet been able to get
    verified. Perhaps there are as many unverified as verified. And
    some things appear, so far as I can make out, to be false. One
    little thing I could verify myself, and it is good, inasmuch as no
    one is likely to have had any recollection, even if they had any
    knowledge, of it. Phinuit told me to take the watch out of its case
    (it was the old-fashioned turnip variety) and examine it in a good
    light afterwards, and I should see some nicks near the handle which
    Jerry said he had cut into it with his knife.

    "Some faint nicks are there. I had never had the watch out of its
    case before; being, indeed, careful neither to finger it myself nor
    to let any one else finger it.

    "I never let Mrs. Piper in her waking state see the watch till
    quite towards the end of the time, when I purposely left it lying
    on my desk while she came out of the trance. Before long she
    noticed it, with natural curiosity, evidently becoming conscious of
    its existence then for the first time."[139]

There are many other cases of clairvoyance on record of the same type
as Mrs. Piper's, but none which have been studied by so many observers
with equal care, and through so prolonged a period. In the more usual
form of trance clairvoyance, however, the percipient's impressions are
of a visual character. He describes scenes which he appears to himself
to _see_. In the pages of the _Zoist_ and elsewhere vision of the kind
is commonly called "travelling clairvoyance," it having generally been
suggested to the hypnotised subject that he was actually present at
the scene which he was desired to describe. It is possible that this
suggestion, almost universally given, may have had some influence in
determining the pictorial form which the telepathic impressions assume
in such cases, as it has certainly led the percipient himself and the
bystanders in many cases to believe in an extra-corporeal visitation of
the scenes described. Often no details are given which were not within
the knowledge, if not consciously present to the thoughts, of one of
the bystanders. Such, for instance, is the case quoted by Dr. Backman,
of Kalmar, in his paper on clairvoyance (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. pp.
205, 206; viii. 405-407), in which the Director-General of Pilotage for
Sweden, M. Ankarkrona, records how, when absent from home, he received
from a maid-servant hypnotised by Baron Von Rosen an extremely detailed
description of the interior of his own house and its inmates. Hardly a
detail was incorrect, but no single detail was given which could not
have been extracted from M. Ankarkrona's mind. To such a case there is
no difficulty in applying the telepathic explanation.


No. 99.--From A. W. DOBBIE.

In the case to be next quoted, however, the information given by the
hypnotised subject transcends the conscious knowledge, at all events,
of those present. The account comes from Mr. A. W. Dobbie, of Adelaide,
South Australia, who has for some years studied the phenomena of
hypnotism on a number of subjects, and has observed some striking
manifestations of telepathy and clairvoyance. I quote from a letter
written to me in July 1886, containing a copy of his notes made at the
time of the experiment, "the moment the words were uttered." The Hon.
Dr. Campbell, M.L.C., who had lost a gold sleeve-link, brought its
fellow on the 28th May 1886 to Mr. Dobbie, who placed it in the hand of
one of his subjects. Then

    "Miss Martha began by first accurately describing Dr. Campbell's
    features, then spoke of a little fair-haired boy who had a stud,
    or sleeve-link, in his hand, also of a lady calling him 'Neil';
    then said that this little boy had taken the link into a place
    like a nursery where there were some toys, especially a large toy
    elephant, and that he had dropped the link into this elephant
    through a hole which had been torn or knocked in the breast;
    also that he had taken it out again, and gave two or three other
    interesting particulars. We were reluctantly compelled to postpone
    further investigation until two or three evenings afterwards.

    "On the next occasion (in the interval, however, the missing
    sleeve-link had been found, but left untouched), I again placed
    the link in her hand and the previous particulars were at once
    reproduced; but as she seemed to be getting on very slowly, it
    occurred to Dr. Campbell to suggest placing his hand on that of
    the clairvoyant, so I placed him _en rapport_ and allowed him to
    do so, he simply touching the back of her hand with the points of
    his fingers. As she still seemed to have great difficulty (she is
    always much slower than her sister) in proceeding, it suddenly
    occurred to me that it would be an interesting experiment to place
    Miss Eliza Dixon _en rapport_ with Miss Martha, so I simply joined
    their disengaged hands, and Miss Eliza immediately commenced as
    follows, viz.:--

    "'I'm in a house, upstairs, I was in a bathroom, then I went into
    another room nearly opposite, there is a large mirror just inside
    the door on the left hand, there is a double-sized dressing-table
    with drawers down each side of it, the sleeve-link is in the corner
    of the drawer nearest the door. When they found it they left it
    there. I know why they left it there, it was because they wanted
    to see if we would find it. I can see a nice easy-chair there, it
    is an old one, I would like it when I am put to sleep, because it
    is nice and low. The bed has curtains, they are a sort of brownish
    net and have a fringe of darker brown. The wall paper is of a light
    blue colour. There is a cane lounge there and a pretty Japanese
    screen behind it, the screen folds up. There is a portrait of an
    old gentleman over the mantelpiece, he is dead, I knew him when
    he was alive, his name is the same as the gentleman who acts as
    Governor when the Governor is absent from the colony,[140] I will
    tell you his name directly--it is the Rev. Mr. Way. It was a little
    boy who put the sleeve-link in that drawer, he is very fair, his
    hair is almost white, he is a pretty little boy, he has blue eyes
    and is about three years old. The link had been left on that table,
    the little boy was in the nursery, and he went into the bedroom
    after the gentleman had left. I can see who the gentleman is, it is
    Dr. Campbell. Doesn't that little boy look a young Turk, the link
    is quite a handful for his little hand, he is running about with it
    very pleased; but he doesn't seem to know what to do with it. (A.)

    [Dr. Campbell was not present from this point.]

    "'Now I can hear some one calling up the stairs, a lady is calling
    two names, Colin is one and Neil is the other, the other boy is
    about five years old and is darker than the other. The eldest,
    Colin, is going downstairs now, he is gone into what looks like a
    dining-room, the lady says, "Where is Neil?" "Upstairs, ma." "Go
    and tell him to come down at once." The little fair-haired boy
    had put the link down; but when he heard his brother coming up,
    he picked it up again. Colin says--"Neil, you are to come down at
    once." "I won't," says Neil. "You're a goose," replies Colin, and
    he turned and went down without Neil. What a young monkey! now
    he has gone into the nursery and put the link into a large toy
    elephant, he put it through a hole in front, which is broken. He
    has gone downstairs now, I suppose he thinks it is safe there.

    "'Now that gentleman has come into the room again and he wants that
    link; he is looking all about for it, he thinks it might be knocked
    down: the lady is there now too, and they are both looking for it.
    The lady says, "Are you sure you put it there?" The gentleman says,
    "Yes."

    "'Now it seems like next day, the servant is turning the carpet up
    and looking all about for it; but can't find it.

    "'The gentleman is asking that young Turk if he has seen it, he
    knows that he is fond of pretty things. The little boy says, "No."
    He seems to think it is fine fun to serve his father like that.

    "'Now it seems to be another day and the little boy is in the
    nursery again, he has taken the link out of the elephant, now he
    has dropped it into that drawer, that is all I have to tell you
    about it, I told you the rest before.'"

Dr. Campbell, after reading through the above account, writes:--

    "ADELAIDE, _July_ 9_th_, 1886.

    "At the point (A) the séance was discontinued till the next
    sitting, when I was absent. The conversation reported as passing
    between the children is correct. The description of the room is
    accurate in every point. The portrait is that of the late Rev.
    James Way. The description of the children and their names are
    true. The fact that the link was discovered in the drawer, in the
    interval between one sitting and the final one, and that the link
    was left there, pending the discovery of it by the clairvoyant,
    is also correct, as this was my suggestion to Mrs. Campbell when
    she showed it to me in the corner of the drawer. In fact, every
    circumstance reported is absolutely correct. I know, further, that
    neither of the clairvoyants has ever been inside of my door. My
    children are utterly unknown to them, either in appearance or by
    name. I may say also that they had no knowledge of my intention to
    place the link in their possession, or even of my presence at the
    séance, as they were both on each occasion in the mesmeric sleep
    when I arrived."

In a later letter, dated December 16th, 1887, Dr. Campbell writes:--

    "With respect to the large toy elephant, I certainly knew of its
    existence, but was not thinking of it at the time the clairvoyant
    was speaking. I did not know even by suspicion that the elephant
    was so mutilated as to have a large opening in its chest, and on
    coming home had to examine the toy to see whether the statement was
    correct. I need hardly say that it was absolutely correct."

    Mr. Dobbie tells us that "neither he nor his clairvoyants had
    any opportunity, directly or indirectly, of knowing any of the
    particulars brought out by the clairvoyant." He afterwards saw the
    room described, and says "the description is simply perfect in
    every particular."

This narrative presents us, at any rate, with a case of
thought-transference of a very remarkable kind, an accurate and
detailed description being given of a room wholly unknown to the
clairvoyantes. But it is doubtful whether even here more was stated
by the percipients than could have been extracted from the minds of
those present. The statement as to the child placing the sleeve-link
in the toy elephant could not, unfortunately, be verified, and the
conversation described was natural enough under the circumstances,
and may have been the result of a happy conjecture. It is unfortunate
that a detailed description of the room was not given until the
second sitting, since that lessens the improbability, in any case
considerable, that some information as to the details given might have
reached the ears of the clairvoyantes.[141] The most remarkable feature
in the case is the statement, subsequently verified, as to the hole
in the front of the elephant. We must suppose either that this detail
was derived from the mind of the child, or that Dr. Campbell had once
observed the hole but had forgotten its existence at the time of the
experiment. Mr. Dobbie gives other instances of clairvoyance, by one of
which the hypothesis of thought-transference from a distant and unknown
person is strongly suggested. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. p. 63, etc.)


No. 100.--From DR. WILTSE.

We next quote two cases out of several recorded by Dr. A. S. Wiltse,
of Skiddy, Kansas (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. pp. 72 _et seq._). The
percipient was Fannie G., a servant of about fifteen years, who
was frequently hypnotised by Dr. Wiltse in the summer of 1882, and
developed clairvoyant powers of a very remarkable kind. Dr. Wiltse
unfortunately took no notes at the time of the experiments, but he
appears to be an accurate reporter, and it will be seen that his
account of the incidents quoted is confirmed in each case by other
observers. The first experiment was recorded with others in 1886, in a
paper read before the Owosso Academy of Medicine; the second was not
apparently written down until the account was sent to us in 1890:--

    "Miss Florence F., now Mrs. R., a neighbour, was invited to attend
    one evening with tests which she was to arrange during the day. She
    came and told the subject to go to her kitchen and tell her what
    she saw. It was about twenty rods to Miss F.'s kitchen. Subject
    was led to suppose she had gone to the kitchen, and being asked
    what she saw, readily answered: 'The table sits in the centre of
    the room, and upon it is a box covered with a cloth.' 'What is
    in the box, Fannie?' I asked. 'Oh, I daren't look in the box!
    Miss Florence might be mad.' 'Miss Florence is willing you should
    look; raise the cloth, Fannie, and tell me what is there.' She
    immediately answered, 'There are seven loaves of bread and sixteen
    biscuits in it.' (Correct.)

    "I set this down as telepathy because Miss Florence F. was in the
    room, and undoubtedly the facts were prominently in her mind,
    having been purposely so arranged by her for a test; but what
    follows is not so plainly telepathy.

    "Miss Florence asked Fannie to tell her what was in her stable. She
    answered, 'Two black horses, one grey horse, and one red horse'
    (meaning a bay horse). Miss Florence: 'That is wrong, Fannie; there
    are only my black horses in the stable.' Ten or fifteen minutes
    later, a brother of Miss Florence came to the house and told Miss
    Florence that there were travellers at the house, and upon inquiry
    we learned that the grey and 'red' horse belonged to them, and that
    they had been in the stable half-an-hour when Fannie's clairvoyant
    eye scanned it."

Mrs. Roberts, the Miss Florence F. of the narrative, writes to Dr.
Wiltse:--

    "CARDIFF, TENN., _January_ 13_th_, 1891.

    "Your letter was received late last night, and I hasten to reply.
    Your statement[142] is correct as far as it goes. But if you
    remember we asked, or rather you asked Fannie, to go into our
    store-room and see what was in there, and she said a hind quarter
    of beef, which was true, we had got it late that evening. You also
    asked her to go in the kitchen and see how many loaves of bread she
    could find, which she told, and on counting them after returning
    home, she was correct. It was in the winter of '81 or '82, I think,
    either December '81, or in the January or February of '82, I cannot
    remember the month; I know it was cold weather. If you remember
    when old Julian Scott was drowned, it was about that time, for
    if I remember right you were trying that same night to get her to
    find his body. I think, as well as I remember, that she located
    his saddle, and a few days after it was found in a place that she
    described, but she could not find the body.

    "MRS. FLORENCE F. ROBERTS."

In the second of the incidents above described, and in the account
which follows, the percipient's statements included facts which were
not within the knowledge of any of those present, and we are forced to
the conclusion that the percipient in some way derived her knowledge
from persons at a distance. The case presents a curious experimental
parallel to the dream (No. 60) recorded in Chapter VIII., and to case
No. 107 below. In the present instance, however, the persons whom we
may perhaps call the agents, though unconscious of their agency in the
matter, do not appear to have been personally unknown to the percipient.


No. 101.--From DR. WILTSE.

    "Mr. Howard lived six miles from me. He had just built a large
    frame house; our subject had never seen the house, although, I
    presume, she may have heard it talked of. Mr. Howard had not been
    home for some days, and asked that Fannie should go there and see
    if all were well. She exclaimed at the size of the house, but
    railed at the ugliness of the front fence, saying she would not
    have 'such an old torn-down' fence in front of so nice a house.
    'Yes,' said Howard, laughing, 'my wife has been worrying the life
    out of me about the fence and the front steps.' 'Oh,' interrupted
    Fannie, 'the steps are nice and new!' 'She is off there,' said
    Howard, 'the steps are worse than the fence.' 'Don't you see,'
    exclaimed Fannie, impatiently, 'how new and nice the steps are?
    Humph!' (And she seemed absolutely disgusted, judging by the tone.)
    'I think they are real nice.'

    "Changing the subject, Howard asked her how many windows were in
    his house. Almost instantly she gave a number (I think it was
    twenty-six). Howard thought it was too many, but upon carefully
    counting, found it exact.

    "From my house he went directly home, and, to his great surprise,
    found that during his absence his wife had employed a carpenter
    who had built new front steps, and they had been completed a day
    or two before Fannie had scanned the premises for him with her
    invisible telescope.

    "Mr. Howard's son, a youth, had gone into an adjoining county
    and was not expected back for some days. Fannie was acquainted
    with the young man (Andrew). Mr. Howard, having business back at
    the station, was with us again the next night. His faith in our
    'oracle' had assumed larger proportions, and he suggested a visit
    home by means of Fannie's wonderful faculty. She described the
    rooms excellently, even to a bouquet on one of the tables, and said
    that several young people were there. Asked who they were, she
    replied that she did not know any of them except Andrew. 'But,' I
    said, 'Andrew is not at home.' Fannie: 'Why, don't you see him?'
    Q. 'Sure, Fannie?' F. 'Oh, don't I know Andrew? Right there, he
    is.' Mr. Howard returned home the next morning, where he found that
    Andrew had returned late the day before, and that several young
    people in the neighbourhood had passed the evening with him."

The following are copies of questions addressed to Mr. Howard, and his
replies to them:--

    "'Did she describe your new doorsteps to you before you knew they
    were built?' 'Yes.'

    "_Question._--'Did she describe your house and tell you Andrew was
    there when you thought he was away, and, if so, was he actually at
    home as she stated?'

    "_Answer._--'Yes.'

    "_Question._--'From what you saw, were you satisfied that Fannie
    had, when mesmerised, powers of imparting knowledge unknown to
    others about her?'

    "_Answer._--'Yes.'

                             "WILLIAM HOWARD,
                                   Kismet, Tenn., Morgan Co."

    "We testify to these questions, asked William Howard, to be facts.
    We were present at the same time Mr. Howard was when Miss G. was
    mesmerised by Dr. A. S. Wiltse. We further state that when any of
    us would prick the doctor with a pin, she would flinch with the
    same part of her body. Miss G. was not in the habit of the use of
    tobacco. The doctor was in a different room, with a wall between
    them. When he would smoke, she grew nauseated and seemed to taste
    the same as he did.

    "W. T. HOWARD AND LIZZIE HOWARD."


No. 102.--From MR. WILLIAM BOYD.

A remarkable case has been recorded, from contemporary knowledge, by
Mr. William Boyd, of Peterhead, N.B. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. pp. 49
_et seq._). The events occurred as far back as 1850, but a full account
of them was contributed by Mr. Boyd to the _Aberdeen Herald_ for May
8th and 18th of that year, from which it appears that the statements
made by the percipient were written down and communicated to Mr. Boyd
and others before their correspondence with the facts was known. The
incident attracted much notice at the time, from its connection with
the whaling fleet, the chief topic of local interest. The following is
an extract from the original notes made by Mr. Reid, the hypnotiser,
published in the _Aberdeen Herald_, May 18th, 1850:--

    "On the evening of April 22nd I put John Park, tailor, aged
    twenty-two, into a state of clairvoyance, in presence of twelve
    respectable inhabitants of this town. (Here follows a description
    of certain statements regarding the fate of Franklin's expedition
    and the ships _Erebus_ and _Terror_, which in the light of
    information subsequently received proved to have been inaccurate.)
    He (the clairvoyant) then visited Old Greenland, as was desired,
    and having gone on board the _Hamilton Ross_, a whale-ship
    belonging to this port, saw David Cardno, second mate, getting
    his hand bandaged up by the doctor in the cabin, having got it
    injured while sealing. He was then told by the captain that they
    had upwards of 100 tons of oil. I again, on the evening of the
    23rd, put him into a clairvoyant state. (Here follow some further
    particulars regarding Sir John Franklin's expedition, which also
    are proved to have been inaccurate.) I again directed him to Old
    Greenland, and he again visited the _Hamilton Ross_, and found
    Captain Gray, of the _Eclipse_, conversing with the captain about
    the seal fishing being up.

    "(Signed) WILLIAM REID."

It appears from the _Herald_ of May 8th that the _Hamilton Ross_ did
come to port first out of eleven ships, that she brought 159 tons of
oil, that Cardno had injured his hand, and arrived with his arm in a
sling, and that on the 23rd April the captain of the _Hamilton Ross_
was conversing with the captain of the _Eclipse_. Mr. Boyd points out,
however, that Cardno had some years before lost the tip of one finger,
so that the clairvoyant's statement of the accident may have been
simply a reminiscence. It is worth noting that here, as generally in
visions of the kind, the false was mingled with the true, and that the
percipient appears quite unable to distinguish between pictures which
are obviously the work of his own imagination, and those which are
apparently due to inspiration from without.

The next case is also remote in date, but we have received the evidence
of several persons still living who were conversant with the facts at
the time of their occurrence, and the account given below is taken from
contemporary notes. "Jane" was the wife of a pit-man in County Durham,
who for many years, from 1845 onwards, was hypnotised for the sake of
her health by Mrs. T. Myers, of Twinstead Rectory, Mrs. Fraser, her
sister, and other members of the same family. In the hypnotic sleep
she appears to have been sensible to telepathic influences of the
same kind as those described at the beginning of Chapter III. But she
also gave remarkable demonstrations of "travelling clairvoyance," and
frequently described correctly the interior of houses she had never
seen. Occasionally she went beyond this, and stated facts not within
the knowledge of those present, and opposed to their preconceptions. A
good instance is the following, taken from notes made in the summer of
1853:--

    No. 103.--From DR. F.[143]

    "Before commencing the sitting, I fixed to take her to a house,
    without communicating my intentions to any of the parties present.
    In the morning of the day I stated to a patient of my own, Mr.
    Eglinton, at present residing in the village of Tynemouth, that I
    intended to visit him. He stated that he would be present between
    8 and 10 P.M. in a particular room, so that there might be no
    difficulty in finding him. He was just recovering from a very
    severe illness, and was so weak that he could scarcely walk. He was
    exceedingly thin from the effects of his complaint.

    "After the usual state had been obtained, I said, 'We are standing
    beside a railway station, now we pass along a road, and in front of
    us see a house with a laburnum tree in front of it.' She directly
    replied, 'Is it the red house with a brass knocker?' I said, 'No,
    it has an iron knocker.' I have since looked, however, and find
    that the door has an old-fashioned brass handle in the shape of a
    knocker. She then asked, 'Shall we go up the steps? Shall we go
    along this passage, and up these stairs? Is this a window on the
    stair-head?' I said, 'You are quite right, and now I want you to
    look into the room upon the left-hand side.' She replied, 'Oh, yes,
    in the bedroom. There is no one in this room; there is a bed in
    it, but there is no person in it.' I was not aware that a bedroom
    was in the place I mentioned, but upon inquiry next day I found
    she was correct. I told her she must look into the next room, and
    she would see a sofa. She answered, 'But there is here a little
    gallery. Now I am in the room, and see a lady with black hair lying
    upon the sofa.' I attempted to puzzle her about the colour of her
    hair, and feeling sure it was Mr. Eglinton who was lying there,
    I sharply cross-questioned her, but still she persisted in her
    story. The questioning, however, seemed to distract her mind, and
    she commenced talking about a lady at Whickham, until I at last
    recalled her to the room at Tynemouth, by asking whether there
    was not a gentleman in the room. 'No,' she said; 'we can see no
    gentleman there.'

    "After a little she described the door opening, and asked, with a
    tone of great surprise, 'Is that a gentleman?' I replied, 'Yes; is
    he thin or fat?' 'Very fat,' she answered; 'but has he a cork leg?'
    I assured her that he had no cork leg, and tried to puzzle her
    again about him. She, however, assured me that he was very fat and
    had a great corporation, and asked me whether I did not think such
    a fat man must eat and drink a great deal to get such a corporation
    as that. She also described him as sitting by the table with papers
    beside him, and a glass of brandy and water. 'Is it not wine?' I
    asked. 'No,' she said, 'it's brandy.' 'Is it not whisky or rum?'
    'No, it is brandy,' was the answer; 'and now,' she continued, 'the
    lady is going to get her supper, but the fat gentleman does not
    take any.' I requested her to tell me the colour of his hair, but
    she only answered that the lady's hair was dark. I then inquired
    if he had any brains in his head,[144] but she seemed altogether
    puzzled about him, and said she could not see any. I then asked her
    if she could see his name upon any of the letters lying about. She
    replied, 'Yes'; and upon my saying that the name began with E, she
    spelt each letter of the name 'Eglinton.'

    "I was so convinced that I had at last detected her in a complete
    mistake that I arose, and declined proceeding further in the
    matter, stating that, although her description of the house and the
    name of the person were correct, in everything connected with the
    gentleman she had guessed the opposite from the truth.

    "On the following morning Mr. E. asked me the result of the
    experiment, and after having related it to him, he gave me the
    following account:--He had found himself unable to sit up to
    so late an hour, but wishful fairly to test the powers of the
    clairvoyante, he had ordered his clothes to be stuffed into the
    form of a figure, and to make the contrast more striking to his
    natural appearance, had an extra pillow pushed into the clothes so
    as to form a 'corporation.' The figure had been placed near the
    table, in a sitting position, and a glass of brandy and water and
    the newspapers placed beside it. The name, he further added, was
    spelt correctly, though up to that time I had been in the habit of
    writing it 'Eglington,' instead of as spelt by the clairvoyante,
    'Eglinton.'"

In this case it will be seen that the only person from whom knowledge
of the facts given could have been derived was personally unknown to
the percipient, the only apparent link of connection being their common
acquaintance with Dr. F.

In the last case to be mentioned there are again some indications of
thought-transference from the mind of a person at a distance. On April
8th, 1890, Dr. Backman, at Kalmar, received a letter from Dr. Kjellman,
at Stockholm, asking that on the following day Dr. Backman should
request one of his subjects, Alma Radberg, to "find" Dr. von B. (known
to Alma), and describe the apartment (Dr. Kjellman's own) in which he
would be sitting, adding that something would be hung on the chandelier
for her to describe. The percipient in the trance gave a description
of the room, and when asked to look at the chandelier she said there
was no chandelier, something more like a lamp, and described something
long and narrow, of white metal, hanging from it, with some red stuff
round it. When awake she said that what she saw was probably a pair
of scissors for cutting paper, or a paper-knife. Dr. Backman sent his
notes to Dr. Kjellman, who replied, showing that the description of
the room, though in some respects accurate (_e.g._, she mentioned a
long stuffed easy-chair, a glass bookcase, three doors in the lobby,
etc.), was in other features incorrect, and should on the whole be
regarded as inconclusive. "But," he adds, "her statement that the
object was hanging in a lamp, not a chandelier, was right. It is both
a lamp and a chandelier, and the lamp was drawn down a long way under
the chandelier," and that the object hanging there was "a large pair of
paper scissors, fixed by an india-rubber otoscope, and with a tea-rose
and some forget-me-nots in one of the handles of the scissors." It will
thus be seen that on the one point to which her attention had been
specially directed, the hypnotic's description was strikingly accurate;
and the articles described were hardly within the range of conjecture.

Dr. Backman has made other experiments with the same subject, in which
he obtained further indications of clairvoyance of this kind. (_Proc.
S.P.R._, vol. vii. p. 207, etc.)

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 132: For instance, Gregory and others record that the
clairvoyant subjects of a certain Major Buckley were able to read
the mottoes enclosed in nuts (the equivalent of the modern Christmas
crackers) purchased at random from a confectioner's shop, and still
unopened. The recent evidence of the kind is quite inconsiderable, and
is perhaps hardly sufficient to allow of the existence of a faculty of
independent clairvoyance being treated as an open question. Experiments
with Mrs. Piper in this direction have yielded negative results, and
Professor Richet's trials with Madame B. (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. pp.
77 and 149) are neither sufficiently numerous nor sufficiently striking
to justify any conclusions being drawn from them. Some curious results
have, however, been obtained by M. J. Ch. Roux (_Annales des Sciences
Psychiques_, vol. iii. pp. 198 _et seq._), and somewhat similar results
have been obtained in this country by two Associates of the S.P.R. But
it is possible that all these instances may be susceptible of another
explanation. See, however, Mr. Myers' article on "Sensory Automatism,"
_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. viii. pp. 436 _et seq._]

[Footnote 133: The definition of clairvoyance given in the text differs
somewhat from that adopted by Mrs. Sidgwick (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii.
p. 30)--viz., "A faculty of acquiring supernormally, but not by reading
the minds of persons present, a knowledge of facts such as we normally
acquire by the use of our senses." Whether such a faculty exists or
not, it is certain that the phenomena which suggest it occur under the
same conditions and inextricably mingled with others which can, with
some plausibility, be explained as due to thought-transference from the
conscious or unconscious memory of persons actually present. And as the
two sets of phenomena are found together in fact, it seemed best as a
matter of practical convenience that they should not be separated in
discussion. Moreover, the suggested application of the word finds ample
justification in popular usage.]

[Footnote 134: It should be added that during the progress of similar
investigations in the United States of America, Dr. Hodgson employed
private detectives to shadow Mr. and Mrs. Piper for some weeks, and
that nothing was discovered to intimate that any steps were taken by
either, whether by personal inquiry or by correspondence, to ascertain
facts relating to the history of actual or possible sitters. Mr. Piper
did not accompany his wife to this country.]

[Footnote 135: Independently of the fact that "Dr. Phinuit" is
as obviously untrustworthy as Mrs. Piper in her natural state is
apparently the reverse, the inquiries which have been made have
entirely failed to corroborate the accounts, in themselves not always
concordant, which "Dr. Phinuit" has given of his birth, his education,
and other circumstances in his "earth-life." His knowledge of his
native language is confined to a few simple phrases and a slight
accent, frequently found useful in disguising a bad shot at a proper
name; and the careful investigations conducted by Dr. Hodgson into Mrs.
Piper's antecedents as a "medium" have made it almost certain that "Dr.
Phinuit" is an invention, borrowed from the person through whose agency
Mrs. Piper first became entranced, and who purported himself to be
controlled by a French doctor named Albert Finnett (pronounced Finné).
It should be added that "Dr. Phinuit" possesses apparently no knowledge
of the medical names of drugs, nor any more intimate acquaintance with
their properties than could be gathered from a manual of domestic
medicine. (Vol. viii. pp. 47, 50, 51, etc.)]

[Footnote 136: At the present time (May 1894) "Dr. Phinuit" has, I
understand, almost entirely ceased to "control" Mrs. Piper; his place
being taken by the _soi-disant_ spirit of a young American, recently
deceased, who has given remarkable proofs of his identity.]

[Footnote 137: I am glad to be able to append the following testimonial
to Phinuit's good qualities. An investigator who has had unusual
facilities for observing both Dr. Phinuit and Mrs. Piper, after reading
the account given in the text, writes to me: "I suppose the account
of Phinuit is true as far as it goes, but all the same.... I suppose
because he is more sympathetic, I am rather fond of Phinuit."]

[Footnote 138: At the evening sitting a servant unfortunately
introduced the sitters by their real names, but the circumstance will
hardly, I think, be held materially to affect the evidence.]

[Footnote 139: It is impossible by means of a few short extracts
to give a fair idea either of the strength of the evidence for
telepathy afforded by the phenomena observed with Mrs. Piper, or of
the variety and complexity of the problems there presented. Readers
who are interested in the subject are referred to the record of the
observations made by the S.P.R., occupying nearly 400 closely-printed
octavo pages. (_Proc._, vol. vi. pp. 436-660; vol. viii. pp. 1-167.)
Further observations have been made during the year 1893 in the United
States by Dr. Hodgson and others, the records of which have not yet
been published.]

[Footnote 140: Chief Justice Way is the gentleman who acts as Deputy
for his Excellency when absent from the colony.--A. W. D.]

[Footnote 141: It is hardly necessary to say that such an
interpretation in no way reflects upon the good faith of the hypnotics.
Hints derived from conversation overheard unconsciously might be quite
sufficient.]

[Footnote 142: The statement sent to Mrs. Roberts was substantially a
copy of the last nine lines only of the preceding account. No reference
was made to the visit to the kitchen.]

[Footnote 143: Dr. F., who is still living, is disinclined to have his
name published, as he does not wish to be troubled with correspondence
on the subject.]

[Footnote 144: On a previous occasion she had described a skull in a
surgery as a head, but "not a live head, and with no brains in it."]




