CHAPTER XII.

COLLECTIVE HALLUCINATIONS.


We have now to discuss that numerous class of cases in which the
phantasm was perceived by two or more persons. The difficulties of
interpretation which such cases present are enhanced for us by the
various defects to which the evidence is here peculiarly liable. Many
so-called cases of collective apparition, especially when the figure
is seen out-of-doors, were probably real men and women.[121] In others
we have to deal with a collective illusion, a quasi-hallucinatory
superstructure built up by each witness, aided by hints from the
others, on a common sensory basis. Such, for instance, appears to us
the most probable interpretation of the following singular case.

From MRS. ALDERSON.

    "My son and I were staying in the town of Bonchurch (Isle of Wight)
    last Easter vacation (1886). Our lodgings were close to the sea,
    and the garden of our house abutted on the beach, and there were
    no trees or bushes in it high enough to intercept our view. The
    evening of Easter Sunday was so fine that when Miss Jowett (the
    landlady's daughter) brought in the lamp, I begged her not to pull
    down the blinds, and lay on the sofa looking out at the sea, while
    my son was reading at the table. Owing to a letter I had just
    received from my sister at home, stating that one of the servants
    had again seen 'the old lady,' my thoughts had been directed
    towards ghosts and such things. But I was not a little astonished
    when, on presently looking out of the window, I saw the figure
    of a woman standing at the edge of the verandah. She appeared to
    be a broad woman, and not tall (Mrs. A. is tall), and to wear an
    old-fashioned bonnet, and white gloves on her closed hands. As it
    was dark the figure was only outlined against the sky, and I could
    not distinguish any other details. It was, however, opaque, and
    not in any way transparent, just as if it had been a real person.
    I looked at it for some time, and then looked away. When, after a
    time, I looked again, the woman's hands had disappeared behind what
    appeared to be a white marble cross, with a little bit of the top
    broken off, and with a railing on one side of the woman and the
    cross, such as one sometimes sees in graveyards.

    "After looking at this apparition, which remained motionless, for
    some time, about twenty minutes, perhaps, I asked my son [then an
    undergraduate at B.N.C.] to come and to look out of the window, and
    tell me what he saw. He exclaimed, 'What an uncanny sight!' and
    described the woman and the cross exactly as I saw it. I then rang
    the bell, and when Miss J. answered it, I asked her also to look
    out of the window and tell me what she saw, and she also described
    the woman and the cross, just as they appeared to my son and
    myself. Some one suggested that it might be a reflection of some
    sort, and we all looked about the room to see whether there was
    anything in it that could cause such a reflection, but came to the
    conclusion that there was nothing to account for it."

Mr. Alderson writes:--

    "Staying at B. (Isle of Wight) during the Easter vacation of 1886,
    I remember distinctly seeing an apparition in the form of a woman
    with her hands clasped on the top of a cross. The cross looked old
    and worn, as one sees in churchyards. My mother drew my attention
    to the figure, and after we had watched it for some time we rang
    the bell and asked the servant if she saw the figure. She said she
    did. I then went out to the verandah (where the figure was), and
    immediately it vanished.

    "E. H. ALDERSON."

Acorresponding account of the incident has been received from Miss
Jowett, the landlady's daughter. We owe the accounts of the incident
to Mr. F. Schiller, who investigated the matter for the Oxford
Phasmatological Society.

The persistency of the vision in this case is a feature very rarely
found in cases of undoubted hallucination, and the fact that it was
only seen through glass suggests that the whole appearance was due
to a reflection of some kind, although it must be admitted that this
explanation, which was considered and rejected by the percipients at
the time, cannot be accommodated to the facts without difficulty.

In the epidemics of religious hallucination so common in the Middle
Ages, and still occurring from time to time in Catholic countries,
it would appear that as a rule there is no objective basis for the
perception. When, as at Knock, in Ireland, a few years ago, the figure
of the Virgin or a Saint is said to have been seen by a large number
of persons simultaneously, it seems probable that in those who really
saw the figure the hallucination was due to repeated verbal suggestions
acting on minds which, under the influence of strong emotion, were
temporarily in a state analogous to that of trance. The nearest analogy
to such cases is no doubt to be found in hypnotism. A collective
hallucination can be imposed upon a whole roomful of hypnotised persons
by the mere command of the operator. But not the most explicit verbal
suggestion--_si vera est fabula_--could make the courtiers in the
fairy tale see the king's clothes; and there is no evidence that with
normal persons in full possession of their ordinary faculties any
hints derivable from look, word, or gesture could suffice to originate
an instantaneous hallucination. Still, the possibility of such an
explanation under certain conditions should perhaps be kept in view.
(See later, Chapter XVI.)

A possible explanation of a different kind has been already
illustrated by the story quoted on page 153, where it was shown that
a solitary hallucination had grown in the course of five-and-twenty
years into a collective vision. The narrator in this case was a child
at the time of the alleged experience. Children and uneducated persons
generally, who are not prone to analyse their own sensations, seem
liable after a certain interval to mistake the image called up by
another's recital for an actual experience of their own; and this is
especially likely to occur when the auditor was present at the time of
the experience or familiar with the scene of the occurrence. Indeed,
most persons who visualise with moderate facility are probably liable
to this form of mistake on a small scale. I had about five years
since an example of this in my own case. A friend had described to me
minutely some simple apparatus of his own invention. About a year later
he brought the apparatus to London and offered to show it to me. I
replied that I had already seen it; but on being confronted with it I
found the proportions and general appearance of the actual object quite
unlike my mental image of it. I had in fact never seen the object,
but the image which I had mentally constructed to enable me to follow
my friend's description a year before remained so vivid as to lead
me to believe that it was founded on actual sensation. But a sensory
hallucination is too striking and unusual an experience to be readily
feigned, and it is very improbable that the memory of educated persons,
at any rate, would be untrustworthy as regards their recent experiences
of the kind. As already explained, the accounts of this and other forms
of telepathic affection included in this book have in almost all cases
been written down within ten years of the event.

When the fullest allowance has been made for all possible explanations
we find a considerable number of cases remaining of which no other
account can be given than that they are apparitions, due to no
ascertained cause, which are perceived by two or more persons
simultaneously. That the collective perception proves the objective,
or--to use a less ambiguous word--the _material_ existence of the thing
perceived, is probably held now by few persons outside the ranks of
professed mystics. Apart from the theoretical difficulties of such a
hypothesis--difficulties which have by no means been surmounted by the
invocation of fixed ether, intercalary vortex rings, space of four
dimensions, and other subtler forms of the theory evolved in recent
times,--it is to be noted that no facts of any significance have been
adduced to support it. There is at present no trustworthy evidence that
an apparition has ever been weighed or photographed,[122] or submitted
to spectroscopic or chemical analysis. But, indeed, the theory betrays
its own origin in a prescientific age; and without formal destruction
by argument it has shared in the euthanasia which has overtaken many
other pious opinions found inadequate to the facts. The phenomena which
it professes to explain are paralleled in all their essential features
by other phenomena, for which even its supporters would hardly be
rash enough to claim substantial reality; and as the phantasms now to
be discussed bear in all points a close resemblance to those already
described as occurring to solitary percipients, probably no one who
accepts the one class of appearances as hallucinatory will hesitate to
accept the other.

But when the hallucinatory character of collectively-perceived,
or, as they may be styled for brevity, "collective" phantasms is
recognised, there are difficulties of interpretation to be dealt
with. On the telepathic hypothesis there are two modes in which a
collective hallucination may be conceived to originate: (_a_) it may
be communicated direct from a third person to each of the percipients;
or (_b_) it may be communicated by telepathic infection from one
percipient to another. The first explanation involves in most cases,
as Mr. Gurney has pointed out (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. pp.
171, 172), serious theoretical difficulties. For on the view to which
we are led by a review of all the evidence, a telepathic hallucination,
like any other, is, as a rule, the work of the percipient's mind, and
is not transferred ready made from the agent. As such it is frequently
of slow growth, and there are grounds for believing that it is
sometimes not externalised for the percipient's senses until some hours
after the receipt of the original telepathic impulse. We should hardly
expect, therefore, to find two percipients independently developing
similar hallucinations, and at the same moment. But in most of the
cases of collective hallucination hitherto reported, the hallucinations
have been, so far as could be ascertained, similar and simultaneous,
so as indeed to suggest a real figure rather than a hallucination.
Moreover, in well-attested recent narratives it rarely happens that
a connection between the hallucination and any unusual state of the
person represented is clearly established; whilst in many, perhaps
most cases, the hallucination has not been recognised as resembling
any person known to either percipient, and has in some instances been
purely grotesque. In most cases, therefore, it seems easier to believe
that we have to deal with a contagious hallucination, which, whether
initiated by a telepathic impulse, or purely subjective in its origin,
has been transferred telepathically from the original percipient to
others in his company at the time. In some cases, indeed, it is no
doubt permissible, as suggested by Mr. Gurney, to conjecture that the
minds of all the percipients may have been directly influenced by the
agent, and that subsequently an overflow from the mind of one of the
percipients may have served to reinforce the original impulse, and
determine the exact moment of the explosion in his co-percipients, just
as the current regulates the exact hour of striking in electrically
synchronised clocks. Or again, the mind of each percipient may
react upon the others. There are, however, a few cases where the
percipients appear to have had experiences relating to the same event
neither precisely similar nor simultaneous, which seem to require
the hypothesis of an impulse in each case directly derived from the
person represented. Some cases of the kind are given in _Phantasms of
the Living_ (vol. i. p. 362; vol. ii. 173-183), and others will be
cited in the latter part of this chapter. It will be more convenient,
however, to begin by giving examples of the ordinary type of collective
hallucination.


_Collective Auditory Hallucinations._

No. 78.--From MR. C. H. CARY.

    "SECRETARY'S OFFICE, GENERAL POST OFFICE,
    29_th March_ 1892.

    "At Bow, London, on the 8th March 1875, at about 8.30 P.M., I
    heard a voice say, 'Joseph, Joseph.' I was talking with my father
    and cousin (Joseph Cary) about the battle of Balaclava. I was in
    good health, etc. My age was nearly thirteen. All three of us
    heard the voice, which we suppose to have been that of Joseph's
    grandmother."[123]

In conversation, Mr. Cary explained to me that the voice was not
recognised by any of those who heard it. It was indeed at first
mistaken for the voice of Mrs. Cary (Mr. C. H. Cary's mother), who was
at the time in an adjoining room, but who had not spoken. A telegram
announcing the grandmother's death was received on the day following,
and Mr. Joseph Cary then said that the voice must have been that of his
grandmother. Mr. C. H. Cary had never seen this lady.

Mr. R. H. Cary writes from 49 Gladsmuir Road, London, N.:--

    "_March_ 31_st_, 1892.

    "With reference to your inquiry concerning the voice which was
    heard at the time of the late Mrs. Victor's death, I am able to
    state that my son, my nephew, and myself were sitting together,
    and we all heard it distinctly. This occurred about fourteen years
    ago. The account given by my son exactly coincides with my own
    recollection.

    "R. H. CARY."

We have ascertained from the Registrar-General that Mary Victor, widow
of Thomas Victor, farmer, died at Linwood, Paul, Penzance, on March
8th, 1875, from bronchitis.

Mr. C. H. Cary adds that though Mrs. Victor was known to be ill,
her death was not thought to be imminent. He has himself had other
auditory hallucinations--viz., the hearing of footsteps on two or three
occasions at about the time of the death of a relation.

In the next case the voice heard did not correspond with any external
event. It was, as it were, "the after-image" of a voice once familiar
in the house.


No. 79.--From MISS ANNIE NEWBOLD.

    "_May_ 7_th_, 1892.

    "Florence N., a little child of under four years old, to whom I
    was very much attached, died on May 23rd, 1889. She lived in the
    house where I have my studio, and during the daytime was invariably
    with me. There were no other children in the house, and she was
    a general pet. I was ill for some time after her death, and one
    morning in July 1889 I went to see Mrs. N. We were sitting talking
    in her room on the ground-floor when I suddenly heard the child's
    voice distinctly call 'Miss Boo' (her name for me). I was about
    to answer, when I remembered that it could be no living voice and
    so continued my sentence, thinking that I would say nothing about
    the occurrence to her mother. At that moment Mrs. N. turned to me
    and said, 'Miss Newbold, did you hear that?' 'Yes,' I replied,
    'what was it?' And she said, 'My little child, and she called
    "Miss Boo."' We both noticed that the sound came from below, as
    if she were standing in the kitchen doorway underneath the room
    in which we were sitting. There was no possibility of its being
    another child, as there was not one in the house. The upper floors
    were empty, too, at the time. I can vouch for the accuracy of this
    account.

    "ANNIE NEWBOLD."

Mrs. N. writes:--

    "Miss Newbold came to see me one morning in July 1889, about two
    months after my only child's death. We were in my room talking when
    I distinctly heard my little girl's voice call 'Miss Boo.' I asked
    Miss Newbold if she had heard anything and she said 'Yes. What was
    it?' I replied, 'My little child, and she said "Miss Boo."'

    "LIZZIE N."

In answer to questions, Miss Newbold writes:--

    "1. Mrs. N. never heard her little girl's voice on any other
    occasion.

    "2. We were not talking about the little girl at the time, nor upon
    any subject connected with her. I, however, had a box of roses on
    my knee, which I was mechanically sorting, and putting all the
    white ones on one side to send to the little child's grave.

    "3. Mrs. N. has never heard any other voices, either before or
    since. Neither have I; but I have three or four times in my
    life been conscious of a presence without being able to explain
    definitely what it was I felt. I have never seen anything."[124]


_Collective Visual Hallucinations._

Passing to visual phantasms, we will begin by citing a case in which
there can be little doubt that the hallucination was purely subjective;
a better case for illustrating the hypothesis of the infectious
character of casual hallucination could hardly be found. It is to be
noted indeed that the second percipient saw the apparition on the first
occasion only after a distinct _verbal_ suggestion, but, as already
stated, there is no evidence that a single verbal suggestion can
produce a hallucination in a healthy person in full possession of his
normal faculties.


No. 80.--From MRS. GREIFFENBERG and MRS. ERNI-GREIFFENBERG.

Mr. F. C. S. Schiller, through whom the account was obtained, tells
us that he heard the story in October 1890 from the two percipients.
The following account was put together by him from an account (which
he also sent us) written by Mrs. Erni-Greiffenberg, and various
conversations which he had with both ladies on the subject. He
afterwards obtained their signatures to it. Neither of them has had any
other hallucinatory experience.

    "_December_ 14_th_, 1890.

    "In the beginning of the summer of 1884 we were sitting at dinner
    at home as usual, in the middle of the day. In the midst of the
    conversation I noticed my mother suddenly looking down at something
    beneath the table. I inquired whether she had dropped anything, and
    received the answer, 'No, but I wonder how that cat can have got
    into the room?' Looking underneath the table, I was surprised to
    see a large white Angora cat beside my mother's chair. We both got
    up, and I opened the door to let the cat out. She marched round the
    table, went noiselessly out of the door, and when about half-way
    down the passage turned round and faced us. For a short time she
    regularly stared at us with her green eyes, then she dissolved
    away, like a mist, under our eyes.

    "Even apart from the mode of her disappearance, we felt convinced
    that the cat could not have been a real one, as we neither had one
    of our own, nor knew of any that would answer to the description
    in the place, and so this appearance made an unpleasant impression
    upon us.

    "This impression was, however, greatly enhanced by what happened
    in the following year, 1885, when we were staying in Leipzig with
    my married sister (the daughter of Mrs. Greiffenberg). We had come
    home one afternoon from a walk, when, on opening the door of the
    flat, we were met in the hall by the same white cat. It proceeded
    down the passage in front of us, and looked at us with the same
    melancholy gaze. When it got to the door of the cellar (which was
    locked), it again dissolved into nothing.

    "On this occasion also it was first seen by my mother, and we
    were both impressed by the uncanny and gruesome character of the
    appearance. In this case, also, the cat could not have been a real
    one, as there was no such cat in the neighbourhood."

A very striking example of a collective hallucination, apparently of
the same type, was given to us by Mrs. Ward. She and her husband,
the late E. M. Ward, R.A., in 1851 saw in their bedroom two small
pear-shaped lights which, when touched, broke into small luminous
fragments. (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. ii. p. 193.) We have also a
case in which our informant, when a girl of fifteen, with another girl,
saw in the middle of the room, at a dancing class, a hallucinatory
chair. Yet another case is recorded by Miss Foy, a careful observer,
who had been troubled for some time with a hallucinatory skeleton, the
subjective character of which she fully recognised. On one occasion
when in hospital the hallucination recurred, and appears to have been
seen also by the patient in the adjoining bed, to whom no hint of any
kind had been given. In both these cases, however, the evidence depends
upon a single memory. We have another case in which a singular luminous
body--apparently a hallucination of a rudimentary kind--was perceived
by two witnesses coincidently with the death of a near relative of one
of them. The Rev. A. T. S. Goodrick, from whom I originally received
the account _viva voce_, was walking with a friend across a moor in
Sutherlandshire

    "when there suddenly arose, to all appearance out of the road
    between our feet as we walked, a ball of fire, about the size of
    an 18lb. cannon ball. It was of an orange-red colour, and there
    seemed to be a kind of rotatory motion in it, not unlike a firework
    of some description.... It seemed to move forward with us, at a
    distance of not more than 6 inches in front, and at the same time
    rose pretty swiftly breast high ... and then disappeared and left
    no trace."

Mr. Goodrick adds that a light rain was falling; but there was no
thunderstorm.

From uneducated witnesses such an account no doubt would have but
little value. A will-o'-the-wisp in an adjoining marsh, or even a
flash of lightning, might in such a case form a sufficient basis for
the story. And even assuming that the account here given accurately
describes what was seen, it is difficult to feel certain that the
appearance was hallucinatory. But if it were of a physical nature, it
is certainly not easy to conjecture what it could have been, and the
coincidence with the death is an additional argument for regarding the
phenomenon as hallucinatory.

In the next case the phantasm seems to belong to a not unusual type
of subjective hallucinations, the "after-image" of a familiar figure.
There are no grounds for ascribing the apparition to any "agency"
on the part of the person whose image was seen. If the incident is
correctly described, the _prima facie_ explanation is that a casual
hallucination was communicated by telepathic suggestion to a second
person in the company of the original percipient. At our request the
two accounts which follow were written independently.


No. 81.--From MRS. MILMAN.

    "17 SOUTHWELL GARDENS, S.W.,
    _March_ 20_th_, 1888.

    "About three years ago I was coming out of the dining-room one
    day, after lunch, with my sister. My mother had, as I supposed,
    preceded us upstairs, as usual. The library door, which faces
    the dining-room, stood wide open, and looking through it as I
    crossed the hall, I saw my mother in the library, seated at the
    writing-table, and apparently writing. Instead, therefore, of going
    upstairs, as I had intended, I went to the library door, wishing to
    speak to her, but when I looked in the room was empty.

    "At the same moment, my sister, who had also been going towards
    the stairs in the first instance, changed her direction, and,
    crossing the hall, came up to the library door behind me. She then
    exclaimed, 'Why, I thought I saw mamma in the library, at the
    writing-table.' On comparing notes, we found that we had both seen
    her seated at the writing-table, and bending over it as if writing.
    My mother was never in the habit of writing in the library.

    "I recollect her dress perfectly, as the impression was quite
    distinct and vivid. She had on a black cloak, and bonnet with a
    yellow bird in it, which she generally wore.

    "It is the only time anything of the kind has happened to me.

    "M. J. MILMAN."


From MISS CAMPBELL.

    "17 SOUTHWELL GARDENS, S.W.,
    _March_ 21_st_, 1888.

    "My sister and mother and myself, after returning from our morning
    drive, came into the dining-room without removing our things, and
    had luncheon as usual, during which my sister and I laughed and
    cracked jokes in the gayest of spirits. After a time my mother rose
    and left the room, but we remained on for a few minutes. Finally
    we both got up and went into the passage, and I was about to go
    upstairs and take off my things when I saw my sister turn into my
    father's study (which was directly opposite the dining-room), with
    the evident intention, as I supposed, of speaking to my mother,
    whom I distinctly noticed seated at my father's desk in her cloak
    and bonnet, busily absorbed in writing. The door of the study was
    wide open at the time. I turned round and followed her to the
    door, when, to my surprise, my mother had completely disappeared,
    and I noticed my sister turned away too, and left the room as if
    puzzled. I asked her, with some curiosity, what she went into the
    room for? She replied that she fancied she saw my mother bending
    over the desk writing, and went in to speak to her. Feeling very
    much startled and alarmed, we went upstairs to see after her, and
    found her in her bedroom, where she went immediately on leaving the
    dining-room, and had been all the time.

    "E. J. CAMPBELL."

In the next case the apparition was recognised by one of the
percipients only, as resembling a relative who had been dead some
years. Neither percipient appears to have seen the face.


No. 82.--From MRS. J. C.

    "_August_ 20_th_, 1893.

    "Seven years ago my husband and I had the following curious
    experience:--

    "In the middle of the night I awoke with the feeling that some one
    was near me, and at once saw a figure moving from the side of my
    bed towards the wardrobe where I kept jewellery. My supposition
    was that it was a burglar, and I refrained from waking my husband
    (whose bed was two feet from mine), as I thought the burglar would
    be armed, and I knew my husband would certainly attack him and be
    at his mercy. I therefore lay perfectly still.

    "The apparition having passed the foot of my bed, then came
    opposite my husband's, when, to my astonishment, I saw my husband
    sit up in bed gazing at the figure. In a moment or two he lay down
    again, and the figure apparently passed to the door.

    "We neither of us spoke one word that night.

    "In the morning I asked my husband to look if the doors were locked
    (of which there are three in the room). They were all secure. I
    also examined the beds to see if they by any possibility could have
    touched, and so I unconsciously have awakened him, but they were
    quite separate. I then asked if he remembered anything happening in
    the night, and he replied, 'Yes, a strange thing: I thought I saw
    my father go out of that door.' Not till then did I tell him that I
    thought the figure was a burglar, and how frightened I had been at
    the thought of his struggling with an armed man, and had therefore
    remained silent.

    "The gas was burning, and I could see quite across the room."

I received a full account of the incident orally from Mrs. C. on the
20th August 1893. She told me that she never saw the face of the
figure, and could not see, or cannot now recollect, the dress. She had
no doubt at the time that it was a burglar. Mrs. C. has had no other
hallucination of any kind.

Mr. C. writes on the 21st August 1893:--

    "I have read my wife's account, and endorse it.

    "To my recollection I was not dreaming previously to sitting up in
    bed, when I believed I saw my father going towards the door. My
    mind had not been specially active about his affairs at that time,
    although I was rather anxious about some matters of business.

    "The figure I supposed to be my father (and I had no thought it was
    any one else) moved noiselessly across the room and disappeared
    through the doorway. I should have treated it as a dream only,
    if my wife had not recalled my attention to it in the morning by
    asking me if I remembered sitting up in bed.

    "Although I am certain my eyes were open at the time of the
    apparition, I did not see the face, but recognised the figure as
    that of my father by the general appearance as I remembered him.

    "I have had no other similar waking experience, but have previously
    seen my father distinctly in a dream after his decease."

Mr. C. told me that he was positive the figure could not have been
that of a real man: the doors were found locked on the inside in the
morning. Moreover, his recognition of the figure, though he could not
see the face, was unmistakable.

We have many similar accounts of collective phantasms which appear
to have differed from subjective hallucinations of the ordinary type
in no other particular than the fact of their occurrence to two
persons simultaneously. Thus, to quote a few instances, Mrs. Willett,
of Bedales, Lindfield, Sussex, sent us an extract from her diary
describing a figure seen by her daughter and a visitor,--a fair-haired
child running along a gallery. The account is confirmed by the visitor,
Miss S. From Mrs. and Miss Goodhall we have an account of a tall figure
seen by them when driving in a country lane. Miss C---- and two of her
sisters saw in a bedroom in a London house the figure of a young man of
middle height wearing a peaked cap and dark clothes. Mrs. Y. and her
niece saw the figure of a child in a long grey dressing-gown running
down a lighted staircase. In this last case the figure was mistaken
for Mrs. Y.'s daughter, but in the other cases the phantasm bore no
resemblance to any one with whom the percipients were acquainted. In
no instance does it seem possible except by violently straining the
probabilities to suppose the figure seen to have been that of a human
being.

In the next case the phantasm, which was recognised, occurred within a
short time of the death of the person represented. The narrator is a
decorator and house-painter, of Uniontown, Kentucky, U.S.A.


No. 83.--From MR. S. S. FALKINBURG.

    "_September_ 12_th_, 1884.

    "The following circumstance is impressed upon my mind in a manner
    which will preclude its ever being forgotten by me or the members
    of my family interested. My little son Arthur, who was then five
    years old, and the pet of his grandpapa, was playing on the floor,
    when I entered the house a quarter to seven o'clock, Friday
    evening, July 11th, 1879. I was very tired, having been receiving
    and paying for staves all day, and it being an exceedingly sultry
    evening, I lay down by Artie on the carpet, and entered into
    conversation with my wife--not, however, in regard to my parents.
    Artie, as usually was the case, came and lay down with his little
    head upon my left arm, when all at once he exclaimed, 'Papa! papa!
    Grandpa!' I cast my eyes towards the ceiling, or opened my eyes,
    I am not sure which, when, between me and the joists (it was an
    old-fashioned log-cabin), I saw the face of my father as plainly
    as ever I saw him in my life. He appeared to me to be very pale,
    and looked _sad_, as I had seen him upon my last visit to him three
    months previous. I immediately spoke to my wife, who was sitting
    within a few feet of me, and said, 'Clara, there is something wrong
    at home; father is either dead or very sick.' She tried to persuade
    me that it was my imagination, but I could not help feeling that
    something was wrong. Being very tired, we soon after retired, and
    about ten o'clock Artie woke me up repeating, 'Papa, grandpa is
    here.' I looked, and believe, if I remember right, got up, at any
    rate to get the child warm, as he complained of coldness, and it
    was very sultry weather. Next morning I expressed my determination
    to go at once to Indianapolis. My wife made light of it and
    over-persuaded me, and I did not go until Monday morning, and upon
    arriving at home (my father's), I found that he had been buried the
    day before, Sunday, July 13th.

    "Now comes the mysterious part to me. After I had told my mother
    and brother of my vision, or whatever it may have been, they told
    me the following:--

    "On the morning of the 11th July, the day of his death, he arose
    early and expressed himself as feeling unusually well, and ate a
    hearty breakfast. He took the Bible (he was a Methodist minister),
    and went and remained until near noon. He ate a hearty dinner,
    and went to the front gate, and, looking up and down the street,
    remarked that he could not, or at least would not be disappointed,
    some one was surely coming. During the afternoon and evening
    he seemed restless, and went to the gate, looking down street,
    frequently. At last, about time for supper, he mentioned my name,
    and expressed his conviction that God, in His own good time, would
    answer his prayers in my behalf, I being at that time very wild.
    Mother going into the kitchen to prepare supper, he followed
    her and continued talking to her about myself and family, and
    especially Arthur, my son. Supper being over, he moved his chair
    near the door, and was conversing about me at the time he died. The
    last words were about me, and were spoken, by mother's clock, 14
    minutes of 7. He did not fall, but just quit talking and was dead.

    "In answer to my inquiries, my son Arthur says he remembers the
    circumstances, and the impression he received upon that occasion is
    ineffaceable.

    "SAMUEL S. FALKINBURG."

We have procured a certificate of death from the Indianapolis Board of
Health, which confirms the date given.

Mrs. Falkinburg writes to us, on September 12, 1884:--

    "In answer to your request, I will say that I cheerfully give my
    recollection of the circumstance to which you refer.

    "We were living in Brown County, Indiana, fifty miles south
    of Indianapolis, in the summer of 1879. My husband (Mr. S. S.
    Falkinburg) was in the employ of one John Ayers, buying staves.

    "On the evening of July 11th, about 6.30 o'clock, he came into the
    room where I was sitting, and lay down on the carpet with my little
    boy Arthur, complaining of being very tired and warm. Entering
    into conversation on some unimportant matter, Arthur went to him
    and lay down by his side. In a few moments my notice was attracted
    by hearing Arthur exclaim: 'Oh, papa, grandpa, grandpa, papa,' at
    the same time pointing with his little hand toward the ceiling.
    I looked in the direction he was pointing, but saw nothing. My
    husband, however, said: 'Clara, there is something wrong at home;
    father is either dead or very sick.' I tried to laugh him out of
    what I thought an idle fancy; but he insisted that he saw the face
    of his father looking at him from near the ceiling, and Arthur
    said, 'Grandpa was come, for he saw him.' That night we were
    awakened by Artie again calling his papa to see 'grandpa.'

    "A short time after my husband started (Monday) to go to
    Indianapolis, I received a letter calling him to the burial of his
    father; and some time after, in conversation with his mother, it
    transpired that the time he and Artie saw the vision was within two
    or three minutes of the time his father died.

    "CLARA T. FALKINBURG."

Asked whether this was his sole experience of a visual hallucination,
Mr. Falkinburg replied that it was. Occasionally, however, since that
time, he has had auditory impressions suggestive of his father's
presence.

Here again, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it seems
more probable that Mr. Falkinburg's hallucination was telepathically
originated, than that the casual remark of a child of five could
produce an effect hitherto observed only as the result of hypnotic
influence or some other equally potent disturbing cause.

In the following case, which again comes to us from the United
States, the vision was of a more complicated kind, and part only of
the original percipient's experience was shared. The occurrence of the
apparition within a few hours of the death of a person to whom it bore
some resemblance seems to be established; but in estimating the value
of the coincidence, it should be borne in mind that the phantasm was
not at the time referred to the deceased, and that there are numerous
chances of the coincidence of an unrecognised hallucination with a
death amongst a doctor's circle of acquaintance.


No. 84.--From DR. W. O. S.,

who wrote to Dr. Hodgson from Albany, New York, on the 10th September
1888, enclosing the following account:--

    "I am a physician, have been in practice about eleven years; am in
    excellent health, do not use intoxicants, tobacco, drugs, or strong
    tea or coffee. Am not subject (in the least) to dreams, and have
    never been a believer in apparitions, etc.

    "On Monday last, September 3rd, 1888, I went to bed about 11 P.M.,
    after my day's work. Had supper, a light one, about 7 P.M.; made
    calls after supper.

    "My bedroom is on the second floor of a city block house, and I
    kept all my doors locked except the one leading to my wife's room,
    next to mine, opening into mine by a wide sliding door, always
    left wide open at night. The diagram opposite will illustrate the
    relation of the rooms.

    "I occupy room 1 and my wife room 2. Her room has but one window,
    and a door opening only into my room. My room has three doors (all
    bolted at night) and one window. Both windows in our rooms have
    heavy green shades, which are drawn nearly to the bottom of the
    window at night, shutting out early daylight. No artificial lights
    command the windows, and the moonlight very seldom.

    "I undressed and went to bed about 11, and soon was asleep. In
    the neighbourhood of 4 A.M. I was awakened by a strong light in
    my face. I awoke and thought I saw my wife standing at Fig. 3, as
    she was to rise at 5.30 to take an early train. The light was so
    bright and pervading that I spoke, but got no answer. As I spoke,
    the figure retreated to Fig. 4, and as gradually faded to a spot at
    Fig. 5. The noiseless shifting of the light made me think it was a
    servant in the hall and the light was thrown through the keyhole as
    she moved. That could not be, as some clothing covered the keyhole.
    I then thought a burglar must be in the room, as the light settled
    near a large safe in my room. Thereupon I called loudly to my wife,
    and sprang to light a light. As I called her name she suddenly
    awoke, and called out, 'What is that bright light in your room?' I
    lit the gas and searched (there had been no light in either room).
    Everything was undisturbed.

    "My wife left on the early train. I attended to my work as usual.
    At noon, when I reached home, the servant who answers the door
    informed me that a man had been to my office to see about a
    certificate for a young lady who had died suddenly early that
    morning from a hemorrhage from the lungs. She died about one
    o'clock--the figure I saw about four o'clock.

[Illustration]

    There was but little resemblance between the two, as far as I
    noticed, except height and figure. The faces were not unlike,
    except that the apparition seemed considerably older. I had seen
    the young lady the evening before, but, although much interested
    in the case, did not consider it immediately serious. She had been
    in excellent health up to within two days of her death. At first
    she spit a little blood, from a strain. When she was taken with the
    severe hemorrhage, and choked to death, she called for help and for
    me.

    "This is the first experience of the kind I have ever had, or
    personally have known about. It was very clear--the figure or
    apparition--at first, but rapidly faded. My wife remarked the light
    before I had spoken anything except her name. When I awake I am
    wide awake in an instant, as I am accustomed to answer a telephone
    in the hall and my office-bell at night."

From MRS. W. O. S.

    "ALBANY, _September_ 27_th_, 1888.

    "On the morning of September 4 I was suddenly awakened out of a
    sound sleep by my husband's calling to me from an adjoining room.
    Before I answered him I was struck with the fact that although the
    green shade to his window was drawn down, his room seemed flooded
    by a soft yellow light, while my chamber, with the window on same
    side as his, and with the shade drawn up, was dark. The first thing
    I said was, 'What is that light?' He replied he didn't know. I then
    got up and went into his room, which was still quite light. The
    light faded away in a moment or two. The shade was down all the
    time. When I went back to my room I saw that it was a few moments
    after four."

In answer to further questions, Mrs. W. O. S. adds:--

    "_October_ 16_th_, 1888.

    "In regard to the light in my husband's room, it seemed to me to be
    perhaps more in the corner between his window and my door, although
    it was faintly distributed through the room. When I first saw the
    light (lying in bed) it was brilliant, but I only commanded a view
    of the corner of his room, between his window and my door. When
    I reached the door the light had begun to fade, though it seemed
    brighter in the doorway where I stood than elsewhere. My husband
    seemed greatly perplexed, and said, 'How strange! I thought surely
    there was a woman in my room.' I said, 'Did you think it was I?' He
    said, 'At first, of course, I thought so, but when I rubbed my eyes
    I saw it was not. It looked some like Mrs. B----' (another patient
    of his,--not the girl who died that night). He, moreover, said that
    the figure never seemed to look directly at him, but towards the
    wall beyond his bed; and that the figure seemed clothed in white,
    or something very light. That was all he said, except that later,
    when he knew the girl was dead, and I asked him if the figure
    at all resembled her, he said, 'Yes, it did look like her, only
    older.'"[125]

So far the instances quoted belong to what may be called the normal
type of collective hallucination. In the last case, indeed, one
percipient saw less than the other, but that may have been due merely
to the fact that she awoke later. In the three cases which follow the
impressions produced upon the percipients were diverse, and there is
no evidence that they were simultaneous. In the first of the three
cases, indeed, the circumstances strongly suggest that the mind of one
percipient was influenced by the other. But in the last case, where the
percipients were far apart, and their impressions markedly different,
it seems reasonable to conjecture--their interest in the agent being
equal--that the results produced were in each case directly referable
to the dying man.

The narrative which follows was originally printed in July 1883, in
an account written by the Warden, entitled "The Orphanage and Home,
Aberlour, Craigellachie." It will be observed that the account, though
written in the third person, is actually first hand.


No. 85.--From the REV. C. H. JUPP, Warden.

    "In 1875 a man died leaving a widow and six orphan children.
    The three eldest were admitted into the Orphanage. Three years
    afterwards the widow died, and friends succeeded in getting funds
    to send the rest here, the youngest being about four years of age.
    [Late one evening, about six months after the admission of the
    younger children, some visitors arrived unexpectedly; and] the
    Warden agreed to take a bed in the little ones' dormitory, which
    contained ten beds, nine occupied.

    "In the morning, at breakfast, the Warden made the following
    statement:--'As near as I can tell I fell asleep about eleven
    o'clock, and slept very soundly for some time. I suddenly woke
    without any apparent reason, and felt an impulse to turn round, my
    face being towards the wall, from the children. Before turning, I
    looked up and saw a soft light in the room. The gas was burning
    low in the hall, and the dormitory door being open, I thought it
    probable that the light came from that source. It was soon evident,
    however, that such was not the case. I turned round, and then a
    wonderful vision met my gaze. Over the second bed from mine, and
    on the same side of the room, there was floating a small cloud of
    light, forming a halo of the brightness of the moon on an ordinary
    moonlight night.

    "'I sat upright in bed, looking at this strange appearance, took
    up my watch and found the hands pointing to five minutes to one.
    Everything was quiet, and all the children sleeping soundly. In the
    bed, over which the light seemed to float, slept the youngest of
    the six children mentioned above.

    "'I asked myself, "Am I dreaming?" No! I was wide awake. I was
    seized with a strong impulse to rise and touch the substance, or
    whatever it might be (for it was about five feet high), and was
    getting up when something seemed to hold me back. I am certain
    I heard nothing, yet I _felt_ and perfectly understood the
    words--"No, lie down it won't hurt you." I _at once_ did what I
    _felt_ I was told to do. I fell asleep shortly afterwards and rose
    at half-past five, that being my usual time.

    "'At six o'clock I began dressing the children, beginning at the
    bed furthest from the one in which I slept. Presently I came to the
    bed over which I had seen the light hovering. I took the little
    boy out, placed him on my knee, and put on some of his clothes. The
    child had been talking with the others; suddenly he was silent. And
    then, looking me hard in the face with an extraordinary expression,
    he said, "Oh, Mr. Jupp, my mother came to me last night. Did you
    see her?" For a moment I could not answer the child. I then thought
    it better to pass it off, and said, "Come, we must make haste, or
    we shall be late for breakfast."'

    "The child never afterwards referred to the matter, we are told,
    nor has it since ever been mentioned to him. The Warden says it is
    a mystery to him; he simply states the fact and there leaves the
    matter, being perfectly satisfied that he was mistaken in no one
    particular."

In answer to inquiries, the Rev. C. Jupp writes to us:--

    "THE ORPHANAGE AND CONVALESCENT HOME,
    ABERLOUR, CRAIGELLACHIE,
    _November_ 13_th_, 1883.

    "I fear anything the little boy might now say would be unreliable,
    or I would at once question him. Although the matter was fully
    discussed at the time, it was never mentioned in the hearing of
    the child; and yet when, at the request of friends, the account
    was published in our little magazine, and the child read it, his
    countenance changed, and looking up, he said, 'Mr. Jupp, that
    is me.' I said, 'Yes, that is what we saw.' He said, 'Yes,' and
    then seemed to fall into deep thought, evidently with pleasant
    remembrances, for he smiled so sweetly to himself, and seemed to
    forget I was present.

    "I much regret now that I did not learn something from the child at
    the time.

    "CHAS. JUPP."

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Jupp says that he has never had any other
hallucination of the senses; and adds:--

    "My wife was the only person of _adult age_ to whom I mentioned
    the circumstance at the time. Shortly after, I mentioned it to our
    Bishop and Primus."

Mrs. Jupp writes, from the Orphanage, on June 23, 1886:--

    "This is to certify that the account of the light seen by the
    Warden of this establishment is correct, and was mentioned to me at
    the time"--_i.e._, next morning.

It is to be regretted that it is not now possible to ascertain
whether the child's experience were of the nature of a dream or a
borderland hallucination. But the ambiguity does not affect either the
interpretation or the significance of the incident.

In the next case the two apparitions were not only different, but were
seen in different rooms. The time in each case appears to have been
within an hour of midnight. It will be noticed that each percipient is
doubtful whether to class her experience as a dream or a waking vision.
If dreams, they were certainly of an unusual type, since they included
in each case an impression of the room in which they occurred.


No. 86.--From SISTER MARTHA.

Account, signed by herself, which Sister Martha (Sister of the Order of
Saint Charles) gave to M. Ch. Richet at Mirecourt--

    "On Friday, 6th March 1891, I was called to nurse M. Bastien. At
    night, when I had been dozing for about five minutes, I had the
    following dream--if I may call it a dream; I think I was sleeping.
    A light, a sound came from the fireplace, and a woman stepped
    out whose appearance I did not recognise, but who had a voice
    like Madame Bastien's. I saw her as distinctly as I see you. She
    approached the bed where Cécile was sleeping, and taking her hand,
    said, 'How sweet Cécile is!' I followed her--in my dream, crossing
    myself as I went. She opened the door and vanished.

    "I cannot say the exact hour, but it was early in the night,
    between 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.--I do not know exactly, for I had not
    a watch. I awoke immediately after this dream. I did not waken
    Cécile, for I did not want to say anything to her about it, but as
    the dream impressed me very much, I told it to her the following
    morning when I awoke. I can give no further details about the dream
    except that the lady carried a candle and had coloured spots on her
    garments.

    "I have never had a similar dream except once, when I thought I saw
    my dead mother and heard her say, 'You do not remember me in your
    prayers.'"

Madame Houdaille writes:--

    "MIRECOURT, 20_th March_, 1891.

    "During my father's illness the Sister kept watch on the first
    floor, and my brother and I passed the evening on the ground floor.
    About ten o'clock I left my brother and went upstairs to bed.
    Between eleven o'clock and midnight (I do not know whether I was
    waking or sleeping, probably between the two) I perceived, near
    my bed, a white shadow like a phantom, which I had not time to
    recognise. I gave a loud cry of terror which startled my brother,
    who was just going up to bed. He hastened to my room, and found me
    gazing wildly around. The rest of the night passed quietly.

    "Next morning Cécile told me about the Sister's dream.

    "She, Cécile, had seen or heard nothing. I was almost angry with
    her and her tale, and treated it as a silly dream, so terrified
    was I at the occurrence of the two apparitions the same night, and
    probably at the same hour. Cécile and the Sister knew nothing of
    my dream. I did not tell it to the Sister till two days after M.
    Richet and Octave[126] had visited the hospital."[127]

In the next case, as already said, the two percipients were many miles
apart. The impression in the first narrative should probably be classed
as a dream; in the second as an auditory hallucination.


No. 87.--From SIR LAWRENCE JONES.

    "CRANMER HALL, FAKENHAM, NORFOLK,
    _April_ 26_th_, 1893.

    "On August 20th, 1884, I was staying at my father-in-law's house
    at Bury St. Edmunds. I had left my father in perfectly good health
    about a fortnight before. He was at home at this address. About
    August 18th I had had a letter from my mother saying that my father
    was not quite well, and that the doctor had seen him and made very
    light of the matter, attributing his indisposition to the extreme
    heat of the weather.

    "I was not in any way anxious on my father's account, as he was
    rather subject to slight bilious attacks.

    "I should add, though, that I had been spending that day, August
    20th, at Cambridge, and should have stayed the night there had
    not a sort of vague presentiment haunted me that possibly there
    would be a letter from home the next morning. My wife, too, had
    a similar feeling that if I stayed the night at Cambridge I might
    regret it. In consequence of this feeling I returned to Bury,
    and that night woke up suddenly to find myself streaming with
    perspiration and calling out: 'Something dreadful is happening; I
    don't know what.' The impression of horror remained some time, but
    at last I fell asleep till the morning.

    "My father, Sir Willoughby Jones, died very suddenly of heart
    disease about 1 A.M. on August 21st. He was not in his room at the
    moment, but was carried back to his room and restoratives applied,
    but in vain.

    "My brother Herbert and I were the only two of the family absent
    from home at the time. The thoughts of those present (my mother,
    brother, and three sisters) no doubt turned most anxiously towards
    us, and it is to a telepathic impression from them in their anxiety
    and sorrow that I attribute the intimations we received.

    "LAWRENCE J. JONES."

Lady Jones writes:--

    "I have a vivid remembrance of the occurrence related above by my
    husband. I was sound asleep when he awoke, and seizing me by [the]
    wrist, exclaimed: 'Such a dreadful thing is happening,' and I had
    much difficulty in persuading him that there was nothing wrong.

    "He went to sleep again, but was much relieved in the morning
    by finding a long letter from Sir Willoughby, posted the day
    before, and written in good spirits. Having read this and gone to
    his dressing-room, however, he soon returned with the telegram
    summoning him home at once, and said as he came in: 'My impression
    in the night was only too true.'

    "EVELYN M. JONES."

Mr. Herbert Jones, the other percipient, describes his experience as
follows:--

    "KNEBWORTH RECTORY, STEVENAGE.
    "_Recollections of August_ 20_th_, 1884.

    "I had spent the day at Harpenden, and returned home about 8 P.M.,
    and went to bed about 10.30.

    "I woke at 12 o'clock, hearing my name called twice, as I
    fancied. I lit my candle, and, seeing nothing, concluded it was a
    dream--looked at my watch, and went to sleep again.

    "I woke again and heard people carrying something downstairs from
    the upper storey, just outside my room. I lit my candle, got out of
    bed, and waited till the men were outside my door. They seemed to
    be carrying something heavy, and came down step by step.

    "I opened my door, and it was pitch dark. I was puzzled and
    dumbfounded. I went into my sitting-room and into the hall, but
    everything was dark and quiet. I went back to bed convinced I had
    been the sport of another nightmare. It was about 2 A.M. by my
    watch. At breakfast next morning on my plate was a telegram telling
    me to come home.

    "This whole story may be nothing, but it was odd that I should have
    twice got up in one night, and that during that night and those
    hours my father was dying.

    "H. E. JONES.
    "_April_ 4_th_, 1893."

Sir Lawrence Jones adds:--

    "My brother was then a curate in London, living at 32 Palace
    Street, Westminster, where the above experience took place.

    "L. J. J."

A case somewhat resembling this last is recorded by Professor Richet
(_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. pp. 163, 164). On the night of the 14-15th
November 1887, when his physiological laboratory in Paris was burnt,
two of his intimate friends, M. Ferrari and M. Héricourt, dreamt of
fire; and on the evening of the 15th Madame B. (the hypnotic subject
referred to in Chapter V.) was hypnotised by M. Gibert at Havre and
"sent on a journey" [_i.e._, in imagination] to Paris to visit,
amongst others, M. Richet. Shortly afterwards she awoke herself by
crying out in great distress, "It is burning." Unfortunately, those
present contented themselves with calming her excitement, and did not
at the time inquire into the nature of her impression. But the triple
coincidence is certainly remarkable.

A case which may perhaps be referred to the same category is recorded
by the Rev. A. T. Fryer in the _Journal_ of the S.P.R. for June 1890.
Mr. C. Williams died at Plaxtol, Sevenoaks, on Sunday, April 28th,
1889, having been confined to his bed with pleuro-pneumonia since the
preceding Tuesday. On Friday the 26th his figure was seen in the street
by Mr. Hind at about 10.40 A.M., and on the day following at about 1
P.M. by two ladies, Miss Dalison and Miss Sinclair, simultaneously.
None of the percipients were aware of Mr. Williams' illness. It was
impossible that the figure seen could have been the real man, and, as
Mr. Fryer shows that a mistake of identity was under the circumstances
extremely improbable, it seems not unlikely that we have here to deal
with a case of two telepathic hallucinations originated independently
and at a considerable interval by the same agent.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 121: Thus we have a case, regarded by the narrator as
hallucinatory, in which three persons saw a figure ascending the
staircase of a country rectory. The occurrence took place shortly after
the return of the family from church, and the figure was supposed to be
that of the rector, until it was ascertained that he was at the time
in another part of the house. As, however, it was dark and the head of
the figure could not be seen, the identification could hardly have been
complete, and as no search was made in the upper part of the house, it
seems possible that the figure was that of some person who had gained
entrance to the house during the absence of the family at church.]

[Footnote 122: See the article on Spirit Photographs by Mrs. Henry
Sidgwick, _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. pp. 268-289.]

[Footnote 123: This account was originally written in answer to a
series of questions on a "census" form. A few connecting words have
been inserted in order to make it read consecutively.]

[Footnote 124: With this may be compared an incident recorded by
William Bell Scott (_Autobiographical Notes_, vol. ii. pp. 117, 118).
The account is perhaps worth quoting, though the length of time which
has elapsed, and the fact that it rests upon a single memory, leave to
the narrative little value other than that derived from its literary
associations. It should be added, however, that Mr. Scott's claim to a
rational scepticism in these matters appears to be borne out by other
passages in the book.

"I have so repeatedly expressed my unbelief in all the vulgar or
popular forms of supernaturalism (says Mr. Scott), that I feel a little
hesitation in recording a circumstance resembling that class of things
which began the very evening after his [i.e., Rossetti's] departure.
I could now get a little peace to revise my _Dürer Journal_, and my
German friend Mr. Reid, who had given me an hour, stayed to dinner.
Rossetti's habit, when composing or even correcting for the press, was
to retire after dinner to the room above, the drawing-room of the old
house, to read aloud to himself, when by himself. This he did in a
voice so loud that we in the dining-room beneath could almost hear his
words. Well, as we were sitting after dinner, when he must have been
approaching London in the train, what could it be we heard? The usual
voice reading to itself in the usual place over our heads! I looked at
A. B.; she was listening intently till she could bear it no longer,
and left the room. Our learned priest found me, I fancy, to be rather
_distrait_, so he rose, saying it was about his time, and besides, he
continued, 'I hear Miss Boyd has some friend in the drawing-room, so
I won't go up. Give her my good-bye and respects.' I joined her at
once, but of course we heard nothing in the room itself. Such is the
circumstance as it took place. Mr. Reid, who knew nothing of the habit
of D. G. R., hearing the voice as well as we did, although it sounded
to him like talking rather than reading, was a sure evidence we were
not deceiving ourselves. Next night it was the same, and so it went on
till I left. When we tried to approach it was not audible, or when the
doors of the drawing-room and its small ante-room communicating with
the staircase were left open, we could make nothing of it. It gradually
tapered off when Miss Boyd was left by herself; by-and-by the whole
establishment was bolted and barred for the winter. Next season it had
entirely ceased."]

[Footnote 125: _Proc. American S.P.R._, pp. 405-408. The reader may be
interested in comparing the ragged and possibly commonplace account
given in the text with the following spirited version of the same
incident quoted from the _Arena_, March 1892. The writer of the account
states that "the story, as I tell it, was given me by the wife." But he
does not, it will be observed, quote it as in Mrs. W. O. S.'s words.
After describing how the doctor was awakened by a strong light in the
room and saw the figure of a woman, whom he at first mistook for his
wife, the writer in the _Arena_ proceeds as follows:--

"By this time he was broad awake, and sat upright in bed staring at the
figure. He noticed that it was a woman in a white garment; and looking
sharply, he recognised it, as he thought, as one of his patients who
was very ill. Then he realised that this could not be so, and that if
any one was in the room, it must be an intruder who had no right to be
there. With the vague thought of a possible burglar thus disguised, he
sprang out of bed and grasped his revolver, which he was accustomed
to have near at hand. This brought him face to face with the figure,
not three feet away. He now saw every detail of dress, complexion, and
feature, and for the first time recognised the fact that it was not a
being of flesh and blood. Then it was that, in quite an excited manner,
he called his wife, hoping that she would get there to see it also.
But the moment he called her name, the figure disappeared, leaving,
however, the intense yellow light behind, and which they both observed
for five minutes by the watch before it faded out.

"The next day it was found that one of his patients, closely resembling
the figure he had seen, had died a few minutes before he saw his
vision,--had died _calling for him_.

"It will be seen that this story, like the first one in this article,
_is perfectly authentic in every particular. There is no question as to
the facts_."

That, no doubt, is how the thing ought to have happened. A revolver
and a watch are essential to a properly upholstered ghost-story. There
ought to have been the dramatic confrontation of the living man with
his spectral visitant; there ought to have been the instant recognition
and as instant disappearance. Above all, there ought to have been the
exquisite adjustment in the times of vision and death.]

[Footnote 126: M. Octave Houdaille.]

[Footnote 127: _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, vol. i. pp. 98, 99.]




