CHAPTER XVI.

THEORIES AND CONCLUSIONS.


Consideration more or less adequate has now been given to the various
phenomena in which there is proof apparent of the action of telepathy.
The experimental evidence has shown that a simple sensation or idea may
be transferred from one mind to another, and that this transference
may take place alike in the normal state and in the hypnotic trance.
It has been shown also that the transferred idea may be reproduced in
the percipient's organism under various disguises; at one time, for
instance, it may cause vague distress or terror, or a blind impulse
to action; under other circumstances it may inspire definite and
complicated movements, as those involved in writing. Again, it may
induce sleep or even more deep-seated organic effects, such as hysteria
or local anæsthesia. Once more, it may be embellished with imagery
presumably furnished by the percipient's own mind, and may appear as
a dream or hallucination representing the distant agent. And these
various results may be obtained either by deliberate experiment; as the
result of some crisis affecting another mind; or, lastly, as following
on some peculiar state of receptivity established, under conditions not
yet clearly ascertained, in the percipient's mind.

But it would not be reasonable to infer that the few hundreds or
thousands of examples collected during the last twelve years by a
few groups of investigators exhaust the possibilities or indicate
the limits of telepathic action. By those, at least, who accept
the demonstration of telepathy as a real agency it will hardly be
anticipated that its action should be confined to the comparatively
few cases which present a coincidence sufficiently striking to be
quoted as ostensive instances. That the distribution, indeed, of
telepathic sensitiveness at the present time should be sporadic--as
the distribution of a musical ear or the power of visualisation is
sporadic--may appear not improbable. But we should be prepared to
find instances of its presumptive operation which fall below the
level of demonstration, and might with almost equal plausibility be
referred to some other cause. And such instances we do certainly
find, in simultaneous dreams and in vague presentiments, and in
innumerable coincidences of thought and expression in ordinary life.
And the suggestion that the same power may serve as an auxiliary to
more completely systematised modes of expression, though incapable of
proof, may yet be thought worthy of consideration. It is conceivable,
for instance, that it may aid the intercourse of a mother with her
infant child, that the influence of the orator may be due not only
to the spoken word, and that even in our daily conversation thoughts
may pass by this means which find no outward expression. The personal
influence of the operator in hypnotism may perhaps be regarded as a
proof presumptive of telepathy. When all the phenomena of "mesmerism"
were attributed, by the few who believed in them, to the passage of
a fluid from the mesmerist to his patient, it was easy to credit the
successful operator with as large an endowment of available fluid as
the facts might seem to require. But from those who assert that the
results are not merely explicable, but are in practice to be explained,
as due to suggestion alone, no entirely satisfactory explanation has
ever been forthcoming of the observed differences between one operator
and another. It is difficult to believe that Liébeault, Bernheim,
Schrenck-Notzing, Van Eeden, Lloyd Tuckey, Bramwell, etc., have
succeeded where so many others have failed, merely through the exercise
of greater patience, or the possession of an established reputation,
which after all is based on the successes which it is now invoked
to explain.[150] And the fact that a large proportion of well-known
hypnotists have acted as agents in successful telepathic experiments
of an unusual kind is a further argument in the same direction. There
are, moreover, some more dubious beliefs, for the most part discredited
by educated persons, yet persisting with a singular vitality, which
receive in telepathy a simple and perhaps sufficient explanation. It
has already been shown that some of the marvels of Dr. Dee and the
Specularii have been paralleled by recent visions in "the crystal,"
revealing events then passing at a distance unknown to the seer; and
that the nucleus of fact in some legends of ghosts and haunted houses
is probably to be sought in a telepathic hallucination. And many of the
alleged wonders of witchcraft and of ancient magic in general, when
disentangled from the accretions formed round them by popular myth
and superstition, present a marked resemblance to some of the facts
recorded in this book. It is obvious, for instance, that the same power
which inhibited Mr. Beard's utterance (p. 83) could have prevented
the witch's victim from repeating the Lord's Prayer. And Mr. Godfrey
(p. 228), in the sixteenth century, might have found that to appear
in two places at once would be perilously strong evidence of unlawful
powers.[151]

But there are two special kinds of marvels, whose occurrence has been
widely vouched for within quite recent times by men of proved ability
and trained in the experimental methods of the modern laboratory,
which deserve to be considered in this connection--the influence of
metals and magnets on the human organism, and the physical phenomena of
Spiritualism. Baron von Reichenbach in the last generation published
the results of numerous observations on various sensitives, who alleged
that they could see flame-like emanations from crystals, from the poles
of a magnet, from the bodies of the sick, and from newly-made graves,
and that they experienced various sensations from contact with magnets
and metals. On the evidence of Reichenbach's prolonged and laborious
researches the existence of this supposed magnetic sense obtained a
certain degree of credence. Accordingly the S.P.R., shortly after its
foundation in 1882, conducted a series of control experiments on a
number of persons with a powerful electro-magnet, which was alternately
magnetised and demagnetised by a commutator in an adjoining room. Of
forty-five persons tested three professed to see luminous appearances
on the poles of the magnet; and on two or three occasions they were
able to indicate with surprising accuracy throughout a whole evening
the exact moment at which the current was switched on or off--the
light, as they alleged, appearing or disappearing simultaneously. But
these isolated successes were not repeated, and the very conditions
of the experiment implied that it was known to some of those present
whether or not the magnet was charged. Now it is obvious that unless
special precautions are taken to guard against the telepathic[152]
communication of this knowledge all experiments of the kind must be
inconclusive; and other investigators have failed to detect any trace
of the so-called magnetic sense.[153]

Within the last few years this supposed sensitiveness has appeared
in another form. M. Babinski of the Salpetrière claims to have shown
that certain ailments--such, for example, as hemiplegia and hysterical
mutism--can be transferred by the influence of a magnet from one side
of the body to another, or from one patient to another. MM. Binet and
Féré[154] find that unilateral hallucinations can be shifted by the
same influence from one side of the body to the other, and that in
general memories and sensations--real or imaginary--can be modified
and destroyed by the magnet. And MM. Bourru, Burot, Luys, and others
have published whole treatises dealing with the alleged influence
of various drugs and metals on certain patients. A few drops of
laurel-water enclosed in a flask and brought near to the patient, will,
according to these writers, induce ecstasy; ipecacuanha will cause
vomiting; alcohol intoxication, and so on; each drug, though securely
stoppered and sealed, giving rise to the appropriate physical symptoms
in the patient. However, MM. Bernheim,[155] Delboeuf,[156] and Jules
Voisin[157] showed some time since, and Mr. Ernest Hart[158] has lately
repeated the demonstration, that the same results can be made to
follow if the patient is led to believe that an inert piece of wood is
a magnet, or that an empty flask contains a powerful drug. It may be
fairly assumed therefore that when special precautions are not shown to
have been taken--and there is little evidence that such precautions
were as a rule taken--suggestion by word or look would be sufficient
to account for the phenomena observed. But it is obvious that negative
experiments of this kind are not in themselves conclusive; and it is
difficult to believe that all the results recorded by investigators
of such experience as Babinski, Féré, and others could have been due
simply to carelessness on their part, or hypnotic cunning on the part
of the subject. Indeed, in commenting on the counter experiments
made by M. Jules Voisin, MM. Bourru and Burot expressly state that
if the results obtained by them are to be attributed to suggestion,
as he proposes, it is "_une suggestion sans parole, sans geste,
sans pensée même_."[159] But a suggestion without word, gesture, or
conscious thought is an accurate description of one form of telepathic
suggestion; and if such suggestion has indeed been at work we have an
explanation of the otherwise inexplicable reliance placed by these
French investigators upon experiments so much controverted, and their
faith in an interpretation so little supported by scientific analogy.

That in general the so-called physical phenomena of Spiritualism are
due to self-deception and exaggeration on the one hand, and to fraud on
the other, is a proposition which to most readers, it is likely, will
seem to need little demonstration. And there are of course many cases,
such as the recent experiments with Eusapia Palladino[160] at Milan,
where, though competent observers--Richet, Schiaparelli, Lombroso,
Brofferio--have seen things beyond their power to explain, yet the
line between what was possible to fraudulent ingenuity and what was
not possible cannot be drawn with sufficient sharpness to warrant the
invocation of any new agency. But there are other records which cannot
be so summarily dismissed. Thus Mr. Crookes, F.R.S.,[161] has described
the movements of a balance, specially constructed for the purpose of
the experiments, in the presence of himself and other observers, under
conditions which seemed to render it impossible for the effects to
have been produced by the muscular force of any of those present. Lord
Lindsay has testified to having seen Home's stature elongated to the
extent of 11 inches, and heavy tables and other articles of furniture
rise in the air without visible support, and to having himself, at
Home's instance, handled, and seen others handle, red-hot coals with
impunity. Other witnesses of repute have testified to the appearance
of strange luminous bodies, the raining down of liquid scent, the
production of inexplicable musical sounds and other phenomena equally
marvellous.[162]

Now it is difficult to believe that Mr. Crookes and those with
him could in their normal senses have imagined movements of a
self-registering balance which never really took place, or have failed
to detect actual movements on Home's part; or that Home could have
seemed to Lord Lindsay and others to add some fraction of a cubit to
his stature or to float unsupported in the air, when he was really
only stretching cramped muscles, or supporting himself on a captive
balloon, or by unseen wires; or that when he was seen to carry hot
coals about the room, and to place them, still glowing, upon the bare
head of Mr. S. C. Hall, he relied upon the observers overlooking
such inconspicuous objects as a pair of tongs and an asbestos
skull-cap--alternatives which must have been at least as obvious
at the time to the observers who, by recording these things, have
imperilled their reputation for scientific acumen, and even for common
sense, as now to their irresponsible critics. But it is certainly not
less difficult to believe, on such grounds as these, in the discovery
of a new physical force--or rather new forces; for the energy which
could move a balance cannot properly be assumed to be identical with
the energy which could increase Home's stature, or restrain the action
of fire; or, as elsewhere recorded, bring delicate flowers uninjured
through closed doors. But fortunately we are not compelled to choose
between the alternatives of such almost incredible stupidity and a
multiplicity of new modes of energy. It has been plausibly suggested
that the observers in such cases are the subjects of a collective
hallucination. It is true that we have no precise analogy to support
such a hypothesis. The hallucinations of hypnotism can be imposed upon
several subjects simultaneously by dint of repeated verbal suggestions.
But here there were none of the recognised preliminaries to the
hypnotic trance: in many of the recorded cases the observers did not
know what to expect, and it is clear that verbal suggestion was not
essential to the results; while there is no trace of that break in the
continuity of consciousness which elsewhere marks the passage from the
hypnotic to the normal state. Moreover, in some of the best-attested
cases it was the presumed operator, and not the witnesses, who was
entranced. Assuredly if the phenomena described were due to hypnotic
hallucination, it was hallucination without any of the characteristic
features of hypnotism. But if we assume--as in the absence of any
evidence to the contrary we are entitled, if not bound, to assume--that
the observers were in their normal state, we can find no nearer
parallel to this supposed hallucination than the collective telepathic
hallucinations of which examples have been given in Chapter XII.[163]

It is true that the parallel is by no means exact. The hypothesis
requires us to suppose not merely that investigators of spiritualistic
phenomena are liable to see, by hallucination, things which are not
there, but also that they are occasionally withheld, by hallucination,
from seeing actual movements and objects. For Mr. Crookes' automatic
balance recorded a real movement; flowers and other objects have
actually been brought into locked rooms; furniture has been
demonstrably displaced, or has even moved before the eyes of the
investigators, and been found at the conclusion of the experiment in
its new position; an actual blister was raised on Lord Lindsay's skin
by the touch of a live coal which Home held in a hand apparently bare.
Now if these results were due to the action of known forces, muscular
and other, it seems clear that some of the medium's movements and
appliances escaped observation. We have, however, no record, so far as
I know, of collective negative hallucination telepathically caused. But
it may be pointed out that whilst it is only in unusual circumstances
that a hallucination of the kind could attract sufficient attention to
be recorded, negative hallucinations can be imposed without difficulty
on a hypnotic subject. So that their telepathic origination in the
circumstances suggested presents no greater _à priori_ difficulty than
that of positive hallucinations. There are, however, other differences
between the collective hallucinations recorded in Chapter XII. and
those which the hypothesis requires. For the former were for the most
part vague and transitory, and were rarely shared by more than two
persons; whilst the hypothetical hallucinations of the spiritualistic
séance are persistent, and may affect several persons simultaneously
and to an equal extent. It may be suggested, however, that the
different conditions in the latter case--the common expectancy, the
attunement of the minds of all present to a common mood, the absence of
external solicitation to the senses--may be sufficient to account for
the differing characteristics of the phenomena observed.

It may be objected that the problem does not require the intervention
of such a _Deus ex machina_ as collective hallucination; that fraud
and malobservation are adequate to account for all the facts reported.
I confess that I am unable so lightly to set aside the deliberate
testimony of men of proved scientific distinction, whose word is still
regarded as authoritative in observations not less delicate, and for
results to the layman hardly less dubious. But I do not suggest that
the phenomena, however interpreted, are likely to add anything to the
proof of telepathy. I would merely urge that, as until the possibility
of thought-transference in its various forms has been patiently and
rigorously excluded, odylic flames and magnetic influences must remain
unproven, so, in dealing with that residuum of evidence for the
physical phenomena called spiritualistic which appears inexplicable by
fraud and malobservation, the possibility of collective hallucination
telepathically caused should be kept in view.[164]

It should be observed that the treatment of telepathy by those
responsible for the word involves as little of theory as Newton's
conception of gravitation. What Newton did was to find the simplest
general expression for the observed facts by saying that the heavenly
bodies acted upon each other with a certain measurable force. He
did not attempt to explain the mode of this action. And whilst
succeeding astronomers have for the most part been content to follow
Newton's example, the science has, nevertheless, advanced in a
steady and continuous progression. So the conception of telepathy
simply colligates the observed facts of spontaneous and experimental
thought-transference, as instances of the action of one mind upon
another. The nature of the action the theory does not discuss; it
merely defines it negatively, as being outside the normal sensory
channels. In accordance with this view, Mr. Gurney, and the English
investigators generally, have consistently employed psychical terms in
their discussion of the subject: they have spoken of the transmission
of ideas, not neuroses, and of the affection of mind by mind, rather
than of brain by brain.[165] This treatment involves no prejudgment
of the question. Whatever may be the nature of the cause, we know the
effects at present only in their psychical aspect, and in default of
a physical theory, as psychical it seemed convenient to discuss them.
This mode of speech is of course as legitimate as the popular usage
which permits us, when the sun's rays strike upon our retina, to ignore
the intervening physical processes, and to express only the psychical
result, "I see the sun." But Mr. Gurney and his colleagues were further
influenced in adopting and maintaining this usage by a conviction
that the advancement of the subject has not hitherto been dependent
upon the discovery of physical correlates for the observed psychical
action, and that the energy which would be diverted to the search for
explanations, could be more fruitfully employed on the still imperfect
demonstration that there is something to be explained.

But it is obvious that this attitude of reserve cannot be maintained
indefinitely. Since Mr. Gurney wrote the sum-total of observations
and experiments has steadily increased, and there is hardly any
longer room for doubt that we have something here which no physical
processes at present known can adequately account for. It is not
possible to observe facts without speculating on the underlying law:
it is the law indicated by the facts, more than the facts themselves,
which is of permanent interest to the human mind. Nor indeed can any
fruitful observation be long maintained, which is not accompanied,
guided, and stimulated by theoretical speculation. Professor Lodge has
called upon us, in this matter, to "press the doctrine of ultimate
intelligibility;"[166] and in so saying he has at once given articulate
expression to an impulse from whose blind urgency no student of nature
can escape, and has formulated what is after all the _differentia_ of
the scientific mind. The average man accepts things as they are; the
man of science presses the doctrine of ultimate intelligibility.

But however legitimate at the present stage of the inquiry theoretical
speculation might seem, such speculation has for the most part been
conspicuously wanting in the treatment of the subject by those best
qualified to deal with it. At any rate the attitude of most continental
investigators, like that of their English colleagues, has been a
purely positive one. They have contented themselves with describing
in psychical terms the psychical phenomena which they have observed.
There are, indeed, some competent inquirers at the present time who
incline to attribute thought-transference to the direct action of
mind upon mind, or to some process yet more transcendent, just as in
the last generation there were some who thought they were able to
discern, in such instances as came under their notice, proof of the
agency of disembodied spirits. And Von Hartmann, boldly accepting the
facts wholesale, ascribes them to a communication between finite minds
effected through the inter-mediation of the Absolute.[167] But until
we have exhausted the resources of the world which we know, we should
perhaps conclude, with Mistress Quickly, that there is no need to
trouble ourselves with any such thoughts yet.

Any attempt at a physical explanation is, of course, beset with
many difficulties. To begin with, there is no sense-organ for
our presumed new mode of sensation; nor at the present stage of
physiological knowledge is there likelihood that we can annex any
as yet unappropriated organ to register telepathic stimuli, as the
semicircular canals are supposed to register the movements of the body
in space. In lacking an elaborate machinery specially adapted for
receiving its messages and concentrating them on the peripheral end
of the nerves, telepathy would thus seem to be on a par with radiant
energy affecting the general surface of the body. But the sensations of
heat and cold are without quality or difference, other than difference
of degree; whereas telepathic messages, as we have seen, purport often
to be as detailed and precise as those conveyed by the same radiant
energy falling on the organs of vision.

As regards the mode of transmission, we find first the theory of a
fluid, which owes its origin to Mesmer, and was in vogue at a time when
fluids were still fashionable in scientific circles. Dr. Baréty[168]
has recently revived this theory in a new form. He alleges that
there is a nerve-energy (_force neurique rayonnante_) which radiates
from the eyes, the fingers, and the breath of the operator, and is
capable of producing various effects upon hypnotised subjects. He
finds that a knitting-needle acts as a conductor for this force, and
water as a non-conductor; that the nerve-rays can be focussed by a
magnifying-glass, refracted by a prism, and reflected from a mirror
or other plane surface at an angle equal to the angle of incidence.
Dr. Baréty has omitted to state whether in the latter case the rays
are polarised, nor has he shown whether the force varies inversely to
the square of the distance. But the consideration of these remarkable
results need hardly detain us long, since they can all readily be
explained by suggestion, verbal or telepathic.

If we leave fluids and radiant nerve-energy on one side, we
find practically only one mode suggested for the telepathic
transference--viz., that the physical changes which are the
accompaniments of thought or sensation in the agent are transmitted
from the brain as undulations in the intervening medium, and thus
excite corresponding changes in some other brain, without any
other portion of the organism being necessarily implicated in the
transmission. This hypothesis has found its most philosophical champion
in Dr. Ochorowicz, who has devoted several chapters of his book, _De
la Suggestion mentale_, to the discussion of the various theories on
the subject. He begins by recalling the reciprocal convertibility of
all physical forces with which we are acquainted, and especially draws
attention to what he calls the law of reversibility, a law which he
illustrates by a description of the photophone. The photophone is an
instrument in which a mirror is made to vibrate to the human voice.
The mirror reflects a ray of light, which, vibrating in its turn,
falls upon a plate of selenium, modifying its electric conductivity.
The intermittent current so produced is transmitted through a
telephone, and the original articulate sound is reproduced. Now in
hypnotised subjects--and M. Ochorowicz does not in this connection
treat of thought-transference between persons in the normal state--the
equilibrium of the nervous system, he sees reason to believe, is
profoundly affected. The nerve-energy liberated in this state, he
points out, "cannot pass beyond" the subject's brain "without being
transformed. Nevertheless, like any other force, it cannot remain
isolated; like any other force it escapes, but in disguise. Orthodox
science allows it only one way out, the motor nerves. These are the
holes in the dark lantern through which the rays of light escape....
Thought remains in the brain, just as the chemical energy of the
galvanic battery remains in the cells, but each is represented outside
by its correlative energy, which in the case of the battery is called
the electric current, but for which in the other we have as yet no
name. In any case there is some correlative energy--for the currents
of the motor nerves do not and cannot constitute the only dynamic
equivalent of cerebral energy--to represent all the complex movements
of the cerebral mechanism."[169]

Considered purely in its physiological aspect, such a theory appears
to present no special difficulty; or rather, to put the matter more
exactly, our ignorance of the ultimate nature of nerve-processes is
so nearly complete as to permit us to theorise _in vacuo_, with
little risk of encountering any insuperable obstacle. It is true that
Professor G. Stanley Hall,[170] in commenting on such physical theories
of telepathy, maintains that they contravene well-established physical
laws:--"The law of 'isolated conductivity,' formulated fully by
Johannes Müller, which Helmholtz compares in importance to the law of
gravity, first brought order into the field of neurology by insisting
that impressions never jump from one fibre to another.... Is it likely
that a neural state should jump from one brain to another, through a
great interval, when intense stimuli on one nerve cannot affect another
in the closest contact with it?" But it is clear that the "law" in
question is merely a generalisation from observed facts, and from
facts, moreover, not of the same order as those now under discussion.
For the question here is not of the affection of another nerve-fibre
in the same organism, but of a nerve-centre in another organism. And
whilst it must have seemed _à priori_ probable that between nerves
belonging to the same system induction would not take place, because
the alternative could hardly fail to be injurious to the organism,
and that the susceptibility to such induction, if originally present,
would have been eliminated in the course of evolution, it is at least
theoretically conceivable that between different organisms induction
might have persisted as innocuous, or even have been developed as
positively beneficial.

In current theories it is assumed that there are changes in
brain-substance correlated with psychical events, and that these
changes, in their ultimate analysis, are of the nature of vibrations.
That these vibrations should be capable of in some way propagating
themselves through the surrounding medium would seem therefore a
natural corollary. The real objections to such physical theories appear
to be of a more general kind--viz., the improbability that any such
capacity of nervous induction should have remained unobserved until
now; and the difficulty of supposing vibrations so minute to be capable
of producing effects at so great a distance, and to have a selective
capacity so finely adjusted that out of all the thousands of persons
within the radius, say, of such a brain-wave as that set a-going by
Mr. Cleave (p. 234), only one set of brain-molecules should be stirred
to sympathetic vibration. The first difficulty in its psychical aspect
has already been touched upon at the commencement of this chapter, and
need not here be further considered. The second is more serious. It
is difficult to find an exact parallel for the transmission across a
considerable intervening space of energy at once so minute in quantity
and so highly specialised. Mr. W. H. Preece has indeed shown that
a current can be induced in a closed circuit at a distance of some
three miles or more, and Professor Lodge has reminded us (_loc. cit._)
that "all magnets are sympathetically connected, so that, if suitably
suspended, a vibration from one disturbs others, even though they be
distant ninety-two million miles." But the forces engaged are in the
one case on a commercial, in the other on a cosmic scale. Yet the
difficulty is not, perhaps, insuperable. The amount of energy which
has been proved capable, at the distance of half a mile, of inducing
sleep in a French peasant woman may be readily conceived as not more
attenuated than those "sweet influences" which are yet potent enough to
summon up before us the vision of the Pleiades or the glowing nebula of
Orion. Nor need the difficulty of selection trouble us much; for, after
all, one of the chief characteristics of organic life in general is the
power--a power ever more differentiated in the higher organisms--of
reacting only to selected stimuli. In short, it is too soon to say that
any physical communication between living beings of the kind suggested
is inconceivable. We shall be justified in affirming or denying its
possibility on the day when we have guessed the secret of our own
existence, and are able to explain how some fraction of a millegramme
of albumen can contain not merely the promise of life, but the germ
of a particular and individual organism, which shall reveal its own
pedigree and contain in itself an epitome of life on our planet.

Until, therefore, we know more of the nature of the cerebral changes
which are presumed to be the physical concomitants of thought,
we are at most entitled to suggest that some kind of vibrations,
propagated somehow through a conjectural medium from an unspecified
nerve-centre, may possibly explain the transference of thought. Our
main justification at the present time for discussing theories which
aim at some solution is that they may indicate the lines on which
experiment and observation may be usefully directed. Thus, it is not
known how far the results depend on the state of health of the parties
to the experiments, on their occupations and state of consciousness at
the time; whether blood-relationship or familiar intimacy between agent
and percipient is conducive to success; or whether the transmission
is in any way affected by the introduction of more than one agent.
And though some progress has been made in tracing the development
of the transmitted idea after it has reached the percipient's mind,
observations on the relation of the agent's impression to that of
the percipient are at present few and isolated. The difficulties of
systematic experiment in this direction are considerable, as will be
apparent to any one who carefully studies the reports of the Brighton
experiments (pp. 65-80); but it would seem that further investigation
might be expected to throw light upon such questions as whether the
percipient's original impression is necessarily of the same kind as the
agent's; whether in the case of visual impressions lateral inversion
or complementary colours can be detected, and so on.

Once more, but little has been learnt of the purely mechanical
conditions under which the transmission is effected. There are indeed
indications that contact facilitates the transference;[171] but from
the difficulty of discriminating, when contact is permitted, between
thought-transference and muscle-reading, even thus much can hardly be
affirmed with certainty. On the analogy of the known physical forces
it is of course to be anticipated that the difficulty of effecting
telepathic communication would increase very rapidly with the distance.
Yet even here experimental verification is difficult to obtain. It
is obvious, indeed, in our experiments, that an increased interval
between agent and percipient, especially if a wall or floor is made
to intervene, has affected the results prejudicially. But it is by no
means clear, as already said, how far the observed effects are to be
attributed, not to the physical obstacle of the intervening space,
but to the psychical effect produced thereby on the parties to the
experiment.

There is, however, a difference, already referred to, in the
characteristics of the ideas transferred at close quarters, and those
transferred at a distance, which is so marked and so general as to
call for some explanation of this kind. In the experiments conducted
in the same room or house, and in most of the spontaneous cases at
close quarters, the idea transferred corresponds to a mental image
consciously present to the mind of the agent. But the cases, whether
experimental or spontaneous, of such detailed transference at a
distance of more than a mile or two are very few--too few to justify
any valid generalisation. For in most cases of thought-transference at
a distance the idea transferred is one not consciously present to the
agent's mind at all--the idea of his own personality.

To some critics indeed (see _Mind_, 1887, p. 280) this difficulty has
seemed so serious as to suggest doubts of the propriety of referring
the two sets of results to a common category; and Von Hartmann,
whilst claiming, as already said, connection through the Absolute as
the explanation of the results obtained at a distance, is content to
postulate some kind of nervous induction in the case of experiments at
close quarters. But if we examine the facts more closely we find, as
has already been shown in some of the trials conducted by MM Gibert and
Pierre Janet in inducing sleep at a distance, and in a few other cases
(_e.g._, Nos. 40, 53, 58), that the idea of the personality of the
agent may be transferred to the percipient, together with the specific
idea present to the agent's mind. Moreover, in the recorded cases of
thought-transference at close quarters, with hardly any exception, the
presence of the agent was known to the percipient, and no evidence
for the telepathic transmission of the idea of him can therefore be
furnished. But since the idea of self is probably always present as
part of the permanent substratum of consciousness, and since we have
actual evidence that in some cases that idea may be communicated to the
percipient, together with the idea consciously willed by the agent,
it seems permissible to conclude that it may form an element in every
case of transference. And if this be admitted, not merely will the
difficulty referred to disappear, but some progress will have been made
towards obtaining experimental verification of the physical effects
of distance on telepathic transmission. For it would seem to follow
that the telepathic energy, which at close quarters is able to effect
the transference even of the trivial and momentary contents of the
agent's mind, is competent when acting at a distance to convey only
those continuous and more massive vibrations which may be presumed to
correspond to his conception of his own personality. That the agent
is not consciously "thinking of himself" need not prevent us from
accepting this view. Nor would a like unconsciousness on the part of
the percipient be a serious objection. For, as we have already seen
(Nos. 24, 25, 27, etc.), ideas can be transferred from the subconscious
to the subconscious; and indeed there is some ground for thinking that,
outside of direct experiment, the intervention of the conscious mind
in the telepathic transmission of thought is exceptional. Even in some
of the most striking experimental cases it has been shown that either
agent or percipient, or both, were asleep or entranced at the time.
(See Chapter X., p. 239.)

This close connection of the activity of thought-transference with
the subliminal consciousness, the consciousness which appears in
hypnosis, and occasionally in dream-life and in spontaneous trance and
automatism, may perhaps offer a clue to the origin of the faculty.
For the future place of telepathy in the history of the race concerns
us even more nearly than the mode of its operation; and we are led
therefore to ask whether the faculty as we know it is but the germ
of a more splendid capacity, or the last vestige of a power grown
stunted through disuse. By those who view the matter simply as a topic
of natural history the latter alternative will be preferred. The
possible utility of telepathy as a supplement to gesture, etc., at a
time when speech and writing were not yet evolved, is too obvious for
comment. Whilst, on the other hand, such a faculty can with difficulty
be conceived as originating by any physical process of evolution in
our modern civilisation. But more direct evidence of the place of
telepathy in our development is not wanting. For there are indications
that the consciousness which lies below the threshold, with which the
activity of telepathy is constantly associated, may be regarded as
representing an earlier stage in the consciousness of the individual,
and even it may be an earlier stage in the history of the race. The
readiest means of summoning into temporary activity this subterranean
consciousness is in the hypnotic trance. Now the consciousness
displayed by the hypnotised subject includes, as a rule, the whole of
the normal consciousness, and also extends beyond it. That is, the
hypnotised subject is aware not only of what goes on in the trance but
also of his normal life: when awaked the events of the trance have
passed from his memory and are not revived until the next period of
trance. Our work-a-day consciousness would appear to be, in fact, a
selection from a much larger field of potential consciousness. Or, to
put it in another way, the pressure on the narrow limits of our working
consciousness is so great that ideas and sensations are continually
being crowded out and forced down below the threshold. The subliminal
consciousness thus becomes the receptacle of lapsed memories and
sensations; and up to a certain point in the history of each individual
these lapsed ideas can be temporarily revived. Long forgotten memories
of childhood, for instance, can be resuscitated in the hypnotic trance,
and ideas which have demonstrably never penetrated into consciousness
at all can be brought to light by crystal-vision, planchette-writing,
or other automatic processes.

Again, one of the most marked characteristics of the subliminal
consciousness, whether in dream, hypnosis, spontaneous trance, or in
crystal vision and other automatism, is its power of visualisation--a
power which, as Mr. Galton has shown, and our daily experience
proves, tends to become aborted in later life. And beyond these
indications of memories lost and imagery crowded out in the lifetime
of the individual, we come across traces of faculties which have long
ceased to obey the guidance or minister to the needs of civilised
man--the psychological lumber of many generations ago. Such at least,
it may be suggested, is a possible interpretation of the control
frequently exercised by the hypnotic over the processes of digestion
and circulation and the functions of the organic life generally. And
the more doubtful observations, which seem to indicate the possession
by the subconscious life of a sense of the passage of time and of a
muscular sense superior to that of the waking state, may be held to
point in the same direction.

From such facts and such analogies as these it may be argued that
telepathy is perchance the relic of a once-serviceable faculty, which
eked out the primitive alphabet of gesture, and helped to bind our
ancestors of the cave or the tree in as yet inarticulate community, Dr.
Jules Héricourt,[172] indeed, goes further, and suggests that we find
here traces of the primeval unspecialised sensitiveness which preceded
the development of a nervous system--a heritage shared with the amœba
and the sea-anemone.

On the other hand, it may be urged that our present knowledge, either
of telepathy itself or of the subconscious activities with which it is
sought to link it, cannot by any means be held sufficient to support
such an inference as to the probable origin of the faculty; and
further, that the absence of mundane analogies, and the difficulties
attending any such explanation yet suggested, forbid us to assume that
the facts are capable of expression in physical terms.

It is further urged that whilst the dependence of telepathy on any
material conditions is not obvious, it is constantly associated not
only in popular belief, but in testimony from trustworthy sources,
with phenomena which seem to point to supernormal faculties, such
as clairvoyance, retrocognition, and prevision, themselves hardly
susceptible of a physical explanation. This view has found its ablest
exponent in Mr. F. W. H. Myers.[173]

And though Mr. Myers would himself readily admit that the evidence for
these alleged supernormal faculties is not on a par with the evidence
for telepathy, yet he maintains that such as it is it cannot be
summarily dismissed. No doubt if it should appear with fuller knowledge
that there are sufficient grounds for believing in faculties which give
to man knowledge, not derivable from living minds, of the distant,
the far past, and the future, it would be more reasonable to regard
telepathy as a member of the group of such supernormal faculties,
operating in ways wholly apart from the familiar sense activities, and
not amenable, like these, to terrestrial laws.

Such considerations may at any rate be held to justify a suspension
of judgment. We are not yet, it may be said, called upon to decide
whether telepathy is a vestigial or a rudimentary faculty; whether
its manifestations are governed by forces correlative with heat and
electricity, or whether we are justified in discerning in them the
operation of some vaster cosmic agencies. But there is another aspect
of the question. The first stage of our inquiry is not yet complete.
It would be futile for us to debate what manner of new agency we
propose to believe in until it is generally admitted by competent
persons that the facts are not to be attributed to such recognised,
if insufficiently familiar, causes as illusion, misrepresentation,
and the subconscious quickening of normal faculties. More and varied
experiments are wanted, more and more accurate records of spontaneous
phenomena; and at the present stage there should be no lack of either
one or other. Most scientific inquiries demand of the investigator long
years of special study and preparation, and an elaborate mechanical
equipment. But experiments in thought-transference can be conducted by
any one with sufficient leisure and patience to observe the requisite
precautions; whilst telepathic visions need for their recording no
other qualifications than accuracy and good faith. In fact Science,
whose boast it was once

    "Aerias tentasse domos animoque rotundum
    Percurrisse polum,"

has now come down from those airy realms and turned its attention
to the things of earth, and especially to the study of our human
environment and the growth of human intelligence. And in this its
latest phase Science has, of necessity, followed the tendency of the
age and become democratic. Every parent can become a fellow-worker
with Darwin in the laboratory of the infant mind; in investigating the
faculties and idiosyncrasies of man, even the lines imprinted on his
finger-tips and his shifts to remember the multiplication-table, there
is not less need of the accumulated small contributions of the many
than of the life-long labours of the expert. And in this newest field
of scientific research there can be no doubt that results of permanent
value await the worker who is content to walk upon the solid earth,
and to turn his eyes from the mirage which has dazzled many of his
predecessors.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 150: The fact that most, if not all, the medical men quoted
would themselves reject the explanation hinted at in the text, and
would regard their own success as due rather to skill and patience than
to any specific endowment, should, of course, have due weight, but
cannot be regarded as decisive.]

[Footnote 151: See also the account given by Dr. Gibotteau in the
_Annales des Sciences Psychiques_ of the power possessed by _Berthe_
(see _ante_, p. 139) of causing people to stumble or lose their sense
of direction. Mr. Andrew Lang has recently drawn attention to the
remarkable resemblances between accounts of medieval magic, etc.,
and modern telepathic phenomena (see, _e.g._, his article in _Cont.
Review_, Sept. 1893).]

[Footnote 152: It is possible that we need not go so far as telepathy
for an explanation. Slight indications unconsciously apprehended
may have furnished the necessary clue in all cases, as they almost
certainly did in some.]

[Footnote 153: See _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. i. p. 230, vol. ii. p. 56;
_Phil. Mag._, April 1883; _Proc. Amer. S.P.R._, p. 116.]

[Footnote 154: _Animal Magnetism_ (International Science Series), pp.
264 _et seq._ Cf. Ottolenghi and Lombroso, in _Rev. Phil._, Oct. 1889,
on polarisation of hallucinations by magnets.]

[Footnote 155: _Rev. de l'Hypnotisme_, Dec. 1887.]

[Footnote 156: _Ibid._, June 1887.]

[Footnote 157: _Rev. des Sciences Hypnotiques_, 1887-88, p. 111.]

[Footnote 158: _Brit. Med. Journal_, Jan. 1893.]

[Footnote 159: _Rev. des Sciences Hypnotiques_, 1887-88, p. 151. See
also _Force Psychique et Suggestion Mentale_, by Dr. Claude Perronnet,
pp. 21-26, who shows clearly how thought-transference may vitiate many
hypnotic experiments.]

[Footnote 160: _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, Jan.-Feb. 1893;
_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 218.]

[Footnote 161: _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. p. 98.]

[Footnote 162: See, for instance, the _Report on Spiritualism of the
London Dialectical Society_; Experiences of Mr. Stainton Moses in
_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 245; and article, "Spiritualism," in the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_, by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, and in _Chambers'
Encyclopædia_, by Alfred Russel Wallace, F.R.S.]

[Footnote 163: It need hardly be said that the oft-quoted story of
the European who came late and unobserved to the performance of an
Indian Fakir, and from a distant tree saw him cutting up a pumpkin when
the crowd saw him cutting up a child, is merely _ben trovato_. Nor,
indeed, until we have contemporaneous accounts of these performances
from carefully trained observers is there need of any such hypothesis
to explain the feats of Indian jugglery. See Mr. Hodgson's article in
_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 354.]

[Footnote 164: The explanation suggested in the text for the physical
phenomena of Spiritualism is worked out in some detail by Von
Hartmann, the philosopher of the unconscious, in a little treatise on
_Spiritism_, which has been translated into English by "C.C.M.," 1885.
But Von Hartmann believes that some of the phenomena are produced by a
hypothetical nerve-force under the direction of the somnambulic self of
the medium--a prodigality of hypotheses which in the circumstances is
surely superfluous.]

[Footnote 165: See _Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. pp. 110-113.]

[Footnote 166: Presidential Address to the Section of Mathematics and
Physics of the British Association, August 1891.]

[Footnote 167: "If all individuals of higher or lower order are rooted
in the Absolute, retrogressively in this they have a second connection
among themselves, and there is requisite only a restoration of the
_rapport_ or telephonic junction (_Telephonanschluss_) between two
individuals in the Absolute, by an intense interest of the will,
to bring about the unconscious interchange between them without
sense-mediation." (_Spiritism_, by Ed. von Hartmann, trans. C.C.M., p.
75.)]

[Footnote 168: _Des Propriétés physiques d'une force particulière du
corps humain_, 1882.]

[Footnote 169: _De la Suggestion mentale_, Paris, 1887, pp. 511, 512.]

[Footnote 170: _American Journal of Psychology_, vol. i., No. 1.]

[Footnote 171: See, for instance, Professor Lodge's paper in _Proc.
S.P.R._, vol. vii. p. 374.]

[Footnote 172: _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, vol. i. p. 317.]

[Footnote 173: See his articles on the "Subliminal Consciousness,"
etc., _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii. p. 298; vol. viii. p. 333, pp. 436 _et
seq._]



INDEX.


    Aksakof A., cases recorded by, 184, 266

    American Society for Psychical Research, founding of, 4;
      experiments by, 15, 27

    Anæsthesia telepathically produced, 101-104

    Anxiety as cause of hallucination, 216, 223

    Auditory hallucinations, 25, 218, 247-251, 274-276

    Automatic writing, 91-96, 183

    Azam, Dr., experiments by, 59


    Babinski, 375

    Backman, Dr., experiments by, 338, 349, 357

    Barber, Mrs., case recorded by, 168

    Baréty, Dr., 384

    Barnby, Sir Joseph, case recorded by, 358

    Barrett, Professor, 19, 72;
      experiments by, 84

    Beard, S. H., 83

    Bergson, case of cornea-reading, 12

    Bernheim, Professor, 3, 212, 375

    Bidder, the Misses, case recorded by, 190

    Binet and Féré, experiments by, 209, 375

    Bonjean, 11

    Booth, Miss Mabel Gore, case recorded by, 263

    Borderland hallucinations, 193, 217, 257, 292

    Bourru and Burot, 375

    Boyd, W., case recorded by, 346

    Boyle, R. V., case recorded by, 196

    Brown, Mrs., experiments by, 27

    Bruce, Archdeacon, case recorded by, 182

    Busk, Miss, case recorded by, 205

    Buttemer, R. H., experiments by, 95


    Caldecott, Miss L., case recorded by, 255

    Campbell, Captain, case recorded by, 198

    Campbell, Miss, and Miss Despard, experiments by, 127

    Carat, Dr., case recorded by, 257

    Cards, power of distinguishing by touch, 13

    Cary, C. H., case recorded by, 274

    Casual hallucinations, 208, 215-225

    Census of hallucinations, 215

    Chance coincidence, 27, 143, 146, 186-188, 220-225

    Clairvoyance, 2, 19, 204, 393;
      definition of, 326;
      travelling, 295, 338-350

    Clairvoyant, dream, 204, 363, 367

    Clark, Miss C., case recorded by, 247

    Clothes of apparitions, 152, 200, 230, 244, 246

    Codes, fraudulent, 10, 11, 25
    Collective agency, 21, 23, 30, 37, 43, 64, 74

    Collective hallucinations, 378-380;
      evidential defects, 153, 268-272;
      explanation of, 272-274

    Collective illusion, 268

    Colour, transference of, 32, 34, 35, 64

    Commands, execution of telepathic, 87, 90, 110-113, 121

    Commands, telepathic disobeyed, 89, 90

    Community of sensation, 18

    Contact in thought-transference experiments, 14, 19, 30, 34, 389

    Contagious hallucinations, 273, 308, 316

    Cornea-reading, 11, 12, 35

    Crookes, William, 377

    Crystal as means of inducing hallucination, 352

    Crystal vision, 2, 75, 353, 357-359, 373

    Cumberland, Stuart, 14


    Dariex, Dr., 89, 118

    Dates, unconsciously falsified, 153

    Death, dreams of, 188;
      hallucinations coinciding with, 147, 220-225

    Deferred recognition, 247, 254

    Deferred telepathic impression, 65, 79, 264

    Delbœuf, Professor, 212, 375

    Dessoir, Max, experiments by, 38

    Dempster, Miss Hawkins, case recorded by, 302

    De Vesci, Lady, case recorded by, 181

    "Dick," case of pseudo-clairvoyance, 13

    Direction, hallucination in sense of, 139, 141

    Distance, effect of on experiments, 74, 105, 132, 139, 389-391

    Dobbie, A. W., experiments by, 338

    Documentary evidence, 157-159, 187

    Double impression, transference of, 37

    Dreams, analogy with hallucinations, 186, 189, 197, 207-208

    Dreams, clairvoyant, 204, 363, 367

    Dream evidence, 185-189

    Dufay, Dr., experiments by, 116

    Dupré, Dr., case recorded by, 172

    Dusart, Dr., 118


    Edgeworth, Prof., calculations of probabilities, 27

    Elliotson, Dr., experiments by, 19

    Emotion, transference of, 141, 173-180

    Errors of inference, 148;
      of memory, 152, 220-222;
      of narration, 149;
      of observation, 147

    Esdaile, Dr., 19

    Evans, Rev. C. L., case recorded by, 299

    Experiments in physical sciences, 6-9


    Falkinburg, S. S., case recorded by, 283

    Fatigue, influence on clairvoyance, 353, 362, 367

    Féré (and Binet), experiments by, 209, 375

    Fraud, 10, 11

    Freese, Mrs., case recorded by, 367

    Frost, Rev. Matthew, case recorded by, 265

    Fryer, Rev. A. T., case recorded by, 295


    Ghosts, 2, 150, 153, 226, 272

    Gibert, Dr., experiments by, 88, 108

    Gibotteau, Dr., experiments by, 80, 139, 368

    Godfrey, Rev. Clarence, experiments by, 228

    Goodall, Edward, case recorded by, 202

    Goodrick, Rev. A. T. S., case recorded by, 279

    Gower, Leveson, case recorded by, 175

    Gradual development of impressions, 76-78, 176, 255

    Gregory, Prof., 19

    Greiffenberg, Mrs., case recorded by, 277

    Greves, Dr. Hyla, 23

    Grimaldi and Fronda, experiments by, 56

    Gurney, Edmund, 20, 91, 102, 155, 188, 215, 381;
      experiments by, 20, 27, 33, 57, 60, 101, 213

    Guthrie, Malcolm, experiments by, 20, 23, 33


    Hall, Prof. Stanley, 386

    Hallucinations, "borderland," 193, 217, 257, 292;
      casual, 208, 215-225;
      census of, 215;
      centrally initiated, 214;
      contagious, 273, 308, 316;
      grotesque, 273, 277, 278;
      heteroplastic, 233, 246, 304-315;
      hypnotic, 208-211, 270, 378;
      of memory, 154-155, 187, 271;
      post-hypnotic, 211-214;
      pseudo, 68;
      rudimentary, 126, 217, 251, 278, 279;
      telepathic, experimentally induced, 68, 132, 134, 140, 141, 226-246

    Hamilton, E. W., case recorded by, 200

    Harrison, Mrs., case recorded by, 194

    Hart, Ernest, 375

    Hartmann, Edward, 383, 390

    Haunted houses, 315-325, 373

    Hay, Sir John Drummond, case recorded by, 251

    Haynes, Gideon, case recorded by, 170

    Hennique, Leon, experiments by, 129

    Herbert, Auberon, 81

    Herdman, Prof., 23

    Héricourt, Dr., 118;
      Dr. Jules, 393

    Heteroplastic hallucinations, 233, 246, 304-315

    Hicks, Dr., 23

    Hodgson, Dr. R., 13, 155, 379;
      case recorded by, 304

    Hudson, W. H., 13

    Hurly, Miss Berta, case recorded by, 258

    Husbands, John, case recorded by, 309

    Hyperæsthesia, 11, 59, 70

    Hypnotic state favourable to thought-transference, 18, 58, 91, 393

    Hypnotism, 3, 18, 58, 59, 372


    Inference, errors of, 148

    Illusion, collective, 268;
      telepathic, 64, 65, 169

    Impersonal agency, 179

    Impersonations in trance, 329-331


    Janet, Professor Pierre, 88, 91, 209, 390;
      experiments by, 108

    James, Professor W., cases recorded by, 174, 334

    Johnson, Miss, experiments by, 70, 75

    Jones, Sir Lawrence, case recorded by, 293

    Jupp, Rev. C. H., case recorded by, 290


    Kapnist, Countess Eugenie, case recorded by, 252

    Keulemans, J. G., self-induced trance, 351

    Kirk, Joseph, experiments by, 131-139, 244

    Knott, Mrs., case recorded by, 316

    Krebs, F. H., case recorded by, 174


    Lang, Andrew, 373

    Latency of telepathic impression, 65, 264

    Latour, Dr. Tolosa, experiments by, 119

    Liébeault, Dr., case recorded by, 184;
      experiments by, 63, 212

    Liégeois, Professor, experiments by, 63, 212

    Lip-reading, 11, 70

    Local association of some apparitions, 314

    Lodge, Professor Oliver, 382, 387, 389;
      experiments by, 33, 35, 332, 336

    Luminosity accompanying telepathic hallucinations, 255, 257, 286

    Luys, Dr., 375


    Mabire, Etienne, and Anton Schmoll, experiments by, 42

    "Magnetic sense," 374

    Magnets, alleged influence of, 375

    Marks, F. A., case recorded by, 362

    Maughan, Miss Edith, experiments by, 238

    McAlpine, Mrs., case recorded by, 260

    Memory, errors of, 152, 220-222;
      hallucination of, 154, 155, 187, 271

    Mesmer, 384

    Mesmerism (_See_ Hypnotism)

    Metals, alleged influence of, 375

    Milman, Mrs., case recorded by, 280

    Misinterpretation of telepathic message, 302

    Muscle-reading, 14, 30

    Music, transference of, at a distance, 122

    Myers, Dr. A. T., 71, 109

    Myers, F. W. H., 20, 325, 328, 393;
      cases recorded by, 183, 236, 311, 353;
      experiments by, 21, 49, 109-113, 210


    Narration, errors of, 149

    "Nervous induction," 102, 386, 390

    Newbold, Miss Annie, case recorded by, 275

    Newnham, Rev. P. H., experiments by, 92

    Number-habit, 16


    Observation, errors of, 147

    Ochorowicz, Dr., 384;
      experiments by, 28, 88


    P----, J. H., experiments by, 89, 120

    Pain, experimental transference of, 23, 34, 60;
      spontaneous transference of, 162, 192

    Paquet, Mrs., case recorded by, 360

    Pickering, Prof., on number-habit, 16

    Piper, Mrs., phenomena observed with, 327

    _Point de repère_, 183, 210, 214, 217, 352

    Post-hypnotic hallucinations, 211-214

    Precautions necessary in experiments, 10-17

    Presumptive action of telepathy, 372, 373

    Pseudo-hallucinations, 68

    Pseudo-presentiments, 154, 187

    Pseudo-telepathy, 10, 11, 13


    Real person mistaken for ghost, 148

    Reciprocal impressions, 298-302

    Reddell, Frances, case recorded by, 306

    Reichenbach's phenomena, 374

    Richet, Prof., 113, 166;
      cases recorded by, 113, 166, 171, 295, 311;
      experiments by, 26, 57, 98, 116, 376

    Roux, J. C., experiments by, 124

    Royce, Prof., cases recorded by, 192, 195;
      on pseudo-presentiment, 154


    Sauvaire, Dr., hyperæsthesia described by, 13

    Schmoll, Anton, and Etienne Mabire, experiments by, 42

    Schrenck-Notzing, Dr. Von, experiments by, 54, 239

    Secondary consciousness, moral inferiority of, 95, 96, 331

    Second-hand evidence of little value, 150, 152, 156, 288;
      useful as standard of comparison, 156, 160, 298, 304

    Severn, Arthur, case recorded by, 162

    "Shell-hearing," 355

    Sidgwick, Mrs. H., experiments by, 65, 70, 75, 102;
      Professor, 4, 20, 65, 70, 215

    Sister Martha, case recorded by, 292

    Sleep, produced telepathically, 107-119, 135, 139

    Sloman, Rev. A., case recorded by, 167

    Smell, transference of, 164

    Smith, G. A., 60, 65, 71, 75, 83, 101, 211, 355

    Smith, H., case recorded by, 219

    Society for Psychical Research, 4, 10, 83, 215, 374

    Society for Psychical Research, American, founding of, 4;
      experiments by, 15, 27

    Sounds, transference of, experimental, 24, 122;
      spontaneous, 168, 247-251, 274-276

    Sparks, H. P., experiments by, 234

    Spiritualism, 3, 19, 376-380

    Stewart, Professor Balfour, 20

    Subconscious action of telepathy, 58, 91, 139, 239, 254, 391

    Subliminal consciousness, 95, 254, 392

    Sully, Professor, 215


    Table-tilting, 73, 96, 99

    Tamburini, Prof., case recorded by, 175

    Taste, experiments with sense of, 20, 34, 58

    Telepathy, definition, 6;
      frequently subconscious, 58, 91, 139, 239, 254, 391;
      a generalisation not a theory, 381;
      origin of faculty, 391-393;
      suggested explanation of, 382-388

    Terror, experimentally induced, 141

    Thaw, Dr. Blair, experiments by, 31, 81, 86

    Thought-forms, 15

    Thought-transference, definition, 6;
      first observations, 18

    Townshend, C. H., 19

    Tudor, William, case recorded by, 249

    Tunes, transference of, 25


    Venturi, Prof., case recorded by, 181

    Verrall, Mrs., 13, 210


    Wesermann, H. M., experiments by, 231

    Will, influence of, 82, 85, 108

    Willing-game, 15, 19

    Wiltse, Dr., experiments by, 242, 342, 344

    Witchcraft, 3, 373


    X., Miss, experiments by, 122, 210, 353;
      cases recorded by, 164, 166


THE WALTER SCOTT PRESS, NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.




_New Books and New Editions._


CONTEMPORARY SCIENCE SERIES.

Crown 8vo, Cloth, Price 6s. Illustrated.

MAN AND WOMAN:

A STUDY OF HUMAN SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS.

By HAVELOCK ELLIS,

Author of "The Criminal," "The Nationalisation of Health," etc.


Crown 8vo, Cloth, Price 3s. 6d. With Illustrations.

THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM:

A STUDY OF MACHINE PRODUCTION.

BY JOHN A. HOBSON, M.A.


    THIRD EDITION. Twentieth Thousand. Crown 8vo, Cloth, 6s.

ESTHER WATERS: A NOVEL.

BY GEORGE MOORE.

"Strong, vivid, sober, yet undaunted in its realism, full to the brim
of observation of life and character, _Esther Waters_ is not only
immeasurably superior to anything the author has ever written before,
but it is one of the most remarkable works that has appeared in print
this year, and one which does credit not only to the author, but the
country in which it has been written."--_The World._


Crown 8vo, Half Antique, Paper Boards, 2s. 6d.

THE THEATRICAL WORLD FOR 1893.

BY WILLIAM ARCHER.

"That the literary drama dealing with social problems made great
advance during 1893 is universally admitted, but if proof were wanted
nothing could be more conclusive than Mr. Archer's series of thoughtful
and pointed articles."--_Daily Chronicle._


SECOND EDITION. Crown 8vo, Cloth, Price 6s.

MODERN PAINTING.

BY GEORGE MOORE.

"Of the very few books on art that painters and critics should on no
account leave unread this is surely one."--_The Studio._


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.




DRAMATIC ESSAYS.

EDITED BY

WILLIAM ARCHER AND ROBERT W. LOWE.

_Three Volumes_, _Crown_ 8_vo_, _Cloth_, _Price_ 3/6 _each_.

Dramatic Criticism, as we now understand it--the systematic
appraisement from day to day and week to week of contemporary plays and
acting--began in England about the beginning of the present century.
Until very near the end of the eighteenth century, "the critics" gave
direct utterance to their judgments in the theatre itself, or in the
coffee-houses, only occasionally straying into print in letters to the
news-sheets, or in lampoons or panegyrics in prose or verse, published
in pamphlet form. Modern criticism began with modern journalism; but
some of its earliest utterances were of far more than ephemeral value.
During the earlier half of the present century several of the leading
essayists of the day--men of the first literary eminence--concerned
themselves largely with the theatre. Under the title of


"DRAMATIC ESSAYS"

will be issued, in three volumes, such of their theatrical criticisms
as seem to be of abiding interest.

_THE FIRST SERIES_ will contain selections from the criticisms of
LEIGH HUNT, both those published in 1807 (long out of print), and the
admirable articles contributed more than twenty years later to _The
Tatler_, and never republished.

_THE SECOND SERIES_ will contain selections from the criticisms of
WILLIAM HAZLITT. Hazlitt's Essays on Kean and his contemporaries have
long been inaccessible, save to collectors.

_THE THIRD SERIES_ will contain hitherto uncollected criticisms by
JOHN FORSTER, GEORGE HENRY LEWES, and others, with selections from the
writings of WILLIAM ROBSON (The Old Playgoer).

The Essays will be concisely but adequately annotated, and each volume
will contain an Introduction by WILLIAM ARCHER, and an Engraved
Portrait Frontispiece.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED, 24 Warwick Lane.




LIBRARY OF HUMOUR

_Cloth Elegant_, _Large Crown_ 8_vo_, _Price_ 3/6 _per vol_.


_VOLUMES ALREADY ISSUED._

    THE HUMOUR OF FRANCE. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes,
    by Elizabeth Lee. With numerous Illustrations by Paul Frénzeny.

    THE HUMOUR OF GERMANY. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes,
    by Hans Müller-Casenov. With numerous Illustrations by C. E. Brock.

    THE HUMOUR OF ITALY. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes, by
    A. Werner. With 50 Illustrations and a Frontispiece by Arturo Faldi.

    THE HUMOUR OF AMERICA. Selected with a copious Biographical Index
    of American Humorists, by James Barr.

    THE HUMOUR OF HOLLAND. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes,
    by A. Werner. With numerous Illustrations by Dudley Hardy.

_VOLUMES IN PREPARATION._

    THE HUMOUR OF IRELAND. Selected by D. J. O'Donoghue. With numerous
    Illustrations by Oliver Paque. [_Ready Sept._ 1894.

    THE HUMOUR OF SPAIN. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes,
    by S. Taylor. With numerous Illustrations by H. R. Millar. [_Ready
    Oct._ 1894.

    THE HUMOUR OF RUSSIA. Translated, with Notes, by E. L. Boole, and
    an Introduction by Stepniak. With 50 Illustrations by Paul Frénzeny.

    THE HUMOUR OF JAPAN. Translated, with an Introduction, by A. M.
    With Illustrations by George Bigot (from Drawings made in Japan).


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane.




BOOKS OF FAIRY TALES.

_Crown_ 8_vo_, _Cloth Elegant_, _Price_ 3/6 _per Vol_.

ENGLISH FAIRY AND OTHER FOLK TALES.

Selected and Edited, with an Introduction,

BY EDWIN SIDNEY HARTLAND.

_With Twelve Full-Page Illustrations by_ CHARLES E. BROCK.


SCOTTISH FAIRY AND FOLK TALES.

Selected and Edited, with an Introduction,

BY SIR GEORGE DOUGLAS, BART.

_With Twelve Full-Page Illustrations by_ JAMES TORRANCE.


IRISH FAIRY AND FOLK TALES.

Selected and Edited, with an Introduction,

BY W. B. YEATS.

_With Twelve Full-Page Illustrations by_ JAMES TORRANCE.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.




Crown 8vo, about 350 pp. each, Cloth Cover, 2s. 6d. per vol.
Half-polished Morocco, gilt top, 5s.

COUNT TOLSTOÏ'S WORKS.


The following Volumes are already issued--

    A RUSSIAN PROPRIETOR.

    THE COSSACKS.

    IVAN ILYITCH, AND OTHER STORIES.

    MY RELIGION.

    LIFE.

    MY CONFESSION.

    CHILDHOOD, BOYHOOD, YOUTH.

    THE PHYSIOLOGY OF WAR.

    ANNA KARÉNINA. 3s. 6d.

    WHAT TO DO?

    WAR AND PEACE. (4 VOLS.)

    THE LONG EXILE, AND OTHER STORIES FOR CHILDREN.

    SEVASTOPOL.

    THE KREUTZER SONATA, AND FAMILY HAPPINESS.

    THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU. 2s. 6d.

    Uniform with the above.

    IMPRESSIONS OF RUSSIA.

    BY DR. GEORG BRANDES.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED, 24 Warwick Lane.




MR. GEORGE MOORE'S NEW NOVEL.

Cloth, Crown 8vo, Price 6s.


ESTHER WATERS: A Novel.

BY GEORGE MOORE.

"Strong, vivid, sober, yet undaunted in its realism, full to the brim
of observation of life and character, _Esther Waters_ is not only
immeasurably superior to anything the author has ever written before,
but it is one of the most remarkable works that has appeared in print
this year, and one which does credit not only to the author, but the
country in which it has been written."--_The World._

"As we live the book through again in memory, we feel more and more
confident that Mr. Moore has once for all vindicated his position
among the half-dozen living novelists of whom the historian of English
literature will have to take account."--_Daily Chronicle._

"It may be as well to set down, beyond possibility of misapprehension,
my belief that in _Esther Waters_ we have the most artistic, the most
complete, and the most inevitable work of fiction that has been written
in England for at least two years."--A. T. Q. C. in _The Speaker_.

"Hardly since the time of Defoe have the habits and manners of the
'masses' been delineated as they are delineated here.... _Esther
Waters_ is the best story that he (Mr. Moore) has written, and one on
which he may be heartily congratulated."--_Globe._

"Matthew Arnold, reviewing one of Tolstoï's novels, remarked that the
Russian novelist seemed to write because the thing happened so, and for
no other reason. That is precisely the merit of Mr. Moore's book.... It
seems inevitable."--_Westminster Gazette._


OTHER NOVELS BY GEORGE MOORE.

Crown 8vo, Cloth, 3s. 6d. each.

=A DRAMA IN MUSLIN.= Seventh Edition.

=A MODERN LOVER.= New Edition.

=A MUMMER'S WIFE.= Twentieth Edition.

=VAIN FORTUNE.= 6s. With Illustrations by Maurice Greiffenhagen. A few
Large-Paper Copies at One Guinea.

Second Edition, Crown 8vo, Cloth, 6s.

=MODERN PAINTING.= By George Moore.

"Of the very few books on art that painters and critics should on no
account leave unread this is surely one."--_Studio._

"His book is one of the best books about pictures that have come into
our hands for some years."--_St. James's Gazette._

"A more original, a better informed, a more suggestive, and, let us
add, a more amusing work on the art of to-day, we have never read than
this volume."--_Glasgow Herald._


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane.




THE SCOTT LIBRARY.

Cloth, Uncut Edges, Gilt Top. Price 1s. 6d. per Volume.


VOLUMES ALREADY ISSUED--

    1 MALORY'S ROMANCE OF KING ARTHUR AND THE
    Quest of the Holy Grail. Edited by Ernest Rhys.

    2 THOREAU'S WALDEN. WITH INTRODUCTORY NOTE
    by Will H. Dircks.

    3 THOREAU'S "WEEK." WITH PREFATORY NOTE BY
    Will H. Dircks.

    4 THOREAU'S ESSAYS. EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
    by Will H. Dircks.

    5 CONFESSIONS OF AN ENGLISH OPIUM-EATER, ETC.
    By Thomas De Quincey. With Introductory Note by William Sharp.

    6 LANDOR'S IMAGINARY CONVERSATIONS. SELECTED,
    with Introduction, by Havelock Ellis.

    7 PLUTARCH'S LIVES (LANGHORNE). WITH INTRODUCTORY
    Note by B. J. Snell, M.A.

    8 BROWNE'S RELIGIO MEDICI, ETC. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by J. Addington Symonds.

    9 SHELLEY'S ESSAYS AND LETTERS. EDITED, WITH
    Introductory Note, by Ernest Rhys.

    10 SWIFT'S PROSE WRITINGS. CHOSEN AND ARRANGED,
    with Introduction, by Walter Lewin.

    11 MY STUDY WINDOWS. BY JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.
    With Introduction by R. Garnett, LL.D.

    12 LOWELL'S ESSAYS ON THE ENGLISH POETS. WITH
    a new Introduction by Mr. Lowell.

    13 THE BIGLOW PAPERS. BY JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.
    With a Prefatory Note by Ernest Rhys.

    14 GREAT ENGLISH PAINTERS. SELECTED FROM
    Cunningham's _Lives_. Edited by William Sharp.

    15 BYRON'S LETTERS AND JOURNALS. SELECTED,
    with Introduction, by Mathilde Blind.

    16 LEIGH HUNT'S ESSAYS. WITH INTRODUCTION AND
    Notes by Arthur Symons.

    17 LONGFELLOW'S "HYPERION," "KAVANAH," AND
    "The Trouveres." With Introduction by W. Tirebuck.

    18 GREAT MUSICAL COMPOSERS. BY G. F. FERRIS.
    Edited, with Introduction, by Mrs. William Sharp.

    19 THE MEDITATIONS OF MARCUS AURELIUS. EDITED
    by Alice Zimmern.

    20 THE TEACHING OF EPICTETUS. TRANSLATED FROM
    the Greek, with Introduction and Notes, by T. W. Rolleston.

    21 SELECTIONS FROM SENECA. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by Walter Clode.

    22 SPECIMEN DAYS IN AMERICA. BY WALT WHITMAN.
    Revised by the Author, with fresh Preface.

    23 DEMOCRATIC VISTAS, AND OTHER PAPERS. BY
    Walt Whitman. (Published by arrangement with the Author.)

    24 WHITE'S NATURAL HISTORY OF SELBORNE. WITH
    a Preface by Richard Jefferies.

    25 DEFOE'S CAPTAIN SINGLETON. EDITED, WITH
    Introduction, by H. Halliday Sparling.

    26 MAZZINI'S ESSAYS: LITERARY, POLITICAL, AND
    Religious. With Introduction by William Clarke.

    27 PROSE WRITINGS OF HEINE. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by Havelock Ellis.

    28 REYNOLDS'S DISCOURSES. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by Helen Zimmern.

    29 PAPERS OF STEELE AND ADDISON. EDITED BY
    Walter Lewin.

    30 BURNS'S LETTERS. SELECTED AND ARRANGED,
    with Introduction, by J. Logie Robertson, M.A.

    31 VOLSUNGA SAGA. WILLIAM MORRIS. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by H. H. Sparling.

    32 SARTOR RESARTUS. BY THOMAS CARLYLE. WITH
    Introduction by Ernest Rhys.

    33 SELECT WRITINGS OF EMERSON. WITH INTRODUCTION
    by Percival Chubb.

    34 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF LORD HERBERT. EDITED,
    with an Introduction, by Will H. Dircks.

    35 ENGLISH PROSE, FROM MAUNDEVILLE TO
    Thackeray. Chosen and Edited by Arthur Galton.

    36 THE PILLARS OF SOCIETY, AND OTHER PLAYS. BY
    Henrik Ibsen. Edited, with an Introduction, by Havelock Ellis.

    37 IRISH FAIRY AND FOLK TALES. EDITED AND
    Selected by W. B. Yeats.

    38 ESSAYS OF DR. JOHNSON, WITH BIOGRAPHICAL
    Introduction and Notes by Stuart J. Reid.

    39 ESSAYS OF WILLIAM HAZLITT. SELECTED AND
    Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by Frank Carr.

    40 LANDOR'S PENTAMERON, AND OTHER IMAGINARY
    Conversations. Edited, with a Preface, by H. Ellis.

    41 POE'S TALES AND ESSAYS. EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTION,
    by Ernest Rhys.

    42 VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. BY OLIVER GOLDSMITH.
    Edited, with Preface, by Ernest Rhys.

    43 POLITICAL ORATIONS, FROM WENTWORTH TO
    Macaulay. Edited, with Introduction, by William Clarke.

    44 THE AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST-TABLE. BY
    Oliver Wendell Holmes.

    45 THE POET AT THE BREAKFAST-TABLE. BY OLIVER
    Wendell Holmes.

    46 THE PROFESSOR AT THE BREAKFAST-TABLE. BY
    Oliver Wendell Holmes.

    47 LORD CHESTERFIELD'S LETTERS TO HIS SON.
    Selected, with Introduction, by Charles Sayle.

    48 STORIES FROM CARLETON. SELECTED, WITH INTRODUCTION,
    by W. Yeats.

    49 JANE EYRE. BY CHARLOTTE BRONTË. EDITED BY
    Clement K. Shorter.

    50 ELIZABETHAN ENGLAND. EDITED BY LOTHROP
    Withington, with a Preface by Dr. Furnivall.

    51 THE PROSE WRITINGS OF THOMAS DAVIS. EDITED
    by T. W. Rolleston.

    52 SPENCE'S ANECDOTES. A SELECTION. EDITED,
    with an Introduction and Notes, by John Underhill.

    53 MORE'S UTOPIA, AND LIFE OF EDWARD V. EDITED,
    with an Introduction, by Maurice Adams.

    54 SADI'S GULISTAN, OR FLOWER GARDEN. TRANSLATED,
    with an Essay, by James Ross.

    55 ENGLISH FAIRY AND FOLK TALES. EDITED BY
    E. Sidney Hartland.

    56 NORTHERN STUDIES. BY EDMUND GOSSE. WITH
    a Note by Ernest Rhys.

    57 EARLY REVIEWS OF GREAT WRITERS. EDITED BY
    E. Stevenson.

    58 ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS. WITH GEORGE HENRY
    Lewes's Essay on Aristotle prefixed.

    59 LANDOR'S PERICLES AND ASPASIA. EDITED, WITH
    an Introduction, by Havelock Ellis.

    60 ANNALS OF TACITUS. THOMAS GORDON'S TRANSLATION.
    Edited, with an Introduction, by Arthur Galton.

    61 ESSAYS OF ELIA. BY CHARLES LAMB. EDITED,
    with an Introduction, by Ernest Rhys.

    62 BALZAC'S SHORTER STORIES. TRANSLATED BY
    William Wilson and the Count Stenbock.

    63 COMEDIES OF DE MUSSET. EDITED, WITH AN
    Introductory Note, by S. L. Gwynn.

    64 CORAL REEFS. BY CHARLES DARWIN. EDITED,
    with an Introduction, by Dr. J. W. Williams.

    65 SHERIDAN'S PLAYS. EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION,
    by Rudolf Dircks.

    66 OUR VILLAGE. BY MISS MITFORD. EDITED, WITH
    an Introduction, by Ernest Rhys.

    67 MASTER HUMPHREY'S CLOCK, AND OTHER STORIES.
    By Charles Dickens. With Introduction by Frank T. Marzials.

    68 TALES FROM WONDERLAND. BY RUDOLPH
    Baumbach. Translated by Helen B. Dole.

    69 ESSAYS AND PAPERS BY DOUGLAS JERROLD. EDITED
    by Walter Jerrold.

    70 VINDICATION OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMAN. BY
    Mary Wollstonecraft. Introduction by Mrs. E Robins Pennell.

    71 "THE ATHENIAN ORACLE." A SELECTION. EDITED
    by John Underhill, with Prefatory Note by Walter Besant.

    72 ESSAYS OF SAINT-BEUVE. TRANSLATED AND
    Edited, with an Introduction, by Elizabeth Lee.

    73 SELECTIONS FROM PLATO. FROM THE TRANSLATION
    of Sydenham and Taylor. Edited by T. W. Rolleston.

    74 HEINE'S ITALIAN TRAVEL SKETCHES, ETC. TRANSLATED
    by Elizabeth A. Sharp. With an Introduction from the French of
    Theophile Gautier.

    75 SCHILLER'S MAID OF ORLEANS. TRANSLATED,
    with an Introduction, by Major-General Patrick Maxwell.

    76 SELECTIONS FROM SYDNEY SMITH. EDITED, WITH
    an Introduction, by Ernest Rhys.

    77 THE NEW SPIRIT. BY HAVELOCK ELLIS.

    78 THE BOOK OF MARVELLOUS ADVENTURES. FROM
    the "Morte d'Arthur." Edited by Ernest Rhys. [This, together with
    No. 1, forms the complete "Morte d'Arthur."]

    79 ESSAYS AND APHORISMS. BY SIR ARTHUR HELPS.
    With an Introduction by E. A. Helps.

    80 ESSAYS OF MONTAIGNE. SELECTED, WITH A
    Prefatory Note, by Percival Chubb.

    81 THE LUCK OF BARRY LYNDON. BY W. M.
    Thackeray. Edited by F. T. Marzials.

    82 SCHILLER'S WILLIAM TELL. TRANSLATED, WITH
    an Introduction, by Major-General Patrick Maxwell.

    83 CARLYLE'S ESSAYS ON GERMAN LITERATURE.
    With an Introduction by Ernest Rhys.

    84 PLAYS AND DRAMATIC ESSAYS OF CHARLES LAMB.
    Edited, with an Introduction, by Rudolf Dircks.

    85 THE PROSE OF WORDSWORTH. SELECTED AND
    Edited, with an Introduction, by Professor William Knight.

    86 ESSAYS, DIALOGUES, AND THOUGHTS OF COUNT
    Giacomo Leopardi. Translated, with an Introduction and Notes, by
    Major-General Patrick Maxwell.

    87 THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL A RUSSIAN COMEDY.
    By Nikolai V. Gogol. Translated from the original, with an Introduction
    and Notes, by Arthur A. Sykes.

    88 ESSAYS AND APOTHEGMS OF FRANCIS, LORD BACON:
    Edited, with an Introduction, by John Buchan.

    89 PROSE OF MILTON: SELECTED AND EDITED, WITH
    an Introduction, by Richard Garnett, LL.D.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED, 24 Warwick Lane.




GREAT WRITERS.

A NEW SERIES OF CRITICAL BIOGRAPHIES.

Edited by ERIC ROBERTSON and FRANK T. MARZIALS.

A Complete Bibliography to each Volume, by J. P. ANDERSON, British
Museum, London.

Cloth, Uncut Edges, Gilt Top. Price 1/6.


VOLUMES ALREADY ISSUED--

    LIFE OF LONGFELLOW. By PROF. ERIC S. ROBERTSON.
    "A most readable little work."--_Liverpool Mercury._

    LIFE OF COLERIDGE. By HALL CAINE.
    "Brief and vigorous, written throughout with spirit and great literary
    skill."--_Scotsman._

    LIFE OF DICKENS. By FRANK T. MARZIALS.
    "Notwithstanding the mass of matter that has been printed relating
    to Dickens and his works ... we should, until we came across this
    volume, have been at a loss to recommend any popular life of
    England's most popular novelist as being really satisfactory. The
    difficulty is removed by Mr. Marzials's little book."--_Athenæum._

    LIFE OF DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI. By J. KNIGHT.
     "Mr. Knight's picture of the great poet and painter is the fullest
    and best yet presented to the public."--_The Graphic._

    LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON. By COLONEL F. GRANT.
    "Colonel Grant has performed his task with diligence, sound judgment,
    good taste, and accuracy."--_Illustrated London News._

    LIFE OF DARWIN. By G. T. BETTANY.
     "Mr. G. T. Bettany's _Life of Darwin_ is a sound and conscientious
    work."--_Saturday Review._

    LIFE OF CHARLOTTE BRONTË. By A. BIRRELL.
    "Those who know much of Charlotte Brontë will learn more, and
    those who know nothing about her will find all that is best worth
    learning in Mr. Birrell's pleasant book."--_St. James' Gazette._

    LIFE OF THOMAS CARLYLE. By R. GARNETT, LL.D.
    "This is an admirable book. Nothing could be more felicitous and
    fairer than the way in which he takes us through Carlyle's life and
    works."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

    LIFE OF ADAM SMITH. By R. B. HALDANE, M.P.
    "Written with a perspicuity seldom exemplified when dealing with
    economic science."--_Scotsman._

    LIFE OF KEATS. By W. M. ROSSETTI.
    "Valuable for the ample information which it contains."--_Cambridge
    Independent._

    LIFE OF SHELLEY. By WILLIAM SHARP.
    "The criticisms ... entitle this capital monograph to be ranked with
    the best biographies of Shelley."--_Westminster Review._

    LIFE OF SMOLLETT. By DAVID HANNAY.
    "A capable record of a writer who still remains one of the great
    masters of the English novel."--_Saturday Review._

    LIFE OF GOLDSMITH. By AUSTIN DOBSON.
     "The story of his literary and social life in London, with all its
    humorous and pathetic vicissitudes, is here retold, as none could
    tell it better."--_Daily News._

    LIFE OF SCOTT. By PROFESSOR YONGE.
    "This is a most enjoyable book."--_Aberdeen Free Press._

    LIFE OF BURNS. By PROFESSOR BLACKIE.
    "The editor certainly made a hit when he persuaded Blackie to write
    about Burns."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

    LIFE OF VICTOR HUGO. By FRANK T. MARZIALS.
    "Mr. Marzials's volume presents to us, in a more handy form than any
    English or even French handbook gives, the summary of what is known
    about the life of the great poet."--_Saturday Review._

    LIFE OF EMERSON. By RICHARD GARNETT, LL.D.
    "No record of Emerson's life could be more desirable."--_Saturday
    Review._

    LIFE OF GOETHE. By JAMES SIME.
    "Mr. James Sime's competence as a biographer of Goethe is beyond
    question."--_Manchester Guardian._

    LIFE OF CONGREVE. By EDMUND GOSSE.
    "Mr. Gosse has written an admirable biography."--_Academy._

    LIFE OF BUNYAN. By CANON VENABLES.
    "A most intelligent, appreciative, and valuable memoir."--_Scotsman._

    LIFE OF CRABBE. By T. E. KEBBEL.
    "No English poet since Shakespeare has observed certain aspects of
    nature and of human life more closely."--_Athenæum._

    LIFE OF HEINE. By WILLIAM SHARP.
    "An admirable monograph ... more fully written up to the level
    of recent knowledge and criticism than any other English
    work."--_Scotsman._

    LIFE OF MILL. By W. L. COURTNEY.
    "A most sympathetic and discriminating memoir."--_Glasgow Herald._

    LIFE OF SCHILLER. By HENRY W. NEVINSON.
    "Presents the poet's life in a neatly rounded picture."--_Scotsman._

    LIFE OF CAPTAIN MARRYAT. By DAVID HANNAY.
    "We have nothing but praise for the manner in which Mr. Hannay has
    done justice to him."--_Saturday Review._

    LIFE OF LESSING. By T. W. ROLLESTON.
    "One of the best books of the series."--_Manchester Guardian._

    LIFE OF MILTON. By RICHARD GARNETT, LL.D.
    "Has never been more charmingly or adequately told."--_Scottish
    Leader._

    LIFE OF BALZAC. By FREDERICK WEDMORE.
    "Mr. Wedmore's monograph on the greatest of French writers of
    fiction, whose greatness is to be measured by comparison with his
    successors, is a piece of careful and critical composition, neat
    and nice in style."--_Daily News._

    LIFE OF GEORGE ELIOT. By OSCAR BROWNING.
    "A book of the character of Mr. Browning's, to stand midway between
    the bulky work of Mr. Cross and the very slight sketch of Miss
    Blind, was much to be desired, and Mr. Browning has done his work
    with vivacity, and not without skill."--_Manchester Guardian._

    LIFE OF JANE AUSTEN. By GOLDWIN SMITH.
    "Mr. Goldwin Smith has added another to the not inconsiderable roll
    of eminent men who have found their delight in Miss Austen.... His
    little book upon her, just published by Walter Scott, is certainly
    a fascinating book to those who already know her and love her well;
    and we have little doubt that it will prove also a fascinating book
    to those who have still to make her acquaintance."--_Spectator._

    LIFE OF BROWNING. By WILLIAM SHARP.
    "This little volume is a model of excellent English, and in every
    respect it seems to us what a biography should be."--_Public
    Opinion._

    LIFE OF BYRON By HON. RODEN NOEL.
    "The Hon. Roden Noel's volume on Byron is decidedly one of the
    most readable in the excellent 'Great Writers' series."--_Scottish
    Leader._

    LIFE OF HAWTHORNE. By MONCURE CONWAY.
    "It is a delightful _causerie_--pleasant, genial talk about a most
    interesting man. Easy and conversational as the tone is throughout,
    no important fact is omitted, no valueless fact is recalled; and
    it is entirely exempt from platitude and conventionality."--_The
    Speaker._

    LIFE OF SCHOPENHAUER. By PROFESSOR WALLACE.
    "We can speak very highly of this little book of Mr. Wallace's. It
    is, perhaps, excessively lenient in dealing with the man, and it
    cannot be said to be at all ferociously critical in dealing with
    the philosophy."--_Saturday Review._

    LIFE OF SHERIDAN. By LLOYD SANDERS.
    "To say that Mr. Lloyd Sanders, in this little volume, has produced
    the best existing memoir of Sheridan, is really to award much
    fainter praise than the work deserves."--_Manchester Examiner._

    LIFE OF THACKERAY. By HERMAN MERIVALE and F. T. MARZIALS.
    "The monograph just published is well worth reading, ... and the
    book, with its excellent bibliography, is one which neither the
    student nor the general reader can well afford to miss."--_Pall
    Mall Gazette._

    LIFE OF CERVANTES. By H. E. WATTS.
    "We can commend this book as a worthy addition to the useful series
    to which it belongs."--_London Daily Chronicle._

    LIFE OF VOLTAIRE. By FRANCIS ESPINASSE.
    George Saintsbury, in _The Illustrated London News_, says:--"In
    this little volume the wayfaring man who has no time to devour
    libraries will find most things that it concerns him to know about
    Voltaire's actual life and work put very clearly, sufficiently, and
    accurately for the most part."

    LIFE OF LEIGH HUNT. By COSMO MONKHOUSE.
    "Mr. Monkhouse has brought together and skilfully set in order much
    widely scattered material ... candid as well as sympathetic."--_The
    Athenæum._

    LIFE OF WHITTIER. By W. J. LINTON.
    "Well written, and well worthy to stand with preceding volumes in
    the useful 'Great Writers' series."--_Black and White._

       *       *       *       *       *

LIBRARY EDITION OF "GREAT WRITERS," _Demy_ 8vo, 2s. 6d.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED, 24 Warwick Lane.




SELECTED THREE-VOL. SETS

IN NEW BROCADE BINDING.

6s. per Set, in Shell Case to match. May also be had bound in Roan,
with Roan Case to match, 9s. per Set.


_THE FOLLOWING SETS CAN BE OBTAINED_--


POEMS OF

    WORDSWORTH
    KEATS
    SHELLEY

    LONGFELLOW
    WHITTIER
    EMERSON

    HOGG
    ALLAN RAMSAY
    SCOTTISH MINOR POETS

    SHAKESPEARE
    BEN JONSON
    MARLOWE

    SONNETS OF THIS CENTURY
    SONNETS OF EUROPE
    AMERICAN SONNETS

    HEINE
    GOETHE
    HUGO

    COLERIDGE
    SOUTHEY
    COWPER

    BORDER BALLADS
    JACOBITE SONGS
    OSSIAN

    CAVALIER POETS
    LOVE LYRICS
    HERRICK

    CHRISTIAN YEAR
    IMITATION OF CHRIST
    HERBERT

    AMERICAN HUMOROUS VERSE
    ENGLISH HUMOROUS VERSE
    BALLADES AND
    RONDEAUS

    EARLY ENGLISH POETRY
    CHAUCER
    SPENSER

    HORACE
    GREEK ANTHOLOGY
    LANDOR

    GOLDSMITH
    MOORE
    IRISH MINSTRELSY

    WOMEN POETS
    CHILDREN OF POETS
    SEA MUSIC

    PRAED
    HUNT AND HOOD
    DOBELL

    MEREDITH
    MARSTON
    LOVE LETTERS

    BURNS'S SONGS
    BURNS'S POEMS
    LIFE OF BURNS BY BLACKIE

    SCOTT'S MARMION, &c.
    SCOTT'S LADY OF LAKE &c.
    LIFE OF SCOTT
    BY PROF. YONGE


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.




SELECTED THREE-VOL. SETS

IN NEW BROCADE BINDING.

6_s. PER SET, IN SHELL CASE TO MATCH._

Also Bound in Roan, in Shell Case, Price 9s. per Set.


    _O. W. Holmes Set_--
       Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table.
       Professor at the Breakfast-Table.
       Poet at the Breakfast-Table.

    _Landor Set_--
       Landor's Imaginary Conversations.
       Pentameron.
       Pericles and Aspasia.

    _Three English Essayists_--
    Essays of Elia.
    Essays of Leigh Hunt.
    Essays of William Hazlitt.

    _Three Classical Moralists_--
       Meditations of Marcus Aurelius.
       Teaching of Epictetus.
       Morals of Seneca.

    _Walden Set_--
       Thoreau's Walden.
       Thoreau's Week.
       Thoreau's Selections.

    _Famous Letters Set_--
       Letters of Byron.
       Letters of Chesterfield.
       Letters of Burns.

    _Lowell Set_--
       My Study Windows.
       The English Poets.
       The Biglow Papers.

    _Heine Set_--
       Life of Heine.
       Heine's Prose.
       Heine's Travel-Sketches.

    _Three Essayists_--
       Essays of Mazzini.
       Essays of Sainte-Beuve.
       Essays of Montaigne.

    _Schiller Set_--
       Life of Schiller.
       Maid of Orleans.
       William Tell.

    _Carlyle Set_--
       Life of Carlyle.
       Sartor Resartus.
       Carlyle's German Essays.


London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.




IBSEN'S PROSE DRAMAS.

EDITED BY WILLIAM ARCHER.

Complete in Five Vols. Crown 8vo, Cloth, Price 3/6 each.

Set of Five Vols., in Case, 17/6; in Half Morocco, in Case, 32/6.


_"We seem at last to be shown men and women as they are; and at first
it is more than we can endure. ... All Ibsen's characters speak and act
as if they were hypnotised, and under their creator's imperious demand
to reveal themselves. There never was such a mirror held up to nature
before: it is too terrible.... Yet we must return to Ibsen, with his
remorseless surgery, his remorseless electric-light, until we, too,
have grown strong and learned to face the naked--if necessary, the
flayed and bleeding--reality."_--SPEAKER (London).

    VOL. I. "A DOLL'S HOUSE," "THE LEAGUE OF YOUTH," and "THE PILLARS
    OF SOCIETY." With Portrait of the Author, and Biographical
    Introduction by WILLIAM ARCHER.

    VOL. II. "GHOSTS," "AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE," and "THE WILD DUCK."
    With an Introductory Note.

    VOL. III. "LADY INGER OF ÖSTRÅT," "THE VIKINGS AT HELGELAND," "THE
    PRETENDERS." With an Introductory Note and Portrait of Ibsen.

    VOL. IV. "EMPEROR AND GALILEAN." With an Introductory Note by
    WILLIAM ARCHER.

    VOL. V. "ROSMERSHOLM," "THE LADY FROM THE SEA," "HEDDA GABLER."
    Translated by WILLIAM ARCHER. With an Introductory Note.

The sequence of the plays _in each volume_ is chronological; the
complete set of volumes comprising the dramas thus presents them in
chronological order.

"The art of prose translation does not perhaps enjoy a very high
literary status in England, but we have no hesitation in numbering
the present version of Ibsen, so far as it has gone (Vols. I.
and II.), among the very best achievements, in that kind, of our
generation."--_Academy._

"We have seldom, if ever, met with a translation so absolutely
idiomatic."--_Glasgow Herald._


LONDON: WALTER SCOTT, LIMITED, 24 WARWICK LANE.




THE CANTERBURY POETS.

EDITED BY WILLIAM SHARP. IN 1/- MONTHLY VOLUMES.

    Cloth, Red Edges    --  1s.      Red Roan, Gilt Edges, 2s. 6d.
    Cloth, Uncut Edges  --  1s.      Pad. Morocco, Gilt Edges, 5s.

       *       *       *       *       *

    =THE CHRISTIAN YEAR=                  By the Rev. John Keble.
    =COLERIDGE=                         Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =LONGFELLOW=                              Edited by Eva Hope.
    =CAMPBELL=                             Edited by John Hogben.
    =SHELLEY=                           Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =WORDSWORTH=                       Edited by A. J. Symington.
    =BLAKE=                             Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =WHITTIER=                                Edited by Eva Hope.
    =POE=                               Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =CHATTERTON=                         Edited by John Richmond.
    =BURNS=. Poems                      Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =BURNS=. Songs                      Edited by Joseph Skipsey.
    =MARLOWE=                       Edited by Percy E. Pinkerton.
    =KEATS=                                Edited by John Hogben.
    =HERBERT=                              Edited by Ernest Rhys.
    =HUGO=                         Translated by Dean Carrington.
    =COWPER=                                  Edited by Eva Hope.
    =SHAKESPEARE'S POEMS, Etc.=          Edited by William Sharp.
    =EMERSON=                             Edited by Walter Lewin.
    =SONNETS OF THIS CENTURY=            Edited by William Sharp.
    =WHITMAN=                              Edited by Ernest Rhys.
    =SCOTT=. Marmion, etc.               Edited by William Sharp.
    =SCOTT=. Lady of the Lake, etc.      Edited by William Sharp.
    =PRAED=                           Edited by Frederick Cooper.
    =HOGG=                   Edited by his Daughter, Mrs. Garden.
    =GOLDSMITH=                       Edited by William Tirebuck.
    =LOVE LETTERS. Etc.=                          By Eric Mackay.
    =SPENSER=                          Edited by Hon. Roden Noel.
    =CHILDREN OF THE POETS=          Edited by Eric S. Robertson.
    =JONSON=                      Edited by J. Addington Symonds.
    =BYRON (2 Vols.)=                   Edited by Mathilde Blind.
    =THE SONNETS OF EUROPE=              Edited by S. Waddington.
    =RAMSAY=                        Edited by J. Logie Robertson.
    =DOBELL=                               Edited by Mrs. Dobell.
    =DAYS OF THE YEAR=        With Introduction by William Sharp.
    =POPE=                                 Edited by John Hogben.
    =HEINE=                               Edited by Mrs. Kroeker.
    =BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER=           Edited by John S. Fletcher.
    =BOWLES, LAMB, &c.=               Edited by William Tirebuck.
    =EARLY ENGLISH POETRY=      Edited by H. Macaulay Fitzgibbon.
    =SEA MUSIC=                              Edited by Mrs Sharp.
    =HERRICK=                              Edited by Ernest Rhys.
    =BALLADES AND RONDEAUS=           Edited by J. Gleeson White.
    =IRISH MINSTRELSY=            Edited by H. Halliday Sparling.
    =MILTON'S PARADISE LOST=   Edited by J. Bradshaw, M.A., LL.D.
    =JACOBITE BALLADS=                  Edited by G. S. Macquoid.
    =AUSTRALIAN BALLADS=          Edited by D. B. W. Sladen, B.A.
    =MOORE=                               Edited by John Dorrian.
    =BORDER BALLADS=                  Edited by Graham R. Tomson.
    =SONG-TIDE=                         By Philip Bourke Marston.
    =ODES OF HORACE=     Translations by Sir Stephen de Vere, Bt.
    =OSSIAN=                          Edited by George Eyre-Todd.
    =ELFIN MUSIC=                  Edited by Arthur Edward Waite.
    =SOUTHEY=                       Edited by Sidney R. Thompson.
    =CHAUCER=                     Edited by Frederick Noël Paton.
    =POEMS OF WILD LIFE=    Edited by Charles G. D. Roberts, M.A.
    =PARADISE REGAINED=        Edited by J. Bradshaw, M.A., LL.D.
    =CRABBE=                              Edited by E. Lamplough.
    =DORA GREENWELL=                   Edited by William Dorling.
    =FAUST=                        Edited by Elizabeth Craigmyle.
    =AMERICAN SONNETS=                   Edited by William Sharp.
    =LANDOR'S POEMS=                    Edited by Ernest Radford.
    =GREEK ANTHOLOGY=                 Edited by Graham R. Tomson.
    =HUNT AND HOOD=                 Edited by J. Harwood Panting.
    =HUMOROUS POEMS=                    Edited by Ralph H. Caine.
    =LYTTON'S PLAYS=              Edited by R. Farquharson Sharp.
    =GREAT ODES=                         Edited by William Sharp.
    =MEREDITH'S POEMS=               Edited by M. Betham-Edwards.
    =PAINTER-POETS=                     Edited by Kineton Parkes.
    =WOMEN POETS=                           Edited by Mrs. Sharp.
    =LOVE LYRICS=                        Edited by Percy Hulburd.
    =AMERICAN HUMOROUS VERSE=               Edited by James Barr.
    =MINOR SCOTCH LYRICS=           Edited by Sir George Douglas.
    =CAVALIER LYRISTS=                  Edited by Will H. Dircks.
    =GERMAN BALLADS=               Edited by Elizabeth Craigmyle.
    =SONGS OF BERANGER=            Translated by William Toynbee.
    =HON. RODEN NOEL'S POEMS=            With an Introduction by
                                                          R. Buchanan.
    =SONGS OF FREEDOM=            Selected, with an Introduction,
                                                        by H. S. Salt.
    =CANADIAN POEMS AND LAYS=     Edited by W. D. Lighthall, M.A.
    =CONTEMPORARY SCOTTISH VERSE=     Edited by Sir Geo. Douglas.

London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane




NEW EDITION IN NEW BINDING.

In the new edition there are added about forty reproductions in
fac-simile of autographs of distinguished singers and instrumentalists,
including Sarasate, Joachim, Sir Charles Hallé, Paderewsky,
Stavenhagen, Henschel, Trebelli, Miss Macintyre, Jean Gérardy, etc.


_Quarto, cloth elegant, gilt edges, emblematic design on cover_, 6_s_.
_May also be had in a variety of Fancy Bindings._

THE

MUSIC OF THE POETS:

A MUSICIANS' BIRTHDAY BOOK.

EDITED BY ELEONORE D'ESTERRE KEELING.

This is a unique Birthday Book. Against each date are given the names
of musicians whose birthday it is, together with a verse-quotation
appropriate to the character of their different compositions
or performances. A special feature of the book consists in the
reproduction in fac-simile of autographs, and autographic music, of
living composers. Three sonnets by Mr. Theodore Watts, on the "Fausts"
of Berlioz, Schumann, and Gounod, have been written specially for this
volume. It is illustrated with designs of various musical instruments,
etc.; autographs of Rubenstein, Dvorâk, Greig, Mackenzie, Villiers
Stanford, etc., etc.

London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane




The Contemporary Science Series.


I. THE EVOLUTION OF SEX. By Professor PATRICK GEDDES and J. ARTHUR
THOMSON. With 90 Illustrations. Second Edition.

"The authors have brought to the task--as indeed their names
guarantee--a wealth of knowledge, a lucid and attractive method of
treatment, and a rich vein of picturesque language."--_Nature._


II. ELECTRICITY IN MODERN LIFE. By G. W. DE TUNZELMANN. With 88
Illustrations.

"A clearly-written and connected sketch of what is known about
electricity and magnetism, the more prominent modern applications, and
the principles on which they are based."--_Saturday Review._


III. THE ORIGIN OF THE ARYANS. By DR. ISAAC TAYLOR. Illustrated. Second
Edition.

"Canon Taylor is probably the most encyclopædic all-round scholar now
living. His new volume on the Origin of the Aryans is a first-rate
example of the excellent account to which he can turn his exceptionally
wide and varied information.... Masterly and exhaustive."--_Pall Mall
Gazette._


IV. PHYSIOGNOMY AND EXPRESSION. By P. MANTEGAZZA. Illustrated.

"Professor Mantegazza is a writer full of life and spirit, and
the natural attractiveness of his subject is not destroyed by his
scientific handling of it."--_Literary World_ (Boston).


V. EVOLUTION AND DISEASE. By J. B. SUTTON, F.R.C.S. With 135
Illustrations.

"The book is as interesting as a novel, without sacrifice of
accuracy or system, and is calculated to give an appreciation of
the fundamentals of pathology to the lay reader, while forming
a useful collection of illustrations of disease for medical
reference."--_Journal of Mental Science._


VI. THE VILLAGE COMMUNITY. By G. L. GOMME. Illustrated.

"The fruit of some years of investigation on a subject which has of
late attracted much attention, and is of much importance, inasmuch as
it lies at the basis of our society."--_Antiquary._


VII. THE CRIMINAL. By HAVELOCK ELLIS. Illustrated.

"An ably written, an instructive, and a most entertaining book."--_Law
Quarterly Review._


VIII. SANITY AND INSANITY. By DR. CHARLES MERCIER. Illustrated.

"Taken as a whole, it is the brightest book on the physical side of
mental science published in our time."--_Pall Mall Gazette._


IX. HYPNOTISM. By DR. ALBERT MOLL. Second Edition.

"Marks a step of some importance in the study of some difficult
physiological and psychological problems which have not yet received
much attention in the scientific world of England."--_Nature._


X. MANUAL TRAINING. By DR. C. M. WOODWARD, Director of the Manual
Training School, St. Louis. Illustrated.

"There is no greater authority on the subject than Professor
Woodward."--_Manchester Guardian._


XI. THE SCIENCE OF FAIRY TALES. By E. SIDNEY HARTLAND.

"Mr. Hartland's book will win the sympathy of all earnest students,
both by the knowledge it displays, and by a thorough love and
appreciation of his subject, which is evident throughout."--_Spectator._


XII. PRIMITIVE FOLK. By ELIE RECLUS.

"For an introduction to the study of the questions of property,
marriage, government, religion,--in a word, to the evolution of
society,--this little volume will be found most convenient."--_Scottish
Leader._


XIII. THE EVOLUTION OF MARRIAGE. By Professor LETOURNEAU.

"Among the distinguished French students of sociology, Professor
Letourneau has long stood in the first rank. He approaches the great
study of man free from bias and shy of generalisations. To collect,
scrutinise, and appraise facts is his chief business."--_Science._


XIV. BACTERIA AND THEIR PRODUCTS. By Dr. G. SIMS WOODHEAD. Illustrated.

"An excellent summary of the present state of knowledge of the
subject."--_Lancet._


XV. EDUCATION AND HEREDITY. By J. M. GUYAU.

"It is at once a treatise on sociology, ethics, and rædagogics. It
is doubtful whether among all the ardent evolutionists who have had
their say on the moral and the educational question any one has
carried forward the new doctrine so boldly to its extreme logical
consequence."--Professor SULLY in _Mind_.


XVI. THE MAN OF GENIUS. By Professor LOMBROSO. Illustrated.

"By far the most comprehensive and fascinating collection of facts
and generalisations concerning genius which has yet been brought
together."--_Journal of Mental Science._


XVII. THE GRAMMAR OF SCIENCE. By KARL PEARSON, M.A., Gresham Professor
of Geometry. Illustrated.

"The problems discussed with great ability and lucidity, and often in a
most suggestive manner, by Prof. Pearson, are such as should interest
_all_ students of natural science."--_Natural Science._


XVIII. PROPERTY: ITS ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT. By Professor LETOURNEAU.

"M. Letourneau has read a great deal, and he seems to us to have
selected and interpreted his facts with considerable judgment and
learning."--_Westminster Review._


XIX. VOLCANOES: PAST AND PRESENT. By EDWARD HULL, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.
With 45 Illustrations.

"A very readable account of the phenomena of volcanoes and
earthquakes."--_Nature._


XX. PUBLIC HEALTH. By Dr. J. F. J. SYKES. With numerous Illustrations.

"Takes up essential points in evolution, environment, prophylaxis, and
sanitation bearing upon the preservation of public health."--_Lancet._


XXI. MODERN METEOROLOGY. By FRANK WALDO, Ph.D., etc. With 112
Illustrations.

"The present volume is the best on the subject for general use that we
have seen."--_Daily Telegraph._


XXII. THE GERM-PLASM: A THEORY OF HEREDITY. By Dr. A. WEISMANN.
Illustrated.

"There has been no work published since Darwin's own books which has
brought to light so many new facts."--_British Medical Journal._


XXIII. INDUSTRIES OF ANIMALS. By F. HOUSSAY. Illustrated.

"His accuracy is undoubted, yet his facts out-marvel all romance. These
facts are here made use of as materials wherewith to form the mighty
fabric of evolution."--_Manchester Guardian._


XXIV. MAN AND WOMAN: A STUDY OF HUMAN SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS. By
HAVELOCK ELLIS. With Illustrations.

"There is no work approaching his [Mr. Ellis's] in exhaustiveness,
accuracy, and fairness of judgment."


XXV. THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN CAPITALISM. A STUDY OF MACHINE PRODUCTION.
By JOHN A. HOBSON, M. A. With Diagrams.


XXVI. APPARITIONS AND THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE: OR, THE COMMUNICATION OF
SENSATIONS, IDEAS, AND EMOTIONS OTHERWISE THAN BY THE KNOWN SENSES. By
FRANK PODMORE. Illustrated.

London: WALTER SCOTT, LTD., 24 Warwick Lane

       *       *       *       *       *

  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                    Transcriber Notes:                              |
  |                                                                    |
  | P. 235 'it order' changed to 'in order'.                           |
  | Add: Contemporary science series. 'couutry' changed to 'country'.  |
  | Added contact information at the end of the adds.                  |
  | Fixed up various punctuation.                                      |
  | Tags that surround text: _Natural Science._ indicate italics, and: |
  | Tags that surround text: =SONGS OF BERANGER= indicate bold text.   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Apparitions and thought-transference:
an examination of the evidence for te, by Frank Podmore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK APPARITIONS ***

***** This file should be named 56489-0.txt or 56489-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/4/8/56489/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness, Jane Robins and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

