CHAPTER II.

EXPERIMENTAL TRANSFERENCE OF SIMPLE SENSATIONS IN THE NORMAL STATE.


It is somewhat remarkable that the facts of thought-transference should
only have attracted serious attention within the last two decades.
With waking percipients, indeed, such phenomena do not seem to occur
unsought with sufficient frequency, or--if we leave on one side for the
moment telepathic hallucinations--on a sufficiently striking scale to
afford evidence of any transmission of thought or sensation otherwise
than through the familiar channels. But the hypnotic state appears
to offer peculiar facilities for such transmission, and hypnotism,
under the name of mesmerism, has now been closely studied by numerous
observers for upwards of a century. The earlier French observers,[15]
indeed, occasionally recorded instances of what appears to have been
thought-transference between the mesmerist and his subject. But these
facts were observed by the way, in the search for phenomena of another
kind; and no attempt appears to have been made to follow up the clue
by means of direct experiment. Even the English observers of 1840 and
onwards, though familiar with what they termed "community of sensation"
between the operator and his subject, appear never to have realised
its possible significance. Dr. Elliotson, for instance, describes in
the _Zoist_ (vol. v. pp. 242-245) some experiments in which a lady,
mesmerised by himself, was able to indicate correctly the taste of
salt, cinnamon, sugar, ginger, water, and pepper, as Dr. Elliotson
placed successively these various substances in his mouth. But he
seems to have recorded the results chiefly from curiosity, and to
have regarded them as of little scientific interest compared with the
stiffening of a limb, or the painless performance of an operation under
mesmeric anæsthesia. Dr. Esdaile (_Practical Mesmerism_, p. 125), Mr.
C. H. Townshend (_Facts in Mesmerism_, pp. 68, 72, 76, etc., etc.),
Professor Gregory (_Animal Magnetism_, p. 231), and other writers of
that time, record similar observations. But the subject seems to have
been crowded out, on the one hand, with the more cautious observers,
by the growing importance of hypnotism as an anæsthetic and a curative
agency, on the other by the greater marvels of "clairvoyance" and
"spirit" communications.

It was Professor Barrett, of the Royal College of Science, Dublin, who,
in a paper read before the British Association at Glasgow in 1876,
first isolated the phenomenon from its somewhat dubious surroundings,
and drew public attention to its importance. Up to that time "community
of sensation" or thought-transference seems to have been known only
as a rare and fitful accompaniment of the hypnotic trance. But in
the course of the correspondence arising out of his paper Professor
Barrett learnt of several instances where similar phenomena had been
observed in the waking state. The Willing game was just then coming
into fashion, and cases had been observed in which the thing willed had
been performed without contact between the performer and the person
willing, and apparently without the possibility of any normal means
of communication between them. Later, in the years 1881-82, a long
series of experiments, in which Professor Sidgwick, the late Professor
Balfour Stewart, the late Edmund Gurney, Mr. F. W. H. Myers and others
joined with Professor Barrett, seemed to establish the possibility
of a new mode of communication. And these earlier results have been
confirmed by further experiments continued down to the present time by
many observers both in this country and abroad. In the present chapter
some account will be given of experiments in the transference of
simple ideas and sensations performed with percipients in the ordinary
waking state. The next chapter will deal with similar results obtained
with hypnotised persons. In Chapters IV. and V. results of a more
complicated or unusual character will be described and discussed.


_Transference of Tastes._

The particular form of telepathy which first attracted attention to
the whole subject, the transmission to the percipient of impressions
of taste and pain experienced by the agent, appears to have been
observed in the normal state very rarely. One such case may be here
quoted. In the years 1883-85 Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, J.P., of Liverpool,
the then head of a large drapery business in that city, conducted a
long series of experiments with two of his employees, Miss E. and
Miss R. In September 1883 Mr. Guthrie, Mr. Edmund Gurney, and Mr.
Myers, indicated respectively by the initials M. G., E. G., and M.,
had a series of trials with these percipients in the transference of
tastes. The percipients, who were fully awake, were blindfolded; the
packets or bottles containing the substances experimented upon were
placed beyond the range of possible vision; and in the case of strongly
smelling substances, either at a distance or outside the room; and
other precautions were taken by the agents, by keeping the mouth closed
and turning the head away, etc., in order that the percipients should
not become aware by the sense of smell of the nature of the substance
experimented with. Strict silence was of course observed. It may be
conceded that when all possible precautions are taken, experiments
with sapid substances must be inconclusive when the agent is in the
same room with the percipient; since nearly all such substances have
an odour, however faint. In view, however, of the extreme sensibility
already demonstrated (see below, pp. 23, etc.) of these particular
percipients to transferred impressions of other kinds, it seems
probable that the results in this case also were actually due to
telepathy. The alternative explanation is to attribute to persons in
the normal waking state a degree of hyperæsthesia for which we have
no exact parallel even in the records of hypnotism. For to persons of
normal susceptibility the odour of a small quantity, _e.g._ of salt or
alum, in the mouth of another person at a distance of two or three feet
would certainly be quite inappreciable.


No. 1.--By MR. GUTHRIE AND OTHERS.

_September 3, 1883._

    EXPT. TASTER. PERCIPIENT. SUBSTANCE.            ANSWERS GIVEN.

    1     M.      E.         Vinegar.          "A sharp and nasty taste."
    2     M.      E.         Mustard.          "Mustard."
    3     M.      R.           Do.             "Ammonia."
    4     M.      E.         Sugar.            "I still taste the hot
                                                 taste of the mustard."

_September 4._

    5   E. G. & M.   E.   Worcestershire sauce "Worcestershire sauce."
    6   M. G.        R.      Do.               "Vinegar."
    7   E. G. & M.   E.   Port wine            "Between eau de Cologne and
                                                 beer."
    8   M. G.        R.      Do.               "Raspberry vinegar."
    9   E. G. & M.   E.   Bitter aloes         "Horrible and bitter."
    10  M. G.        R.   Alum                 "A taste of ink--of
                                                 iron--of vinegar. I feel
                                                 it on my lips--it is as
                                                 if I had been eating
                                                 alum."
    11  M. G.        E.   Alum                 (E. perceived that M. G.
                                                 was as not tasting bitter
                                                 aloes, E. G. and M.
                                                 supposed, but something
                                                 different. No distinct
                                                 perception on account of
                                                 the persistence of the
                                                 bitter taste.)


    EXPT. TASTER.   PERCIPIENT.  SUBSTANCE.        ANSWERS GIVEN.
    12  E. G. & M.  E.        Nutmeg       "Peppermint--no--what you
                                              put in puddings--nutmeg."
    13  M. G.       R.          Do.             "Nutmeg."
    14  E. G. & M.  R.        Sugar             Nothing perceived.
    15  M. G.       R.          Do.             Nothing perceived.
                                           (Sugar should be tried at an
                                             earlier stage in the series,
                                             as, after the aloes, we
                                             could scarcely taste it
                                             ourselves.)
    16  E. G. & M.  E.       Cayenne pepper     "Mustard."
    17  M. G.       R.          Do.           "Cayenne pepper."
                                              (After the cayenne we were
                                                unable to taste anything
                                                further that evening.)

Throughout the next series of experiments the substances were kept
outside the room in which the percipients were seated.

    _September 5._

    18  E. G. & M.  E.  Carbonate of Soda  Nothing perceived.
    19  M. G.       R.  Caraway seeds      "It feels like meal--like a
                                             seed loaf--caraway seeds."
                                           (The _substance_ of the
                                             seeds seems to be perceived
                                             before their _taste_.)
    20  E. G. & M.  E.  Cloves               "Cloves."
    21  E. G. & M.  E.  Citric acid          Nothing felt.
    22  M. G.       R.     Do.                "Salt."
    23  E. G. & M.  E.  Liquorice            "Cloves."
    24  M. G.       R.  Cloves               "Cinnamon."
    25  E. G. & M.  E.  Acid jujube          "Pear drop."
    26  M. G.       R.    Do.                "Something hard, which is
                                               giving way--acid jujube."
    27  E. G. & M.  E.  Candied ginger       "Something sweet and hot."
    28  M. G.       R.    Do.                "Almond toffy."
                                             (M. G. took this ginger in
                                               the dark, and was some
                                               time before he realised
                                               that it was ginger.)
    29  E. G. & M.  E.  Home-made Noyau.     "Salt."
    30  M. G.       R.    Do.                "Port wine."
                                             (This was by far the most
                                               strongly smelling of the
                                               substances tried; the
                                               scent of kernels being
                                               hard to conceal. Yet it
                                               was named by E. as salt.)
    31  E. G. & M.  E.  Bitter aloes         "Bitter."
    32  M. G.       R.    Do.                Nothing felt.

    (_Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research_,
      vol. ii. pp. 3, 4.)

Further experiments in this direction are much to be desired. But
apart from the difficulty above referred to, experiments of the kind
are liable to be tedious and inconclusive because of the inability of
most persons to discriminate accurately between one taste and another,
when the guidance of all other senses is lacking. To conduct such
experiments to a successful issue, it would probably be necessary that
the percipients should have some preliminary training to enable them
to distinguish by taste alone between various salts and pharmaceutical
preparations.


_Transference of Pains._

Experiments in the transference of pains are not attended with the
same difficulties, nor open to the same evidential objections; and
some interesting trials of this kind with one of the same percipients,
Miss R., met with a fair amount of success. The experiments were
carried on at intervals, interspersed with experiments of other kinds,
by Mr. Guthrie at Liverpool during nine months in 1884 and 1885. The
percipient on each occasion was blindfolded and seated with her back
towards the rest of the party, who each pinched or otherwise injured
themselves in the same part of the body at the same time. The agents
in these experiments--the whole series of which is here recorded--were
three or more of the following:--Mr. Guthrie, Professor Herdman, Dr.
Hicks, Dr. Hyla Greves, Mr. R. C. Johnson, F.R.A.S., Mr. Birchall, Miss
Redmond, and on one occasion another lady. The results are given in the
following table:--


No. 2.--BY MR. GUTHRIE AND OTHERS.

    1.--Back of left hand pricked. Rightly localised. 2.--Lobe of left
    ear pricked. Rightly localised. 3.--Left wrist pricked. "Is it
    in the left hand?" pointing to the back near the little finger.
    4.--Third finger of left hand tightly bound round with wire. A
    lower joint of that finger was guessed. 5.--Left wrist scratched
    with pins. "Is it in the left wrist, like being scratched?"
    6.--Left ankle pricked. Rightly localised.

    7.--Spot behind left ear pricked. No result.

    8.--Right knee pricked. Rightly localised.

    9.--Right shoulder pricked. Rightly localised.

    10.--Hands burned over gas. "Like a pulling pain ... then tingling,
    like cold and hot alternately," localised by gesture only.

    11.--End of tongue bitten. "Is it the lip or the tongue?"

    12.--Palm of left hand pricked. "Is it a tingling pain in the left
    hand here?" placing her finger on the palm of the left hand.

    13.--Back of neck pricked. "Is it a pricking of the neck?"

    14.--Front of left arm above elbow pricked. Rightly localised.

    15.--Spot just above left ankle pricked. Rightly localised.

    16.--Spot just above right wrist pricked. "I am not quite sure, but
    I feel a pain in the right arm, from the thumb upwards to above the
    wrist."

    17.--Inside of left ankle pricked. Outside of left ankle guessed.

    18.--Spot beneath right collar-bone pricked. The exactly
    corresponding spot on the left side guessed.

    19.--Back hair pulled. No result.

    20.--Inside of right wrist pricked. Right foot guessed.

(_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. iii. pp. 424-452.)


_Transference of Sounds._

It is noteworthy that there is little experimental evidence for the
transmission of an auditory impression. Occasionally, in trials with
names and cards the nature of the mistakes made has seemed to indicate
audition, as when, _e.g._, _three_ is given for _Queen_ or _ace_ for
_eight_. But obviously a long series of experiments and a long series
of mistakes would be necessary to afford material for any conclusion.
Sometimes a percipient has stated that he heard the name of the thing
thought of; as, for instance, in a case recorded in Chapter V., where
the percipient "heard" the word _gloves_ before "seeing" a vision of
them. But such cases appear to be rare. Experiments with a view to test
the transmission of _actual_ sounds could of course only be carried
out under special conditions, of which one would be the separation
of the agent from the percipient by a considerable intervening
space--and this condition is, of itself, found to interfere with
success. Some evidence, indeed, of a quasi-experimental character for
the transference of musical sounds at a distance will be given in a
later chapter (Chapter V., No. 33). Experiments with imagined sounds
appear to have been rarely tried, or at least, successful results have
rarely been recorded.[16] Occasionally indeed experimenters have put on
record that in thinking of an object they have mentally repeated the
name of the object as well as pictured the object itself, and there are
a few cases where the general idea of the object thought of appears to
have reached the percipient before the outlines of the form, which may
possibly be explained as due to the reception of an auditory before a
visual impression.[17]

This lack of evidence for auditory transmission is no doubt largely
due to a desire on the part of experimenters in the first instance
to make the proof of actual thought-transference as complete as
possible. Experiments with sounds would impose a greater strain upon
the agents, since in most cases they must be imagined sounds. Moreover,
in such experiments it would be at once more difficult to estimate
with precision degrees of success, and to preserve a permanent record
of the result; and finally, the subject thought of would be more
easily communicated either fraudulently, by a code, or by unconscious
indications on the part of the agent. In this connection it is possibly
significant that whilst in morbid conditions auditory hallucinations
are much commoner than visual, the proportion appears to be reversed
with telepathic hallucinations. It seems probable that the apparent
infrequency of auditory transmission may be in part due to the fact
that in the modern world the sense of vision is for educated persons
the habitual channel for precise or important information. To the Greek
in the time of Socrates no doubt the ear was the main avenue for all
knowledge; it was the ear that received not merely the current talk of
the market-place and the gymnasium, but the oratory of the law-court,
the literature of the stage, and the philosophy of the Schools. But
for modern civilised societies the newspaper and the libraries have
placed the eye in a position of unquestioned pre-eminence. It seems
likely therefore, apart from all defects in such evidence, that the
agent would find a greater difficulty, as a rule, in calling up a vivid
representation of a sound than of a vision; and that the percipient
would experience a corresponding difference in the reception and
discrimination of the two classes of impressions.


_Transference of Ideas not definitely classed._

Experiments by PROFESSOR RICHET and others.

In the following cases, where the exact nature of the impression
received was not apparently consciously classified by the percipient,
it may be presumed to have been either of a visual or an auditory
nature. M. Charles Richet (_Revue Philosophique_, Dec. 1884, "La
suggestion mentale et le calcul des probabilités") conducted a series
of experiments in guessing the suits of cards drawn at random from a
pack. 2927 trials were made: ten persons besides M. Richet himself--who
acted sometimes as agent and sometimes as percipient--taking part in
the experiments. In the 2927 trials the suit was correctly named 789
times, the most probable number of correct guesses being 732. A similar
series of trials was conducted, on Edmund Gurney's initiative, by some
members of the S.P.R. and others. There were 17 series, containing
17,653 trials, and 4760 successes; the theoretically probable number,
on the assumption that the results were due to chance, being 4413.
The probability for some cause other than chance deduced from this
result is .999,999,98, which represents perhaps a higher degree of
probability than the inhabitants of this hemisphere are justified in
attaching to the belief that the ensuing night will be followed by
another day.[18] In a similar series of experiments carried out under
the direction of the American S.P.R. the proportion of successes was
little higher than the theoretically probable number.[19] But in the
absence of details as to the conditions under which the experiments
were made, no unfavourable inference can fairly be drawn from these
results. At any rate some very remarkable results were obtained later,
in a series of trials made on the lines laid down by the committee of
the American Society. The agent in this case was Mrs. J. F. Brown, the
percipient Nellie Gallagher, "a domestic lately come from the county
of Northumberland, in New Brunswick." The experiments appear to have
been carried out with great care, and the results are recorded and
analysed at length (_Proc. Am. S.P.R._, pp. 322-349). 3000 trials were
made in guessing the numbers from 0 to 9 or from 1 to 10 inclusive. The
order of the digits in each set of 100 trials was determined by drawing
lots. The agent sat at one side of a table, the percipient at the other
side. At first the percipient sat facing the agent, but after about
1000 trials had been made her back was turned to the table--and this
position was continued to the end. The paper containing the numbers
to be guessed was placed in the agent's lap, out of sight of the
percipient. There was no mirror in the room. In the result the digits
were correctly named 584 times, or nearly twice the probable number,
300. The proportion of the successes steadily increased, from 175 in
the first batch of 1000 trials, to 190 in the second, and 219 in the
third batch.


No. 3.--By DR. OCHOROWICZ.

In the following set of experiments, made by Dr. Ochorowicz,
ex-Professor of Psychology and Natural Philosophy at the University of
Lemberg, described in his book _La Suggestion mentale_ (pp. 69, 75,
76), there are not sufficient indications in most cases to enable a
judgment to be formed as to the special form of sense-impression made
on the percipient's mind. The percipient was a Madame D., 70 years of
age. She had been shown to be amenable to hypnotism, but during these
experiments she was in a normal condition. She is described as being of
strong constitution and in good health; intelligent above the average,
well read, and accustomed to literary work. The first experiments
with Madame D. are not quoted here, not having been conducted, as Dr.
Ochorowicz explains, under strict conditions. The objects thought of
had been selected by the agent, instead of being taken haphazard, and
the choice had frequently been directly suggested by his surroundings.
It seemed possible, therefore, to explain the results as due to an
unconscious association of ideas common to agent and percipient.
Dr. Ochorowicz, however, has shown by his careful analysis of the
experiments recorded in the earlier chapters of his book that he is
fully aware of the risk of error from this and other causes, and in
the series of the 2nd May and the following days he tells us that
adequate precautions were taken.


    _An Object._

    36. A bust of M. N.            |  Portrait ... of a man ... a
                                   |      bust.
    37. A fan.                     |  Something round.
    38. A key.                     |  Something made of lead ...
                                   |      of bronze ... it is iron.
    39. A hand holding a ring.     |  Something shining, a diamond
                                   |      ... a ring.


    _A Taste._

    40. Acid.                      |    Sweet.


    _A Diagram._

    41. A square.                  |    Something irregular.
    42. A circle.                  |    A triangle ... a circle.


    _A Letter._

    43. M.                         |     M.
    44. D.                         |     D.
    45. J.                         |     J.
    46. B.                         |     A, X, R, B.
    47. O.                         |     W, A; no, it is an O.
    48. Jan.                       |     J ... (go on!) Jan.

_Third Series_, May 6th, 1885.--Twenty-five experiments were made,
of which, unfortunately, I have kept no record, except of the three
following, which impressed me most. (The subject had her back to us,
held the pencil and _wrote_ whatever came into her head. We touched her
back lightly, keeping our eyes fixed on the letters we had written.)

    49. Brabant.                   |  Bra ... (I made a mental
                                          effort to help the subject,
                                          without speaking.)
                                      Brabant.
    50. Paris.                     |  P ... aris.
    51. Telephone.                 |  T ... elephone.

    _Fourth Series_, May 8th.--Same conditions.

    52. Z.                         |  L, P, K, J.
    53. B.                         |  B.
    54. T.                         |  S, T, F.
    55. N.                         |  M, N.
    56. P.                         |  R, Z, A.
    57. Y.                         |  V, Y.
    58. E.                         |  E.
    59. Gustave.                   |  F, J, Gabriel.
    60. Duch.                      |  E, O.
    61. Ba.                        |  B, A.
    62. No.                        |  F, K, O.


    _A Number._

    63. 44.                        |  6, 8, 12.
    64. 2.                         |  7, 5, 9.

    (I told my assistant to imagine the look of the number when
    written, and not its sound.)

    65. 3.                         |  8, 3.
    66. 7.                         |  7.
    67. 8.                         |  8; no, 0, 6, 9.

Then followed thirteen trials with fantastic figures, details of which
Dr. Ochorowicz does not record. He tells us, however, that only five
of the representations presented even a general resemblance to the
originals.

It is to be observed that in this series of experiments contact was
not completely excluded in all the trials. But if Dr. Ochorowicz's
memory may be relied upon for the statement that the agent looked
at the original letters and diagrams, and not at the percipient's
attempts at reproducing them, the hypothesis of involuntary muscular
guidance must be severely strained to account for the results. At any
rate, in the three remaining trials in this series it seems clear that
muscle-reading is inadequate as an explanation.

    A person thought of.

              _Subject._           |           _Answer._
    68. The percipient.            |  M. O----; no, it's myself.
    69. M. D----.                  |  M. D----.

    An Image.

    70. We pictured to ourselves   | I see passing clouds ... a
            a crescent moon. M.    |    light ... (in a satisfied
            P---- on a background  |    tone)--it is the moon.
            of clouds, I in a      |
            clear dark blue sky.   |


_Transference of Visual Images._

NO. 4.--By DR. BLAIR THAW.

The experiments which follow were made by Dr. Blair Thaw, M.D., of New
York. The series quoted, which took place on the 28th of April 1892,
comprises all the trials in which Dr. Thaw was himself the percipient.
Dr. Thaw had his eyes blindfolded and his ears muffled, and the agent,
Mrs. Thaw, and Mr. M. H. Wyatt, who was present but took no part in
the agency, kept silent, except when it was necessary to state whether
an object, card, number, or colour was to be guessed. The objects were
in all cases actually looked at by the agent, the "colour" being a
coloured disc, and the numbers being printed on separate cards.[20]

_1st Object._ SILK PINCUSHION, in form of Orange-Red Apple, quite
round.--Percipient: _A Disc_. When asked what colour, said, _Red or
Orange_. When asked what object, named _Pincushion_.

_2nd Object._ A SHORT LEAD PENCIL, nearly covered by the nickel cover.
Never seen by percipient. Percipient: _Something white or light. A
card. I thought of Mr. Wyatt's silver pencil_.

_3rd Object._ A DARK VIOLET in Mr. Wyatt's button-hole, but not known
to be in the house by percipient. Percipient: _Something dark. Not very
big. Longish. Narrow. Soft. It can't be a cigarette because it is dark
brown. A dirty colour._ Asked about smell, said: _Not strong, but what
you might call pungent; a clean smell_.

Percipient had not noticed smell before, though sitting by Mr. Wyatt
some time, but when afterwards told of the violet knew that this was
the odour noticed in experiment.

Asked to spell name, percipient said: _Phrygian, Phrigid, or first
