CHAPTER VII.

TRANSFERENCE OF IDEAS AND EMOTIONS.


Before proceeding to give examples of the evidence for spontaneous
thought-transference, it may be well to repeat something of what has
been said in the preceding chapter. In the first place, the narratives
quoted in this book are offered as samples only of the evidence of this
kind actually accumulated. No single narrative can afford to stand
alone. Each contains one or more elements of weakness; and in the last
resort chance coincidence, memory-hallucination, or even deliberate
deception would be _in any single case_ a more probable explanation
than a new mode of mental affection. It is only, to borrow Mr. Gurney's
metaphor, as a faggot, and not as a bundle of separate sticks, that the
evidence can finally be judged. But, in the second place, it is not
claimed that the evidence reviewed even in its entirety is by itself
sufficient to demonstrate the possibility of the affection of one mind
by another at a distance. The main proof of such affection is based on
the experiments already described, to which the spontaneous evidence
so far adduced must be regarded as illustrative and in some degree
auxiliary.

It will be more convenient, as a matter of arrangement, that the
spontaneous experiences first considered should be those which
resemble most closely the results of direct experiment, though this
classification has the disadvantage of placing in the forefront cases
of the least definite and striking kind; cases, that is, which are most
readily explicable as due to chance coincidence. It is on all grounds,
therefore, expedient that the reader should reserve his final verdict
until he has the whole case before him.

In the present chapter there will be adduced instances of the
spontaneous transference of (1) simple sensations; (2) ideas and
mental pictures; (3) emotional states; (4) impulses tending to action.
The first two classes, and in some measure the last, resemble the
results described in the first five chapters of this book; for the
third probably no direct experimental parallel can be offered, for the
sufficient reason that vivid and intense emotion cannot be evoked at
will.


_Transference of Simple Sensations._

We will begin by quoting two instances of the transference of simple
sensation. The first we owe to the kindness of Mr. Ruskin. The
percipient was Mrs. Severn, wife of the well-known landscape painter.


No. 41.--From MRS. ARTHUR SEVERN.

    "BRANTWOOD, CONISTON,
    _October_ 27_th_, 1883.

    "I woke up with a start, feeling I had had a hard blow on my mouth,
    and with a distinct sense that I had been cut and was bleeding
    under my upper lip, and seized my pocket-handkerchief, and held
    it (in a little pushed lump) to the part, as I sat up in bed, and
    after a few seconds, when I removed it, I was astonished not to
    see any blood, and only then realised it was impossible anything
    could have struck me there, as I lay fast asleep in bed, and so I
    thought it was only a dream!--but I looked at my watch, and saw it
    was seven, and finding Arthur (my husband) was not in the room, I
    concluded (rightly) that he must have gone out on the lake for an
    early sail, as it was so fine.

    "I then fell asleep. At breakfast (half-past nine), Arthur
    came in rather late, and I noticed he rather purposely sat
    farther away from me than usual, and every now and then put his
    pocket-handkerchief furtively up to his lip, in the very way I had
    done. I said, 'Arthur, why are you doing that?' and added a little
    anxiously, 'I know you've hurt yourself! but I'll tell you why
    afterwards.' He said, 'Well, when I was sailing, a sudden squall
    came, throwing the tiller suddenly round, and it struck me a bad
    blow in the mouth, under the upper lip, and it has been bleeding
    a good deal and won't stop.' I then said, 'Have you any idea what
    o'clock it was when it happened?' and he answered, 'It must have
    been about seven.'

    "I then told what had happened to _me_, much to _his_ surprise, and
    all who were with us at breakfast.

    "It happened here about three years ago at Brantwood, to me.

    "JOAN R. SEVERN."

Mr. Severn wrote to us on the 15th November 1883, giving an account of
the trivial accident described by the percipient, and adding that after
leaving the boat he

    "walked up to the house, anxious of course to hide as much as
    possible what had happened to my mouth, and getting another
    handkerchief walked into the breakfast-room, and managed to say
    something about having been out early. In an instant my wife said,
    'You don't mean to say you have hurt your mouth?' or words to that
    effect. I then explained what had happened, and was surprised to
    see some extra interest on her face, and still more surprised when
    she told me she had started out of her sleep thinking she had
    received a blow on the mouth! and that it was a few minutes past
    seven o'clock, and wondered if my accident had happened at the same
    time; but as I had no watch with me I couldn't tell, though, on
    comparing notes, it certainly looked as if it had been about the
    same time.

    "ARTHUR SEVERN."

    (_Phantasms of the Living_, vol. i. pp, 188, 189.)

So far as I know, this is a unique instance, if we limit ourselves to
first-hand evidence, of the spontaneous transference of a sensation
of pain to a waking percipient.[86] Impressions of the kind, indeed,
unless more definite and intense than the analogy of experiment gives
us warrant for anticipating, would as a rule be quickly forgotten, or
would be naturally ascribed to some other source than telepathy. We owe
the record of the present instance to the fortunate chance that the
agent and percipient met within an hour of the occurrence, and that the
pain of the percipient, though slight, was not such as could be readily
attributed to ordinary causes. In the next instance, also, where the
impression belonged to a different sense, the agent and percipient were
in the habit of meeting almost daily, otherwise it seems possible that
the coincidence would have escaped notice.


No. 42.--From MISS X.

The percipient was Miss X.; the agent was her friend D., already
referred to, who writes:--

    "_April_ 13_th_, 1888.

    "In the spring of 1881, in the evening after dinner, I accidentally
    set fire to the curtains of a sitting-room, and put myself and
    several others into some danger. The next morning, on visiting
    X., I heard from her that she had been disturbed overnight by an
    unaccountable smell of fire, which she could not trace, but which
    seemed to follow her wherever she went. I was led to discover the
    fire, and so probably to save the house, by what seemed a chance
    thought of X. I had left the room, unconscious of anything wrong,
    and had settled to my work elsewhere, when I suddenly remembered I
    had not put away some papers I had been looking at, and which I had
    thought might wait for daylight, but a strong feeling that X. would
    insist upon order, had she been there, induced me to go back, when
    I found the whole place in flames."

Miss X., in describing the case, adds: "I took considerable trouble to
ascertain the cause (of the smell of fire), and was quieted only by
the assurance that it was imperceptible to the rest of the household."
(_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. p. 367.)

When we leave these simple modes of feeling, and consider the
affections of the higher senses of hearing and sight, we are confronted
with a new problem. Sensations of the first class are almost purely
homogeneous, they owe little or nothing to memory and imagination.
Moreover, though generally due to an external cause, they are in the
case of smell or taste occasionally, and in that of pain frequently,
excited by causes within the organism. It is not, therefore, a matter
calling for comment that in such cases the transferred idea should
assume a definitely sensory form. But when the organs of sight or
hearing are sensibly affected, past experience has taught us to look
for an external cause; the line between _idea_ and _sensation_ is here
sharply drawn and clearly understood.[87] The line, indeed, as drawn by
common use may not correspond to any real distinction in the nature of
the experience itself. Ideas may be only paler sensations, and a train
of thought nothing else than a series of suppressed hallucinations.
But at any rate the distinction, whether fundamental or not, serves
a useful purpose as a rough-and-ready means of classing our mental
experiences. A visual or auditory image either is on the same level
of intensity as the series of impressions which represent for us the
external world, or it falls below that level. In the former case we
call it a sensation or percept, in the latter, an idea. Sensations
and percepts may be again subdivided, as objective or hallucinatory,
according as they do or do not correspond to a supposed material cause.
In the experiments described in the first five chapters, it will have
been observed that when the transferred impression was of a visual
nature it generally remained ideal, rising occasionally, however, as
in some of the experiments with hypnotised percipients, and in Mr.
Kirk's cases, to the level of a complete sensory hallucination or
quasi-percept. In the present chapter it is proposed to deal with
auditory and visual phantasms which, so far as can be judged, were
of an ideal kind, though one or two of the cases cited may seem to
approximate to sensory embodiment. The more striking hallucinatory
effects will be reserved for later chapters.


_Transference of Ideas._

There is one kind of coincidence, so common as to have passed into
a proverb, which is often referred to as illustrating the action of
telepathy; that is, the idea of a person coming into the mind shortly
before the person himself actually approaches. In most of the cases
cited the coincidence is too indefinite to call for attention, as it
is obvious that the narrator has not taken the elementary precaution
of noting the "misses" as well as the "hits." But if telepathy acts
at all, there is no _à priori_ unlikelihood of its acting in this
direction as well as in others, and it is to be desired that persons
who believe themselves susceptible to impressions of the kind would
keep a full record of their occurrence. Two instances which happened
in his own recent experience are recorded by Professor Richet
(_Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. v. p. 52). Leaving such cases, however,
as too indefinite to have much evidential value, we may quote the
following as an example of an impression of a more detailed kind.


No. 43.--From MISS X.

On the 12th October 1891, Miss X. wrote to Mr. Myers as follows:--

    "... I was much upset yesterday by the consciousness that a Master
    B. (son of A. B.) had arrived unexpectedly upon the scene ...
    no nurse--doctor three miles off--husband away. Being Sunday, I
    could not telegraph, but the news as to hour and sex arrived this
    morning. My impression was at 2.30 onwards. He arrived at 3.30,
    and in the interval I heard her voice over and over again calling
    my name. All is well now, but these impressions are not always
    comfortable."

In a later letter Miss X. writes:--

    "A.'s own account is that (about two, I think), when she was made
    aware of her danger, the thought passed through her mind how
    fortunate it was that the impossibility of telegraphing would
    prevent anxiety at home, and then--that any way _I_ should know.
    No one expected to have any cause for anxiety for at least a week.
    Yes; I ought to have sent to Mrs. Sidgwick, but I was so wretchedly
    ill that--don't shudder--I never at the time even _thought_ of the
    S.P.R. I had been dreadfully worried all that week, and was utterly
    worn out."

The coincidence is, no doubt, not of the strongest kind. But in
estimating its value it should not be overlooked that the impression
was sufficiently intense to produce a decided feeling of discomfort.
And though Miss X. unfortunately omitted to send an account of her
experience until after she had learnt of its partial correspondence
with the event, she did not know at the time when the first letter was
written that her impression was correct as regards the details of the
absence of husband and nurse. Whatever the value of the coincidence,
therefore, it seems clear that the account owes nothing to exaggeration
or unconscious reading back of details. With this may be compared a
narrative sent to me in December 1891, by the Rev. A. Sloman, Master
of Birkenhead School. On the 12th of the month, whilst Mrs. Sloman was
absent at a concert, a chimney in the school-house had caught fire,
and Mr. Sloman had been summoned from his work to give directions
for dealing with the mischief. On the matter being mentioned to Mrs.
Sloman on her return, she at once explained that during the concert,
just about the actual time of the fire, "I suddenly began to think
what you would do if the house took fire, and I distinctly pictured
you going into the kitchen and speaking about a wet blanket." The
account was written down and signed by both Mr. and Mrs. Sloman on the
day of the occurrence, and the coincidence in time between event and
impression seems to be well established. It must be admitted that the
apprehension of fire may not improbably have a more or less permanent
place in the background of a housewife's consciousness; still, even a
slight outbreak of fire is not in an ordinary household a matter of
common occurrence.

The next case is interesting as presenting evidence of the transference
of an auditory impression. The account was originally published in the
_Spectator_ of June 24th, 1882:--


No. 44.--From MRS. BARBER.

    "FERNDENE, ABBEYDALE, near SHEFFIELD,
    _June_ 22_nd_, 1882.

    "I had one day been spending the morning in shopping, and returned
    by train just in time to sit down with my children to our early
    family dinner. My youngest child--a sensitive, quick-witted little
    maiden of two years and six weeks old--was one of the circle.
    Dinner had just commenced, when I suddenly recollected an incident
    in my morning's experience which I had intended to tell her, and I
    looked at the child with the full intention of saying, 'Mother saw
    a big black dog in a shop, with curly hair,' catching her eyes in
    mine, as I paused an instant before speaking. Just then something
    called off my attention, _and the sentence was not uttered_. What
    was my amazement, about two minutes afterwards, to hear my little
    lady announce, 'Mother saw a big dog in a shop.' I gasped. 'Yes, I
    did!' I answered; 'but how did you know?' 'With funny hair,' she
    added, quite calmly, and ignoring my question. 'What colour was it,
    Evelyn?' said one of her elder brothers; 'was it black?' She said,
    'Yes.'"

I called on Mrs. Barber in the spring of 1886, and heard full details
of the incident from herself and Mr. Barber, who, though not himself
present at the time, was conversant with the facts. The incident
took place on January 6th, 1882, and Mrs. Barber allowed me to see
the note-book in which the account (substantially reproduced in the
_Spectator_) was written down on January 11th. Of course there is
always the possibility in a case of this kind that the lips may have
unconsciously begun to form the words, but in the present instance it
seems unlikely that any indication of the kind would have escaped the
notice of the others present at the table. Mrs. Barber has given us
other accounts, extracted from her journal, of thought-transference, in
which the same percipient was concerned. She writes on December 26th,
1886:--

    "On Wednesday J. went to London, and on getting his breakfast at a
    little inn in C----, he found a 'blackclock' (_i.e._, cockroach)
    floating in his coffee. He fished it out and supposed it was all
    right, but on pursuing the coffee he got one in his mouth! Next
    day, at breakfast, he said, 'What's the most horrible thing that
    could happen to any one at breakfast? I don't mean getting killed,
    or anything of that sort.' E. looked at him for a moment and said,
    'To have a blackclock in your coffee!'

    "She was asleep in bed when her father returned the night before,
    and they met at the breakfast-table for the first time the next
    morning, when the question was asked quite suddenly. When asked how
    she came to think of it, she said, 'I looked at the bacon-dish, and
    thought a blackclock in the bacon,--no, he would see that--it must
    have been in the coffee.'

    "She has a special horror of 'blackclocks,' so the incident may
    merely have been one of the numerous instances of her unusually
    quick wit.

    "CAROLINE BARBER."


_Transference of Mental Pictures._

The next three narratives are interesting as illustrating three
different stages in the externalisation of visual impressions. In the
first case, which is quoted from the _Proceedings of the American
S.P.R._ (pp. 444, 445), the impression seems to have been almost of the
nature of an illusion--_i.e._, the idea emerged into consciousness only
when a somewhat similar image was presented to the external organ of
vision.[88]


No. 45.--From MR. HAYNES.

In a letter to Mr. Hodgson, Mr. Haynes writes:--

    "BOSTON, _June_ 25, 1887.

    "The name of the prisoner alluded to has passed from my
    recollection. He belonged in East Boston, and was sentenced for
    life for an assault upon a woman. I think he was pardoned some
    years ago, but am not certain about it. He had but one child, a
    boy about five years old, who always came with his wife to visit
    him. He seemed very fond of the child, always held him in his arms
    during the visit, and showed a good deal of feeling at parting.

    "The following is an account of the affair made at the time:--

    "'The following very singular incident I can vouch for as having
    actually occurred. I refer to it, not to illustrate a supernatural
    or any other unusual agency, as I am a sceptic in such matters, but
    as a remarkable instance of hallucination or presentiment.

    "'I received a message from the wife of one of our convicts, in
    prison for life, that their only child, a bright little boy five
    years old, was dead, he having accidentally fallen into the water
    and been drowned. I was requested to communicate to the father the
    death of the child, but not the cause, as the wife preferred to
    tell him herself when she should visit him a week or two later.

    "'I sent for him to the guard-room, and after a few questions in
    regard to himself, I said I had some sad news for him. He quickly
    replied, "I know what it is, Mr. Warden; my boy is dead!" "How did
    you hear of it?" I asked. "Oh, I knew it was so; he was drowned,
    was he not, Mr. Warden?" "But who informed you of it?" I again
    asked. "No one," he replied. "How, then, did you know he was dead,
    and what makes you think he was drowned?" "Last Sunday," he said,
    "your little boy was in the chapel; he fell asleep, and you took
    him up and held him. As I looked up and caught sight of him lying
    in your arms, instantly the thought occurred to me that my boy was
    dead--drowned. In vain I tried to banish it from my mind, to think
    of something else, but could not; the tears came into my eyes, and
    it has been ringing in my ears ever since; and when you sent for
    me, my heart sunk within me, for I felt sure my fears were to be
    confirmed."

    "'What made it more remarkable was the fact that the child was
    missed during the forenoon of that Sunday, but the body was not
    found for some days after.'

    "The foregoing is copied from my journal, the entry made on the day
    of the interview, and I can assure you is strictly correct in every
    particular.

    "GIDEON HAYNES."

In answer to inquiries as to the name and address of the percipient,
Mr. Haynes writes:--

    "His name was Timothy Cronan. He was pardoned in 1873 or 1874. Mr.
    Darling, the officer in the guard-room to-day, occupied the same
    position when I had the interview with Cronan. He was present,
    and remembers distinctly all the circumstances of the case, which
    were discussed by us at the time. Cronan served some ten or twelve
    years. ... He has not been heard from at the prison since his
    discharge."

In this case it may perhaps be inferred, from the circumstances of its
occurrence, that the impression was of a rudimentary visual character.

In the next case it seems clear that the percipient saw what she
described, but the impression appears to have been of a purely inward
nature.


No. 46.--From PROFESSOR RICHET.

    "On Monday, July 2nd, 1888, after having passed all the day in my
    laboratory, I hypnotised Léonie at 8 P.M., and while she tried to
    make out a diagram concealed in an envelope I said to her quite
    suddenly: 'What has happened to M. Langlois?' Léonie knows M.
    Langlois from having seen him two or three times some time ago in
    my physiological laboratory, where he acts as my assistant. 'He has
    burnt himself,' Léonie replied. 'Good,' I said, 'and where has he
    burnt himself?' 'On the left hand. It is not fire: it is---I don't
    know its name. Why does he not take care when he pours it out?'
    'Of what colour,' I asked, 'is the stuff which he pours out?' 'It
    is not red, it is brown; he has hurt himself very much--the skin
    puffed up directly.'

    "Now, this description is admirably exact. At 4 P.M. that day M.
    Langlois had wished to pour some bromine into a bottle. He had
    done this clumsily, so that some of the bromine flowed on to his
    left hand, which held the funnel, and at once burnt him severely.
    Although he at once put his hand into water, wherever the bromine
    had touched it a blister was formed in a few seconds--a blister
    which one could not better describe than by saying, 'the skin
    puffed up.' I need not say that Léonie had not left my house,
    nor seen any one from my laboratory. Of this I am _absolutely
    certain_, and I am certain that I had not mentioned the incident of
    the burn to any one. Moreover, this was the first time for nearly a
    year that M. Langlois had handled bromine, and when Léonie saw him
    six months before at the laboratory he was engaged in experiments
    of quite another kind." (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 69, 70.)

In the next case the mental picture seems to have been much more vivid
than the visions of distant familiar scenes, or faces, which most
of us can summon up by an effort of will; in fact, the impression
probably approached very nearly to a hallucination. It is noteworthy,
however, that it did not apparently form part of the external order,
but replaced it. We have no means therefore of measuring the degree of
vividness.


No. 47.--From DR. G. DUPRÉ.

    "REIMS, _July_ 6_th_, 1891.

    "One day in May 1890, I had just been visiting a patient, and was
    coming downstairs, when suddenly I had the impression that my
    little girl of four years old had fallen down the stone stairs of
    my house, and hurt herself."

    "Then gradually after the first impression, as though a curtain
    which hid the sight from me were slowly drawn back, I saw my child
    lying at the foot of the stairs, with her chin bleeding, but I had
    no impression of hearing her cries.

    "The vision was blotted out suddenly, but the memory of it remained
    with me. I took note of the hour--10.30 A.M.--and continued my
    professional rounds."

    "When I got home I much astonished my family by giving a
    description of the accident, and naming the hour when it occurred."

    "The circumstance made a great impression on me, and my memory of
    it is quite clear.

    "Dr. G. DUPRÉ."

In a further letter Dr. Dupré adds:--

    "REIMS, _August_ 2_nd_, 1891.

    "The account which I have given you is exact in every point. Madame
    Dupré remembers it perfectly. As I had a great many visits to pay
    that day I did not return home at once, but continued my rounds. I
    took particular note of the time, however, and it was found to be
    exact.

    "This phenomenon of perception seemed to me so curious that I noted
    all the particulars, in order to analyse them at my leisure.

    "When I got home my first words were these, addressed to my wife,
    'Loulou is hurt. Is it serious?' Madame Dupré exclaimed, 'Who
    told you?' 'No one,' I replied; 'I saw her fall,' and then while
    examining my little girl I told my wife about the vision.

    "I did not relate the circumstance to any one else but my
    father-in-law, Dr. Bracon, and he did not take it very seriously.
    Indeed, I was not inclined to lay much stress upon the matter
    either, as I did not wish to be considered visionary or credulous."

Madame Dupré writes:--

    "25_th September_ 1891.

    "My husband's account of his telepathic experience is perfectly
    correct. For my own part I was extremely surprised at the
    circumstances, for till then my attitude towards all questions
    of clairvoyance had been one of almost complete incredulity. Let
    me add, however, that my husband is of an excessively nervous
    temperament, and was liable to somnambulism in his youth. It is
    seldom that a night passes in which he does not talk in his sleep.
    It would be quite possible to hold a conversation with him for a
    few minutes whilst he is in this condition." (_Annales des Sciences
    Psychiques_, vol. i. pp. 324, 325.)

It seems permissible to conjecture that in this case Madame Dupré, as
in the previous case Professor Richet, was the agent.


_Transference of Emotion._

Sometimes the telepathic impulse appears to express itself in a vague
feeling of alarm or distress. Of course, impressions of this sort, with
no definite content, and not recognised at the time as having reference
to any particular person, can do little to strengthen the proof of
telepathy. But when it has been shown, by the mention of the experience
beforehand, or by any unusual action consequent on its occurrence,
that the emotion was unique in the history of the percipient, and when
the coincidence with a serious crisis is clearly established, the
telepathic explanation may be admitted as at least plausible. These
conditions appeared to be fulfilled in the following case, which is
quoted from the _Proceedings of the American S.P.R._ (pp. 474, 475).


No. 48.--From MR. F. H. KREBS.

The percipient in this case described his experience to Professor
William James, of Harvard, who writes as follows:--

    "Mr. Krebs (special student) stopped after the logic lesson of
    Friday, November 26, and told me the facts related in his narrative.

    "I advised him to put them on paper, which he has thus done.

    "His father is said by him to be too much injured to do any writing
    at present.

    "WM. JAMES.

    "_December_ 1, 1886."

    From MR. F. H. KREBS.

    "On the afternoon of Wednesday, November 24, I was very uneasy,
    could not sit still, and wandered about the whole afternoon with
    little purpose. This uneasiness was unaccountable; but instead of
    wearing away it increased, and after returning to my room at about
    6.45 it turned into positive fear. I fancied that there was some
    one continually behind me, and, although I turned my chair around
    several times, this feeling remained. At last I got up and went
    into my bedroom, looked under the bed and into the closet; finding
    nothing, I came back into the room and looked behind the curtains.
    Satisfied that there was nothing present to account for my fancy,
    I sat down again, when instantly the peculiar sensation recurred;
    and at last, finding it unbearable, I went down to a friend's room,
    where I remained the rest of the evening. To him I expressed my
    belief that this sensation was a warning sent to show me that some
    one of my family had been injured or killed.

    "While in his room the peculiar sensation ceased, and, despite my
    nervousness, I was in no unusual state of mind; but on returning to
    my room to go to bed it returned with renewed force. On the next
    day (the 25th), on coming to my grandfather's, I found out that the
    day before (the 24th), at a little past 12, my father had jumped
    from a moving train and been severely injured. While I do not think
    that this warning was direct enough to convince sceptics that I
    was warned of my father's mishap, I certainly consider that it is
    curious enough to demand attention. I have never before had the
    same peculiar sensation that there was some being besides myself in
    an apparently empty room, nor have I ever before been so frightened
    and startled at absolutely nothing.

    "On questioning my father, he said that before the accident he was
    not thinking of me, but that at the very moment that it happened
    his whole family seemed to be before him, and he saw them as
    distinctly as if there.

    F. H. KREBS, JUN.

    "_November_ 29, 1886."

    From MR. CHAUNCEY SMITH, JUN.

    "I, the undersigned, distinctly remember that F. H. Krebs, Jun.,
    came into my room November 24 and complained of being very nervous.
    I cannot remember exactly what he said, as I was studying at the
    time, and did not pay much attention to his talk.

    "On the 25th he came into my room in the evening, and made a
    statement that his state the evening before was the consequence of
    an accident that happened to his father, and that he had the night
    before told me that he had received a warning of some accident to
    some one dear to him. This I did not contradict, because I consider
    that it is extremely probable that he said it, and that I did not,
    through inattention, notice it.

    "CHAUNCEY SMITH, JUN."

The present case well illustrates the difficulties attendant on any
efforts to procure reliable contemporary evidence for psychical events.
Even when, as here, the percipient himself took the right course, from
the standpoint of psychical research, his forethought was to a great
extent frustrated by the shortcomings of his friend.

With this narrative may be compared three cases given in _Phantasms
of the Living_ (vol. i. pp. 280 _et seq._) of the occurrence of
exceptional distress to one twin at the time of the death of the other.
Mr. Leveson Gower has sent us an account of a similar marked fit of
depression, accompanied by "a vivid sense of the presence of death,"
which coincided with the quite sudden and unlooked-for death of a near
relation, the late Lady Marion Alford. (_Journal S.P.R._, May 1888.)
Professor Tamburini records an analogous case. A lunatic died in the
asylum at Reggio on the 21st May 1892. A letter of inquiry, dated the
22nd May, was received at the asylum from the husband, who had not
previously written for more than a year; and it was ascertained that he
was prompted to write the letter by a feeling of "great discomfort, as
though some misfortune were about to befall him," experienced on the
previous day, the day of the death.


No. 49.--From Dr N., of New York State.

The next case is specially interesting, because the emotion which was
felt in the first instance was succeeded by a visual impression of a
detailed kind. This case again comes to us from America (_Proc. Am.
S.P.R._, pp. 397-400). Dr. N., the percipient, writes to Professor
Royce as follows:--

    [Postmarked _Aug._ 16, 1886.]

    "In the convalescence from a malarial fever during which great
    hyperæsthesia of brain had obtained, but no hallucinations or false
    perceptions, I was sitting alone in my room looking out of the
    window. My thoughts were of indifferent trivialities; after a time
    my mind seemed to become absolutely vacant; my eyes felt fixed,
    the air seemed to grow white. I could see objects about me, but it
    was a terrible effort of _will_ to perceive anything. I then felt
    great and painful sense as of sympathy with some one suffering,
    who or where I did not know. After a little time I knew with whom,
    but how I knew I cannot tell; for it seemed some time after this
    knowledge of personality that I saw distinctly, in my brain, _not_
    before my eyes, a large, square room, evidently in a hotel, and saw
    the person of whom I had been conscious, lying face downward on the
    bed in the throes of mental and physical anguish. I felt rather
    than heard sobs and grieving, and felt conscious of the nature of
    the grief subjectively; its objective cause was not transmitted to
    me. Extreme exhaustion followed the experience, which lasted forty
    minutes intensely, and then very slowly wore away. Let me note:--

    "1st. I had not thought of the person for some time and there was
    no reminder in the room.

    "2nd. The experience was remembered with more vividness than that
    seen in the normal way, while the contrary is true of dreams.

    "3rd. The natural order of perception was reversed, _i.e._, the
    emotion came first, the sense of a personality second, the vision
    or perception of the person third.

    "I should be glad to have a theory given of this reverse in the
    natural order of perception."

The agent, M., is well known to both Professor Royce and Dr. Hodgson.
In the report it is stated that "there can be no doubt of his high
character and general good judgment." He writes as follows:--

    "BOSTON, _Nov._ 16_th_, 1886.

    "Some years ago, perhaps eight or nine, while in a city of Rhode
    Island on business, my house being then, as now, in Boston, I
    received news which was most unexpected and distressing to me,
    affecting me so seriously that I retired to my room at the hotel,
    a large square room, and threw myself upon my bed, face downward,
    remaining there a long time in great mental distress. The acuteness
    of the feeling after a time abating, I left the room. I returned
    next day to Boston, and the day after that received a short letter
    from the person whose statement I enclose herewith, and dated at
    the town in Western New York, from which her enclosed letter comes.
    The note begged me to tell her without delay what was the matter
    with me 'on Friday, at 2 o'clock,'--the very day and hour when I
    was affected as I have described.

    "This lady was a somewhat familiar acquaintance and friend, but I
    had not heard from her for many months previous to this note, and
    I do not know that any thought of her had come into my mind for a
    long time. I should still further add that the news which had so
    distressed me had not the slightest connection with her.

    "I wrote at once, stating that she was right as to her impression
    (she said in her letter that she was sure I was in very great
    trouble at the time mentioned), and expressed my surprise at the
    whole affair.

    "Twice since that time she has written to me, giving me some
    impression in regard to my condition or situation, both referring
    to cases of illness or suffering of some kind, and both times her
    impressions have proved correct enough to be considered remarkable,
    yet not so exact in detail or distinctness as the first time. I
    feel confident that I have her original letter, but have not been
    able to command the time necessary to find it.

    "(Signed) M.

    "P.S.--The three occurrences above detailed comprise all the
    experiences of this sort which I have had in my life."

Mr. M. has searched in vain for the original letter of Dr. N. referring
to the incident. Two letters, however, referring to one of the later
experiences mentioned by him have been found, and copies of them, made
by Dr. Hodgson on June 6th, 1887, are given below.


(1.)

DR. N. to MR. M.

    "DOCTOR'S OFFICE, _July_ 24_th_,
    (Year not given).

    "If I don't hear from you to-morrow, I shall write you a letter! I
    am anxious about you.

    "N."


(2.)

MR. M. to DR. N.

    BOSTON, _July_ 26, 1883.

    "What clairvoyant vision again told you of me Monday and Tuesday
    and Wednesday? Was it as vivid and real as the other time? It had,
    at least, a very closely related cause.

    "It is past 1 A.M., but I will not go to bed till I have sent you
    a word. A letter will follow very soon. For two days I have been
    thinking of the way you wrote to me that time, and I should have
    written to you within twenty-four hours if I had not received the
    note from you. Please write to me as you proposed. This is only to
    tell you that I am alive and not ill, but tired, tired! Tell me of
    yourself. I have had a hard three months in the West, eighteen to
    twenty hours a day, scarce a respite--I am not ill; I am sure I am
    not, but I am _worked out_. I couldn't get to ---- or write.

    "I used the telegraph even with my sisters.

    "I hope for a letter, and will surely send you one.

    "Yours,
    "M."

These letters, which apparently relate to the second of the three
experiences mentioned by M., afford incidentally strong corroboration
of the accuracy of the statements made as to the first and most
remarkable experience.

Several instances have been already published (_Phantasms of the
Living_, vol. ii. pp. 365-370) of what appears to be telepathic
affection, in which there was no apparent link to connect the agent and
percipient. Thus intimation of the deaths of three dukes--Cambridge,
Portland, and Wellington--was conveyed to complete strangers. A similar
impression is recorded (_Journal S.P.R._, Nov. 1892) as affecting a
stranger at the death of Lord Tennyson, and a somewhat similar instance
is recorded (_Journal_, May 1892) in connection with the death of
General the Hon. Sir Leicester Smyth. The Head-master of a Grammar
School in Leicester saw in a vision the irruption of water into the
Thames Tunnel (_Phantasms, loc. cit._). In all these cases, if we
accept the incidents as telepathic, they recall, as Mr. Gurney remarks,
"the Greek notion of φήμη, the Rumour which spreads from some unknown
source, and far outstrips all known means of transport." The evidence
so far adduced, however, is by no means sufficient to establish any
such conclusion. But the following narrative, which comes from a lady
well known to me, is worth considering in this connection.


No. 50.--From MISS Y.

    "PERTH, 19_th January_ 1890.

    "One Sunday evening I was writing to my sister, in my own room,
    and a wild storm was raging round the house (in Perth). Suddenly
    an eerie feeling came over me, I could not keep my thoughts on my
    letter, ideas of death and disaster haunted me so persistently. It
    was a vague but intense feeling; a sudden ghastly realisation of
    human tragedy, with no 'where,' 'how,' or 'when' about it.

    "I remember flying upstairs to seek refuge with my mother, and
    I remember her soothing voice saying, 'Nonsense, child,' when I
    insisted that I was sure '_lots_ of people were dying.'

    "We both thought it was a little nervous attack, and thought
    no more about it. But when we heard the news of the Tay Bridge
    disaster next day, we both noticed (we received the news separately
    from the maid when she came to wake us) that the time of the
    accident coincided with my strange experience of the evening
    before.

    "We spoke of the 'coincidence' together, but did not attach much
    importance to it.

    "I have never had any experience like it, before or since."

Mrs. Y., in a letter of the same date, corroborates her daughter's
statement. Mrs. Y.'s account, it should be added, was written without
previous consultation with Miss Y., and embodies her independent
recollection of the incident.

    "On the night of the Tay Bridge disaster A. was sitting alone in
    her room, when she suddenly came running upstairs to me, saying
    that she had heard shrieks in the air; that something dreadful must
    have happened, for the air seemed full of shrieks. She thought a
    great many people must be dying. Next morning the milk-boy told the
    servant that the Tay Bridge was down."

In a later letter, Miss Y. adds:--

    "My mother says she cannot remember my having any other experience
    of the kind. It happened before 9 P.M., we think."

    From the _Times_ of December 29th, 1879 (Monday), it appears
    that the accident took place on the previous evening (28th). The
    Edinburgh train, due at Dundee at 7.15 P.M., crossed the bridge
    during a violent gale. It was duly signalled from the Fife side
    as having entered on the bridge for Dundee at 7.14. It was seen
    running along the rails, and then suddenly there was observed a
    flash of fire. The opinion was the train then left the rails and
    went over the bridge.


_Motor Impulses._

Occasionally the telepathic impression manifests itself to
consciousness as a monition or impulse to perform a certain action.
There is no ground for thinking in such a case that the idea
transferred from the agent has in itself any special impulsive quality.
The impulse towards action is no doubt the result of the percipient's
unconscious reasoning on the information supplied to him.

Sometimes the impulse to action, though strong, is vague and
inarticulate. Thus Mrs. Hadselle, of Pittsfield, Mass., U.S.A.,
narrates (_Journal S.P.R._, May 1891) that some years ago she
experienced, when spending the evening with some friends, "a sudden
and unaccountable desire to go home, accompanied by a dread and fear
of something, I knew not what." She eventually yielded to her impulse,
and at some inconvenience returned home, just in time to rescue her
son, who was insensible through the smoke from a fire of wet sticks in
his room. Professor Venturi (_Annales des Sci. Psy._, vol. iii. pp.
331-333) relates that in July 1885, in obedience to an irresistible
impulse, he made a sudden and quite unpremeditated journey from
Pozzuoli to his home at Nocera, to find his child in serious danger
from a sudden attack of croup. A case is recorded in the _Proc. Am.
S.P.R._ (pp. 227, 228), in which a lady living in a Western State
awoke in the night of January 30th-31st, 1886, with a strong feeling
that her daughter in Washington was ill and needed her, and in the
morning telegraphed to her son-in-law, offering to come at once. There
had been no previous cause of anxiety on the mother's part, but as a
matter of fact the daughter had been taken suddenly and seriously ill
on that night. A letter and the telegram relating to the event have
been preserved. In another case Lady de Vesci, in 1872, telegraphed on
a sudden impulse from Ireland to a friend in Hong Kong. The telegram
arrived less than twenty-four hours before the recipient's death, an
event which Lady de Vesci had no reason to anticipate for some months
(_Journal S.P.R._, October 1891).

In another case, also recorded by Mrs. Hadselle (_loc. cit._), the
impulse took the form of a voice bidding her go to a certain town,
where, as it appeared, an intimate friend stood in urgent need
of her. The effect produced in this case was so strong that the
percipient actually bought a fresh railway ticket and changed her
route. In the following case the impulse found a more unusual mode of
expression--viz., utterance on the part of the percipient.


No. 51.--From ARCHDEACON BRUCE.

    "ST. WOOLOS' VICARAGE, NEWPORT,
    MONMOUTHSHIRE, _July_ 6_th_, 1892.

    "On April 19th, Easter Tuesday, I went to Ebbw Vale to preach at
    the opening of a new iron church in Beaufort parish.

    "I had arranged that Mrs. Bruce and my daughter should drive in the
    afternoon.

    "The morning service and public luncheon over, I walked up to the
    Vicarage at Ebbw Vale to call on the Vicar. As I went there I
    heard the bell of the new church at Beaufort ringing for afternoon
    service at three. It had stopped some little time before I reached
    the Vicarage (of Ebbw Vale). The Vicar was out, and it struck me
    that I might get back to the Beaufort new church in time to hear
    some of the sermon before my train left (at 4.35). On my way back
    through Ebbw Vale, and not far from the bottom of the hill on which
    the Ebbw Vale Vicarage is placed, I saw over a provision shop one
    of those huge, staring Bovril advertisements--the familiar large
    ox-head. I had seen fifty of them before, but something fascinated
    me in connection with this particular one. I turned to it, and
    was moved to address it in these, my _ipsissima verba_: 'You ugly
    brute, don't stare at me like that: has some accident happened to
    the wife?' Just the faintest tinge of uneasiness passed through
    me as I spoke, but it vanished at once. This must have been as
    nearly as possible 3.20. I reached home at six to find the vet.
    in my stable-yard tending my poor horse, and Mrs. Bruce and my
    daughter in a condition of collapse in the house. The accident had
    happened--so Mrs. Bruce thinks--precisely at 3.30, but she is not
    confident of the moment. My own times I can fix precisely.

    "I had no reason to fear any accident, as my coachman had driven
    them with the same horse frequently, and save a little freshness
    at starting, the horse was always quiet on the road, even to
    sluggishness. A most unusual occurrence set it off. A telegraph
    operator, at the top of a telegraph post, hauled up a long flashing
    coil of wire under the horse's nose. Any horse in the world, except
    the Troy horse, would have bolted under the circumstances.

    "My wife's estimate of the precise time can only be taken as
    approximate. She saw the time when she got home, and took that as
    her zero, but the confusion and excitement of the walk home from
    the scene of the accident leaves room for doubt as to her power of
    settling the time accurately. The accident happened about 2-1/4
    miles from home, and she was home by 4.10; but she was some time on
    the ground waiting until the horse was disengaged, etc.

    "W. CONYBEARE BRUCE."

Archdeacon Bruce adds later:--

    "_May_ 20_th_, 1893.

    "I think I stated the fact that the impression of danger to Mrs.
    Bruce was only momentary--it passed at once--and it was only when
    I heard of the accident that I recalled the impression. I did not
    therefore go home expecting to find that anything had happened.

    "W. CONYBEARE BRUCE."

Mrs. Bruce writes:--

    "The first thought that flashed across me as the accident happened
    was, 'What will W. say?' My ruling idea then was to get home before
    my husband, so as to save him alarm."

The Rev. A. T. Fryer, to whom the incident was originally communicated
by the percipient, ascertained independently from the Vicar of Ebbw
Vale that the date of Archdeacon Bruce's visit to him was April 19th,
1892. It is worth noting that here, as in case 45, an external object
appears to have acted as a _point de repère_, and to have thus aided
in the development of the transferred idea. Another instance of a
telepathic impulse leading to speech is to be found in the _Annales des
Sciences Psychiques_ (vol. i. p. 36). The Lady Superior of a convent
was moved during the celebration of a service to pray for the safety of
the children of a neighbour--a visitor to the convent--who was somewhat
startled by the Superior's abrupt action. It subsequently appeared
that at about the time of this prayer the two boys were involved in a
carriage accident.

The most striking evidence, however, of telepathically induced action
is to be found in automatic writing. Some experimental cases of the
kind have been quoted in Chapter IV. The spontaneous cases are more
numerous. Mr. Myers has recorded several instances in his article on
Motor Automatism (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 26 _et seq._), and Mr.
W. T. Stead has published, in the _Review of Reviews_ and elsewhere,
accounts of messages and conversations with friends at a distance
written through his hand. Generally speaking, however, where living
persons are concerned, it is difficult, without full knowledge of all
the circumstances, to feel assured that the facts recorded by this
means are not such as might conceivably have been within the knowledge
of the writer, or at least within his powers of conjecture. The best
evidence, therefore, for spontaneous telepathic automatism is no doubt
afforded by those cases in which some altogether unforeseen event, such
as the death of the presumed agent, is communicated. Such is the case
recorded by M. Aksakof (_Psychische Studien_, February 1889, quoted
in _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. pp. 434, etc.), in which Mademoiselle Emma
Stramm, a Swiss governess at Wilna, on the 15th January 1887 wrote
particulars of the death on the same day of a former acquaintance
of hers, August Duvanel, in Canton Zurich. A similar instance is
recorded by Dr. Liébeault (_Annales des Sciences Psychiques_, vol. i.
pp. 25, 26). The automatic writer was in this case at Nancy, and the
person whose death was announced was a young English lady resident at
Coblentz. Dr. Liébeault was shown the written message within an hour or
two of the séance, and some days before news of the death was received.
Other cases of the kind are recorded by M. Aksakof and others (_Revue
Spirite_, August 1891, April 1892, etc.).

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 86: Two other examples are referred to in _Phantasms_,
vol. i. p. 189, but in neither case is the evidence obtainable at
first-hand.]

[Footnote 87: Except, of course, in cases of rudimentary
hallucinations, such as after-images and bright spots in the eyes and
singing in the ears, which are caused by the physical condition of the
external organ.]

[Footnote 88: See case No. 51, later; and compare Mr. Galton's
observations in his lecture at the Royal Institution on "The Just
Perceptible Difference" (reported in the _Times_, January 30th, 1893).
Mr. Galton found that the ideal auditory impressions called up by
reading the printed substance of a lecture enabled him to hear the
lecturer's voice at a greater distance than when he had not the printed
text before him; the ideal appears to have supplemented the real
impression, as, in the case given in the text, the real reinforced the
ideal.]




