CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY--SPECIAL GROUNDS OF CAUTION.


It is salutary sometimes to reflect how recent is the growth of our
scientific cosmos, and how brief an interval separates it from the
chaos which went before. This may be seen even in Sciences which deal
with matters of common observation. Amongst material phenomena the
facts of Geology are assuredly not least calculated to excite the
curiosity or impress the imagination of men. Yet until the middle of
the last century no serious attempt was made to solve the physical
problems they presented. The origin of the organic remains embedded
in the rocks had indeed formed the subject of speculation ever since
the days of Aristotle. Theophrastus had suggested that they were
formed by the plastic forces of Nature. Mediæval astrologers ascribed
their formation to planetary influences. And these hypotheses, with
the alternative view of the Church, that fossil bones and shells were
relics of the Mosaic Deluge, appear to have satisfied the learned of
Europe until the time of Voltaire, who reinforced the rationalistic
position, as he conceived it, by the suggestion that the shells, at
any rate, had been dropped from the hats of pilgrims returning from
the Holy Land. Yet Werner and Hutton were even then preparing to
elucidate the causes of stratification and the genesis of the igneous
rocks. Cuvier in the next generation was to demonstrate the essential
analogies of the fossils found in the Paris basin with living species;
Agassiz was to investigate the relation of fossil fishes and to show
the true nature of their embedded remains. Nay, even in the middle of
the present century, so slow is the growth and spread of organised
knowledge, it was possible for a pious Scotchman to ascribe the origin
of mountain chains to a cataclysm which, after the fall of Man, had
broken up and distorted the once symmetrical surface of the earth;[4]
for a Dean of York to essay to bring the Mediæval theory up to date and
prove that the whole series of geological strata, with their varied
organic remains, were formed by volcanic eruptions acting in concert
with the Mosaic Deluge;[5] and for another English divine to warn his
readers against any sacrilegious meddling with the arcana of the rocks,
because they represented the tentative essays of the Creator at organic
forms--a concealed storehouse of celestial misfits![6]

The subject-matter of the present inquiry has passed, or is now
passing, through stages closely similar to those above described.
"Ghosts" and warning dreams have been matters of popular belief and
interest since the earliest ages known to history, and are prevalent
amongst even the least advanced races at the present time. The
Specularii and Dr. Dee have familiarised us with clairvoyance and
crystal vision. Many of the alleged marvels of witchcraft were
probably due to the agency of hypnotism, which in later times, under
the various names of mesmerism, electrobiology, animal magnetism, has
attracted the curiosity of the unlettered, and from time to time the
serious interest of the learned. These phenomena indeed were made the
subject of scientific inquiry, first in France and later in England,
during the first half of the present century; have now again, after a
brief period of eclipse, been investigated for the last two decades
by competent observers on the Continent, and are at length winning a
recognised footing in scientific circles in this country. Yet within
the last two or three years we have witnessed the spectacle of more
than one medical man, of some repute in this island, laughing to scorn
all the researches of Charcot and Bernheim, just as their prototypes a
generation or two ago ignored the results of Cuvier and Agassiz, and
held it an insult to the Creator to accept the scientific explanation
of coprolites.

And as regards the other subjects, to which must be added the
alleged marvels of the Spiritualists, there have indeed been one
or two isolated series of observations by competent inquirers, but
for the most part the learned have held themselves free to ascribe
the phenomena without investigation to fraud and hysteria, and the
unlearned to "magnetism," "psychic force," or the Devil. For whilst
men of science, preoccupied for the most part with other lines of
inquiry, have kept themselves aloof, the vacant ground was naturally
occupied by the ignorant and credulous, and by those who looked to
win a harvest from ignorance and credulity. It is not of course
implied that all persons who interested themselves in such matters
came under one or other of these categories. There were many sensible
men and women amongst them, but they lacked for the most part the
special training necessary for such inquiries, or they failed through
want of co-operation and support. No serious and organised attempt
at investigation was made until, in 1882, the Society for Psychical
Research was founded in London, under the presidency of Professor Henry
Sidgwick. He and his colleagues were the pioneers in the research, and
their example has been widely followed. Two years later an American
society under the same title (now a flourishing branch of the English
society) was founded in Boston; and there are at the present time
societies with similar objects at Berlin, Munich, Stockholm, and
elsewhere. Moreover, the Société de Psychologie Physiologique, which
was founded in Paris, under the presidency of M. Charcot, in 1885, has
devoted much attention to some forms of telepathy.

But the forces of superstition and charlatanry, to which this vast
territory has been ceded for so long, have bequeathed an unfortunate
legacy to those who would now colonise it in the name of Science;
and the preliminary difficulties of the undertaking can perhaps most
effectually be met by a frank recognition of that fact. On the one
hand, a large number of thinking men have been repelled, and still feel
repulsion, from a subject whose record is so unsavoury. On the other
hand, the appetite for the marvellous which has been so long unchecked
is not easily restrained. The old habits of inaccuracy, of magnifying
the proportions of things, of confusing surmises with facts, cannot be
eradicated without long and careful discipline. To one writer, indeed,
those dangers seemed so serious that he solemnly warned the Society for
Psychical Research, at the outset of its career, against the risk of
stimulating into disastrous activity inborn tendencies to superstition,
by even the semblance of an inquiry into these matters. Without going
to such lengths, it may be conceded to the critic that even with those
who endeavour to apply scientific methods to the investigation the
mental attitude is liable to be warped by the environment, and that
here, as elsewhere, evil communications may corrupt. As regards the
actual investigators this difficulty is growing less serious, as more
men who have received their training in other branches of science are
attracted to the inquiry, and as the affinities of the subject to
long-recognised departments of knowledge become daily more apparent.
In another direction, however, this mental attitude presents still a
more or less formidable obstacle. Many of the observations on which
students of the subject are compelled to rely are derived from persons
who have had no training in such habits of accuracy as are required in
scientific research. When accounts of the ornithorhynchus first reached
this country naturalists laughed at the traveller's tale of a beast
with the tail of a beaver and the bill and webbed feet of a duck. In
the same way scientific men for long refused to admit the existence of
aerolites, as they now decline to credit the reports of a Sea Serpent
of colossal proportions. In all these cases, so long as the alleged
facts rest solely on the testimony of men untrained in habits of close
observation and accurate reporting, a suspension of judgment seems
to be justified. And if these considerations are valid in ordinary
cases, a much higher degree of caution may be reasonably demanded of
investigators who leave the neutral ground of the physical sciences
to enter upon a field in which the emotions and sympathies are most
keenly engaged, and in which the incidents narrated may have served
to afford support to the dearest hopes and sanction to the deepest
convictions of the narrator. So insidious, in such a case, is the work
of the imagination, so untrustworthy is the memory, so various are the
sources of error in human testimony, that it may be doubted whether we
should be justified in attaching weight to the phenomena of telepathic
hallucination and clairvoyance, to which a large part of this book is
devoted, if the alleged observations were incapable of experimental
verification. Certainly in such a case, though the recipient of an
experience of this kind might cherish a private conviction of its
significance, it would hardly be possible for such a view to win
general assent.

In fact, however, the clue to the interpretation of the more striking
phenomena, in the case of which, since they occur for the most part
spontaneously, direct experiment or even methodical and continuous
observation are rarely possible, is furnished by actual experiment on
a smaller scale and with mental affections of a less unusual kind.
The thesis which these pages are designed to illustrate and support
is briefly: _that communication is possible between mind and mind
otherwise than through the known channels of the senses_. Proof of
the existence of such communication, provisionally called _Thought
Transference_ or _Telepathy_ (from _tele_ = at a distance, and _pathos_
= feeling), will be found in a considerable mass of experiments
conducted during the last twelve years by various observers in
different European countries and in America. Before proceeding, in the
course of the next four chapters, to examine this part of the evidence
in detail, it will be well to consider its various defects and sources
of error--defects common in some degree to all experiments of which
living beings are the subject, and sources of error for the most part
peculiar to this and kindred inquiries. The word _experiment_ in this
connection usually, and rightly, suggests the most perfect form of
experiment, that in which all the conditions are known, and in which
the results can be predicted both quantitatively and qualitatively.
If, for instance, we add a certain quantity of nitric acid under given
conditions to a certain quantity of benzine, we know that there will
result a certain quantity of a third substance which is unlike either
of its constituents in taste, smell, and physical properties. Or if we
burn a given quantity of coal in a particular engine, we can predict,
within narrow limits of error, the total amount of energy which will be
evolved. That we cannot in the second instance predict with absolute
accuracy the amount of energy produced is simply due to the difficulty
of measuring with precision all the factors in the case. But when we
leave the problems of chemistry and physics and approach the problems
of biology, the difficulties increase a hundredfold. Here not only are
we unable to measure the various factors, we cannot even name them.
No skill or forethought would have enabled an observer, from however
patient a study of parentage and environment, to have predicted the
appearance, say, of Emanuel Swedenborg or Michael Faraday. Of the
seven children of John Lamb and his wife it might have seemed easier
to conjecture that the majority would not survive childhood, and that
one would become insane, than that another should take his place
amongst those whose writings the world would not willingly let die.
And even where, as in most biological researches, the results drawn
from observation can be to some extent checked and controlled by direct
experiment, generations may elapse before the balance of probabilities
on one side or the other becomes so great as to lead to unanimity
amongst the inquirers. One of the most interesting, and certainly not
the least important, of the questions now occupying biologists, is
that of the transmission to the offspring of characters acquired in
the lifetime of the individual. Observations have been accumulated on
the subject since before the days of Lamarck; and these observations,
interpreted and confirmed by experiment, have been adduced and are
still held by many as evidence that such transmission occurs. On the
other hand, Weismann and his followers contend that no such inference
can legitimately be drawn from the observations and experiments quoted,
and that the occurrence of such transmission is irreconcilable with
what is known of the growth and development of the germ. And for all
that has been said and written the opinion of competent biologists is
still divided upon the question.

But in many biological problems the conditions are much simpler, and
the questions at issue can more readily be brought to the test of
experiment. Yet even so various unknown factors are included, and the
results obtained are correspondingly difficult of interpretation.
No question affects us more nearly than the part played by the
several kinds of food in repairing the daily waste of the human body.
Statistics and analyses have been collected of workhouse, prison, and
military dietaries; innumerable experiments have been conducted on
fasting men and hypertrophied dogs and rabbits; and yet the precise
function of nitrogenous substances in nutrition is still undetermined.
Again, the import of the experiments made during the last few decades
by Goltz, Hitzig, Ferrier, Horsley, and others on the functions of
various areas of the brain substance, and the exact nature and degree
of localisation which those experiments imply, are still matter of
debate amongst the physiologists concerned.

To take yet another instance, and one which has a more intimate
bearing upon the experiments to be discussed. Some years ago Dr.
Charlton Bastian claimed to have proved experimentally the fact of
abiogenesis, or the generation of living organisms from non-living
matter. He had placed various organic infusions in glass tubes, which
were heated to the boiling point and then hermetically sealed. When
the tubes were, after a certain interval, unsealed, the contained
liquid was found in some cases to be swarming with bacteria. Believing
that these micro-organisms and their germs were invariably destroyed
by the heat of boiling water, Dr. Bastian saw no other conclusion
than that the bacteria were formed directly from the infusion. His
conclusions were not accepted by the scientific world. But they were
rejected, not because the fact of abiogenesis was regarded as in itself
improbable, nor yet because Dr. Bastian was unable to indicate by what
steps or processes the transformation of an infusion of hay into
living organisms of definite and relatively complex structure could
be conceived to take place, but because Pasteur, Tyndall, and others
showed that the germs of some of these micro-organisms are capable of
sustaining for some minutes the heat of boiling water; and further,
that when elaborate precautions were taken, by filtering and otherwise
purifying the air, tubes containing similar infusions would remain
sterile for an indefinite period.

The conclusion that under certain conditions thought-transference
may occur rests upon reasoning similar to that by which Dr. Bastian
sought to establish a theory of abiogenesis. Neither the organs by
which nor the medium through which the communication is made can be
indicated; nor can we even, with a few trifling exceptions, point to
the conditions which favour such communication. But ignorance on these
points, though a defect, is not a defect which in the present state of
experimental psychology can be held seriously to weaken the evidence,
much less to invalidate the conclusion. That conclusion rests on the
elimination of all other possible causes for the effect produced.
But at this point the analogy between the two researches fails. Dr.
Bastian's conjecture was based on a short series of experiments
conducted by a single experimenter under one uniform set of conditions.
At the first breath of criticism the whole fabric collapsed. The
experiments here recorded represent the work of many observers in many
countries, carried on with different subjects under a great variety of
conditions. The results have been before the world for about twelve
years, and during that period have been subjected to much adverse and
some instructive criticism. But no alternative explanation which has
yet been suggested has attained even a momentary plausibility.

Whether the elimination of all other possible causes is indeed
complete, or whether, as in Dr. Bastian's case, there may yet lurk in
these experiments some hitherto unsuspected source of error, the reader
will have the opportunity of judging for himself. To assist him in
forming a judgment some of the main disturbing causes will be briefly
indicated.

(1) _Fraud._--In nearly all the experiments referred to in this
book the agent was himself concerned in the inquiry as a matter of
scientific interest. But it necessarily happens on occasion that
neither agent nor percipient are by education and position absolutely
removed from suspicion of trickery in a matter where trickery might to
imperfectly educated persons appear almost venial. If any such cases
have been admitted, it is because the precautions taken appear to us to
have been adequate. At the same time, the investigators of the Society
for Psychical Research have come across some instances of fraud in
cases where they had grounds for assuming good faith, and it may be
useful, therefore, to illustrate some of the less obvious methods of
acquiring intelligence fraudulently. The conditions of the experiment
should of course, as far as possible, preclude, even where there is
no ground for suspecting fraud, communication between the percipient
and the agent, or any one else knowing the idea which it is sought to
transfer.

In the autumn of 1888 some experiments were conducted with a person
named D., whose antecedents afforded, it was thought, justification
for the belief that the claims which he put forward were genuine. D.
acted as agent, the percipient being a subject of his own, a young
woman called Miss N., who was apparently in a light hypnotic sleep
during the experiment. It was soon discovered that the results were
obtained by means of a code formed from a combination of Miss N.'s
breathing with slight noises--a cough or the creak of a boot--made by
D. himself. I have seen a somewhat similar code employed in Prince's
Hall, Piccadilly, where the conjurer stood in the middle of the hall
with a coin or other object in his hand, a description of which he
communicated to his confederate on the platform by means of a series
of breathings, deep enough visibly to move his dress-coat up and down
on the surface of his white collar, punctuated by slight movements
of head or hand. The novel feature in the first case, however, was
that the percipient herself furnished the groundwork of the code, the
punctuation alone being given by the conjurer. A still more elaborate
form of collusion is described at length by Bonjean.[7] In this case
the subject, a young woman named Lully, appears to have read the words
to be conveyed after the fashion of a deaf mute, by the motion of
the lips of the showman. Lully was apparently in a hypnotic trance,
with the eyes fast closed. Another form of fraud, since it does not
require the aid of a confederate, is perhaps worthy of note. Some years
ago a young Australian came to this country with a reputation for
"genuine thought-reading," based on the successful mystification of
some members of a certain Colonial Legislature. The writer had a few
experiments with this person, in which several small objects--a knife,
a glass bottle, etc.--placed in the full light of a shaded lamp, were
correctly named. The object was in each case placed behind the back of
the "Thought-reader," who looked intently at the writer's eyes, which
were in turn fixed upon the brightly illuminated object. Experiments
made under more usual conditions, not dictated by the "Thought-reader,"
completely failed; and there can be little doubt that the initial
successes were due to the "Thought-reader" seeing the image of the
object reflected in the agent's cornea.

(2) _Hyperæsthesia._--But, after all, it is rarely necessary to
take special precautions against fraud, for there are dangers to be
guarded against of a more subtle kind. There are various, and as yet
imperfectly known methods of communication by which indications may
be unconsciously given and as unconsciously received. Thus, to take
the last instance, it is pretty certain that cornea-reading does not
always imply fraud, and that hints may be gained in all good faith
from any reflecting surface in the neighbourhood of the experimenter;
or the movements of lips, larynx, and even hands and limbs may betray
the secret to eye or ear. We know little of the limits of our sensory
powers even in normal life; and we do know that in certain subconscious
states--automatic, hypnotic, somnambulic--these limits may be greatly
exceeded, and that indications so subtle as frequently to escape
the vigilance of trained observers may be seized and interpreted
by the hypnotic or automatic subject. It is clear, therefore, that
results which it is possible to attribute to deliberate fraud stand
almost necessarily self-condemned. For if the precautions taken by
the investigators left such an explanation open, much more were
those precautions insufficient to guard against the subtler modes of
communication referred to. It is not the friend whom we know whose eyes
must be closed and his ears muffled, but the "Mr. Hyde," whose lurking
presence in each of us we are only now beginning to suspect.

There is a case recorded by M. Bergson,[8] in which a hypnotised boy is
said to have been able to state correctly the number of the page in a
book held by the observer, by reading the corneal image of the figures.
The actual figures were three millimetres high, and their corneal image
is calculated by M. Bergson to have been O.1 mm., or about 1/250 of an
inch in height! In some other experiments conducted by M. Bergson with
the same subject the acuteness of vision is said to have exceeded even
this limit. In another case, recorded by Dr. Sauvaire,[9] a hypnotised
subject was able to recognise the King of Clubs, face downwards,
in two different packs of cards. In the first of these cases the
results, which could not have been attained by the senses under normal
conditions, must apparently be attributed to hyperæsthesia. Instances,
especially of auditory hyperæsthesia, are of course quite familiar to
those who have studied the phenomena of hypnotism. In Dr. Sauvaire's
case, however, the power of distinguishing the cards by touch may have
been the result of practice. Mrs. Verrall records (_Proceedings Soc.
Psych. Research_, vol. viii. p. 480) that she acquired such a power by
means of "a longish series of experiments"; and Mr. Hudson, in _Idle
Days in Patagonia_, tells of a gambler who by careful training had
developed the same faculty in a very high degree.

It seems probable in the cases described by M. Bergson and Dr.
Sauvaire, and possible also in the case of Mr. D.'s subject, that there
was no intentional deception, and that the hypnotised person was not
himself aware of the means by which his knowledge was attained.[10]
The same remark probably applies to the following case, in which,
though the conditions of vision were certainly unusual, it seems not
clear whether the degree of success attained should be attributed to
abnormal sensibility of the eyes, or to the facility acquired by long
practice. In a series of experiments at which the writer assisted, in
1884, an illiterate youth named Dick was hypnotised, a penny was placed
over each eye, and the eyes and surrounding features were elaborately
bandaged with strips of sticking-plaster; a handkerchief being bound
over all. Under these conditions Dick named correctly objects held in
front of him, even at a considerable distance, a little above the level
of his eyes. Normal vision appeared to be impossible. Mr. R. Hodgson,
however, repeated the experiment upon himself, and found after several
trials that he also could see objects, though fitfully and imperfectly,
under the same conditions, the channel of vision being a small chink in
the sticking-plaster on the line where it was fastened to the brow.

(3) _Muscle-reading._--From this last case we may pass to the
illustrations of "thought-reading" given by professional conjurers
and others, where it seems clear that the skill exhibited in the
interpretation of unconscious movements and gestures is due rather to
long practice and careful observation than to any abnormal extension
of faculty. It hardly needs saying that experiments in which contact
is permitted between the agent and percipient can rarely be regarded
as having evidential value. It has been demonstrated again and again
that with the fullest intention of keeping the secret to themselves,
most "agents" in such circumstances are practically certain to betray
it to the professional thought-reader by unconscious movements of some
kind. Indeed, it is difficult to place any limit to the degree of
susceptibility to slight muscular impressions which may be attained.
A careful experimenter has assured the writer that when acting as
percipient in some experiments with diagrams the slight movements of
the agent's hand resting upon her head gave her in one case a clue to
the figure thought of. And Mr. Stuart Cumberland has exhibited feats
still more marvellous before kings and commoners. Nor is it necessary,
as already said, for successful muscle-reading that there should be
actual contact in all cases. The eye or the ear can sometimes follow
movements of the lips or other parts of the body. But though we can
look for little evidence from experiments conducted with contact, or
under conditions which allow of interpretation by gesture, etc., and
their repetition in this connection can rarely be expected to serve any
useful purpose, it seems worth pointing out that, if telepathy is a
fact, we should expect to find it operating not merely where, from the
conditions of the experiment, it must be presumed to be the sole source
of communication, but also as an auxiliary to other more familiar modes
of expression. It seems not improbable, therefore, that some of the
more startling successes of the professional "thought-reader" and some
of the results obtained in the "willing game" may be due to this cause.

(4) _Thought-forms._--There remains one other source of error to
be guarded against. An image--whether of an object, diagram, or
name--which is _chosen_ by the agent may be correctly described by
the percipient simply because their minds are set to move in the
same direction. It must be remembered that, however unexpected and
spontaneous they may appear, ideas do not come by chance, but have
their origin mostly in the previous experience of the thinker. Persons
living constantly in the same physical and intellectual environment
are apt to present a close similarity in their ideas. It would not
even be _prima facie_ evidence of thought-transference, for instance,
if husband and wife, asked to think of a town or of an acquaintance,
should select the same name. And investigation has shown that our
thoughts move in grooves which are determined for us by causes
more deep-seated and more general than the accident of particular
circumstances. Thus it is found that individuals will show a preference
for certain figures or certain numbers over others; and that the
preference for some geometrical figures tends to be tolerably constant.
The American Society for Psychical Research[11] made some interesting
observations on this point in 1888. Blank cards were issued to a large
number of persons, with the request that the recipients would draw on
the card "ten diagrams." 501 cards were returned, and the diagrams
inscribed on them were carefully tabulated. It was found that of the
501 persons no less than 209 drew circles, 174 squares, 160 equilateral
triangles and crosses, while three only drew wheels, two candlesticks,
and one each a corkscrew, a ball, and a knife. It was found that the
simpler geometrical figures[12] occurred not only most frequently but
as a general rule early in each series of ten. It follows, therefore,
that in an experiment the success of the percipient in reproducing a
circle, a square, or a triangle raises a much fainter presumption of
thought-transference than if the object reproduced had been a corkscrew
or a pine-apple. But so much was perhaps obvious even without a
detailed investigation. From a similar analysis of the guesses made,
it can be shown that some percipients have decided preferences amongst
the simple numerals. And in the same way it seems probable that others
have a preference for particular cards. An important illustration of
the working of the "number-habit" has been brought forward by Professor
E. C. Pickering of the Harvard College Observatory, U.S.A.[13] A
revision of part of the Argelander Star-Chart had been undertaken by
several observatories, of which the Harvard Observatory was one. For
the purposes of the revision the assistant had the Argelander chart
before him, whilst the observer, who was in ignorance of the magnitude
assigned in the chart, made an independent estimate of the magnitude
of each star. If no thought-transference or other disturbing cause
affected the result, the amount of deviation of the later observations
from the earlier in each tenth of a degree of magnitude would be
represented by a smooth curve. As a matter of fact, it was found that
the number of cases of complete agreement were much greater, with
some observers more than 50 per cent. greater, than they should have
been on an estimate of the probabilities. At first sight this excess
of the actual over the theoretical numbers suggested the action of
thought-transference between the assistant and the observer. But
Professor Pickering shows, on a further analysis of the figures, that
almost the whole of the excess was due to the preference of both the
earlier and the later observers for 5 and 10 over all other fractions
of a degree.

The practical deduction from this investigation is that in any
experiment care should be taken to exclude, as regards the agent at any
rate, the operation of any diagram or number-habit.[14] If an object is
thought of, it should if possible be chosen by lot, and should not be
an object actually present in the room. If a card, it should be drawn
from the pack at random; if a number, from a receptacle containing a
definite series of numbers; if a diagram, it is preferable that it
should be taken at random from a set of previously-prepared drawings.
It will be seen that in the majority of the cases quoted in the four
succeeding chapters these precautions have been observed.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: _Primary and Present State of the Solar System_, by P.
McFarlane. Edinburgh, Thomas Grant, _circa_ 1845.]

[Footnote 5: At the meeting of the British Association in 1844; quoted
by Hugh Miller, _Testimony of the Rocks_, pp. 358, 359.]

[Footnote 6: _A Brief and Complete Refutation of the Antiscriptural
Theory of the Geologists_, by a Clergyman of the Church of England.
London, 1853; quoted by Hugh Miller, _loc. cit._]

[Footnote 7: _L'Hypnotisme et la suggestion mentale._ Germer Baillière
et Cie. Paris, pp. 261-316.]

[Footnote 8: _Revue Philosophique_, Nov. 1887, quoted in _Proceedings
of the Soc. Psych. Research_, vol. iv. p. 532.]

[Footnote 9: _Revue Philosophique_, March 1887.]

[Footnote 10: Mrs. Verrall states that after long practice she "lost
all consciousness of the means which enabled her to guess, and _saw_
pictures of the cards."]

[Footnote 11: _Proceedings of the American Soc. Psych. Research_, pp.
302 _et seq._]

[Footnote 12: No doubt the great preponderance of geometrical figures
is in some measure due to the use of the word "diagram," which in
English would probably suggest to most persons a geometrical diagram.
But possibly the word has a different shade of meaning in American. It
is certain too that a considerable proportion of the persons who filled
in the cards were acquainted with the object of the inquiry.]

[Footnote 13: _Proc. American Soc. Psych. Research_, pp. 35-43.]

[Footnote 14: It is not possible to eliminate the operation of such
preferences in the percipient. But if care be taken that the series of
things to be guessed is chosen arbitrarily, the only effect of even a
decided preference for particular cards, numbers, etc., on the part
of the percipient will be to lessen the number of coincidences due to
thought-transference.]




