CHAPTER XV.

ON CLAIRVOYANCE IN THE NORMAL STATE.


There is probably no sharp line to be drawn between the cases just
described and those to be dealt with in the first part of the present
chapter. Both present the common feature that the percipient receives
a clear and detailed telepathic impression of an incident or scene in
the experience of some other person, and in both the condition of that
impression is manifestly not an effort of attention or an exceptional
state on the part of the person whose experience is thus represented,
but a specially stimulated receptivity on the part of the percipient.
But in some cases the conditions of this special receptivity are
found in trance, whilst in others the percipient is apparently in the
normal state. This would seem indeed to constitute only a superficial
difference, for in the majority of cases hitherto observed the waking
clairvoyance does not occur spontaneously, but requires special
preparation for its induction, and sometimes the percipient appears to
pass into a state resembling the earlier stages of a hypnotic trance.
Thus Mr. Keulemans, the well-known scientific draughtsman, who has had
many experiences of telepathic clairvoyance,[145] has noticed in the
course of his work, which consists largely of making drawings of birds
for lithographic reproduction, that, in his own words,

    "Whenever strong impressions had got hold of my mind they had a
    tendency to develop themselves into a vivid mind-picture as soon as
    my eye and attention were concentrated upon the eye in the drawing;
    and that whenever I began darkening the iris, leaving the light
    speck the most prominent part, I would slowly pass off into a kind
    of dream-state. The mere act of drawing the eye is not enough to
    bring me into this state, or I should experience such a state at
    least once a day, which I do not. But if a strong mental impression
    takes hold of me I begin drawing an eye.... The drawing will then
    convey to me the news, either in the form of a vague, imperfect
    representation of the person indicated in the impression, or by a
    correct hallucinatory picture of the event as it actually occurred,
    both as regards the person and the surroundings. Sometimes I cannot
    get at the vision at once; other thoughts and scenes interfere.
    But when I begin to feel drowsy I know I shall have it right in
    a second; and here I lose normal consciousness. That there is an
    actual loss of consciousness I know from the fact that on one
    occasion my wife had been in the room talking to me, and not
    receiving a reply thought that something was wrong with me and
    shook my shoulder. The shake brought me back to my waking state."
    (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. viii. p. 517.)

But this would seem to be an extreme case, as under ordinary
circumstances there is no apparent loss of consciousness; and the
essential condition appears to be freedom from interruption and
preoccupation. But the percipient generally finds it helpful, if not
absolutely necessary, to employ a crystal, or some other object, for
the full development of the impression. The exact part played by the
crystal, glass of water, shell, or other object, in facilitating the
hallucination, it is not easy to determine. In some cases, no doubt, it
acts by furnishing a _point de repère_, or nucleus of actual sensation,
round which the hallucination may develop. It is probable also that the
mere act of fixing the eyes on one particular point may, by shutting
out other sources of sensation, help to bring about the state of
quietude necessary for the experiments; and yet again it is likely that
the intrinsic virtue of the act, whatever that may be, is enhanced by
the self-suggestion that it will prove beneficial; if indeed its virtue
may not in some cases be altogether due to that cause. It should be
remembered in this connection that fixation of the eye on a small
bright object is one of the readiest means of inducing hypnosis.[146]


_Induced Clairvoyance._


No. 104.--From MISS X.

Miss X., some of whose experiments have already been quoted, has been
amongst the most constant and successful of crystal seers. The bulk of
her visions, as she has pointed out (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. v. p. 505),
consist either of mere after-images, recrudescent memories of things
seen and heard, or of fancy pictures built out of a rearrangement of
existing materials. But occasionally there occur visions of events
then taking place, or representations of the past experience of some
friend. Space will not permit of illustrations being given of the
first two classes, though the first especially has some bearing on
our researches. The following account of what appears to have been a
telepathic vision is included by Mr. Myers in a paper on the subliminal
consciousness (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. viii. p. 491). D. is the friend
mentioned in Chapter V., p. 122.

    "On August 10th of this year [1892] D. went with her family to
    spend the autumn at a country house which they had taken furnished,
    and which neither of us had ever seen. I was also away from home,
    the distance between us being at least 200 miles.

    "On the morning of the 12th I received a pencil note from her,
    evidently written with difficulty, saying that she had been very
    fiercely attacked by a savage dog, from which she and our own
    little terrier had defended themselves and each other as best they
    could, receiving a score or so of wounds between them before they
    could summon any one to their assistance. She gave me no details,
    assuming that, as often happens between us, I should have received
    intimation of her danger before the news could reach me by ordinary
    methods.

    "D. was extremely disappointed on hearing that I had known nothing.
    I had not consulted the crystal on the day of the accident, and
    had received no intimation. Begging her to tell me nothing further
    as to the scene of her adventure, I sought for it in the crystal
    on Sunday, 14th, and noted the following details:--The attacking
    dog was a large black retriever, and our terrier held him by the
    throat while D. beat at him in the rear. I saw also the details of
    D.'s dress. But all this I knew or could guess. What I could not
    know was that the terrier's collar lay upon the ground, that the
    struggle took place upon a lawn beyond which lay earth--a garden
    bed probably--overshadowed by an aucuba bush.

    "On September 9th I had an opportunity of repeating all this to Mr.
    Myers, and on the 10th I joined D. at their country house. The rest
    of the story I give in her own words:--

    From D.

    "'As we were somewhat disappointed that no intimation of the
    accident which had occurred to me had reached Miss X., she
    determined to try to call up a mental picture of the scene where it
    had occurred, and if possible to verify it when visiting us later
    on.

    "'On the night of her arrival at C----, we were not able to go over
    the whole of the grounds alone, and it was therefore not until the
    following morning that we went together for the special purpose of
    fixing on the exact spot. Miss X. was in front, as I feared some
    unconscious sign of recognition on my part might spoil the effect
    of her choice. The garden is a very large one, and we wandered for
    some time without fixing on a spot, the sole clue given by Miss X.
    being that she "could not get the right place, it wanted a _light_
    bush." I pointed out several, silver maples, etc., in various
    directions, but none would do, and she finally walked down to the
    place where the accident had occurred, close to a large aucuba
    (the _only_ one, I believe, in the shrubbery), and said, "This must
    be it; it has the path and the grass and the bush, as it should,
    but I expected it to be much farther from the house."

    "'I may add that I was not myself aware of this bush, but as I was
    studying them all at the time we were attacked by the dog, and as
    this one is close to the spot where I was knocked down, it seems
    possible that it was the last I noticed, and it may therefore have
    influenced me more than I knew.'"

Mr. Myers adds:--

    "I understand that there are a good many acres of ground round the
    house in question, and that the dog's attack was made within fifty
    yards of the house--plainly an unlikely place for a struggle so
    long protracted without the arrival of help."

As the crystal picture was described to Mr. Myers before its
verification, there was no room for the reading back of details from
the actual scene.


No. 105.--From MISS X.

Miss X. has also succeeded on several occasions in obtaining telepathic
information by holding a shell to her ear. Of one such case she writes
(_ibid._, p. 494):--

    "On Saturday, June 11th, Mr. G. A. Smith spent some time with us
    attempting some thought-transference experiments, which were fairly
    successful, and interested me greatly. Mr. Smith left the house
    soon after seven. After dinner, I took up the shell which had
    played some part--not very successfully--in our experiments. What
    occurred is best given in the following extracts:--

    "'[_June_ 11_th_, 1892] _Saturday Evening_, 8.30. [X. to G. A. S.]

    "'Why--when the shell was repeating to me just now what you said
    about clambering over rocks at Ramsgate--did it stop suddenly to
    ask, still in your voice, "Are you a vegetarian then?"... Perhaps
    you dined at [your next appointment], and declined animal food? Do
    tell me whether you are responsible for this irrelevance.'

    "'_June_ 13_th_, _Monday_. [G. A. S. to X.]

    "'... Without doubt the shell spoke the truth.... As you know,
    I left you soon after seven. After walking fifteen minutes I
    suddenly met Mr. M.... I was thinking about points in connection
    with the experiments we had been engaged in, and am afraid I did
    not follow his remarks very closely ... but he made some allusion
    to little dishes at a vegetarian restaurant somewhere, and
    immediately feeling an interest in the question whether he was a
    champion of the vegetarian cause, I interrupted him with _"Are you
    a vegetarian then?"_ I believe these are the exact words I used. He
    will be sure to remember this, and must be questioned.'

    "'_June_ 23_rd_. [G. A. S. to X.]

    "'I have to-day walked over the course which I took on June 11th,
    from [Miss X.'s house] to the spot where I met Mr. M. It took just
    eleven minutes. If I left you at 7.15, it was probably about 7.30,
    or a very few minutes later, that I put the query to Mr. M.'"

    Mr. M. was away from home, and though at once applied to for
    corroboration, did not send a written statement till June 22nd,
    when he writes to Mr. Smith (after failing to recall the exact
    particulars of the previous conversation):--

    "The main fact remains that you asked me, to the best of my
    belief--bearing on my strong praise of the cooking at the Oxford
    Street Café--whether 'I was a vegetarian.' That is the core of the
    whole matter, and that is _sound_."

From Mr. Smith's statement it would appear that the voice in the
shell reproduced words actually spoken about three-quarters of an
hour before. That is, as is very generally the case, the clairvoyante
perceived, not the events actually happening at the moment, but events
already passed and chronicled in the memories of those who took part
in them. This fact, which seems to have been commonly overlooked
by the earlier writers on the subject, is in itself a very strong
argument for the telepathic explanation of clairvoyance. Knowledge of a
contemporaneous scene might be conceived as due to independent vision
on the part of the percipient; knowledge of what is already past can
most readily be explained as derived from other minds.[147]


No. 106.--From DR. BACKMAN.

This explanation is very clearly indicated in the following case,
quoted from the paper already referred to (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol. vii.
p. 216). Dr. Backman, after describing how occasionally he asked his
subject, while awake, to look in the crystal, writes:--

    "I told the clairvoyant, Miss Olsen, to see in the crystal what
    Miss ----, who was present, had been doing the night before. After
    a few moments she said that she saw a meadow in the crystal, and
    in it a certain number (giving the number correctly) of ladies and
    gentlemen, who were dancing and drinking champagne. This seemed to
    her very improbable, because it was then November, a season that
    is not chosen in this country [Sweden] for picnics. She described
    minutely several other things which were not written down, but were
    quite correct, according to what Miss ---- said later on."

In a letter dated December 19th, 1890, Dr. Backman adds:--

    "Several persons were present. No notes were taken, but the story
    made so much sensation that it has not been forgotten. Miss ----
    supplemented the account to-day by reminding me that on looking
    into the crystal Miss Olsen first gave a perfect description of a
    lady with whom Miss ---- had talked on meeting her in the street
    the day before; she described her face, her dress, etc., very
    accurately, and said besides that she had two gold rings on the
    fourth finger of her left hand (a sign of marriage). After that
    Miss Olsen suddenly began to laugh and said: 'Miss ---- is in a
    merry company--they are dancing--the corks of the champagne bottles
    are jumping,' etc. Miss ---- cannot remember that any wrong detail
    was given by Miss Olsen, except that she thinks the number of
    persons present was not correctly given."

With Dr. Backman's permission we wrote to Miss ---- asking for her
confirmation of these incidents, and she replied as follows, on March
8th, 1891:--

    "I am very willing to give you a description of what I saw and
    heard at Dr. Backman's the day he has mentioned in his letter to
    you.

    "When I came to him, he made a hypnotic experiment with Miss Olsen,
    who should endeavour to find some papers lying somewhere in Dr.
    Backman's apartment, and, to my great surprise, she succeeded in
    finding them. After her being awakened, Dr. Backman gave her a
    large glass button and asked her to look in it and see if she could
    find out what I had done the day before. She succeeded even in this
    to an astonishing degree."


No. 107.--From SIR JOSEPH BARNBY.

In the next case, however, the vision appears to have been as nearly
as possible contemporaneous with the event. Miss A. is a lady who has
had many telepathic experiments of a striking kind. She is extremely
short-sighted and a bad visualist, but her crystal visions she
describes as being clear and well defined, as if she were looking
on a real scene through strong glasses. The following account of an
incident in Miss A.'s experience is given by Sir Joseph Barnby, who
was a witness before the verification. His account has been revised
throughout by Lady Radnor, who has interpolated an explanatory note.
Sir Joseph writes, in November 1892:--

    "I was invited by Lord and Lady Radnor to the wedding of their
    daughter, Lady Wilma Bouverie, which took place August 15th, 1889.

    "I was met at Salisbury by Lord and Lady Radnor and driven to
    Longford Castle. In the course of the drive, Lady Radnor said
    to me: 'We have a young lady staying with us in whom, I think,
    you will be much interested. She possesses the faculty of seeing
    visions, and is otherwise closely connected with the spiritual
    world. Only last night she was looking in her crystal and described
    a room which she saw therein, as a kind of London dining-room.
    [The room described was not in London but at L., and Miss A.
    particularly remarked that the floor was in large squares of black
    and white marble--as it is in the big hall at L., where family
    prayers are said.--H. M. RADNOR.] With a little laugh, she added,
    'And the family are evidently at prayers, the servants are kneeling
    at the chairs round the room and the prayers are being read by a
    tall and distinguished-looking gentleman with a very handsome, long
    grey beard.' With another little laugh, she continued: 'A lady
    just behind him rises from her knees and speaks to him. He puts
    her aside with a wave of the hand, and continues his reading.'
    The young lady here gave a careful description of the lady who had
    risen from her knees.'

    "Lady Radnor then said: 'From the description given, I cannot help
    thinking that the two principal personages described are Lord and
    Lady L., but I shall ask Lord L. this evening, as they are coming
    by a later train, and I should like you to be present when the
    answer is given.'

    "The same evening, after dinner, I was talking to Lord L. when Lady
    Radnor came up to him and said: 'I want to ask you a question. I am
    afraid you will think it a very silly one, but in any case I hope
    you will not ask me why I have put the question?' To this Lord L.
    courteously assented. She then said: 'Were you at home last night?'
    He replied, 'Yes.' She said: 'Were you having family prayers at
    such a time last evening?' With a slight look of surprise he
    replied, 'Yes, we were.' She then said: 'During the course of the
    prayers did Lady L. rise from her knees and speak to you, and did
    you put her aside with a wave of the hand?' Much astonished, Lord
    L. answered: 'Yes, that was so, but may I inquire why you have
    asked this question?' To which Lady Radnor answered: 'You promised
    you wouldn't ask me that!'"

In commenting on the account, Mr. Myers adds:--

    "This incident has been independently recounted to me both by Lady
    Radnor and by Miss A. herself. Another small point not given by Sir
    J. Barnby is that Miss A. did not at first understand that family
    prayers were going on, but exclaimed: 'Here are a number of people
    coming into the room. Why, they're smelling their chairs!' This
    scene may have been exactly contemporaneous." (_Proc. S.P.R._, vol.
    viii. pp. 502, 503.)


_Spontaneous Clairvoyance._

This incident was unquestionably very odd, but its evidential value is
not lessened by that fact. Instances of a similar detailed perception
of events at a distance are occasionally found to occur spontaneously.
Two or three cases coming under this category have indeed already been
quoted in Chapters VII. and VIII. The type, however, is interesting and
important, and it is perhaps worth while citing a few more illustrative
cases. It should be noted, however, that whereas in the cases of
induced clairvoyance so far considered there is little evidence of any
active contribution on the part of other persons to the percipient's
impression, in the majority of the spontaneous instances the central
figure in the vision was undergoing, or had just emerged from, some
unusual experience, and his condition appears to have contributed
to bring about the result. In the case which follows the vision
represented a dying man. It is noteworthy that, as in other cases
already given (_e.g._, No. 46), the percipient's impression presented
a substantially accurate picture of the scene of the drama, but of a
scene which preceded its telepathic representation by some hours. It
seems probable, therefore, that the vision was merely the reflection
of the thoughts of one of the bystanders. And, indeed, in any case it
would be difficult to attribute the impression to the mind of the dying
man, who could scarcely be supposed to have a mental picture of himself
in the act of falling overboard. In the present instance it does not
appear that the percipient was personally acquainted with any of the
witnesses of the scene, amongst whom, on this interpretation, the agent
must be sought, and in this respect the case presents a parallel to
Miss A.'s vision.


No. 108.--From MRS. PAQUET.

The case comes to us through the American Branch of the S.P.R. The
evidence has been prepared by Mr. A. B. Wood, who received an account
of the incident from Mrs. Paquet at a personal interview. Mr. Wood
writes on April 29th, 1890:--[148]

    "On October 24th, 1889, Edmund Dunn, brother of Mrs. Agnes Paquet,
    was serving as fireman on the tug _Wolf_, a small steamer engaged
    in towing vessels in Chicago Harbour. At about 3 o'clock A.M.,
    the tug fastened to a vessel, inside the piers, to tow her up the
    river. While adjusting the tow-line Mr. Dunn fell or was thrown
    overboard by the tow-line, and drowned."

    _Mrs. Paquet's Statement._

    "I arose about the usual hour on the morning of the accident,
    probably about six o'clock. I had slept well throughout the night,
    had no dreams or sudden awakenings. I awoke feeling gloomy and
    depressed, which feeling I could not shake off. After breakfast my
    husband went to his work, and, at the proper time, the children
    were gotten ready and sent to school, leaving me alone in the
    house. Soon after this I decided to steep and drink some tea,
    hoping it would relieve me of the gloomy feelings aforementioned. I
    went into the pantry, took down the tea canister, and as I turned
    around my brother Edmund--or his exact image--stood before me
    and only a few feet away. The apparition stood with back towards
    me, or, rather, partially so, and was in the act of falling
    forward--away from me--seemingly impelled by two ropes or a loop
    of rope drawing against his legs. The vision lasted but a moment,
    disappearing over a low railing or bulwark, but was very distinct.
    I dropped the tea, clasped my hands to my face, and exclaimed, 'My
    God! Ed. is drowned.'

    "At about 10.30 A.M. my husband received a telegram from Chicago,
    announcing the drowning of my brother. When he arrived home he said
    to me, 'Ed. is sick in hospital at Chicago; I have just received
    a telegram,' to which I replied, 'Ed. is drowned; I saw him go
    overboard.' I then gave him a minute description of what I had
    seen. I stated that my brother, as I saw him, was bareheaded, had
    on a heavy, blue sailor's shirt, no coat, and that he went over
    the rail or bulwark. I noticed that his pants' legs were rolled
    up enough to show the white lining inside. I also described the
    appearance of the boat at the point where my brother went overboard.

    "I am not nervous, and neither before nor since have I had any
    experience in the least degree similar to that above related.

    "My brother was not subject to fainting or vertigo.

    "AGNES PAQUET."


    _Mr. Paquet's Statement._

    "At about 10.30 o'clock A.M., October 24th, 1889, I received
    a telegram from Chicago, announcing the drowning of my
    brother-in-law, Edmund Dunn, at 3 o'clock that morning. I went
    directly home, and, wishing to break the force of the sad news I
    had to convey to my wife, I said to her: 'Ed. is sick in hospital
    at Chicago; I have just received a telegram.' To which she replied:
    'Ed. is drowned; I saw him go overboard.' She then described to
    me the appearance and dress of her brother as described in her
    statement; also the appearance of the boat, etc.

    "I started at once for Chicago, and when I arrived there I found
    the appearance of that part of the vessel described by my wife
    to be exactly as she had described it, though she had never seen
    the vessel; and the crew verified my wife's description of her
    brother's dress, etc., except that they thought that he had his
    hat on at the time of the accident. They said that Mr. Dunn had
    purchased a pair of pants a few days before the accident occurred,
    and as they were a trifle long before, wrinkling at the knees, he
    had worn them rolled up, showing the white lining as seen by my
    wife."

Visions of this kind are of rare occurrence with waking percipients.
The preoccupations of the daytime are probably in themselves sufficient
to prevent the emergence of telepathic impressions under ordinary
circumstances. But in the present instance it will be observed that
the vision occurred in an interval of comparative rest after a period
of active occupation. The feeling of gloom and depression mentioned
by Mrs. Paquet may have marked the period of incubation, so to speak,
of a latent impression of calamity. But a comparison of the case with
those which follow suggests that this feeling of depression may have
been not the effect, but the necessary condition of the transmission of
the agent's thought, and that a slight degree of fatigue or ill-health
may under certain circumstances facilitate the emergence of impressions
of this kind. It is, at all events, noteworthy that in two of the
three cases quoted the percipient was suffering from unusual fatigue
or depression, and in the third was recovering from a long illness. In
the next two cases the percipient's experience may have been actually
synchronous with the events perceived.


No. 109.--From MR. F. A. MARKS.

The accounts, from which extracts are given below, were published in
the _Oneida Circular_ (U.S.A.) for January 19th, 1874. The percipient,
Mr. F. A. Marks, writes:--

    W. C., _January_ 14_th_, 1874.

    "You wish the simple facts of my dream. They are these:--One
    afternoon in October [1873], being tired, I lay down to rest. I
    soon fell asleep; at least I have no reason for thinking that I did
    not sleep. I was not on the bed more than a few minutes. During
    this time I dreamed of being near a large body of water. I knew
    it to be the Oneida Lake. The wind was blowing violently, and the
    waves ran exceedingly high. While standing near the lake I felt
    under a strong disposition to sleep. My eyes were heavy, they would
    close themselves. It was with an exertion that I kept them open.
    I was like a man under nightmare; struggling to rouse myself, yet
    only partially successful. Darkness was settling over me. Suddenly,
    when the wind was blowing a gale and the waves seemed rolling one
    over the other, a small sail-boat broke upon my sight, driven
    wildly before the storm. For the moment it seemed as if it would
    be lost. It appeared to be at the mercy of the waves, for they
    rose high above its sides and almost concealed it at times. It was
    manned by two persons--one in the after part; the other _trying to
    pull down the sail!_ Their situation was critical. At this moment a
    feeling of horror shot through me as I recognised in the man whose
    full length I saw standing near the mast and struggling with the
    sail my brother Charles! The man in the stern I did not recognise.
    In the time of the greatest peril, something--I can scarcely tell
    what; I dare not call it an apparition--gave me the impression that
    good beings were interested and watchful over the voyagers.

    "The shock I received on seeing my brother did not allow me
    to sleep long. On awaking I was troubled, and thought I would
    immediately write to Charles, entreating him to be careful.
    Afterwards, thinking it merely a dream, I turned my attention from
    writing, but I mentioned to Frank Smith that I had a troubled dream
    about Charles. After this experience, perhaps three or four days, a
    letter was received from Mrs. Mallory giving an account of Charles'
    condition when he returned to the Joppa station.

    "This letter recalled the dream; and the coincidence of time and
    circumstances made a deep impression on me, though I was unable
    then, and am now, to accurately identify the time of my vision with
    the time of actual peril described in Mrs. Mallory's letter. (The
    letter, however, came so soon as to make it certain that the peril
    and the vision were nearly, if not exactly, _simultaneous_.)"

Mr. C. R. Marks explains that on a beautiful day in October he and a
friend sailed eighteen miles down the lake in a small open boat. They
started for the return voyage on the day following, at 2.45 P.M., in
threatening weather. They had gone but a short distance when a violent
storm came on, and they were in a position of considerable peril:--

    "To add to our apprehensions it began raining, and the wind instead
    of slacking was evidently increasing. We had gone about two miles
    when I was startled by a cry from Arthur to 'look out for the
    sail!' as it was shifting to the other side. I lay down to let the
    sail pass over me, and got on to the other side of the boat to
    counteract the effect of the sail. This is told in a few words,
    but the actual event seemed to take a long time. When down in the
    boat I heard and felt the swash of the waves coming in, and for a
    moment I had the impression that Arthur was already in the water
    and that it would soon be my turn. But on looking round I saw he
    was still in his place, and also that we had shipped considerable
    water. The next thing was to take in sail, and that quickly. I let
    go the halyards, but the sail would not come down, as it was held
    by a miserable toggle at the top. In the excitement of the moment
    I jumped upon the seat at the imminent risk of capsizing the boat,
    and pulled down the sail as far as it would go, which left it
    about six feet high. This was still dangerous, as the slack of the
    sail was distended, looking like a huge bag. This was remedied by
    cutting away the rings in the lower part of the sail and winding up
    the lower yard. After this, with considerable baling, we got along
    tolerably well."

Appended is an extract from a letter written by Mr. B. Bristol,
with whom Mr. F. A. Marks was working at the time of the vision,
corroborating the accounts given above:--

    "I was living in Wallingford at that time, raising small fruit. My
    principal helper was a young man named Frederic Marks, a graduate
    of Yale Scientific School. Frederic had a brother named Charles,
    who was living then in Central New York, near Oneida Lake. One
    rainy afternoon Frederic went upstairs to his room and lay down on
    a lounge. An hour or so after he came back and said he had just
    seen his brother Charles in vision, he thought, as he was not
    conscious of having been asleep. Charles was in a small sail-boat,
    and a companion with him, who sat in the stern steering. There
    seemed to be a wild storm prevailing, for the sea ran high. Charles
    stood in the bow grasping the mast with one arm, with the other
    he had hold of the boom, which appeared to have broken loose. His
    dangerous position so frightened Frederic that he awoke, or the
    vision departed."

In the next case the coincidence was not of itself a striking one, nor,
as the account was not sent to the American S.P.R. until six years
after the event, is the evidence as good as in the last narrative.
But as an incident in itself trivial has remained in the memories of
the other persons concerned, as well as in that of the percipient, it
may be presumed to have made some impression at the time. The case is
quoted from the _Proceedings of the American S.P.R._ (pp. 464-467).


No. 110.--From MRS. L. Z.

    "_June_ 6_th_, 1887.

    "About the end of March 1881, after recovering from severe illness,
    while I was yet confined to my bed, I had the following experience.
    I was staying at the time at 172 Benefit Street, Providence, R.I.

    "I had been asleep and suddenly became, as it were, half awake,
    being conscious of some of the objects in the room. I then heard
    a voice as if from the room adjoining, and made an effort to see
    the speaker, but I found myself unable to move. Then appeared,
    as though in a mist, an ordinary sofa, and behind it the vague
    outline of a woman's figure. I did not recognise the figure, but
    I recognised the voice which I heard; it was the voice of my
    hostess, Mrs. B., who was at that time not in the house. She was
    saying, 'I am ill and all worn out. Mrs. Z. has been so nervous,
    and in such a peculiar mental state, that it has quite affected my
    health' (or words to that effect), 'but I wouldn't for the world
    have her know it.' I then made a stronger effort to distinguish
    the figure, and woke completely to find myself in my room with my
    nurse. I inquired of the nurse who was in the other room, which was
    used as a sleeping-room by my child and her nurse. She said that
    no one was there; but I was so convinced that the voice had come
    from there that I insisted upon her going and looking. She went,
    but found no one there, and the door into the hall was latched. I
    then looked at the clock, which was opposite my bed. It was about 5
    P.M. In the evening, about 8 P.M., Mrs. B. came up to see me, and
    I asked her where she had been that afternoon at 5 o'clock. She
    said that she had been at Mrs. G.'s (about two miles off). I said,
    'You were talking about me.' She said, 'Yes, I was,' looking very
    much surprised. I repeated to her what I had seemed to hear her
    say, word for word. She was much astonished, and was very curious
    as to what else I had heard or seen. I told her that it was all
    very vague, except the appearance of the sofa, which I described
    in detail as being covered with a peculiar striped linen cloth,
    green stripes about two inches wide, alternating with pale-drab
    stripes, somewhat wider, which appeared to be the natural colour of
    the unbleached linen. She said that she had spoken the words which
    I had heard, and that she was at the time reclining on a sofa, but
    she said that the sofa was covered with green velvet.

    "Next day Mrs. G. paid me a visit, and after hearing my story she
    exclaimed, 'You're right. The sofa had at the time the covering
    which you describe; it had just been put on. There is green velvet
    under the covering. I suppose Mrs. B. didn't notice the cover.'"

Mrs. B. writes:--

    "In the year 1881, while living in Providence, on Benefit Street,
    No. 272, Mrs. Z. was with me, and during the winter of 1880 and
    the spring of 1881 she was in a peculiar mental state, and on
    two occasions read my thoughts and heard my voice. I remember
    distinctly on one occasion, when I returned from a visit to a
    friend, Mrs. Z. repeated the conversation that had passed between
    my friend and myself, and spoke of my lying on a lounge that had
    a striped covering. I said, 'No, it was a green plush,' but found
    afterwards she was right, as the summer covering had been put on.

    "ELIZABETH L. B.

    "BROOKLYN, N.Y., _June_ 1887."

Mrs. G. writes from Providence, July 12th, 1887:--

    "When I received your note I could not at all recall the
    circumstances of the vision you referred to, but afterwards Mrs.
    B. refreshed my memory upon the subject, and I distinctly recalled
    it. It was as Mrs. Z. related it to you. At the time it occurred, I
    remember, I thought it quite marvellous.

    "Sickness had prevented my writing you these few lines before.

    "C. B. Y. G."

Even if the conversation was correctly reported, it is probably not
beyond the range of conjecture by a morbidly sensitive invalid;
but the details given of the appearance of the sofa cover seem to
indicate a telepathic faculty, like Dr. Phinuit's, of drawing on the
agent's unconscious perceptions. Mrs. L. Z. gives also an account of
a voluntarily induced clairvoyant dream, in connection with the same
friend, which occurred about this time, and this account also Mrs. B.
is able to corroborate. The whole case is interesting as serving to
indicate that some conditions of disease may be favourable to this
form of telepathy, and as being the only case which I am able to quote
of spontaneous clairvoyance in which the impressions transferred were
of quite trivial incidents. Mrs. Z. appears to have been in a state
between sleeping and waking.

The next case occurred in a dream at night. The dream, it will be
noted, caused the percipient to awake.


No. 111.--From MRS. FREESE.

    "GRANITE LODGE, CHISELHURST,
    _March_ 1884.

    "In September 1881 I had another curious dream, so vivid that I
    seemed to _see_ it.

    "My two boys of eighteen and sixteen were staying in the Black
    Forest, under the care of a Dr. Fresenius. I must say here that I
    always supposed the boys would go everywhere together, and I never
    should have supposed that in that lonely country, so new to them,
    they would be out after dark. My husband and I were staying at St.
    Leonards, and one Saturday night I woke at about 12 o'clock (rather
    before, as I heard it strike) having just seen vividly a dark night
    on a mountain, and my eldest boy lying on his back at the bottom of
    some steep place, his eyes wide open, and saying, 'Good-bye, mother
    and father, I shall never see you again.' I woke with a feeling of
    anxiety, and the next morning when I told it to my husband, though
    we both agreed it was absurd to be anxious, yet he would write and
    tell the boys we hoped they would never go out alone after dark. To
    my surprise my eldest boy, to whom I wrote the dream, wrote back
    expressing his great astonishment, for on that Saturday night he
    was coming home over the mountains, past 11 o'clock; it was pitch
    dark, and he slipped and fell down some 12 feet or so, and landed
    on his back, looking up to the sky. However, he was not much hurt,
    and soon picked himself up and got home all right. He did not say
    what thoughts passed through his mind as he fell."

In answer to inquiries, Mrs. Freese adds:--

    "_Before_ my son wrote about his fall in the Black Forest, I
    related my dream to my husband, and as he seemed a little moved
    by it, I wrote an account of it to my boy, saying his father did
    not wish them to be out after dark alone. I had not told my boy
    _when_ it was, deeming that immaterial, but when in his letter,
    received days after, he said, 'Was it Saturday night, because then
    so-and-so?' I remembered what I should not otherwise have noted,
    that it was Saturday night; for on the Sunday morning my husband,
    being much worried about some business matter, elected to spend the
    morning with me in the fields instead of going to church, and as
    much to divert his mind as anything I related to him my dream of
    the night before."

Mrs. Freese sent us the letter from her son, which contained the
following passage:--

    "With regard to your dream: did you dream it on September 3rd? if
    so it was on that night, coming home rather late, that I fell down
    a precipice of 8 feet, or perhaps more, in the dark, and might have
    broken my neck, but didn't. However, I don't think you will find
    me walking about after dark more than I can help, as the roads are
    very dark, and the fogs in the village awful.

    "FRED. E. FREESE."

    [September 3rd, 1881, was a Saturday.]

Mr. Freese wrote on March 7th, 1884, to confirm his wife's account of
the dream.

An account by Dr. Gibotteau, given in the _Annales des Sciences
Psychiques_, Nov.-Dec. 1892, deserves consideration in this connection.
It is the record of a series of unusually successful experiments in the
transfer of visual images. But the success obtained was apparently due
to a condition of spontaneous clairvoyant perceptivity on the part of
the subject. The percipient, who was throughout in a state not clearly
distinguishable from that of normal wakefulness, was a head-nurse
at the hospital to which Dr. Gibotteau was attached. The occurrence
took place in 1888. Madame R. has now remarried and Dr. Gibotteau has
lost sight of her, so that her testimony cannot be obtained, and
unfortunately Dr. Gibotteau appears not to have committed the incident
to writing until 1892. The account therefore represents merely the
general impression left after the lapse of some years upon the memory
of a trained observer by a very unusual and striking experience.
Briefly, Dr. Gibotteau reports that he succeeded in inducing in
Madame R., by the mere silent will, an immense number of striking
hallucinatory, or rather semi-hallucinatory mental pictures. The ideas
thus transferred included transformations and imaginary movements of
objects actually present in the room; the appearance of human figures
and animals, a serpent, a rabbit, a dog, horses, a bear rampant; and
the disappearance of Dr. Gibotteau himself, leaving behind him an empty
arm-chair. The séance lasted for nearly three hours, with very few
failures of any kind, and left the narrator much exhausted.[149]

The experience, as described, it will be seen, was of an almost
unprecedented kind. It is by no means clear that under a natural
classification either this or others of the somewhat heterogeneous
phenomena described in the present and preceding chapters would be
grouped under the same genus, or that any of them are rightly called
telepathic. They are provisionally ascribed to telepathy, in the sense
already explained (p. 326, Chapter XIV.), because if we accept the
facts at all, that appears to be the cheapest solution. The writer is
not committed to telepathy as the true explanation; he has adopted
it provisionally, as an alternative to some hypothetical faculty of
direct intuition beyond the range of sense. If to any reader who
accepts the writer's estimate of the alleged facts as beyond chance
or misrepresentation, the hypothesis of telepathy appears in such
cases to be strained, it may be replied that when the choice of
explanation seems to lie between telepathy and some faculty even more
dubious and more remote from ordinary analogies, it is right that
the hypothesis of telepathy should be strained--if necessary, to the
breaking-point--before we invoke a stage-deity to cut the knot.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 145: Several instances of Mr. Keulemans' telepathic
experiences are given in _Phantasms of the Living_ (cases 21, 38, 56,
184).]

[Footnote 146: It should perhaps be said that there is nothing in the
experience of the many persons who have so far tried crystal gazing,
at the instance of the S.P.R., to indicate risk of injury to health.
It is no doubt not advisable for an invalid, or for any one suffering
from headache, or undue fatigue, to try the experiment. Indeed, the
experience of Mrs. Verrall and others is that success under such
conditions is unattainable. But with ordinary care to avoid straining
the eyes, no evil effect, it is thought, need be apprehended; and
there is probably no form of experiment which at the cost of so
little trouble may be expected to yield results of so great interest
and value. There is of course no magic in the crystal; a glass
paper-weight, a mirror, or a glass of water will serve the purpose
equally well. Records of experiments will be welcomed by Mr. F. W. H.
Myers, from whose suggestive article many of the illustrations quoted
in the text are taken. (See _Proc._, vol. viii., p. 436, etc.)]

[Footnote 147: Of course in this case there is an alternative
explanation--viz., that Miss X. received the impression at the time
the words were spoken, and that the shell merely developed it for her
conscious self.]

[Footnote 148: _S.P.R._, vol. vi. pp. 33, 34.]

[Footnote 149: A translation of Dr. Gibotteau's account is given by Mr.
Myers, _Proc. S.P.R._, vol. viii. pp. 468, 469.]




