CHAPTER II.

    Society a system of exchanges--Security of individual
    property the principle of exchange--Alexander Selkirk and
    Robinson Crusoe--Imperfect appropriation and unprofitable
    labour                                                          14

CHAPTER III.

    Adventures of John Tanner--Habits of the American
    Indians--Their sufferings from famine, and from the absence
    among them of the principle of division of labour--Evils of
    irregular labour--Respect to property--Their present improved
    condition--Hudson's Bay Indians                                 23

CHAPTER IV.

    The Prodigal--Advantages of the poorest man in civilized life
    over the richest savage--Savings-banks, deposits, and
    interest--Progress of accumulation--Insecurity of capital,
    its causes and results--Property, its constituents--
    Accumulation of capital                                         38

CHAPTER V.

    Common interests of Capital and Labour--Labour directed by
    Accumulation--Capital enhanced by Labour--Balance of rights
    and duties--Relation of demand and supply--Money
    exchanges--Intrinsic and representative value of money          49

CHAPTER VI.

    Importance of capital to the profitable employment of
    labour--Contrast between the prodigal and the prudent man:
    the Dukes of Buckingham and Bridgewater--Making good for
    trade--Unprofitable consumption--War against capital in the
    middle ages--Evils of corporate privileges--Condition of the
    people under Henry VIII.                                        60

CHAPTER VII.

    Rights of labour--Effects of slavery on production--Condition
    of the Anglo Saxons--Progress of freedom in England--Laws
    regulating labour--Wages and prices--Poor-law--Law of
    settlement                                                      71

CHAPTER VIII.

    Possessions of the different classes in England--Condition of
    Colchester in 1301--Tools, stock-in-trade, furniture,
    &c.--Supply of food--Comparative duration of human life--Want
    of facilities for commerce--Plenty and civilization not
    productive of effeminacy--Colchester in the present day         82

CHAPTER IX.

    Certainty the stimulus to industry--Effects of
    insecurity--Instances of unprofitable labour--Former notions
    of commerce--National and class prejudices, and their remedy    96

CHAPTER X.

    Employment of machinery in manufactures and
    agriculture--Erroneous notions formerly prevalent on this
    subject--Its advantages to the labourer--Spade-husbandry--The
    principle of machinery--Machines and tools--Change in the
    condition of England consequent on the introduction of
    machinery--Modern New Zealanders and ancient Greeks--
    Hand-mills and water-mills                                     106

CHAPTER XI.

    Present and former condition of the country--Progress of
    cultivation--Evil influence of feudalism--State of
    agriculture in the sixteenth century--Modern
    improvements--Prices of wheat--Increased breadth of land
    under cultivation--Average consumption of wheat--Implements
    of agriculture now in use--Number of agriculturists in
    Great Britain                                                  124

CHAPTER XII.

    Production of a knife--Manufacture of iron--Raising coal--The
    hot-blast--Iron bridges--Rolling bar-iron--Making
    steel--Sheffield manufactures--Mining in Great
    Britain--Numbers engaged in mines and metal manufactures       139

CHAPTER XIII.

    Conveyance and extended use of coal--Consumption at various
    periods--Condition of the roads in the seventeenth and
    eighteenth centuries--Advantages of good roads--Want of roads
    in Australia--Turnpike-roads--Canals--Railway of
    1680--Railway statistics                                       157

CHAPTER XIV.

    Houses--The Pyramids--Mechanical power--Carpenters'
    tools--American machinery for building--Bricks--Slate--
    Household fittings and furniture--Paper-hangings--Carpets--
    Glass--Pottery--Improvements effected through the
    reduction or repeal of duties on domestic requirements         174

