CHAPTER VII. THE EVOLUTIONISTS

WE have seen how the Transcendentalists tried to suppress vivisection,
in spite of all it has done for the health and happiness of mankind. The
sanguinary intolerance of Robespierre and other disciples of Rousseau
was described earlier in this volume. And the notorious inability of
Carlyle and Garrison to argue calmly with those who differed with
them further illustrates the tendency of confidence in one's own
infallibility. Only he who knows that he may be wrong can admit
consistently that those who reject his favourite beliefs may be right.
The Parliament of Religions showed that there has been a growing
conviction of the equal rights of holders of all forms of belief and
unbelief; this conviction has been promoted by recognition of two great
facts: first, that knowledge is based upon experience, and, second, that
no one's life is so complete that he has nothing to learn from other
people. If they do not believe as he does, it may be merely because
experience has taught them truth which he still needs to learn. Each
one knows only in part; and therefore no one can afford to take it for
granted that anyone else is completely in error.

I. This tolerant method of thought has gained greatly in popularity
since Darwin proved its capacity to solve the problem of the origin
of man. The possibility that all forms of life, even the highest, are
results of a natural process of gradual development has often been
suggested by poets and philosophers. The probability was much discussed
by men of science early in the nineteenth century; but it was not until
1858 that sufficient evidence was presented to justify acceptance of
evolution as anything better than merely a theory. Twenty-one years had
then elapsed since Darwin began a long series of investigations. In
the first place, he collected an irresistible number of cases of the
influence of environment in causing variations in structure, and of the
tendency of such variations to be inherited. Most men who accepted
these propositions admitted their insufficiency to account for the
multiplicity of species; but the explanation became complete when Darwin
discovered that any plant or animal which is peculiarly fit for survival
in the continual struggle for existence is likely to become largely
represented in the next generation. A spontaneous variation which
prolongs the life of its possessor may thus become not only more common
but more firmly fixed in successive generations, until a new species is
established.

To this tendency Darwin gave the name "natural selection"; but this term
literally implies a deliberate choice by some superhuman power. Herbert
Spencer proposed the phrase, "survival of the fittest"; but it must be
remembered that the fitness is not necessarily that of greater moral
worth.

There may be merely such a superiority in strength and cunning
as enables savages to devour a missionary. Spencer says that "the
expression, 'survival of the fittest,'" merely means "the leaving alive
of those which are best able to utilise surrounding aids to life, and
best able to combat or avoid surrounding dangers." Weeds are fitter than
flowers for natural growth; and Joan of Arc proved unfit to survive in
the contest against wicked men.

This discovery of Darwin's made it his duty to avow a view which was so
unpopular that he felt as if he were about "confessing a murder." He was
making "a big book" out of the facts he had collected, when a manuscript
statement of conclusions like his own was sent him by Wallace, who had
discovered independently the great fact of the survival of the fittest.
Darwin wished at first to resign all claim to originality; but his
friends insisted on his taking a share of the honour of the discovery.
Accordingly an essay, which he had written in 1844, was read in company
with that sent him by Wallace before the Linnaean Society, in London, on
July 1, 1858. The importance of the new view was so well understood that
the entire first edition, amounting to 1250 copies, of Darwin's _Origin
of Species_, which book he wrote soon after, was sold on the day of
publication, November 24, 1859. Other editions followed rapidly, with
translations into many languages. No book of the century has been more
revolutionary.

II. Theologians still insisted on the supernatural creation of each
species of plant or animal, and especially of the human race, in
its final form. The inference that man had been developed by natural
processes out of some lower animal, was easily drawn from the _Origin of
Species_, though not expressly stated therein; and there was great alarm
among the clergy. An Anglican bishop, who was nicknamed "Soapy Sam" on
account of his subserviency to public opinion, declared in a leading
quarterly that Darwin held views "absolutely incompatible" with
the Bible, and tending to "banish God from nature." Other prominent
Episcopalians called the new book "an attempt to dethrone God," and
propagate infidelity. Cardinal Manning denounced the "brutal philosophy"
which taught that "There is no God, and the ape is our Adam." Both
Catholics and Protestants started anti-Darwinian societies in London,
and, in 1863, Huxley saw "the whole artillery of the pulpit brought upon
the doctrine of evolution and its supporters." The example of England
was followed promptly by France and Germany. America was distracted
by civil war; and her men of science were so few and timid that the
denunciations of Darwinism which were prompted by the theological and
metaphysical prejudices of Agassiz were generally accepted as final
decisions. The position of the Unitarians and Transcendentalists may be
judged from the fact that, during a period of nearly three years after
the publication of the _Origin of Species_, nothing was said about
Darwinism in the extremely liberal divinity school where I was then
a student. Evolutionism had to look for advocates in America to
Spiritualists like Denton or unbelievers like Underwood at that period.

Clerical opposition increased the general unwillingness of scientific
men to snatch up new views. As early as 1863, however, Darwin received
the support of the famous geologist, Lyell, as well as of a younger
naturalist destined to achieve even more brilliant success. Huxley has
distinguished himself in arguments against the scientific value of the
Bible. Among his other exploits was a demonstration that a chain, in
which no link is missing, connects the horse with a small, extinct
quadruped possessed of comparatively few equine peculiarities. In this
case, transformation of species is an undeniable fact. Other young
naturalists in England, as well as in Germany, gradually became willing
to push the new view to its last results; and Darwin was encouraged
to publish, in 1871, his elaborate account of the origin of our race,
entitled _The Descent of Man_. The wrath of the churches blazed forth
once more; and Gladstone entered the arena. Englishmen ventured no
longer to say much about the differences between Moses and Darwin; for
the obvious retort would have been, "So much the worse for Moses." A
German Lutheran, however, bade his congregation choose between Christ
and Darwin; and the infallibility of Moses was asserted so zealously by
a Parisian Catholic as to win formal thanks from the Pope.

America was now wide awake; irreligious tendencies were assigned to
evolutionism by the president of Yale, as well as by some Princeton
professors; and one of these latter warned believers in the development
of man that they would be punished as infidels after death. The verdict
of men of science has at last been pronounced so plainly as to be
accepted by thoroughly educated people in the Northern States; but
the Southerners are more bigoted. Even so late as 1894, a professor
of biology at the University of Texas was dismissed, in violation of
contract, for teaching evolutionism. A similar offence had been found
sufficient, ten years before, by the Presbyterians of South Carolina,
for driving a devout member of their own sect from his chair in a
theological seminary. That popular writer on geology, Winchell, was
requested in 1878 by a Methodist bishop to resign a professorship at
Nashville, Tennessee, where he had expressed doubt of the descent of
all men from Adam. The geologist refused to resign, and the chair was
suppressed.

Voltaire's chief grievance was the intolerance of Christianity. Paine
and Bradlaugh complained that there was much immorality in the Old
Testament. The most damaging of recent attacks have been made in the
name of science. Genesis and geology had been found irreconcilable
before the appearance of Darwinism; but the new system widened the
breach. The most serious offence to the theologian, however, was that
he could not longer point without danger of contradiction to beneficial
peculiarities in the structure of plants and animals, as marks of the
divine hand. The old argument about design was met by a demonstration
that such peculiarities were apt to arise spontaneously, and become
permanent under the pressure of the struggle for existence. The
theologian has had to retreat to the position that Darwinism has not
accounted for the soul, the intellect, and especially the intuitions.

III. Whether Darwin succeeded or not in this part of his work is not so
important as the fact that, several years before he announced his great
discovery, an elaborate account of the process by which the powers of
thought and feeling have been developed gradually out of the lowest
forms of consciousness was given by Herbert Spencer. The first edition
of his _Principles of Psychology_, published in 1855, carried the
explanation so far as to show the real origin and value of the
intuitions. Their importance had been almost ignored by thinkers who
relied entirely on individual experience, and greatly overrated by the
Transcendentalists; but neither set of philosophers could explain
these mysterious ideas. The infallibility of conscience is not to be
reconciled with such facts as that Paul thought it his duty to persecute
the Christians, or that Garrison, Sumner, John Brown, and Stonewall
Jackson were among the most conscientious men of the century. The
ancient Greeks agreed in recognising justice, but not benevolence, among
the cardinal virtues; precisely the opposite error was made by Kant
and Miss Cobbe; and a tabular view of all the lists of fundamental
intuitions which have been made out by noted metaphysicians might
be mistaken for a relic from the Tower of Babel. Emerson's religious
instincts were not so much impressed as Parker's with the personality of
God and immortality; but the difference seems almost insignificant when
we remember what ideas of theology arose spontaneously in New Zealand.
How widely the intuition of beauty varies may be judged from the
inability of aesthetic Chinamen to admire the white teeth and rosy
cheeks of an English belle. Intuition is plainly not an infallible
oracle; but is it merely a misleading prejudice?

The puzzle was solved when Spencer showed that intuition is a result of
the experience of the race. Courage, for instance, was so important
for the survival of a primitive tribe in the struggle against its
neighbours, that every man found his comfort and reputation depend
mainly on his prowess. If he fought desperately he gained wealth,
honour, and plenty of wives; but cowards were maltreated by other men
and scorned even by the women. The bravest man left the largest number
of offspring; and every boy was told so early and earnestly to be
courageous as to develop a pugnacious instinct, which has come down to
the present day in much greater strength than is needed for the ordinary
demands of civilised life. We love war too much, because our ancestors
were in danger of not loving it enough for their own safety. As courage
ceased to be the one all-important excellence, industry, fidelity, and
honesty were found so useful as to be encouraged with a care which has
done much to mould conscience into its present shape. Other virtues
were inculcated in the same way. The welfare of the family was found to
depend largely on the fidelity of wife to husband; and the result was
that chastity has held a much higher place in the feminine than in
the masculine conscience. So our religious instincts owe much of their
strength to the zeal with which our ancestors sought to avert the divine
wrath. Thus we have ideas which were originally only vague inferences
from primitive experience, but which have gradually gained such strength
and definiteness, that they have much more power than if we had thought
them out unaided by the past. Spencer himself says, "There have
been, and still are, developing in the race certain fundamental moral
intuitions" which "are the results of accumulated experiences of
utility, gradually organised and inherited," but "have come to be quite
independent of conscious experience." They "have no apparent basis in
the individual experiences of utility"; and thus conscience has acquired
its characteristic disinterestedness.

When we feel this inner prompting to a brave or honest action which
must be done promptly or left undone, it is our duty to act without
hesitation or regard to our own interest. We are serving our race in
the way which its experience has taught. Suppose, however, that there is
time enough for deliberation, and that we see a possibility of harm to
our neighbours, our family, or even to our own highest welfare. In this
case, we ought to compare the good and evil results carefully. We should
also do well to consider what was the decision of the consciences of
the best and wisest men under similar circumstances. If we neglect
these precautions, we may be in danger of following not conscience but
passion. There is also a possibility that conscience may embody only
such primitive ideas of duty as have since been found incorrect. This
has often been the case with persecutors and monarchists.

Generosity is still too apt to take an impulsive and reckless form which
perpetuates pauperism. Spencer has taught us that conscience is worthy
not only of obedience, but of education.

Spencer's attempt to substitute a thoughtful for a thoughtless
goodness of character has been much aided by his protest against such
undiscriminating exhortations to self-sacrifice as are constantly heard
from the pulpit. Good people, and especially good women, welcome the
idea of giving up innocent pleasure and enduring needless pain. The
glory of martyrdom blinds them to the fact that, as Spencer says in his
_Psychology_, "Pains are the correlatives of actions injurious to the
organism, while pleasures are the correlatives of actions conducive
to its welfare." In other words, "Pleasures are the incentives to
life-supporting acts, and pains the deterrents from life-destroying
acts." Abstinence from pleasure may involve loss of health.
Self-sacrifice is scarcely possible without some injury to mind or
body; as is the case with people who make it a religious duty to read
no interesting books and take scarcely any exercise on Sunday. It is
further true that "The continual acceptance of benefits at the expense
of a fellow-being is morally injurious"; as "The continual giving up of
pleasures and continual submission to pains are physically injurious."
Blind self-sacrifice "curses giver and receiver--physically deteriorates
the one and morally deteriorates the other," "the outcome of the policy
being destruction of the worthy in making worse the unworthy." No wonder
that men are stronger, and also more selfish, than women. Almost all
self-sacrifice involves loss of individual liberty. The subjection of
women has been deepened by their readiness to sacrifice themselves to
those they love; their fondness for martyrdom often leads them into the
sin of marrying without love; and generosity of heart facilitates ruin.
Women would really be more virtuous if they felt less obligation to
their lovers and more to their race.

IV. Spencer's psychological discoveries were corollaries to that great
principle of evolution of which he made the following announcement as
early as 1857 in the _Westminster Review_. After declaring his belief in
"that divergence of many races from one race which we inferred must have
continually been occurring during geologic time," he stated that "The
law of all progress is to be found in these varied evolutions of the
homogeneous into the heterogeneous," or in other words, "out of the
simple into the complex." The discoveries of Darwin and Wallace were
not announced before 1858, but Spencer avowed in 1852 his belief in "the
theory of evolution" or "development hypothesis," according to which
"complex organic forms may have arisen by successive modifications out
of simple ones." It was without any aid or suggestion from Darwin that
Spencer's statement of the law of evolution was brought into the final
form published in 1862. Evolution was then described as change, not
only from the simple to the complex, but also from the chaotic to
the concentric and consolidated, or, in Spencer's own words, "from an
indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a definite coherent heterogeneity."
Progress, he says, consists in integration as well as differentiation.
There is an increase in permanence and definiteness as well as in
variety. Higher forms are not only more complex and unlike than lower
ones, but also more stable and more strongly marked.

Spencer has been represented by some Transcendentalists as Darwin's
pupil; but the whole system just described would, in all probability,
have been built up in substantially its present form, if both Darwin and
Wallace had kept their discoveries to themselves. The only difference
would have been that Spencer could not have been sustained by such a
great mass of evidence. All these facts were collected by Darwin merely
to prove the physical development of men and other animals from lower
forms of life; but Spencer showed that all the phenomena of thought and
feeling, as well as of astronomy, geology, and chemistry, are results of
the great laws of integration and differentiation. All human history and
social relations can be accounted for in this way. And if this extension
had not been given to the principle of evolution, Darwin's discoveries
might soon have ceased to have much interest, except for students of
natural history. Each of the two great evolutionists helped the other
gain influence; but their co-operation was almost as unintentional as
that of two luminaries which form a double star.

V. Spencer has done much to diminish intolerance, by teaching, as early
as 1862, that all religions are necessary steps in the upward march of
evolution.

He has also attempted to reconcile religion and science, by teaching
that the one all-essential belief is in a great unknowable reality,
which is not only inscrutable but inconceivable. In writing about this
supreme power, he uses capitals with a constancy which would look like
an assumption of knowledge, if the same habit were not followed in
regard to many other words of much less importance. He admits that "We
cannot decide between the alternative suppositions, that phenomena are
due to the variously conditioned workings of a single force, and
that they are due to the conflict of two forces." "Matter cannot be
conceived," he says, "except as manifesting forces of attraction and
repulsion"; but he also says that these antagonistic and conflicting
forces "must not be taken as realities but as our symbols of the
reality," "the forms under which the workings of the unknowable are
cognisable." This creed is accepted by many American evolutionists.
It is the doctrine of one of Spencer's most elaborate and brilliant
interpreters, Professor John Fiske, of such popular clergymen as Doctors
Minot J. Savage and Lyman Abbott, and of many of the members of that
energetic organisation, "The Brooklyn Ethical Association." _The Open
Court_ of Chicago and other periodicals are working avowedly for "the
Religion of Science"; but that is not to be established without much
closer conformity to the old-fashioned creeds and ceremonies than
has been made by Spencer. His later works seem more orthodox than his
earlier ones; but his final decision is that "The very notions, origin,
cause, and purpose, are relations belonging to human thought, which are
probably irrelevant to the ultimate reality." He has also admitted that
the proposition, "Evolution is caused by mind," "cannot be rendered into
thought." And he is right in saying that he has nowhere suggested
worship.

Whether he has proposed a reconciliation, or only a compromise, whether
evolutionism will ever be as popular in the pulpit as Transcendentalism,
and whether there is not more reality in the forces of attraction and
repulsion than in Spencer's great unknowable, are problems which I will
not discuss. Darwin was an agnostic like Huxley, who held that "We know
nothing of what may be beyond phenomena," and "Science commits suicide
when she adopts a creed." Huxley pronounced the course of nature
"neither moral nor immoral, but non-moral," and declared that "The
ethical progress of society depends not on imitating the cosmic process
but on combating it." The severity of his criticism of the Gospel
narratives called out threats of prosecution for blasphemy. He avowed
"entire concurrence" with Haeckel, who holds that belief in a personal
God and an immortal soul are incompatible with the fundamental
principles of evolution. The German scientist argues in his elaborate
history of the development of animals, that life is no manifestation of
divine power, working with benevolent purpose, but merely the necessary
result of unconscious forces, inherent in the chemical constitution
and physical properties of matter, and acting mechanically according
to immutable laws. The position of Haeckel and Huxley is all the more
significant because Frederic Harrison knows of "no single thinker in
Europe who has come forward to support this religion of an unknown
cause."

VI. A much more important controversy has been called out by Spencer's
theory of the limits of government. As early as 1842 he proposed "the
limitation of state action to the maintenance of equitable relations
among citizens." His _Social Statics_ demanded, in 1850, as a necessary
condition of high development, "the liberty of each, limited only by the
like liberty of all." His ideal would be a government where "every man
has freedom to do all he wills, provided he infringes not the equal
freedom of any other man." These propositions are repeated in the
revised edition of 1892, which differs from the earlier one in omitting
a denial of the right of private property in land, and also a demand for
female suffrage. How far Spencer had changed his views may be seen in
his volume on _Justice_. Both editions of _Social Statics_ deny the
right of governments to support churches, public schools, boards of
health, poorhouses, lighthouses, or mints. Spencer would have titles
to land guaranteed by the State, and property-holders protected against
unjust lawsuits; but otherwise the government ought to confine itself,
he thinks, to managing the army, navy, and police.

This position is defended by an appeal to the fact that the citizen is
most energetic and intelligent where he is most free to act for himself.
No American is as helpless before pestilence or famine as a Russian
peasant, or as afraid to go to a burning house until summoned by the
police. A despotism may begin with a strong army; but it ends, like the
Roman Empire, in the weakness which it has brought on by crushing the
spirit of its soldiers. Strong governments make weak men. Never was
there a mightier army than was given by the French Republic to Napoleon.
Industrial prosperity depends even more closely than military glory
on the energy of men who have been at liberty to think and act freely.
People develop most vigorously where they are least meddled with. The
average man knows much more than his rulers do about his own private
business; and he is active to promote it in ways which secure the
general welfare.

Great stress is laid not only in _Social Statics_ but in Spencer's book
on _The Man versus the State_, and in several essays, on the many times
that the British Government has increased an evil by trying to cure it.
What is said about its extravagance will not surprise any American who
remembers what vast sums are squandered by Congress. The post-office is
often spoken of as proof that our Government could run our railroads;
but one of Boston's best postmasters said, "No private business could be
managed like this without going into bankruptcy." The British Government
has a monopoly of the telegraph; and introduction of the telephone was
very difficult in consequence. In Victoria, the Postmaster-General
has abused his privileges so much as to appoint a "sporting agent"
to telegraph the results of a horse-race; and this same highly
protectionist colony has had laws forbidding any shop to be open after
7 P.M., except on Saturday, and any woman to work more than forty-eight
hours a week in any factory. How governments interfered in former
centuries with people's right to feed, clothe, employ, and amuse
themselves, seems almost inconceivable at present.

Persecution was one among many forms of mischievous meddling. Locke, in
arguing for toleration in 1689, was obliged to take the ground that "The
whole jurisdiction of the magistrate reaches only" to securing unto all
the people "life, liberty, health," and also "outward things such as
money, lands, houses, furniture, and the like." "Government," he said,
"hath no end but preservation, and therefore can never have a right
to destroy, enslave, or designedly to impoverish the subject."
Clearer language was used by those French patriots who declared in the
Constitution of 1791 that liberty consists in ability to do everything
which brings no harm to others; and, two years afterwards, that the
liberty of each citizen should extend to where that of some other
citizen begins. Nearly fifty years later, a theory very like Spencer's
was published by Wilhelm von Humboldt, brother of the great naturalist.
Among the many writers who have held that government ought not to be
merely limited but repudiated totally was Thoreau. It was in 1854 that
this zealous abolitionist publicly renounced his allegiance to a great
anti-slavery commonwealth, and that he asserted, in _Walden_, the
necessity of preserving individual liberty by conforming as little as
possible to any social usages, even that of working regularly in order
to support one's self and family in comfort. That same year, Spencer
showed in his essay on _Manners and Fashion_ the difference between a
regulation by which public opinion tries to prevent rude people from
making themselves unnecessarily disagreeable to their neighbours, and
one which encourages dissipation by arbitrarily check-ing innocent
amusement. Even in the latter case, however, there is, as he says, but
little gain from any solitary nonconformity. Reform must be carried on
in co-operation.

That powerful assailant of Transcendentalism, John Stuart Mill, was
not an evolutionist; but it was largely due to his liberal aid that the
system of differentiation and integration was published. This generosity
was consistent with his own position, that all opinions ought to have
a hearing, and especially those which are novel and unpopular, for
they are peculiarly likely to contain some exposure of ancient error or
revelation of new truth. This fact was set forth with such ability in
his book, _On Liberty_, in 1859, that several long passages were
quoted in the public protest, delivered in Ohio five years later by
Vallandigham, against the war then carried on for bringing back the
seceded States. Mill holds that neither government nor public opinion
ought to interfere with any individual, except "to prevent doing harm
to others." He says, for instance, that there would be no tyranny in
forcing parents to let their children have education enough to become
safe members of society. Such a law could scarcely be justified by the
principle of giving all the liberty to each compatible with the like
liberty of all. Among the restrictions which Mill mentions as oppressive
are those in England and America against selling liquor, gambling, and
Sunday amusements. He admits the difficulty of deciding "how far liberty
may be legitimately invaded for the prevention of crime."

VII. It was in full conformity with the principles of Mill, Spencer, and
Locke that the Constitution of Louisiana, as revised in 1879, declared
that the only legitimate object of government "is to protect the citizen
in the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. When it assumes other
functions, it is usurpation and oppression." Similar sentiments have
been occasionally expressed in political platforms. Such narrow limits
have not, so far as I know, ever been observed in the United States or
in any other civilised land. Few people love liberty so much as not to
be willing that the state should give them security against
conflagration and contagious disease. There is also a general demand for
such safety as is given by roads, streets, bridges, lighthouses, and
life-saving stations. The necessity of hospitals, asylums, and
poorhouses is manifest. If all this expense had to be met by
public-spirited individuals, it is probable that their wealth would prove
insufficient. It is further necessary for the public safety that there
should be compulsory vaccination during epidemics of smallpox,
confinement of dangerous lunatics and tramps, rescue of children from
vicious parents, and maintenance of what ought not to be called
compulsory but guaranteed education. Marriage has to be made binding for
the protection of mothers as well as children. The thirst for drink
needs at least as much restraint as is kept up in Scandinavia. And the
tendency of bad money to drive out good is strong enough to justify laws
against circulation of depreciated currency.

Public schools are particularly important in America, where presidential
and congressional elections are apt to turn on financial issues which
can scarcely be understood by men not thoroughly educated. Spencer's
objections apply more closely to the European system, that of
centralisation of management, than to the American. It is well to know
also that he was misled by a hasty reference, perhaps by some assistant,
to an English statistician named Fletcher. This high authority
did admit, in 1849, that he found "a superficial evidence against
instruction." He went on, however, to say much which is not mentioned in
_Social Statics_, and which proved the evidence to be only superficial.
By classifying crimes according to enormity, he showed that the worst
were most frequent in the least educated districts. He also discovered
that those counties in England where ability to sign the marriage
register was most common were most free from paupers, dangerous
criminals, and illegitimate children. "The conclusion is therefore
irresistible," says Fletcher, "that education is essential to the
security of modern society." Most of the other testimony brought forward
in _Social Statics_ is invalidated by Fletcher's method; and Spencer
added nothing in the second edition to the insufficient statements in
the first.

British education has improved greatly in both quality and quantity
since 1876; but the prisons of England and Wales had only two-thirds as
many inmates in 1890 as in 1878, and only one-half as large a part of
the population. The most dangerous prisoners were only one-third as
numerous in 1890 and 1891 as forty-five years earlier; and the
percentage of forgers only one-tenth as great as in 1857. We ought
further to remember the almost complete unanimity of opinion in favour
of free education wherever it is universal.

Public schools in America are all the more useful because they are
superintended by town and city officials, elected in great part by
men who know them personally. This is also the case with the boards of
health, and the managers of poorhouses, cemeteries, public libraries,
and parks. Among other subjects of local self-government are the
roads, bridges, streets, and sewers. Our large cities are notoriously
misgoverned, but it will be easier to raise the character of the
officials than to contract their powers. Much is to be hoped from civil
service reform, proportional representation, and nonpartisan elections.
Town affairs are usually so carefully looked after by people not in
office as to be managed for the public welfare. Both in towns and cities
the tendency is to enlarge rather than contract the functions of the
government. A proposal that any city should let tenements or sell coal
more cheaply than is done by individuals, would seem to be for the
advantage of everybody except a few payers of heavy taxes. The majority
of voters would care little about increase of taxation, in comparison
with the prospect of more demand for labour and greater activity in
business. It is easy to make extravagance popular where the majority
rules. Our State constitutions would probably make it impossible for
coal to be sold or tenements let by cities and towns; but these latter
often carry on gas-works, water-works, electric roads, and other highly
beneficial industries. This may be necessary to check the rapacity of
corporations; but otherwise there is too much danger of extravagance,
discouragement of individual enterprise, and delay in improving the
processes monopolised by the municipality. Some evils would be lessened
by a transfer of the control of lighthouses and life-saving stations
from the national Government to that of the nearest cities, or else of
single States.

Our people are much better able to judge of the success of State than
of Federal legislation and management. Of course the chief duties of the
State are to pass laws for the protection of life and property
against crime, and to manage such indispensable penal, charitable, and
educational institutions as are not provided by the municipalities. It
is still necessary for the States of our Union to keep up the militia;
but perhaps the best thing that could be done for the public safety
would be to have tramps kept from crime, and assisted to employment by
a State police. Ownership of real estate would be more secure, and sale
easier, if titles were guaranteed by the State; and it would also do
well, as Spencer suggests, to help people of moderate means resist
lawsuits brought to extort money. It seems, at all events, well that our
States keep up their boards of health, and their supervision of banks,
railroads, steamboats, and factories. There are a great many unnecessary
laws, as, for instance, was one in Massachusetts for selling coal below
market price. This was fortunately decided to be unconstitutional; but
whether this commonwealth ought to continue to supply free
text-books, especially in high schools, seems to me questionable. Many
individualists object to laws against gambling, selling liquor, and
other conduct which does no direct injury except to those who take part
voluntarily. There are vicious tendencies enough in human nature, I
think, to justify attempts to keep temptation out of sight.

No advantage of this kind can be claimed for the Sunday laws in our
Eastern and Southern States. It is certainly desirable to have one day
a week of rest from labour and business; but it is equally true that a
man's ploughing his field or weeding his garden does not infringe on
the liberty of his neighbours, diminish their security of person and
property, or encourage their vicious propensities, even on Sunday. It
is setting a bad example to break any law; but I do not think that
any citizen of Massachusetts was seriously corrupted by resisting the
Fugitive Slave Act; and I doubt if any Vermonter was morally the worse
for breaking the law in that State against Sunday "visits from house
to house, except from motives of humanity or charity, or for moral
and religious edification." It is better to have the laws obeyed
intelligently than blindly; and those really worthy of respect would
have more authority if every prohibition which is never enforced, except
out of malice, were repealed. Much aid is given to morality by such
religious observances as are voluntary and conscientious; but compulsory
observance breeds both slaves and rebels.

How far our Sunday laws are meant to encourage the peculiar usages
of the popular sects is seen in the fact that, since 1877, about 150
professed Christians, who had kept the Sabbath on the day set apart in
the Bible, were arrested on the charge of having profaned Sunday by such
actions as ploughing a retired field, weeding a garden, cutting wood
needed for immediate use, or making a dress. They refused to pay
any fine; most of them were imprisoned accordingly; in one case the
confinement lasted 129 days; two deaths were hastened by incarceration;
and in the summer of 1895 eight of these "Saturdarians," as they were
nicknamed, were working in a chain-gang on the roads in Tennessee. One
of the eight was a clergyman. Among the commonwealths which prosecuted
observers of the original Sabbath as Sabbath-breakers were Georgia,
Maryland, Missouri, Arkansas, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and
seven other States. Such prosecutions were too much like persecutions;
for people who kept neither Saturday nor Sunday were not so much
molested. If the Sunday laws were really meant for the public welfare,
every citizen would be allowed to choose his own Sabbath, and no one
who kept Saturday sacred would be required to rest on Sunday also. Such
liberal legislation has actually been passed by Rhode Island and many
other States.

How strict the law is against doing business on Sunday may be judged
from the fact that in 1896 a decrepit old woman was sent to jail in
New York City for selling a couple of bananas, and a boy of fifteen was
arrested for selling five cents' worth of coal in January. Three men
were fined for selling umbrellas in the street on a rainy Sunday in
1895, and others were arrested for selling five cents' worth of ice.
People who have no refrigerators suffer under the difficulty of buying
ice, fruit, and meat on a hot Sunday in our Eastern cities.

Sunday laws and customs differ so widely in our various States, that
they cannot all be wise and just. Rest from labour and business is
secured in Southern California, without State legislation, by the
action of public opinion; and were this to become too weak, it would
be reinforced by the trades-unions. Personal liberty is not necessarily
violated by laws prohibiting disturbance of public worship; but it would
be if anyone were compelled to testify in court, or sit on the jury, or
do any other business elsewhere, on any day set apart for rest by his
conscience and religion. There seems to be little necessity for other
legislation, except under peculiar local circumstances to which town
and city magistrates are better able than members of State and national
legislatures to do justice. The question, what places of business that
have no vicious tendencies ought to be allowed to open on Sunday, might
settle itself, as does the question how early they are to close on other
days of the week. There needs no law to prevent business being done at
night. Stores which could offer nothing that many people need to buy
on Sunday, would have so few customers that the proprietors could ill
afford to open their doors. Where the demand is as great and innocent
as it is for fresh meat and fruit in hot weather, the interest of the
proprietor is no more plain than is the duty of the legislator and
magistrate. People employed in hotels, stables, telegraph offices,
libraries, museums, and parks, can, of course, protect themselves from
overwork, as domestic servants do, by stipulating for holidays and
half-holidays.

Whatever may be the gain to public health from cessation of labour and
business on Sunday, there is no such advantage, but rather injury,
from the prohibition of healthy recreations and amusements, which are
acknowledged to be perfectly innocent on at least six days of the week.
Sunday is by no means so strictly observed, especially in this respect,
on the continent of Europe as in the United States. Sabbatarianism is
peculiarly an American and British institution; and this fact justifies
the position that it is by no means a necessary condition of the
security, or even the welfare, of civilised nations. If our Sunday
laws cannot be proved to be necessary, they must be admitted to be
oppressive. Over-taxation is but a slight grievance compared with the
tyranny of sending men and women to jail for inability or unwillingness
to pay the fines imposed in 1895 by the State of Tennessee for working
on their farms, or in Massachusetts soon after for playing cards in
their own rooms. Further consideration of the question, what amusements
should be permitted on Sunday, will be found in an appendix.

Such problems are peculiarly unfit for treatment by our central
Government. Its chief duty, of course, is protection of our people
against invasion and rebellion; and the authority of the President and
Congress ought not to be weakened by vain attempts to settle disputes
which would be dealt with much more satisfactorily by the cities and
towns. A Sunday law too lax for Pennsylvania might be too strict for
California. The system of post-offices is too well adapted for the
general welfare to be given up hastily; but the Government ought to
surrender the monopoly which now makes it almost impossible for citizens
to free themselves from dependence on disobliging or incompetent
postmasters. I have nothing to say against the Census, Education,
Health, and Patent Bureaus, nor against the Smithsonian Museum, except
that our citizens have a right to use their own property as freely on
Sunday as on any other day of the week. I do not see why our Government
should have more than that of other nations to do with the issue of
paper money; but I leave the bank question to abler pens.

The tariff is a much plainer issue. We are told in _Social Statics_ that
"A government trenches upon men's liberties of action" in obstructing
commercial intercourse; "and by so doing directly reverses its function.
To secure for each man the fullest freedom to exercise his faculties,
compatible with the like freedom of all others, we find to be the
state's duty. Now trade-prohibitions and trade-restrictions not only
do not secure this freedom, but they take it away, so that in enforcing
them the state is transformed from a maintainer of rights into a
violator of rights." The obstacles to importation deliberately set up by
American tariffs, indirectly check exportation; for unwillingness to
buy from any other nation diminishes not only its willingness but its
ability to buy our products in return. The United States are actually
exporting large amounts of cattle, wheat, and cotton, as well as
of boots and shoes, agricultural implements, steel rails, hardware,
watches, and cotton cloth. These commodities are produced by Americans
who can defy foreign competition. In some cases the tariff enables them
to raise their prices at home, to the loss of their fellow-citizens.
Prices abroad cannot be raised by our Government. What it can and does
do is to burden both farms and factories by duties on lumber, glass,
coal, wool, woollen goods, and many other imports. The rates are
arranged with a view to increase, not individual liberty or public
security, but the profits of managers of enterprises which would not pay
without such help. Men who are carrying on profitable industries have to
make up part of what is lost in unprofitable ones. In fact, the cost
of living is increased needlessly for all our citizens, except the
privileged few.

There would be less injustice in aiding new enterprises by bounties; but
the proper authorities to decide how much money should be voted for such
purposes are the cities and towns. Some of the makers of our national
Constitution wished to make tariff legislation in Congress impossible
except by a majority of two-thirds; and this might properly be required
for all measures not planned in behalf of individual liberty or the
public safety. Much of the business now done by the nation ought to be
transferred to the States. They took the lead between 1830 and 1870 in
improving rivers and harbours, building railroads, and digging canals.
The result of transferring such work to Congress was that in 1890 it
voted $25,000,000 to carry on 435 undertakings, more than one-fourth of
which had been judged unnecessary by engineers. Two years later, four
times as many new jobs were voted as had been recommended by the House
committee. Among these plans was one, in regard to the Hudson River,
which was the proper business of the State of New York. The extravagance
of our pension system is notorious. If the restriction proposed by
Spencer is applicable anywhere, it is to central rather than local
governments.

VIII. Great as are the evils of unnecessary laws, Spencer's remedy
is too sweeping to be universally supported by evolutionists. Huxley
protests against it as "administrative Nihilism," and declares that if
his next-door neighbour is allowed to bring up children "untaught and
untrained to earn their living, he is doing his best to restrict my
freedom, by increasing the burden of taxation for the support of gaols
and workhouses which I have to pay." His conclusion is that "No limit is
or can be theoretically set to state interference." The impossibility
of drawing "a hard and fast line" is admitted even by so extreme an
individualist as Wordsworth Donisthorpe, who complains that "Crimes go
unpunished in England," while the "Great National Pickpocket" is busy
"reading through all the comedies and burlesques brought out in the
theatres," "running after little boys who dare to play pitch-farthing,"
or "going on sledging expeditions to the North Pole."

Lecky agrees so far with Spencer and Mill as to say, in _Democracy and
Liberty_, that punishment should "be confined, as a general rule, to
acts which are directly injurious to others," and accordingly that
"With Sunday amusements in private life, the legislator should have
no concern." As a check to over-legislation, he recommends biennial
sessions, instead of annual; and he protests against the despotism of
trades-unions. His strongest point against Spencer is that sanitary
legislation has added several years to the average length of life in
England and Wales, prevented more than eighty thousand deaths there in a
single year, and actually reduced the death-rate of the army in India by
more than four-fifths.

IX. Spencer has succeeded in increasing the number of individualists so
much, that Donisthorpe says they can be counted by the thousand, though
there were scarcely enough in 1875 in England to fill an omnibus.
Transcendentalism had made individualism comparatively common long
before in America. The principle of not interfering with other people,
except to prevent their wronging us, is fully applicable, as Spencer
says, to the relation of husband with wife, and also to that of parent
and teacher with child. It could also be followed with great advantage
in the case of domestic servants. There can be no doubt of the
correctness of the position, taken in the _Principles of Sociology_,
that delight in war has a tendency to stifle love of liberty. Sparta,
Russia, and the new German Empire show that where the ideal of a nation
is military glory, "The individual is owned by the State." The citizens
are so graded, that "All are masters of those below and subjects of
those above." The workers must live for the benefit of the fighters,
and both be controlled closely by the government. Armies flourish on the
decay of individual rights. How difficult it was to avoid this, during
some bloody years, even in America, has been shown in Chapter IV. A
nation of shopkeepers is better fitted than a nation of soldiers to
develop free institutions.

One of Spencer's objections to Socialism is that it would "end in
military despotism." Nothing else could replace competition so far as
to keep a nation industrious. Spencer is right in saying, "Benefit and
worth must vary together," which means that wages and salaries should
correspond to value of work. Otherwise, "The society decays from
increase of its least worthy members and decrease of its most worthy
members."

These facts are so generally known already, that there is less danger
than is thought by Spencer, of either the national establishment of
Socialism or of a ruinous extension of governmental interference.
The average American is altogether too willing to have his wealthy
neighbours taxed for his own benefit; but he knows that he can make
himself and his family more comfortable by his own exertions than his
poor neighbours are; and he is not going to let any government forbid
his doing so. He does not object to public libraries, and perhaps
would not to free theatres; but he would vote down any plan which would
prevent his using his money and time to his own greatest advantage. He
is sometimes misled by plausible excuses for wasting public money,
and arresting innocent people; but he insists on at least some better
pretext than was made for the old-fashioned meddling with food,
clothing, business, and religion. He may not call himself an
individualist; but he will never practise Socialism.

This sort of man is already predominant in Great Britain, as well as in
America; and multiplication of the type elsewhere is fostered by mighty
tendencies. The duty of treating every form of religion according to
ethical and not theological standards is rapidly becoming the practice
of all civilised governments; and persecution is peculiar to Turkey
and Russia. These two despotisms form, with Germany, the principal
exceptions to the rule that political liberty is on the increase
throughout Europe, especially in the form of local self-government. The
nineteenth century has made even the poorest people more secure than
ever before from oppression and lawless violence, as well as from
pestilence and famine. Destitution is relieved more amply and wisely,
while industry and intelligence are encouraged by opportunity to enjoy
comforts and luxuries once almost or altogether out of the reach of
monarchs. The fetters formerly laid on trade of cities with their own
suburbs have been broken; and the examples of Great Britain and New
South Wales are proving that nations profit more by helping than
hindering one another in the broad paths of commerce. Industrial
efficiency has certainly been much promoted by the tendency, not only of
scientific education but of manual training, to substitute knowledge of
realities for quarrels about abstractions. All these changes favour the
extension of free institutions and also of individual liberty, wherever
peace can be maintained. Industrial nations gain more than warlike ones
by encouraging intellectual independence; but the general advantage is
great enough to ensure the final triumph of liberty.




APPENDIX: SUNDAY RECREATION

THIS is much more common in New England and Great Britain than it was in
the eighteenth century. The dinner has become the best, instead of the
worst in the week. Scarcely anyone rises early; and nobody is shocked
at reading novels. There is an enormous circulation in both English and
American cities of Sunday papers whose aim is simply amusement. There
is plenty of lively music in the parlours, as well as of merry talk in
which clergymen are ready to lead. People who have comfortable homes can
easily make Sunday the pleasant-est day of the week.

For people who cannot get much recreation at home, there are increasing
opportunities to go to concerts, picture-galleries, and museums. Among
the reading-rooms thrown open on Sunday in America about 1870 was that
of the Boston Public Library; and no difference is now made in this
great institution among the seven days, except that more children's
books and magazines are accessible on Sunday. What important museums are
now open in London, Boston, and New York have been already mentioned
in Chapter VI. These opportunities are still limited; but there is no
obstacle, except that of bad weather, to excursions on foot or bicycle,
behind horse or locomotive, in electric car or steamboat, to beaches,
ponds, and other places of amusement. The public parks are crowded all
day long in summer; and people who go to church in the morning have no
scruple about walking or riding for pleasure in the afternoon. These
practices were expressly sanctioned by Massachusetts in 1887, and by New
Jersey in 1893; and the old law against Sunday visiting has been
repealed since 1880 in Vermont.

The newer States have taken care not to pass such absurd statutes. I
believe that the majority of our people were willing, as for instance
was that prominent Episcopalian, Bishop Potter, to have the Chicago
Exposition open on Sundays. Theatres and baseball grounds attract crowds
of visitors in our cities, especially those west of the Alleghanies.
Whatever changes are made in the East will probably be in the
direction of greater liberty. The only question is how fast the present
opportunities of recreation ought to be increased.

No one would now agree with Dr. Chalmers in calling the Sabbath "an
expedient for pacifying the jealousies of a God of vengeance." Good
people have ceased to think, as the Puritans did, that "Pleasures are
most carefully to be avoided" on every day of the week, or that "Amity
to ourselves is enmity against God." Preachers no longer recommend
"abstaining not only from unlawful pleasures, but also from lawful
delights." Popular clergymen now say with Dr. Bellows: "Amusement is not
only a privilege but a duty, indispensable to health of body and mind,
and essential even to the best development of religion itself." "I put
amusement among the necessaries and not the luxuries of life." "It is
as good a friend to the church as to the theatre, to sound morals and
unsuperstitious piety as to health and happiness,... an interest of
society which the religious class instead of regarding with hostility
and jealousy, ought to encourage and direct." "There is hardly a more
baleful error in the world than that which has produced the feud between
morality and amusement, piety and pleasure."

The fact is that pleasure means health. As I have said in a newspaper
entitled _The Index_: "It is a violation of the laws of health for
anyone, not absolutely bed-ridden or crushed by fatigue, to spend
thirty-six hours without some active exercise in the open air. Trying
to take enough on Saturday to last until Monday, is dangerous, and most
people have little chance for healthy exercise except on Sunday. The
poor, ignorant girl who has had no fresh air for six days ought to be
encouraged to take it freely on the seventh. And we all need our daily
exercise just as much as our regular food and sleep. The two thousand
delegates who asked, in behalf of ninety thousand working men, in 1853,
to have the Crystal Palace open on Sundays, were right in declaring
that 'Physical recreation is as necessary to the working man as food and
drink on the Sabbath.' The fact is that pleasure is naturally healthy
even when not involving active exercise. Dark thoughts breed disease
like dark rooms. The man who never laughs has something wrong about
his digestion or his conscience. Herbert Spencer has proved that our
pleasant actions are beneficial, while painful ones are injurious both
to ourselves and to our race.  (_Principles of Psychology_, vol. i., pp.
278-286; Am. Ed.). Thus Sunday amusements are needed for the general
health.

"They are also necessary for the preservation of morality. This consists
in performing the actions which benefit ourselves and our neighbours, in
other words, pleasant ones, and abstaining from whatever is painful and
injurious. It is only in exceptional cases that we can make others
happy by suffering pain ourselves. Now and then the paths of virtue and
pleasure diverge; but they always come together again. As a rule, they
traverse precisely the same ground and in exactly the same direction.
This is very fortunate; for if pleasure were always vicious, virtue
would be hateful and impossible. The most blessed of all peacemakers is
he who keeps virtue and pleasure from falling out. There is no
better text than that which the little girl said she had learned at
Sunday-school: 'Chain up a child and away she will go!' Even so strict a
man as Dr. Johnson said: 'I am a great friend to public amusements, for
they keep people from vice.' Is there no need of them on the day when
there is more drinking, gambling, and other gross vice than on any
other? Need I say what day keeps our policemen and criminal courts most
busy, or crowds our hospitals with sufferers from riotous brawls?
Has not the experience of two hundred and fifty years justified those
English statesmen who showed themselves much wiser than their Puritan
contemporaries in recommending archery, dancing, and other diversions
on Sunday, because forbidding them 'sets up filthy tippling and
drunkenness?' To keep a man who does not care to go to church from
getting any amusement, is to push him towards the saloon. And not only
the laws against liquor selling, but others even more necessary for
our safety, would be much better enforced if we did not encourage
lawlessness by keeping up statutes which our best men and women violate
without scruple and with impunity, or which actually prevent good people
from taking such recreation as they know they ought to have. Outgrown
ordinances should not be suffered to drag just and necessary laws down
into contempt. "Nobody wants to revive those old laws of Massachusetts
Bay which forbade people to wear lace, or buy foreign fruit, or charge
more than a fixed price for a day's work. No more Quakers will ever
swing from a Boston gallows merely for preaching. But our laws against
Sunday amusements are in the same spirit as that which hung Mary Dyer.
In old times, government kept continually telling people what to do, and
took especial pains to make them go to church on Sunday. If they stayed
away, they were fined; if they did not become members, they were not
allowed to vote; if they got up rival services, they were hung; if they
took any amusement on Sunday, they were whipped. All four classes of
laws for the same unjust end have passed away, except that against
Sunday recreation. This still survives in a modified form. But even in
this shape it is utterly irreconcilable with the fundamental principles
of our government. All American legislation, from the Declaration of
Independence, rests on the great truth that our government is founded in
order to secure us in our unalienable rights to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness. Our State is a limited partnership for mutual
protection. We carry it on in order to make our freedom more complete;
and we tolerate no restrictions on ourselves except such as are
necessary conditions of the greatest possible liberty. These principles
are already fully acknowledged on six days of the week, but only partly
on the seventh. Still, there is a growing recognition of the likeness
between laws against Sunday amusements and such prohibitions of eating
meat in Lent as once caused people to be burned alive."

A weekly day of rest is a blessing; but David Swing is right in saying
that "Absolute rest, perfectly satisfactory to horse and dog, is not
adequate to the high nature of man." Complete torpor of mind and body is
more characteristic of a Hindoo fakir than of a Christian saint. Should
those who wish to rest as much as possible on Sunday sleep in church?
There is nothing irreligious in fresh air. The tendency of outdoor
exercise to purify and elevate our thoughts is so strong that Kingsley
actually defended playing cricket on Sunday as "a carrying out of the
divineness of the Sabbath." If there is no hostility between religion
and amusement on six days of the week, there cannot be much on the
seventh.

No Protestants are more religious than the Swedes and Norwegians.
Everybody goes to church; there is theological teaching in the
public-schools; and advocacy of liberal religious views was punished in
1888 with imprisonment. No Scandinavian objects, so far as I know, to
indoor games, croquet, dancing, or going to the theatre on Sunday; and
these amusements are acknowledged to be perfectly proper throughout
continental Europe. No one who allows himself any exercise or recreation
on Sunday has a right to say that his neighbours do not need more than
he does. Lyman Beecher could not preach his best on any day when he did
not work hard at sawing wood or shovelling sand in his cellar. There
would be less dyspepsia on Monday if there were more exercise on Sunday.
Herbert Spencer tells us that "Happiness is the most powerful of
tonics. By accelerating the circulation of the blood, it facilitates
the performance of every function; and so tends alike to increase health
where it exists, and to restore it when it has been lost. Hence the
essential superiority of play to gymnastics."

A Bible Dancing Class is said to have been organised, in deference to
such facts, in New Jersey by an Episcopalian pastor, who perhaps wishes
to accomplish Jeremiah's prediction of the Messianic kingdom, "Then
shall the virgin rejoice in the dance." Among other liberal clergymen is
Brooke Herford, who says: "We want Sunday to be the happiest day in all
the week. Keep it free from labour, but free for all quiet, innocent
recreations." Rev. Charles Voysey wrote me in 1887, lamenting the
immorality arising "from the curse of having nothing to do or nowhere to
go on Sunday afternoons and evenings." "Young persons especially," he
said, "would be better, and morally more safe, for greater opportunities
of innocent pleasure and games at the hours of enforced idleness on the
Sunday."

The spirit of the legislators is changing like that of the clergy. The
first laws against Sunday amusement were passed by men who thought all
pleasure vicious on every day of the week. Our present statutes are kept
in force by people who like amusement, and get all they want of it; but
who make it almost impossible for their poor neighbours, in order
to conciliate ecclesiastical prejudice. "They bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be borne and lay them on men's shoulders"; but they
themselves do not feel the weight.

Whatever may be the advantage of keeping Sunday, it cannot be kept
religiously when it is kept compulsorily. Rest from unnecessary labour
and business on one day every week may be for the public welfare; but
this rest is not made more secure by indiscriminate prohibitions of
amusement. The idlest man is the most easily tempted to disturb his
neighbours. No man's property is more safe or his personal liberty more
secure because his neighbours are liable to be fined for playing golf.
Laws against Sunday recreation do not protect but violate individual
liberty. A free government has no business to interfere with the right
of the citizens to take healthy exercise and innocent amusement whenever
they choose.

These considerations would justify a protest, not only against the
Sunday laws made by Congress for the District of Columbia, but also
against the statutes of every State in the Union, except Arizona,
California, Idaho, Louisiana, and Wyoming. "Whoever is present at any
sport, game, play, or public diversion, except a concert of sacred
music, or an entertainment given by a religious or charitable society,
the proceeds of which, if any, are to be devoted exclusively to a
religious or charitable purpose," on what is called "the Lord's day"
in Massachusetts is liable to a fine of five dollars; the penalty for
taking part may be fifty dollars; and the proprietor or manager may be
fined as much as five hundred dollars. New Jersey still keeps her
old law against "singing, fiddling, or other music for the sake of
merriment"; and express prohibitions of "any sport" are still maintained
by Connecticut, Maine, and Rhode Island. Prominent among other States
which forbid amusements acknowledged innocent on six days of the week,
are New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, and Vermont. Many of
our States show particular hostility to card-playing, dancing, and
theatre-going. The fact that fishing was practised by some of the
Apostles on Sunday has not saved this quiet recreation from being
prohibited by more than twenty commonwealths.

If every Sunday law were a dead letter, it ought to be repealed, because
it tends to bring needed laws into contempt; but among recent results of
Sunday legislation are the following. In 1876 some children were fined
for playing ball in Rhode Island; so, about this time, in Massachusetts,
were a boy for skating, a young man for playing lawn-tennis, and a
merchant for fishing with his little son. In 1894 two men were fined
$10 each for playing golf on a lonely hill, in the commonwealth just
mentioned; five boys under fifteen arrested for playing marbles in New
York City; and every member of a baseball club in Pennsylvania fined. In
1895 a man and a boy of fifteen were fined $20 each for fishing in New
York; and the attempt of some clergymen, aided by police, to break up
a show in Missouri, caused a tumult in which men's heads were broken by
clubs, while women and children were trampled underfoot. On the first
Sunday that the London galleries and museums were thrown open to their
owners, May 24, 1896, two men were shot dead in Attleboro, Mass., by a
policeman who had been ordered to break up a clambake. In that same year
and State, a manager was fined $70 for allowing _Yankee Doodle_ to be
performed in the Boston Theatre; three men were arrested for bowling;
half a dozen Jews who had been playing cards in a private house were
fined $10 or $20 each, and those who could not pay were sent to jail.
Among the Sabbath-breakers arrested in 1897 were a number of newsboys
at the national capital, nine golfers in Massachusetts, a young man for
holding one end of a rope over which some little girls were skipping in
New York City, and also the manager of a show in New Jersey, who
spent ten days in jail. Fines were levied in 1898 for playing golf in
Connecticut, and twenty-five fishermen were arrested on one Sunday in
Buffalo, N. Y. Such are the risks which still accompany innocent and
healthy amusements in the Eastern States. Many such arrests are made in
order to collect fees, or gratify malice; and neither motive ought to be
encouraged by the friends of religion.

Some magistrates in Long Island, N. Y., are believed, while still
holding that baseball breaks the Sabbath, to have discovered that golf
does not. It is further said that on July 9, 1899, some baseball men who
had been playing a Sunday game to a large crowd saved themselves from
arrest by using their bats and balls to imitate golfing as soon as a
policeman appeared in their grounds.

None of the Sunday laws is so mischievous as the decree of Mrs. Grundy
against all forms of recreation not practised by the wealthy and
fashionable. These people have so much time on six days of the week for
active outdoor sport and indoor public entertainments, that they make
little attempt to indulge in such recreations on Sunday. People who
have only this one chance of playing ball, or dancing, or going to
stereopticon lectures, concerts, and operas, suffer in health by having
these recreations made unpopular as well as illegal. The climate of
New England and New York, as well as of Great Britain and Canada, has
unfortunately been so arranged that there are a great many cold and
rainy Sundays, when much time cannot be spent pleasantly in walking or
riding. This matters little to people who get all the amusement they
want in their parlours. But what becomes of people who have no parlours?
For instance, of servant-girls who have no place where they can sing or
even laugh? Shop-girls and factory-girls find their little rooms, Sunday
after Sunday, too much like prisons. Young men are perhaps even more
unfortunate; for they go to the saloon, though this is often closed
without any better place of amusement being opened. Why should every
week in a democratic country begin with an aristocratic Sunday, a day
whose pleasures are mainly for the rich?

Libraries and museums are blessed places of refuge; but "What are
they among so many?" The residents of the District of Columbia are
particularly unfortunate, as the Smithsonian Museum, National Library,
and other buildings, which are open during six days, are kept shut on
Sunday. Congress seems to be of the opinion that working people need
no knowledge of natural history, except what they can get from sermons
about Jonah's whale and Noah's ark. Washington is not the only
city whose rich men ought to remember the warning of Heber Newton:
"Everything that tends to foster among our working people the notion of
class privilege is making against the truest morality in our midst.
As they look upon the case, it is the wealthy people, whose homes are
private libraries and galleries of art, who protest against the opening
of our libraries and museums to those who can afford no libraries
and buy no pictures. Sabbatarianism is building very dangerous fires
to-day."

We should all be glad to have more intellectual culture given on
Sunday. One way of giving it would be for the churches to open public
reading-rooms in the afternoon. This would be decidedly for their own
interest; and so would be delivery of evening lectures on history,
biography, and literature. The Sunday-schools in England found it
necessary, even as late as 1850, to give much time to teaching reading
and writing as well as the higher branches. Sunday-school rooms in
America, which now are left useless after Sunday noon, might be employed
in teaching English to German, Italian, and Scandinavian immigrants
during the afternoon and evening. Classes might also be formed in vocal
music, light gymnastics, American and English history and literature,
physiology, sociology, and political economy. Such changes would make
our churches all the more worthy of the founder, who "went about doing
good."

The observance of Sunday as a day of rest from labour and business will
be all the more popular as it is made precious to irreligious people.
They are numerous enough to have a right to ask that the public
school-houses be opened for free classes in French, German, drawing,
and modelling; botany, chemistry, and bird-lore; cooking, sewing, and
wood-work. If teachers of these branches were employed on Sunday by our
cities, less money would be needed for police. Our industrial interests
would certainly gain by having this system carried out as far,
for instance, as is done by Lyons and Milan, which have special
Sunday-schools for teaching weaving. Goldsmiths are instructed by
similar schools in Austria, and blacksmiths in Saxony. The full
advantage of Sunday classes of the various kinds here suggested might
not perhaps be seen until a taste for them could be made general, but
doing this would go far to diminish the taste for saloons.

The first step, however, which ought to be taken by our legislatures
is the repeal of all laws hindering the sale of tickets on Sunday to
exhibitions of pictures or curiosities, concerts, stereopticon lectures,
or other instructive entertainments which are acknowledged inoffensive
during the rest of the week. How far dramatic performances and other
very attractive forms of public amusement should be permitted to take
place on Sunday is a question which ought to be settled by municipal
authorities, with due reference to each special case. The people whose
feelings ought to be considered are not those who wish to stay away from
such places. They can easily do that without help from the police. The
people who ought to be heard, first and last, are those who wish to get
innocent amusement on their one day of leisure; and the only thing which
the police need do is to see that they do get it without being defrauded
or tempted into vice. Only the actual existence of such temptation can
justify interference with dancing or card-playing in a private house.
The Sunday reforms most needed, however, are those which will promote
out-door exercise and mental culture.




LIST OF DATES

1776. Declaration of American independence, July 4th.

1780. Emancipation in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.

1783. Peace between IL S. A. and Great Britain, September 3d.

1785. Great prosperity of British factories about this time.

1787. Slavery prohibited north of Ohio River; slave-trade opposed in
England; Bentham's Principles of Morals and Legislation published.

1788. Constitution of U. S. A. ratified by a sufficient number of
States, June 21st.

1789. Bastille taken, July 14th.

1791. Paine's Rights of Man, Part L, published, March 13th; Louis XVI.
accepts the new constitution, September 14th.

1792. France a republic, September 21st.

1793. Slavery abolished in French colonies, February 4th.

1795. Insurrection in Paris crushed by Bonaparte, October 5th; free
public schools founded throughout France.

1796. Bonaparte commander of army of Italy, March 4th.

1797. French Directory makes itself absolute, September 4th; Venice
ceded by France to Austria.

1798. Irish rebellion, May 23d.

1799. Usurpation by Bonaparte, November 10th.

1800. Election of Jefferson; Schelling's Transcendental Idealism
published.

1801. Inauguration of Jefferson, March 4th.

1802. Birth of Victor Hugo, February 26th; Lamarck's Recherches
published.

1803. Hayti declares herself independent, January 2d; death of
Toussaint in prison, April 27th; birth of Emerson, May 25th; Emmet's
insurrection in Ireland, July 23d.

1804. The Code Napoleon announced, January; Napoleon pro-Liberty in the
Nineteenth Century claimed Emperor, May 18th; crowned, December 2d;
Schiller's William Tell published.

1805. Battle of Austerlitz, December 2d.

1806. Death of Schiller, May 9th; birth of J. S. Mill, May 20th; battle
of Jena, October 14th; Berlin decree of Napoleon against commerce with
Great Britain, November 21st.

1807. Slave-trade prohibited by Great Britain, March 25th; Peace of
Tilsit, July 7th, raises Napoleon to height of power; embargo laid by U.
S. A., December 22d; Oken announces the vertebral analogy of the skull;
Hegel's Phaenomenologie des Geistes published.

1808. Rebellion of Spaniards against French rule; witchcraft mob in
England; Goethe's Faust, Part L, published.

1809. Birth of Darwin, February 12th; revolt of Tyrolese under
Hofer, April 8th; states of the Church annexed to France, May 17th;
death of Paine, June 8th; Pope imprisoned, July 6th; divorce of
Josephine, December 15th; Lamarck's Philosophie Zoologique published.

1810. Hofer shot, February 20th; marriage of Napoleon with Austrian
Archduchess, April 1st; post-offices required to open every Sunday in U.
S. A., April 30th; revolt against Spanish rule of Buenos Ayres, May
25th, and of Chili, September 18th.

1811. Nottingham riots against machinery, November.

1812. Birth of Dickens, February 7th; war against Great Britain declared
by U. S. A., June 18th; Wellington enters Madrid, August 12th; Moscow
burned, September 14th; Byron's Childe Harold, Coleridge's Friend, and
Hegel's Logik published.

1813. Wellington invades France, October 7th; battle of Leipsic, October
16th, 18th, and 19th; Francia ruler of Paraguay; Unitarian disabilities
removed in England; Shelley's Queen Mab and Owen's New View of Society
published.

1814. Napoleon is deposed by Senate, April 1st, and abdicates, April
11th; liberal constitution introduced by Louis XVIII., May; Washington
taken and burned by British, August 24th; Peace of Ghent between U. S.
A. and Great Britain, December 24th; Congress of Vienna opens November
3d; graves of Voltaire and Rousseau violated.

1815. Battle of New Orleans, January 8th; Waterloo, June 18th;
controversy of Unitarians and Trinitarians in U. S. A.; last heretic
burned in Mexico; Lamarck publishes the first volume of his Histoire
Naturelle.

1817. Shelley's children taken from him on account of his opinions,
March 26th; demonstration at the Wartburg, October 18th; unusual poverty
in England; her authors and orators made liable to imprisonment without
a trial; Ben-tham demands suffrage for men and women not illiterate;
Shelley's Revolt of Islam published.

1818. Chili liberated by battle of Maipu, won by San Martin, April 5th;
religious tests abolished in Connecticut; Hannah M. Crocker's Rights of
Women published.

1819. Assassination of Kotzebue, March 23d; Carlsbad Conference, August
1st; "Peterloo" massacre at Manchester, August 16th; Shelley's
Prometheus Unbound published.

1820. Revolution in Spain, January 1st; and at Naples, July 2d;
assassination of French princes, February 13th, causes reaction against
liberalism; birth of Herbert Spencer, April 27th; Owen's plan of
Socialism proposed, May 1st; conference of Troppau, December 8th;
Missouri Compromise; Sydney Smith asks, "Who reads an American book?";
Irving's Rip Van Winkle and Legend of Sleepy Hollow published.

1821. Brazil begins a revolt, January 1st, as do Greece and Sardinia
in April, and Peru in July; death of Napoleon, May 5th; Venezuela and
Colombra made free by battle of Carabolo, won June 24th, by Bolivar;
Austria supreme in Italy; Lundy begins his Genius of Universal
Emancipation.

1822. Death of Shelley, July 8th; independence of Brazil proclaimed,
September 8th; massacre at Scio; Fourrier's book on Association
published.

1823. Spanish patriots crushed by French army, April; Monroe Doctrine
announced, December 1st; British Anti-Slavery Society formed; Victor
Hugo's Odes and Ballads published.

1824. Mexico a republic, January 31st; Bolivar, dictator of Feru,
February 10th, defeats Spaniards at Ayachuco, December 9th; death of
Byron, April 19th; accession of Charles X., September 16th; repeal
of statutes forbidding English labourers to combine or emigrate;
Westminster Review founded.

1825. Much opposition to slavery in Kentucky, Maryland, and North
Carolina; many socialist communities founded in U. S. A.; elective
courses of study at Harvard College, and also at the University of
Virginia, where attendance at religious exercises is made voluntary;
Coleridge's Aids to Reflection published.

1826. Citizens of New York petition for repeal of Fugitive Slave
Law, and for emancipation in the District of Columbia.

1827. Battle of Navarino, October 20th; Taylor sent to prison for
blasphemy, October 24th.

1828. Test Act repealed; Frances Wright lectures against clergy.

1829. Jackson inaugurated March 4th; Catholic Emancipation Act signed,
April 13th; Miss Wright opens a Hall of Science in New York City on
Sunday, April 25th; James Mill's Analysis and Fourrier's Industrial New
World published.

1830. Independence of Greece acknowledged by Turkey, April 25th;
accession of William IV., July 26th; revolution at Paris begins July
27th; King's troops driven out, July 29th; he is succeeded by Louis
Philippe, August 9th; revolts in Brussels, Warsaw, and Dresden;
independence of Belgium acknowledged, December 26th; Hetherington sent
to prison for six months for publishing The Poor Man's Guardian; Victor
Hugo's Hernani acted; Tennyson's Poems and Lyell's Principles of Geology
published.

1831. First number of The Liberator\ January 1st, and of The
Investigator, April 2d; Carlile sent to prison for his writings, January
10th; Cobbett tried and acquitted, July 31st; massacre of fifty-five
white men, women, and children by slaves in Virginia, Sunday, August
21st; Warsaw surrenders to Russians, September 7th; Reform Bill defeated
by bishops, October 7th; Jamaica insurrection, December 22d; free trade
convention in Philadelphia; Victor Hugo's Notre Dame de Paris published.

1832. New England Anti-Slavery Society founded in Boston, January
1st (becomes Mass. A. S. in 1836); death of Goethe, March 22d; the
insurrection at Paris described in Les Miserables, June 5th and 6th;
Reform Bill passed and signed, June 7th; Jackson re-elected, November
6th; woman suffrage lecture in London, December 2d; Jackson's
proclamation against attempt of South Carolina to secede, December
11th; bloody resistance to tithes in Ireland; Elliott's Corn Law Rhymes
published.

1833. Gradual reduction of tariff voted by Congress, March 1st; death
of Bentham, June 6th; Act of Parliament for emancipation in West
Indies passed August 28th; American Anti-Slavery Society founded at
Philadelphia, December; pro-slavery mobs there and in New York City;
municipal suffrage extended in Scotland; unsectarian public schools in
Ireland; first free town library in U. S. A. founded at Peterboro, N.
H., and opened Sundays thenceforth; Emerson's first lecture; Carlyle's
Sartor Resartus published.

1834. Emancipation in West Indies takes place, August ist; new poor law
in England, August 14th; insurrection headed by Mazzini in Italy.

1835. Death of Cobbett, June 16th; anti-slavery periodicals taken from
post-office at Charleston, S. C, and burned by mob, July; convent at
Charlestown, Mass., burned by a mob, August; Garrison mobbed in Boston,
and other abolitionists in New York and Vermont, October 21st; extension
of municipal suffrage in England; Tocqueville's Democracy in America
and Strauss's Life of Jesus published.

1836. Transcendental Club founded in Boston, September; Parker begins
to preach; tithes commuted in England; taxes on newspapers reduced;
dissenters permitted to marry without disobedience to conscience;
Emerson's Nature and Dickens' Pickwick Papers published.

1837. Discussion of slavery in House of Representatives suppressed,
January; Miss Grimke's anti-slavery lectures, June; Emerson's address
on The American Scholar, August 31st; Anti-Slavery Convention of N. E.
Methodists, October 25th; Carlyle's French Revolution published.

1838. Emerson's Divinity School Address, July 15th; Kneeland imprisoned
sixty days, that same summer, for blasphemy; Pennsylvania Hall burned by
a pro-slavery mob; Irish tithe system reformed; daguerreotypes
invented; Atlantic crossed by steam; railroad from London to Birmingham;
Channing's Self-Culture published.

1839. Anti-Corn-Law League organised, March 20th; unsectarian common
schools in England; great Chartist petition; Pope forbids attendance at
the scientific congress at Pisa.

1840. Penny postage, January 10th; nomination of candidate for
President, April ist, by Liberty party: quarrels in May among
abolitionists; World's Anti-Slavery Convention at London, in June,
refuses seats to female delegates; local self-government in Irish
cities; protest of American Catholics against sectarianism of public
schools; The Dial begins; Carlyle's Heroes and Hero Worship published.

1841, Hetherington imprisoned in England for publishing Letters to the
Clergy, and the editor of the Oracle of Reason for attacking the Bible;
Emerson's first volume of Essays published.

1842. Garrison calls on free States to secede, May; death of Channing,
October 2d; Brook Farm started, as are many communties about this time;
Spencer's theory of the limits of government published, 1844. Morse
proves value of telegraph by announcing nomination of Frelinghuysen for
Vice-President by Whigs, May 1st; disunion banner publicly accepted by
Garrison, June 1st; annexation of Texas and reduction of tariff decided
by election on November 5th; rule against discussing slavery repealed by
House of Representatives; Lowell's Poems published.

1845. Parker begins to preach regularly in Boston, February 16th; potato
rot in Ireland, August; Vestiges of Creation published.

1846. Mexico invaded by U. S. troops, March; free trade established
in England, June 25th, and bill to reduce American tariff signed, June
26th; first volume of Grote's Greece and first number of Lowell's Biglow
Papers published.

1847. Mexicans defeated at Buena Vista by General Taylor, February 22d
and 23d; death of O'Connell, May 15th.

1848. Revolution in Paris, February 22d; King abdicates, February 24th;
insurrections in Munich, Vienna, Berlin, Venice, and Milan in March,
afterwards in other cities; "spirit rappings" at Rochester, N.Y.,
begin March 31st; Chartist demonstration at London, April 10th;
Emancipation decreed by French Republic, April 27th; socialist
insurrection at Paris, June 23d, 24th, 25th, and 26th; "Woman's Rights"
Convention at Seneca Falls, N. Y., July 19th; revolt in Ireland, July
29th; Buffalo Convention of Free Soilers, August 9th; Kossuth dictator
of Hungary, September 25th; State constitution and town ordinances
made in October by citizens of California without Federal sanction;
pro-slavery defeat at election of Taylor, November 7th; flight of Pope
from Rome, November 24th; Louis Napoleon president of France, December
10th; Lowell's Vision of Sir Launfal, Fable for Critics, and Biglow
Papers published, 1849. Defeat of King of Sardinia by Austrians at
Novara, March 23d, prevents liberation of Italy; Rome captured by
French, July 3d; Hungarian army surrendered to Russians by Gorgei,
August 13th; Venice taken by Austrians, August 28th; Emancipation
Convention in Kentucky.

1850. Death of Wordsworth, April 24th, and of President Taylor, July
9th; Fugitive Slave Bill signed, September 18th; first national
"Woman's Rights" Convention at Worcester, Mass., October 23d and 24th;
Bradlaugh's first lecture; Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter, Spencer's Social
Statics, and Tennyson's In Memoriam published.

1851. London Great Exhibition opens May ist; a fugitive slave rescued at
Boston, Sunday, February 16th, another at Syracuse, N. Y., October ist;
usurpation of Louis Napoleon, December 2d, 1851.

1852. Uncle Tom's Cabin published, March 20th; death of Frances Wright,
and accession of Napoleon III., December 2d; Herbert Spencer announces
the principle of Differentiation.

1854. Repeal of Missouri Compromise proposed by Douglas, January
23d; return of Burns, a fugitive slave, from Boston, June 2d; U. S.
Constitution publicly burned by Garrison, July 4th; Kansas election
carried by border ruffians, November 29th; Thoreau's Walden published.

1855. Spencer's Pyschology and Walt Whitman's Leaves of Grass published,
1856. Sumner assaulted, May 22d..

1857. Disunion Convention, Worcester, Mass., January 15th; death of
Beranger, July 16th, and of Comte, September 5th; tariff reduced twenty
per cent, in U. S. A.; Buckle's History of Civilisation, vol. i.,
published.

1858. Essays by Darwin and Wallace read in public, July ist; Jews
admitted to Parliament by act passed July 23d; death of Robert Owen,
November 17th; Lincoln and Douglas campaign in Illinois.

1859. Austrians defeated at Magenta, June 4th, and Solferino.

June 24th; Lombardy annexed to Sardinia by treaty of Villafranca, July
nth; John Brown takes possession of Harper's Ferry, Sunday, October
16th, and is tried November 2d; Darwin's Origin of Species published,
November 24th; John Brown hung, December 2d. 1860. Split of Democratic
party, April 30th; death of Theodore Parker, May 10th; Garibaldi enters
Naples, September 7th; election of Lincoln, November 6th; secession of
South Carolina, December 20th; annexation of two Sicilies to Sardinia,
December 26th; Mill on Liberty published.

1861. Confederate States of America organised, February 8th; protective
tariff passed, March 2d; Russian serfs emancipated, March 3d; Lincoln
inaugurated, March 4th; Victor Emmanuel King of Italy, March 17th;
Fort Sumter bombarded, April 12th, surrendered, April 13th; Lincoln's
proclamation, Monday, April 15th, calls all the North to arms; death of
Cavour, June 6th; Union defeat at Bull Run, Sunday, July 21st.

1862. Paper money made legal tender in U. S. A., February 25th; return
of fugitives from slavery by army or navy forbidden, March 13th; negro
soldiers, April; death of Thoreau, May 6th, and of Buckle, May 29th;
disastrous campaign of McClellan in Virginia ends by his retreat, July
8th; Union victory at Antietam, September 19th; emancipation announced
as a possible war measure by Lincoln, September 22d; Union defeat at
Fredericksburg, December 13th; Victor Hugo's Les Miserables published,
also Spencer's First Principles containing his full theory of
Integration and Differentiation.

1863. Lincoln proclaims emancipation, January 1st; signs bills
suspending Habeas Corpus Act and establishing conscription, March 3d;
Union defeat at Chancellorsville, May 3d; Vallandigham sentenced, May
7th; battle of Gettysburg, July 1st, 2d, and 3d, ending in a Union
victory; Vicksburg surrendered to General Grant, July 4th; Mississippi
opened by surrender of Port Hudson, July 9th; Union victories at Lookout
Mountain, November 24th, and Chattanooga, November 25th; Fenian
Convention at Chicago, November 25th; Darwinism much opposed by European
clergy about this time.

1864. General Grant takes command of all the Union armies, March 12th;
undecisive battles in the Wilderness and at Spottsylvania, May 5th-10th;
Fugitive Slave Act repealed, June 23d; Nevada admitted, October 31st;
Lincoln re-elected, November 8th; Sherman marches from Atlanta, November
16th, and enters Savannah, December 22d.

1865. Death of Cobden, April 2d; Richmond entered by coloured cavalry,
April 3d; Lee surrenders, April 9th; Lincoln shot, Good Friday, April
14th, dies April 15th; slavery abolished by Thirteenth Amendment,
December 18th; Lecky's Rationalism published.

1866. Prussian victory over Austria at Koniggratz, July 3d; Venice part
of Kingdom of Italy, November 4th.

1867. First convention of the Free Religious Association, May 30th;
suffrage extended in England, August 15th; Home Rule in Hungary.

1868. Fourteenth Amendment in force, July 28th; Cuban declaration of
independence, October 10th.

1869. Irish Church disestablished, July 26th; witnesses allowed to
affirm in Great Britain.

1870. Death of Dickens, June 9th; Napoleon III. defeated at

Sedan, September 1st; France a republic, September 4th; Rome part of the
kingdom of Italy, October 9th; Inger-soll begins to lecture; Home Rule
agitation in Ireland, 1871. Paris surrendered to Prussians, January
28th; Communists supreme there, March 18th, suppressed, May 28th;
emancipation in Brazil; Darwin's Descent of Man published.

1872. Death of Mazzini, March 10th; secret ballot in England; Abbot's
"Demands of Liberalism" published in The Index (which began January 1,
1870).

1873. Spain a republic, February 11th; death of J. S. Mill, May 8th;
American Liberal League, September 1st.

1874. Military usurpation at Madrid, January 3d; death of Sumner, March
11th; citizens of District of Columbia disfranchised, June 17th;
Alphonso XII. king of Spain, December 30th; Mrs. Besant begins to
lecture; Victor Hugo's Ninety-Three published.

1875. Sunday Society organised at London.

1876. Centennial Exhibition at Philadelphia opens, May 10th, and
conventiom of Liberal League, July 1st; disputed election for President,
November 7th; Sunday convention in Boston, November 15th; vivisection
restricted in England; Cuban rebellion suppressed, 242 Liberty in the
Nineteenth Century.

1877. Museum of Fine Arts in Boston open in and after March on Sundays.

1878. Anti-clerical resolution passed by Woman Suffrage Convention,
Rochester, N. Y., July; split of Liberal League at Syracuse, N. Y.,
Sunday, October 27th; Professor Winchell obliged to leave Nashville,
Tenn., for evolutionism.

1879. Specie payment resumed in U. S. A., January 1st; death of
Garrison, May 24th; Henry George's Progress and Poverty published.

1880. Bradlaugh refused his seat in Parliament, May 21st; many patriots
banished to Siberia.

1881. Czar Alexander II. assassinated, March 13th, anti-Jewish mobs on
and after April 27th; Bradlaugh excluded by force, August 1st.

1882. Death of Longfellow, March 24th, of Darwin, April 18th, of
Emerson, April 27th, and of Garibaldi, June 2d.

1883. Foote and Ramsay, English journalists, sentenced respectively to
twelve and nine months in prison for blasphemy.

1884. Death of Wendell Phillips; February 2d; Cleveland elected
President, November 4th; Professor Woodrow dismissed from Presbyterian
Theological Seminary at Columbia, S. C, for teaching evolution, December
12th.

1885. Death of Victor Hugo, May 20th, and of General Grant, July 23d.

1886. Bradlaugh takes his seat, January 13th; railroad strike in

Missouri suppressed by Federal troops, March; bloody conflict of Chicago
anarchists with police, May 4th; statue of Liberty unveiled in New York
Harbour, October 28th.

1887. Chicago anarchists hung, November 11th.

1888. U. S. tariff reduced by Mills Bill, July 21st; Cleveland defeated,
November 6th; imprisonment in Sweden for blasphemy; Bellamy's Looking
Backward published.

1889. Brazil a republic, November 15th; death of Browning, December
12th.

1890. Australian ballot tried in Rhode Island, April 2d; U. S.
tariff raised by McKinley Bill, passed by the 4 Billion Dollars
Congress, and signed October 1st.

1891. Death of Bradlaugh, January 30th, and of Lowell, August 12th; Jews
expelled from Moscow in April, and much persecuted this year and in
1892; New York Museum of Art opened on Sunday, May 31st, to 10,000
visitors.

1892. Death of Walt Whitman, March 26th, of Whittier, September 7th, and
of Tennyson, October 6th; bill excluding Chinese from U. S. A. signed,
May 5th; Congress votes for closing Chicago Exposition on Sundays, July
19th; Cleveland re-elected, November 8th; New York Museum of Natural
History open Sundays; revised edition of Spencer's Social Statics
published.

1893. Chicago Exposition formally opened May ist, first open
Sunday, May 28th; Parliament of Religions begins Monday, September nth,
10 a.m.

1894. Death of Kossuth, March 20th, of Holmes, October 7th, of

Lucy Stone, October 18th, and of Tyndall, December 4th; Debs, leader of
a riot in Chicago, enjoined by U. S. judges, July 2d, and put down by
Federal troops; reduction of U. S. tariff, August 2d; Home Rule approved
by House of Commons, September ist, refused by House of Lords, September
8th; universal suffrage and extension of local self-government in
England; a professor in University of Texas dismissed for evolutionism.

1895. Death of Frederick Douglass, February 20th, and of Huxley, June
29th; rebellion in Cuba; men arrested in New York City for selling ice,
umbrellas, etc., on Sunday; eight men who had worked on that day, after
keeping Saturday as the Sabbath, forced to labour in the chain-gang in
Tennessee.

1896. British Museum, National Gallery, and other institutions opened
to the public on Sunday, May 24th, and afterwards; two Sabbath-breakers
shot dead that same day by a policeman in Massachusetts; death of
William Morris, October 3d; Democratic candidates defeated on a
free-silver platform, November 3d.

1897. Dingley Bill to increase tariff, signed July 24th; death of
Henry George, October 27th.

1898. War declared by U. S. A. against Spain, April 21st; death of
Gladstone, Ascension Day, May 19th; independence of Cuba secured by
treaty, August 12th.

1899. Death of Ingersoll, July 21st.









