CHAPTER VIII.

SOME OF THE WAYS IN WHICH POETS DEAL WITH NATURE.


Those who have not given attention to the subject are apt to imagine that
the chief creators of mythological fables were the poets, and especially
Homer. They suppose that the early poets, by sheer power of imagination,
invented those stories to adorn their poems, and so gave them currency
among the people. It was not so. Even Homer, the earliest poet whom we
know, belonged to an era when the myth-creating instinct was past its
prime, and already on the wane. The fables of the gods, their loves and
their quarrels, as these appear in his poems, there is no reason to
suppose that he created them or imagined them for the first time. It
would rather seem that they had been long current in popular belief,
and that he only used and gave expression to stories which he found
ready-made. Here and there in Homer you may still detect some traces
of the mythologizing tendency still lingering, and catch the primitive
physical meaning of the myth shining through the anthropomorphic covering
which it afterward assumed. Such glimpses we get in Zeus, when he
gathers the clouds in the sky, when he rouses himself to snow upon men
and manifests his feathery shafts, when he rains continuously, when he
bows the heavens and comes down upon the peaks of Ida. Or again, when
Poseidon, the earth-encompassing, the earth-shaker, yokes his car at
Hegeæ and drives full upon the Trojan strand: I take the passage from Mr.
Cordery’s translation of the Iliad:—

                                  “He entered in,
    And there beneath his chariot drew to yoke
    Fast-flying horses, maned with flowing gold,
    Hooved with bright brass; and girt himself in gold,
    Took golden goad, and sprang upon the car;
    So forth upon the billows, round whose path
    Huge monsters gamboled, gathering from the depth
    Afar, anear, and joyous knew their lord;
    Ocean for gladness stood in sunder cloven,
    Whilst lightly flew the steeds, nor ’neath the car
    The burnished axle moistened with the brine:—
    Thus tow’rd the fleet his coursers bore the god.”

Here we have, half-physical, half-mythological, like Milton’s
half-created lion, the fore part perfect, the hinder part still clay,
a well-known natural appearance. After the storm-winds are laid, but
while the sea still feels their power, it is thus that the high-crested
breakers may be seen racing shorewards with their white manes backward
streaming, and glorified with rainbow hues from a bright dawn or a
splendid sunset poured upon them from the land.

But for the most part, even Homer, early poet though he was, has quite
forgotten that original aspect of Nature out of which each god was
shaped, and has invested them with entirely human attributes, even with
human follies and vices, which have no connection at all with the primary
fact, but are the wildest freaks of extravagant fancy. If then even Homer
has so much forgotten the physical origin of his mythic gods, how must
it be with the tragic poets! Æschylus and Sophocles we see have entirely
put aside the immoral fables about them, and are anxious to find the
truth which lies at the root of the popular belief, and to moralize the
whole conception of the gods. When we come down to the Latin poets, we do
not find even this effort; but the gods they have borrowed from Greece
are used as mere poetic machines, with as little of either physical or
moral meaning as a modern romance-writer might use fairies, gnomes, or
hobgoblins.

Although in the more imaginative of modern poets, modes of conceiving
Nature, and expressions every here and there crop out, which in an
earlier age would certainly have flowered into mythology, it is
nevertheless true that, ever since the literary age set in, poets in
general have viewed Nature with a more familiar eye, and described it in
language which ordinary speech would not disown. I shall now endeavor to
classify the several ways in which Nature is dealt with by the poets,
the several aspects of it which enter most prominently into Poetry. It
will be enough for my present purpose merely to generalize, under a few
heads, the most obvious of these forms, without attempting to analyze
them or to account for them.


I.

The first form I shall notice is the expression of that simple,
spontaneous, unreflecting pleasure which all unsophisticated beings feel
in free open-air life. We all know how children feel when they are let
loose to wander at will in green fields, or by a burn-side, or under
the budding woods when the primroses and anemones first appear. The
full-grown man, too, the man of business or letters, knows how—when his
nerves have been over-strung and his heart fretted by worldly things—a
day abroad under a blue sky, with a soft southwest blowing, restores and
harmonizes him. Old persons, we may have observed, who have seen and
suffered much, from whom the world and its interests are receding: what a
sense of peace and refreshment comes over them as they gaze in quiet over
a distant landscape with the sunlight upon it!

This delight, which children, busy men, and weary age alike find in
out-of-door life, may be said to be merely physical, a thing of the
nerves and animal spirits. It is so, no doubt, but it is something
more. Along with pleasure to the senses, there enters in something
more ethereal, not the less real because it may be undefinable. This
fresh child-like delight in Nature has found expression abundantly in
the poets, especially in those of the early time. Chaucer, before all
others, is full of it. As one sample out of many, take this. In the
Prologue to “The Legend of Good Women,” he tells that he has such love to
the daisy that—

            “When comen is the May,
    Then in my bed there daweth me no day
    That I n’am up and walking in the mead,
    To see this flower against the sunné spread,
    When it upriseth early in the morrow;
    That blissful sight softeneth all my sorrow;
    So glad am I when that I have presénce
    Of it, to doen it all reverence,
    As she that is of all flow’rs the flow’r.”

Then he goes on to describe himself kneeling down on the sod to greet the
daisy when it first opens:—

    “And down on knees anon right I me set,
    And as I could this freshé flow’r I grette,
    Kneeling always till it unclosed was
    Upon the small, and soft, and sweeté gras.”

So we see Chaucer has been beforehand with Burns, not to say Wordsworth,
in tender affection for the daisy.

The same transparent expression of delight in the open-air world comes
in unexpectedly in some of the old ballads, which are concerned with far
other matters. Thus:—

    ...

    “When leaves be large and long
    It’s pleasant walking in good greenwood
      To hear the small birds’ song.
    The woodweel sang and would not cease,
      Sitting upon the spray,
    So loud he wakened Robin Hood,
      In greenwood where he lay.”

Suchlike utterances of ballad-writers and early poets might be
multiplied without number. It is a penalty we have to pay for our late
and over-stimulated civilization that such direct and unreflecting
expressions of gladness in the face of Nature seem hardly any
longer possible for a poet. If he will be listened to by our jaded,
sophisticated ears, it is not enough for him to utter once again the
spontaneous gladness that human hearts feel, and always will feel, in the
pleasant air and the sunshine; he must say something about it which shall
be novel, and out of the way, something subtle or analytic, or strongly
stimulative. And yet it cannot but be that a poet who has a heart keenly
sensitive to the common sights of earth and sky, and who describes these
with the direct freshness which feeling heart and clear eye always give,
may still do much to win back men from over-subtilizing, and to make them
feel as if they have never felt before—

    “The simple, the sincere delight,
    The habitual scene of hill and dale,
    The rural herds, the vernal gale,
    The tangled vetches’ purple bloom,
    The fragrance of the bean’s perfume.”


II.

The second method I shall mention is that of using Nature as a background
or setting to human action or emotion,—just as we see Raphael and other
old masters, in their pictures of a Holy Family, bring in behind the
human groups a far-off mountain line, with a piece of blue sky or some
streaks of sunset above it.

This is the way in which Nature is very frequently used by Homer in the
Iliad, and, especially, in the Odyssey. It is as a frame or setting to
his pictures of human action and character. And closely allied to this
is the way of illustrating the actions, the feelings, sometimes the
sufferings, of men, by striking similes taken from the most obvious
appearances of the outward world, or from the doing of wild creatures in
Nature. This is a use of Nature in which the Iliad of Homer especially
abounds, although all poets down to our own day have freely employed it.
In the Iliad there is little or no description of the scenes in which the
battles are fought. The features are hinted at by single epithets, such
as many-fountained Ida, windy Ilion, deep-whirlpooled Scamander, and the
presence of Nature you are made to feel by images fetched straight from
every element,—from the clouds, the mountain-top, the woody crag, the
forest, the sea darkening under the western breeze, the midnight sky with
the moon and the stars shining in its depths.

But there is in the Iliad no dwelling on the features of the scenes
through which the heroes pass, such as you find in the Odyssey and in
the Æneid. In these last, more than in the Iliad, Nature is used as the
regular framework in which human actions are set. I cannot now stay to
quote passages. We shall in the sequel see how large a place is filled,
how much of Nature is let in upon the reader by Homer in his similes,
which are almost all taken from common occurrences in Nature or from the
working of man with Nature. Sometimes, however, we are made to feel the
presence of Nature by other methods than that of simile. In the thick of
the great battle in the 11th Book of the Iliad, just before Agamemnon
breaks forth in his splendid charge, how the mind is relieved by this
glance aside from the heat and hurry of the battle to the cool and quiet
of this woodland scene:—

    “All through the dawn, and as the day grew on
    From either side the shafts were showered amain,
    And fast the people fell. But at the hour
    When the lone woodman in the mountain glens
    Prepares his noonday meal, for that his arms
    Are weary with long labor, and his heart
    Had had its fill of felling the tall treen,
    And craving for sweet food comes over him;
    Just at that hour the Danai by sheer might
    Broke through their foemen’s ranks, each shouting loud
    To cheer his comrade on. First from the van
    Forth-leaping, Agamemnon slew a chief,
    Bienor,”

and then he presses on through the Trojan host, to slay, and slay, and
slay.


III.

Akin to this, and yet distinct from it, is the way of regarding Nature
through the light of the human and especially the historic events which
it has witnessed, and with which some particular spots have become
indelibly associated. This, which I may call the historic coloring of
Nature, has been, of course, the slow accretion of the ages, and only in
quite modern times is it a prominent feature in the poets. The poets of
Greece and Rome, proud as they were of the deeds of their countrymen, do
not seem to have visited their great battle-fields nor to have hung on
the scenery that surrounded them with that romantic interest which modern
poets do. Marathon, Thermopylæ, Salamis, names of glory as they were, and
often on their lips, became to the Greek imagination names for deeds,
abstractions of national achievement, rather than actual localities to
be visited and gazed on for their own sakes and for the memories they
enshrined. It is an English, not a Greek, poet who seizes the great
features of the immortal plain, and sings—

    “The mountains look on Marathon,
    And Marathon looks on the sea.”

The same, too, who, alluding to the great sea-fight, gives the scenery
also:—

    “A king sat on the rocky brow
    That looks o’er sea-born Salamis,
    And ships in thousands lay below,
    And men in nations all were his.
    He counted them at break of day,
    And when the sun set where were they?”

Perhaps of all modern poets, Walter Scott is the one who has looked
on the earth most habitually as seen through the coloring with which
historic events and great historic names have invested it. It is not
only that he has in his romantic epics described the actual features of
the fields of Flodden and of Bannockburn with a minuteness foreign to
the genius of the ancients. He has done this. But, besides, wherever
he set his foot in his native land—not in a battle-field alone, but by
ruined keep or solitary moor, or rocky sea-shore or western island—there
rose before his eye the human forms either of the heroic past or of
the lowlier peasantry, and if no actual record hung among them, his
imagination supplied the want, and peopled the places with characters
appropriate, which shall remain interwoven with the very features of the
scenes while the name of Scotland lasts.

    “For thou upon a hundred streams,
      By tales of love and sorrow.
    Of faithful love, undaunted truth,
      Hast shed the power of Yarrow.”

In some men, not wanting in imagination, the only aspect in which scenery
interests them is when it is linked to history. This is conspicuously
seen in Lord Macaulay. Of him his biographer writes:—“The leading
features of a tract of country impressed themselves rapidly and indelibly
on his observation; all its associations and traditions swept at once
across his memory; and every line of good poetry which its fame or its
beauty had inspired rose almost involuntarily to his lips. But compared
with the wealth of phrase on which he could draw at will when engaged on
the description of human passions, catastrophes, and intrigues, his stock
of epithets applicable to mountains, seas, and clouds was singularly
scanty, and he had no ambition to enlarge it. When he had recorded the
fact, that the leaves were green, the sky blue, and the plain rich, and
the hills clothed with wood, he had said all he had to say, and there was
an end of it.”—That is, Macaulay’s imagination was confined to human and
historic things, and was irresponsive to the direct touch of Nature.

But it is not only by such localized history or romance as Scott has
given, that this human coloring passes into the impassive earth. There is
another more subtle way in which it works, and it is this:—Wherever men
have been upon the earth, even when they have done no memorable deeds,
and left no history behind them, they have lived and they have died,
they have joyed and they have sorrowed; and the sense that men have been
there and disappeared leaves a pathos on the face of many a now unpeopled
solitude.

Those will know what I mean who ever have wandered alone through moors
or glens in the Highlands, where once the old clansmen had their homes,
but in whence they have long departed. Have they not felt, as they
gazed on these wildernesses, where perhaps not even a weathered gable
now tells of man, that the outlines of Nature’s lineaments were touched
with pensiveness indescribable by the atmosphere of foregone humanities
that overspread them? Such are the feelings that are awakened as, far up
in the lap of the highest Bens, you come on the green spots where the
former Celtic people had their summer shielings. In Wordsworth’s “Tour in
Scotland”[9] it is noticed feelingly, as we might expect:—

“At the top of a mountain encircled by higher mountains at a distance,
we were passing without notice a heap of scattered stones, round which
was a belt of green grass—green, and as it seemed rich—where all else was
either poor heather or coarse grass, or unprofitable rushes and spongy
moss. The Highlander made a pause, saying, ‘This place is much changed
since I was here twenty years ago.’ He told us that the heap of stones
had been a hut, where a family was then living, who had their winter
habitation in the valley, and brought their goats thither in the summer
to feed on the mountains, and that they were used to gather them together
at night and morning to be milked close to the door, which was the reason
why the grass was yet so green near the stones. It was affecting in that
solitude to meet with this memorial of manners passed away. We looked
about for some other traces of humanity, but nothing else could we find
in that place.”

Again: “We came to several deserted mountain huts or shiels, and rested
for some time beside one of them, upon a hillock of its green plot of
monumental herbage. The spot of ground where we sat was even beautiful,
the grass being uncommonly verdant, and of a remarkably soft and silky
texture.” The poet, his sister tells, then felt how fitting a subject for
poetry there was in those affecting “relics of human society found in
that grand and solitary region.”


IV.

Another way in which poets and others deal with Nature is when the heart,
under the stress of some strong emotion, colors all Nature with its own
hues, sees all things in sympathy with its own mood, making

    “All melodies an echo of that voice,
    All colors a suffusion from that light.”

This feeling has been expressed in a very natural way by Sir Walter
Scott:—

      “Who says, that when the Poet dies
    Mute Nature mourns her worshiper,
      And celebrates his obsequies;
    Who says, tall cliff and cavern lone
    For the departed Bard make moan;
    That mountains weep in crystal rill;
    That flowers in tears of balm distill;
    Through his loved groves that breezes sigh,
    And oaks in deeper groans reply;
    And rivers teach their rushing wave
    To murmur dirges round his grave.”

This view of Nature has been philosophically condensed into a single
stanza of Coleridge’s ode on Dejection. He says, that in looking at the
outward world

                “We receive but what we give,
    And in our life alone doth Nature live;
    Ours is the wedding garment, ours the shroud.”

And then he goes on to say that if in Nature we would see

                “Aught of higher worth
      From the soul itself must issue forth
    A light, a glory, a fair luminous mist
      Enveloping the Earth.
    And from the soul itself must there be sent
      A sweet and potent voice, of its own birth,
    Of all sweet sounds the life and element.”

Now the thought here expressed, false if taken as an adequate explanation
of our whole attitude towards Nature, is eminently true of certain moods
of mind when we are under strong excitement. It is not true that Nature
is a blank or an unintelligible scroll, with no meaning of its own but
that which we put into it from the light of our own transient feelings.
But it is most true that we are often so absorbed in our own inward moods
that we cannot for the time see anything in the outward world but that
which our eye, colored by the emotion, sends into it.

On this subject Mr. Ruskin discourses eloquently and subtly in a chapter
in the third volume of his “Modern Painters,” to which I would refer
those interested in these matters. He calls the tendency to make Nature
sympathize with our own present feelings “The Pathetic Fallacy.” His
view of the matter is this: “that the temperament which is subject to
the Pathetic Fallacy is that of a mind and body overborne by feeling,
and too weak (for the time) to deal fully and truthfully with what is
before them or upon them.” He points out that “this state is more or
less noble according to the force and elevation of the emotion which has
caused it; but at its best, if the poet is so overpowered as to color his
descriptions by it, then it is morbid and a sign of weakness. For the
emotions have vanquished the intellect.” It is, he says, “a higher order
of mind, in which the intellect rises and asserts itself along with the
utmost tension of passion, and when the whole man can stand in an iron
glow, white hot, perhaps, but still strong, and in no wise evaporating;
even if he melts, losing none of his weight.” Mr. Ruskin further says
(p. 164), “There are four classes of men—the men who feel nothing, and
therefore see truly. [He might rather have said, and therefore see
nothing.] The men who feel strongly, think weakly, and see untruly
(second order of poets). The men who feel strongly, think strongly,
and see truly (first order of poets). And the men who, strong as human
creatures can be, are yet submitted to influences stronger than they,
and see in a sort untruly, because what they see is inconceivably above
them.” This last he calls “the usual condition of prophetic inspiration.”

It will be conceded to Mr. Ruskin that it is not the highest order of
poet who, as he looks out on Nature, is so overmastered by his emotions
as to be continually coloring it with his own mental hues. It is higher
to feel intensely and still think truly, than merely to feel intensely
without true thought. But Mr. Ruskin would allow that for the poet,
whether dramatic, epic, or other, to represent his characters as coloring
the world with their own excited feelings, is neither falsity nor
weakness, but is merely keeping true to a fact of human nature. Numerous
instances of this will occur to every one. Take one from Shakespeare’s
delineations of character. Ariel, breaking through the elements and
powers of Nature, quickens the remorse of Alonso, king of Naples, for a
crime committed twelve years before, till the sounds of Nature become the
voice of conscience—

    “Methought the billows spoke and told me of it;
    The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder,
    That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounced
    The name of Prosper: it did bass my trespass,
    Therefore my son i’ the ooze is bedded, and
    I’ll seek him deeper than e’er plummet sounded,
    And with him there lie mudded.”


V.

Connected with this last mode of treating Nature, but connected in the
way of contrast, is what I may call the Inhuman and Infinite side of
Nature—that side which yields no response to man’s yearnings, and refuses
to make itself plastic under even the strongest power of emotion. For as
I have elsewhere said,[10] outside of and beyond man, aloof from his warm
hopes and fears, his joy and sorrow, his strivings and aspirations, there
lies the vast immensity of Nature’s forces, which pays him no homage and
yields him no sympathy. This aspect of Nature may be seen even in the
tamest landscape, if we look to the clouds or the stars above us, or to
the ocean-waves that roar around our shores—

    “Those clouds that far above us float and pause,
    Whose pathless march no mortal may control,
    Those ocean-waves that, wheresoe’er they roll,
    Yield homage only to eternal laws.”

But nowhere is it so borne in upon man as in the wilderness where no man
is, in the presence of the great mountains which seem so impassive and
unchangeable. Their strength and permanence so contrast with man, of few
years and full of trouble—they are altogether heedless of his feelings
or his destiny. He may smile or weep, he may live or die; they care not.
They are the same in all their ongoings, come what may to him. They
respond to the sunrises and the sunsets, but not to his emotions. All the
same they fulfill their mighty functions, careless though no human eye
should ever look on them. Man’s heart may be full of gladness, yet Nature
frowns; he goes forth from the death-chamber, and Nature affronts him
with sunshine and the song of birds—

    “Nature, an infinite, unfeeling power
    From some great centre moving evermore,
    Keepeth no festal-day when man is born,
    And hath no tears for his mortality.”

It seems as though she marched on, having a purpose of her own
inaccessible to man; she keeps her own secret, and drops no hint to him.
This side of things, whether philosophically or imaginatively regarded,
seems to justify the saying that “the visible world still remains without
its divine interpretation.” And though inexplicable, perhaps for its
very inexplicability, this mysterious silence, this inexorable deafness,
this inhuman indifference of Nature, has oppressed the imagination of
some of the greatest poets with a vague but sublime awe. The sense of it
lay heavy on Lucretius and Shelley, sometimes on Wordsworth, and drew
out of their souls some of the profoundest music. At the present time,
perhaps from the increased scientific knowledge of Nature’s processes,
this contrast between the warm and tender human heart, and the cold and
impassive, almost relentless, elements, more than ever before dominates
the imaginations of men.


VI.

A sixth mode of poetically treating Nature is that which we meet with
in purely descriptive poetry. In Hesiod, in Theocritus, in the Georgics
of Virgil, among the ancients, we have examples of pure description
interwoven in didactic and idyllic poetry; but it is in modern times
that this kind of poetry has chiefly asserted itself. The most striking
example of it is Thomson’s “Seasons.” There we find that man is quite
subordinate, and only comes in to set off Nature and its appearances,
which form the main object of the poem. As it may seem to be one of the
simplest ways of treating Nature, merely to describe it,—to picture what
the eye sees and the ear hears,—faithfully to reproduce the forms and
colors of things, the movements and the sounds which pervade them—perhaps
some may think it should have been the earliest method. But as a fact,
this kind of poetry, which seems so simple, is the product only of a
late age. Early poets hardly ever handle Nature except to interweave it
with human action and emotion, and as set-off against the life of man.
To regard it by itself, and as existing apart from man, is the mental
attitude of a late and cultivated time, even though the descriptions may
seem to be plain and unadorned.

Since writing these sentences, I have read in Mr. Stopford Brooke’s
admirable “English Literature Primer” a passage in which he attributes
the earliest efforts at poetry of natural description to Scotch poets,
and among these especially to Gawain Douglas, early in the sixteenth
century; and then he, in another place, points out how, when this kind of
poetry came prominently forward in more modern times, it was a Scottish
poet who led the way in it. This is what he says:—

“Natural scenery had been hitherto only used as a background to the
picture of human life. It now (that is, in the first thirty years of the
eighteenth century) began to take a much larger place in poetry, and,
after a time, grew to occupy a distinct place of its own apart from man.
The best natural description we have before the time of Pope is that of
two Puritans, Marvell and Milton. But the first poem devoted to natural
description appeared while Pope was yet alive, in the very midst of a
vigorous town poetry. It was the “Seasons,” 1726-30; and it is curious,
remembering what I have said about the peculiar turn of the Scotch for
natural description, that it was the work of James Thomson, a Scotchman.
He described the scenery and country-life of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and
Winter. He wrote with his eye upon their scenery, and, even when he wrote
of it in his room, it was with “a recollected love.” The descriptions
were too much like catalogues, the very fault of the previous Scotch
poets; and his style was always heavy, and often cold, but he was the
first poet who led the English people into that new world of nature in
poetry, which has moved and enchanted us in the works of Wordsworth,
Shelley, Keats, and Tennyson, but which was entirely impossible for Pope
to understand. The impulse Thomson gave was soon followed.”

In our own day such poetic descriptions of Nature have burst the bonds
of metre altogether, and filled many a splendid page of poetic or
imaginative prose. Many instances of this will occur to every one.
Preëminent among these are Mr. Ruskin’s elaborate word-pictures of
natural scenery.

But of all poetic description of Nature, it may be said that if it is to
reach any high level it cannot proceed calmly and unexcitedly after the
manner of an inventory. No eye can see deeply into the meaning of Nature
unless it has also looked as deeply into the recesses of the human heart,
and felt the full gravity of man’s life and destiny. It is only when seen
over against these that Nature renders back her profounder tones.


VII.

There is another way in which the poet deals with the external
world,—when he enters into the life and the movement of Nature by a kind
of imaginative sympathy, and brings it home to us by one stroke, flashing
upon our hearts by one touch, one inspired line, a sense of the inner
life of things, and a conviction that he has been allowed for a moment to
penetrate into their secret. This, which has been called, in a special
way, the interpretative power of Poetry, is that in which it reaches its
highest function, and exercises one of its finest offices of mediation
between the soul of man and Nature.

No one, as far as I know, has seen this aspect of Poetry more truly, or
expressed it so felicitously, as my friend Mr. Matthew Arnold. If he has
not been the first to notice it, he has certainly dwelt on it with more
emphasis than any previous writer, as far as I know. For his views on
this subject I would refer to his delightful Essay on Maurice de Guérin,
in his volume entitled “Essays on Criticism.”

As it is well to give a good thought in its best possible form, Mr.
Arnold will, I know, forgive me if I quote at length his own words. He
says:—

“The grand power of Poetry is its interpretative power, by which I mean,
not the power of drawing out in black and white an explanation of the
mystery of the Universe, but the power of so dealing with things as to
awaken in us a wonderfully full, new, and intimate sense of them, and of
our relations with them. When this sense is awakened in us as to objects
without us, we feel ourselves to be in contact with the essential nature
of those objects, to be no longer bewildered and oppressed by them, but
to have their secret, and to be in harmony with them; and this feeling
calms and satisfies us as no other can.... Poetry indeed interprets in
another way besides this; but one of its two ways of interpreting is by
awakening this sense in us. The interpretations of Science do not give us
this intimate sense of objects as the interpretations of Poetry give it;
they appeal to a limited faculty, and not to the whole man.”

Again Mr. Arnold says:—

“Poetry interprets in two ways: it interprets, by expressing with
magical felicity the physiognomy and movement of the outward world, and
it interprets by expressing, with inspired conviction, the ideas and
laws of the inward world of man’s moral and spiritual nature. In other
words, Poetry is interpretative by having natural magic in it, and by
having moral profundity. In both ways it illuminates man; it gives him
a satisfying sense of reality; it reconciles him with himself and the
Universe. The greatest poets unite in themselves the faculty of both
kinds of interpretation, the naturalistic and the moral. But it is
observable that in the poets who unite both kinds, the latter (the moral)
usually ends by making itself the master. In Shakespeare the two kinds
seem wonderfully to balance each other; but even in him the balance
leans; his expression tends to become too little sensuous and simple, too
much intellectualized. The same thing may be yet more strongly affirmed
of Lucretius and of Wordsworth.”

It is not, however, with moral but with naturalistic interpretation that
we have now to do. And in this faculty of naturalistic interpretation,
perhaps no poet—certainly no modern poet—equals Keats. In him, as Mr.
Arnold says, “the faculty is overpoweringly predominant. The natural
magic is perfect; when he speaks of the outward world he speaks almost
like Adam naming, by Divine inspiration, the creatures; his expression
corresponds with the thing’s essential reality.”

Does not Keats thus bring home to us the meaning—the inner secret—of the
ocean, and the impression it makes on the human heart, when he speaks of

    “The voice mysterious, which whoso hears
    Must think on what will be, and what has been?”

It is he that interprets the meaning of the summer midnight among the
woods, when he says—

            “Upon a tranced summer night
    Those green-robed senators of mighty woods,
    Tall oaks, branch-charmed by the earnest stars,
    Dream, and so dream all night without a stir,
    Save from one gradual solitary gust
    Which comes upon the silence, and dies off,
    As if the ebbing air had but one wave.”

Or take one more instance. All know the stern, almost grim, feeling of
solitude about some little crag-engirdled lochan or tarn far up the heart
of a Highland mountain. Who has given this feeling of grim solitude,
so death-like that any living thing or sound startles you there, as
Wordsworth, by these two strokes?—

    “There sometimes doth a leaping fish
      Send through the tarn a lonely cheer;
    The crags repeat the raven’s croak
      In symphony austere.”

Or again, who has not felt as though he had a new revelation made to him
about the starry sky and the mountain-stillness after reading for the
first time these two well-known lines?—

    “The silence that is in the starry sky,
    The sleep that is among the lonely hills.”

Or once more: who has so called up the impression produced by the sound
of waters heard among the mountains as Wordsworth, when he thus speaks?—

                        “In mute repose
    To lie and listen to the mountain-flood
    Murmuring from Glaramara’s inmost caves.”

But I have dwelt too long on this aspect of Poetry, its penetrating power
of naturalistic interpretation when the poet,

    “With an eye made quiet by the power
    Of harmony and the deep power of joy,”

is given to see into the life of things, and seeing, makes us share his
insight, makes us partakers for a moment at least in

                    “That blessed mood
    In which the burthen of the mystery,
    In which the heavy and the weary weight
    Of all this unintelligible world
    Is lightened.”

Even if it be but a transient glance, a momentary lightening of the
burden that he lends us, it is one of the most intimate and delicate
services—one of the highest and rarest functions which the poet or any
man can perform.


VIII.

Once more: the last and highest way in which Nature ministers to the soul
and spirit of man is when it becomes to him a symbol translucent with the
light of the moral and spiritual world. Or, in other words, the highest
use to which Imagination can put this visible world is, to gather from it
some tidings of the world invisible.

This use is seen when the sights and sounds of Nature, coming in through
eye and ear to the soul, hint at and foreshow “a higher life than this
daily one, a brighter world than that we see.” It is Coleridge who has
said that “it has been the music of gentle and pious minds in all ages,
it is the poetry of all human life, to read the book of Nature in a
figurative sense, and to find therein correspondences and symbols of the
spiritual world.” That this is no mere fanciful use to make of Nature,
that in cultivating the habit of thus reading it we are cultivating a
power which is grounded in reason and the truth of things, can hardly be
doubted, if we believe that the things we see, and the mind that sees
them, have one common origin, come from one Universal Mind, which gives
being to and upholds both alike. This seeing of spiritual truths mirrored
in the face of Nature rests not on any fancied, but in a real analogy
between the natural and the spiritual worlds. They are, in some sense
which Science has not ascertained, but which the vital and religious
imagination can perceive, counterparts the one of the other The highest
authority for this belief, as well as its truest exemplification, we have
in the Parables of our Lord. It was on this truth that He grounded a
large part of his teaching.

I need but allude to what is so familiar; only let us, before we pass
on, think of what is implied in this teaching, which we have all known
from our childhood,—the growth of the Divine life in the soul represented
by the growth of the corn seed in the furrow, the end of the world or
of this æon set forth by the reapers and the harvest. Simple as this
teaching is, level to the child’s capacity, it yet involves a truth that
lies deeper than any philosopher has yet penetrated, even the hidden bond
that connects things visible with things invisible.

Archbishop Trench has said well on this subject:[11]—“On this rests
the possibility of a real and not a merely arbitrary teaching by
Parables—that the world of Nature is throughout a witness for the world
of spirit, proceeding from the same hand, growing out of the same
root, and constituted for that very end. All lovers of truth readily
acknowledge these mysterious harmonies. To them the things on earth are
copies of the things in heaven. They know that the earthly tabernacle is
made after the pattern of things seen in the Mount, and the question of
the Angel in Milton often forces itself on their meditations—

                            ‘What if earth
    Be but the shadow of heaven, and things therein
    Each to other like, more than on earth is thought?’”

But to leave these heights of inspired teaching, we find everywhere the
more meditative poets deriving from visible Nature hints at that which
eye has not seen nor ear heard. One of the simplest and most child-like
instances of this that occurs to me is that beautiful thought of Isaac
Walton:—

    “How joyed my heart in the rich melodies
    That overhead and round me did arise!
    The moving leaves—the waters’ gentle flow—
    Delicious music hung on every bough.
    Then said I, in my heart, If that the Lord
    Such lovely music on the earth accord;
    If to weak sinful man such sounds are given—
    Oh! what must be the melody of Heaven!”

Something of the same thought comes out in a more reflective way in many
of the poems of Henry Vaughan,[12] a writer of the same age as Walton,
and one, like him, now less known and read than he deserves to be. Take
the following, in which Vaughan speaks of the vivid insight of his
childhood in a strain in which some have thought that they overheard the
first note of that tone which Wordsworth has sounded more fully in his
“Ode on the Intimations of Immortality”. It is thus Vaughan speaks of his
childhood:—

    “Happy those early days when I
    Shined in my angel-infancy;
    When yet I had not walked above
    A mile or two from my first love,
    And looking back, at that short space,
    Could see a glimpse of _His_ bright face
    When on some gilded cloud or flower
    My gazing soul would dwell an hour,
    And in those weaker glories spy
    Some shadows of eternity;
    And feel through all this fleshly dress
    Bright shootes of everlastingness.”

Such thoughts may be deemed by some to be fanciful and not practical.
Certainly they are not much in vogue at the present time. But as one has
said, “I cannot conceive a use of our knowledge more practical than to
make it connect the sight of this world with the thought of another.”
Nor can any be more needed by us, or more consolatory. For is it not the
experience of each individual as he grows more thoughtful, as well as the
experience of the race, that the visible, the outward, cannot satisfy?
Is it not the very best element in man that makes him feel forever after
something higher, deeper, more enduring than the things he sees? If we
turn aside from this tendency, and seek to quench it, we do so at the
cost of destroying that which is the best, the noblest inheritance of our
humanity,—the piece of divinity in us.

This suggestive power of Nature, and its unsufficingness, have been felt
by all men who have any glimpse of the ideal in them; by none has it been
more deeply felt, or more adequately expressed, than by him, the great
preacher—poet as well as preacher—of our age. I mean, Dr. Newman. As the
prose words in which he expresses this feeling are in the highest sense
poetry, I cannot, I think, do better than give the thought in his own
perfect language. He is speaking in the opening of Spring:—

“Let these be your thoughts, especially in this Spring season, when the
whole face of Nature is so rich and beautiful. Once only in the year yet
once, does the world which we see show forth its hidden powers, and in a
manner manifest itself. Then there is a sudden rush and burst outwardly
of that hidden life which God has lodged in the material world. Well,
that shows you, as by a sample, what it can do at his command, when He
gives the word. This earth which now buds forth in leaves and blossoms,
will one day burst forth into a new world of light and glory. Who would
think, except from his experience of former Springs all through his
life, who could conceive two or three months before that it was possible
that the face of Nature, which then seemed so lifeless, should become so
splendid and varied? How different is a prospect when leaves are on it,
and off it! How unlikely it would seem before the event that the dry and
naked branches should suddenly be clothed with what is so bright and so
refreshing! Yet in God’s good time leaves come on the trees. The season
may delay, but come it will at last.

“So it is with the coming of that eternal Spring for which all Christians
are waiting. Come it will, though it delay. Therefore we say day by day,
Thy kingdom come; which means, O Lord, show thyself—manifest thyself. The
earth that we see does not satisfy us; it is but a beginning; it is but
a promise of something beyond it; even when it is gayest, with all its
blossoms on, and shows most touchingly what lies hid in it, yet it is not
enough. We know much more lies hid in it than we see.... What we see is
the outward shell of an eternal kingdom, and on that kingdom we fix the
eyes of our faith.... Bright as is the sun and sky and the clouds, green
as are the leaves and the fields, sweet as is the singing of the birds,
we know that they are not all, and we will not take up with a part for
the whole. They proceed from a centre of love and goodness, which is God
himself, but they are not his fullness; they speak of heaven, but they
are not heaven; they are but as stray beams and dim reflections of his
image; they are but crumbs from the table. We are looking for the coming
of the day of God, when all this outward world, fair though it be, shall
perish.... We can bear the loss, for we know it will be but the removing
of a veil. We know, that to remove the world which is seen will be the
manifestation of the world which is not seen. We know that what we see is
a screen hiding from us God and Christ, and his saints and angels; and we
earnestly desire and pray for the dissolution of all that we see, from
our longing after that which we do not see.”

Such are the thoughts and longings which the sight of the vernal earth
can awaken in a spiritual mind well used to heavenly meditations.

If some of us are so sense-bound that such thoughts seem fantastic and
unreal to them, all that can be said is, The more’s the pity. Even the
best among us will probably not venture to appropriate such thoughts
as if these were our habitual companions, but they may have in some
brighter moments known them. At all events they know what they mean, and
are assured that as they themselves grow in spirituality, the beauty
that clothes this visible world, while it soothes, does not suffice, but
becomes more and more the hint and prophecy of a higher beauty which
their heart longs for.

And now, in looking back on these several ways in which poets have
handled Nature, two thoughts suggest themselves:—

1. The ways I have noted are far from exhausting all the possible or even
actual modes in which poets deal with Nature, or, in other words, in
which Nature lends itself to the poet’s service. They are but a few of
the most prominent and obvious. It may interest some to look for others,
and to add them to the classification here given.

2. Though one mode may be more prominent in one poet, and one in another,
yet no poet is limited to only one, or even two, of these several ways
of adapting Nature to his purposes. In the works of the greatest poets,
those of largest and most varied range, perhaps every one of these modes,
and more besides, may be found. To find out and arrange under heads all
the ways in which say Shakespeare and Milton deal with Nature, would be
an interesting study for any one who is young, and has leisure for it.

With one reflection I close this part of my subject. Any one who has
ever been brought to meditate on the relation which the abstractions
of mathematics bear to the Laws of Nature must have felt how exceeding
wonderful it is. A system of thought evoked out of pure intelligence has
been found reflected and, as it were, embodied in the actual movements of
the heavenly bodies, and bringing the whole Physical Cosmos within the
power of man’s thought—

    “From star to star, from kindred sphere to sphere,
    From system on to system, without end.”

Such a one, I say, must have been filled with wonder at this marvelous
adaptation and correspondence between the mind of transitory man and the
vast movements of the most remote and permanent of material things.

A like, though a different, wonder must arise when we reflect how,
in the various modes above noted, and no doubt in many more, outward
Nature lends itself to be the material in which so many of man’s highest
thoughts and emotions can work and embody themselves.

Of the poets and this visible world we may truly say,—

    “They took the whole earth for their toy,
      They played with it in every mood;
    A cell for prayer, a hall for joy,
      They treated Nature as they would.”

He who has once perceived the wonderful adaptation which exists between
the mind of man and the external world—how exquisitely the individual
mind, as well as the mind of the race, is fitted to the world, and the
external world fitted to the mind,—if he has once vividly felt the
reality of this adaptation, he must have paused in wonder at himself,
and at the world that encompasses him, and become penetrated with an
immediate conviction, deeper than all arguments can reach, that the
reasonable soul within him, and the material world without him, which on
so many sides is seen to be the embodiment of reason, and which yields up
its secret to man’s intelligence, and is so plastic to his imagination
and emotions,—that these two existences so answering to each other,
and so strangely communing with each other, are both rooted in the one
Central and Universal Intelligence which embraces and upholds both Nature
and Man.




