CHAPTER XI.

NATURE IN CHAUCER, SHAKESPEARE, AND MILTON.


To pass from the Virgilian view of Nature to that of our earliest
English poet, though it brings us nearer our own age in time, is really
to recede from it in feeling to a remote and primitive antiquity. No
poet ever loved Nature more than Chaucer did; but it was with a simple,
unreflective, child-like love. The Morning Star of English Song, as he
has been called, man of the world and skilled in affairs, at home in
courts and with the great, conversant with the ways of all men, high
and low, could turn aside from the gorgeous imagery that filled his
poetic vision, from the profusion of mediæval ceremonies and cavalcade,
of high processions with soldiers in armor, caparisoned horses and
bedizened ladies, from gallant knights with lordly manners, and homely
country-people, from sights and stories fetched from many lands,—to dwell
tenderly on the plain sights and sounds of external nature, and to sing
of them with the transparency and sweetness of a child. It was Nature in
her “first intention,” her most obvious aspects, that attracted him.
Once, indeed, in the “Assembly of Foules,” he speaks of “that noble
Goddesse of Nature.” This, however, is not his usual language, but rather
a conventional way of speaking caught from the Latin poets he had read.
Again, in a more serious strain, the same poem speaks thus:—

    “Nature, the vicare of the Almightie Lord;”

but it is not on Nature as a great whole, much less as an abstraction,
that his thought usually dwells. It is the outer world in its most
concrete forms and objects, with which he delights to interweave his
poetry—the homely scenes of South England, the oaks and other forest
trees, the green meadows, quiet fields, and comfortable farms, as well
as the great castles where the nobles dwelt. One associates him with
the green lanes and downs of Surrey and Kent, their natural copsewoods
and undulating greenery. I know not that the habitual forms of English
landscape, those which are most rural and most unchanged, have ever
since found a truer poet, one who so brings before the mind the scene
and the spirit of it uncolored by any intervention of his own thought
or sentiment. And his favorite season—it is the May-time. Of this he is
never tired of singing. When there comes a really spring-like day in May,
the east wind gone, and the west wind blowing softly, the leaves coming
out, and the birds singing, at such a season one feels instinctively this
is the Chaucer atmosphere and time. One passage has been cited in a
former chapter in which Chaucer speaks of the daisy very lovingly. Other
passages might be cited in which he turns again and again to the same
flower, proving that it was a favorite with one poet before either Burns
or Wordsworth.

Let me give one more passage which gives the characteristic landscape of
Chaucer and his feeling about it:—

    “When shourés sote of rain descended soft,
    Causing the ground felé times and oft
    Up for to give many a wholesome air,
    And every plainé was y-clothed fair

    “With newé green, and maketh smallé flow’rs
    To springen here and there in field and mead
    So very good and wholesome be the show’rs,
    That they renewen that was old and dead
    In winter time, and out of every seed
    Springeth the herbé, so that every wight
    Of this seasón waxeth right glad and light.

    ...

        “Up I rose three hourés after twelfe
    About the springing of the gladsome day,
    And on I put my gear and mine array,
    And to a pleasant grove I ’gan to pass
    Long ere the brighté sun uprisen was;

    “In which were oakés great, straight as a line,
    Under the which the grass so fresh of hue
    Was newly sprung; and an eight foot or nine
    Evéry tree well from his fellow grew,
    With branches broad laden with leavés new,
    That sprungen out against the sunné sheen,
    Some very red, and some a glad light green,

    “Which (as me thought) was a right pleasant sight;
    And eke the birdés songés for to hear
    Would have rejoicéd any earthly wight;
    And I, that could not yet in no mannere
    Hearen the nightingale of all the year,
    Full busily heark’ned with heart and ear.
    If I her voice perceive could anywhere.”

This is exactly the Chaucer landscape. The forest trees are described
each after their kind; even the varieties of color of oak leaves in
spring-time he notes, some coming out “very red,” some of a golden green
hue—a fact not noticed, as far as I remember, by any other poet; the soft
green grass, as soft as velvet under foot, he is never done praising;
the note of each song-bird he knows and delights in. These, with here
and there a quaint old garden described, such is the scenery in which
his human portraits are inlaid. He is altogether one of the most amply
descriptive of English poets till we arrive at quite recent times. And it
is one sign of the permanence and stability of England, even amidst all
change, that among the copsewoods of Kent and the lanes of Surrey just
such scenes may be seen any spring-day now as Chaucer loved to describe
nearly five hundred years ago. This unchanged landscape is everywhere in
his poetry blended with the mediæval manners and costumes that have long
since passed, as a modern poet, in phrase like Chaucer’s own, has well
sung:—

                “He listeneth to the lark,
    Whose song comes with the sunshine through the dark
    Of painted glass, in leaden lattice bound,
    He listeneth and he laugheth at the sound,
    Then writeth in a book like any clerk.”


SHAKESPEARE.

The drama is the last form of poetry to which we would turn in hope
of finding rural objects and scenery described. Yet it is astonishing
how much of this kind can be culled from a careful search through
Shakespeare’s plays. Indeed it has been remarked how much of out-of-doors
life there is in Shakespeare’s dramas, how much of the action is carried
on under the open sky. No doubt the pressure of human action and emotion
is too absorbing to admit of detailed description—in most cases of more
than passing allusions. Yet engrossed though he is with stirring events
and thrilling emotions and powerful human characters, it is wonderful how
many are the side-glances that he and his characters cast at the Nature
that surrounds them. And these glances are like everything else in him,
rapid, vivid, and intense. As has been said, natural scenes “he so paints
by occurrences, by allusions, by the emotions of his characters, that we
seem to see them before our eyes, and to live in them.” There is hardly
one of his plays in which the season and the scene is not flashed upon
the mind by a single stroke more vividly than it could be by the most
lengthened description:—

    “Lady! by yonder silver moon I swear,
    That tips with silver all the fruit-tree tops.”

How these few words shed round us all the loveliness of the Italian
night! Or that other where the moonshine of the warm summer night
brightens the last scenes of the “Merchant of Venice,” and calls up,
as only moonlight can, all wild and fascinating memories of legend and
romance:—

    “_Lorenzo._ The moon shines bright: In such a night as this,
                 When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
                 And they did make no noise; in such a night
                 Troilus, methinks, mounted the Trojan walls,
                 And sigh’d his soul toward the Grecian tents,
                 Where Cressid lay that night.

    “_Jessica._                            In such a night
                 Did Thisbe fearfully o’ertrip the dew;
                 And saw the lion’s shadow ere himself,
                 And ran dismay’d away.

    “_Lorenzo._                     In such a night
                 Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
                 Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
                 To come again to Carthage.”

A recent critic has spoken of the Poet-Laureate’s “wonderful skill in
creating a perfectly real and living scene—such as always might, and
perhaps somewhere does, exist in external nature—for the theatre of the
feeling he is about to embody, and yet a scene every feature of which
helps to make the emotion more real and vivid.” Careful students of
Shakespeare know how truly these words apply to almost every one of his
plays. He leaves not only the impression of each character deeply graven
on your memory; but the season and the scenery which encompassed them,
though perhaps not above a line or two are given to them, rise before us
almost as indelibly. To take one sample out of many. In “Macbeth,” for
instance, how does the scenery at every turn answer to the action and the
emotion! For the first appearance of the witches there is the blasted
heath, the thunder and lightning; then, as the key-note to Lady Macbeth’s
fell purpose, there is—

          “The raven himself is hoarse
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    Under my battlements.”

But when King Duncan himself, with his retinue, appears, the whole aspect
of things is changed, and the gracious disposition of the old king comes
out very naturally in the view he takes of the castle in which he was so
soon to meet his doom:—

    “This castle has a pleasant seat; the air
    Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
    Unto our gentle senses.”

Banquo replies:—

                    “This guest of summer,
    The temple-haunting martlet, does approve
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven’s breath
    Smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze,
    Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
    Hath made his pendent bed and procreant cradle;
    Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,
    The air is delicate.”

The castle, with its buttresses and battlements, its high gables and
overhanging towers, lends itself as readily to the pleasant humor of the
kindly king that calm afternoon, as it will do to the horror and the
gloom of the morrow. Then the night in which the murder was done is
quite such a night as often comes in dead winter, yet fits in so well
with the deed and the feeling it awakened in men’s hearts.

    “_Lennox._ The night has been unruly: where we lay
             Our chimneys were blown down; and, as they say,
             Lamentings heard i’ the air; strange screams of death
             And other prodigies.

    _Macb._ ’Twas a rough night.

    _Len._   My young remembrance cannot parallel
             A fellow to it.”

This is the talk that passes just before the murder is known. And after
it is known, this is the kind of day that follows:

                “By the clock, ’tis day,
    And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.”

Again, as twilight brings on, the night which is to see Banquo taken out
of the way, Macbeth exclaims—

                “Come, seeling night,
    Skarf up the tender eye of pitiful day;
    And, with thy bloody and invisible hand,
    Cancel, and tear to pieces, that great bond
    Which keeps me pale!—Light thickens, and the crow
    Makes wing to the rooky wood;
    Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
    While night’s black agents to their prey do rouse.”

But why go on quoting passages, which all remember, to show how exactly
all through this or the other dramas the face of Nature answers to the
deeds and the emotions of the human agents, and how a line—sometimes a
word in the midst of a rapid dialogue—lets in the open air, and all
the surrounding nature, more tellingly than pages of description could
have done. But between Shakespeare and a modern poet there is this great
difference, that, while in the latter this correspondence is attained
by careful study and elaborate forethought, in Shakespeare we may well
believe that the white heat of imagination which created and moulded the
characters in all their throng of emotion struck off, at the same moment,
almost unconsciously, the aspects of external nature which were proper to
them.

The forest was evidently with Shakespeare a favorite resort, bringing
back to him, as it would, recollections of his youthful deer-huntings.
In his day the forest was not far off or strange, but still a familiar
place, as we are told, coming up very close to the gates of the country
town. From Stratford-on-Avon he had not far to go before he found himself
in the midst of the forest of fine oaks, the survivors of which are still
seen all about in the parks and lanes of Warwickshire. So when he would
spend the summer night in the most extravagant mirth and drollery, it is
out to the wild wood that he leads his company; when he would surround
the grave thoughts of the exiled Duke and the melancholy of Jaques with a
congenial background, he places them in the Forest of Arden, where free
Nature fits into the mood, and brings soothing to their mental maladies.

    “Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
    Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
    More free from peril than the envious court?”

In how many ways throughout these plays are the aspects of human life set
forth by their resemblances in Nature!

    “_Jul._ The current that with gentle murmur glides,
            Thou know’st, being stopp’d, impatiently doth rage;
            But, when his fair course is not hindered,
            He makes sweet music with the enameled stones,
            Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
            He overtaketh in his pilgrimage;
            And so by many winding nooks he strays
            With willing sport, to the wild ocean.
            Then let me go, and hinder not my course,
            I’ll be as patient as a gentle stream,
            And make my pastime of each weary step,
            Till the last step have brought me to my love;
            And then I’ll rest, as, after much turmoil,
            A blessed soul doth in Elysium.”

Shakespeare, whether from watching the sea from the shore, or from
sailing on it, was evidently at home in describing it.

The sea storm in “Pericles” (Act iii. Scene 1) is full of life and
movement, made all the more terrible by the death of the queen on
shipboard when the tempest is at its height. They are off the coast of
Tharsus, and the ship is driving in upon it unmanageably, and will not
answer to the helm:—

    “_1st Sailor._—Slack the bolins there; thou wilt not, wilt
    thou? Blow and split thyself.

    _2d Sailor._—But sea room, an the brine and cloudy billow
    kiss the moon, I care not.

    _1st Sailor._—Sir, your queen must overboard; the sea works
    high, the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be cleared of
    the dead.”

The human situation and the conflict of the elements combine each
to heighten to the utmost the terror and despair of the other. The
conjunction is no doubt finely imagined. But when a modern poet writes:
“No poetry of shipwreck and the sea has ever equaled the great scene of
‘Pericles,’ no such note of music was ever struck out of the clash and
contention of tempestuous elements,” one cannot but feel that he indulges
in exaggeration.

For coast scenery the description of Dover cliffs stands almost alone.

But while with the forest and the sea-coast Shakespeare’s early life
had made him familiar, he had not, as far as we know, had much, if any,
experience of mountains. Of Nature, as of man, he painted for the most
part what he had seen and known—idealizing it of course, but having
caught the first hint from reality. And mountains formed no part of the
Warwickshire or indeed of the England which he knew. Therefore while we
find many notices of the fields, the forest, and the sea, and of the way
they affect human imaginations, there is no allusion to the effect of
mountain scenery. It could not have been said of him:—

    “The power of hills is on thee.”

On this fact Mr Ruskin has this characteristic reflection, that
Shakespeare having been ordained to take a full view of total human
nature, to be perfectly equal and universal in his portraiture of man,
could be allowed no mountains, nor even supreme natural beauty. For had
he been reared among mountains they would have overbalanced him, have
laid too powerful a grasp on his imagination, have made him lean too much
their way, and so would have marred his universality. Whether we take
this view of it or not, it is certain that the power of the mountains
is not expressed in that poetry which expresses almost every other
conceivable thing, and that the mountain rapture had to lie dumb for two
more centuries before it found utterance in English song.

In “Cymbeline” the two noble youths are brought up in caves among the
mountains, but from this their characters receive no touch of freedom or
grandeur, but are enhanced only by having taken no taint of degradation
from so base a dwelling-place. “The only thing belonging to the hills,”
says Mr. Ruskin, “that Shakespeare seems to feel as noble, was the
pine-tree, and that was because he had seen in Warwickshire clumps of
pine occasionally rising on little sandstone mounds above the lowland
woods.” He touches on this tree fondly again and again.

                                  “As rough
    Their royal blood enchafed, as the rud’st wind,
    That by his top doth take the mountain pine,
    And make him stoop to the vale.”

Again:—

    “You may as well forbid the mountain pines
    To wave their high tops, and to make no noise
    When they are fretted with the gusts of heaven.”

And again:—

    “But when from under this terrestrial bank
    He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines.”

He knew little then of the mountains by experience; but had he known them
more, though they might have added some sternness to his genius, some awe
to his thoughts about life, they might perhaps have narrowed his range
and made his view of men less universal and serene. So Mr. Ruskin thinks.
And yet perhaps it is hardly safe so to speculate about Shakespeare. For
could not the mind which took in and harmonized so many things, have made
room for this other influence, without deranging its proportions and
marring its universality?

Though Shakespeare sometimes describes, in a general way, countries
he had never seen, as in that exquisite description of Sicily in the
“Winter’s Tale,”—

    “The climate’s delicate, the air most sweet,
    Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
    The common praise it bears”—

yet whenever he descends to details of country life and scenery, as he
so often does, every word bears the stamp of having been brought, not
from books, but from what his own eyes had seen in the neighborhood of
Stratford-upon-Avon. How familiar he was with the garden and all its
processes is seen by many a metaphor and allusion, perhaps nowhere more
notably than in the 4th Scene of the 3d Act of “Richard II.,” where in
the Duke of York’s garden at Langley the discourse of the gardener and
his men on the management of fruit-trees is turned to political meaning.
A disordered state is a neglected and unweeded garden, the pruning and
bleeding of fruit-trees are the restraining great and growing men in the
state, and all the operations are so described and applied as only an
adept in gardening could do; or again, there is the well-known metaphor
in Wolsey’s speech where he likens his blushing honors to blossoms nipt
by frost. The process of grafting furnishes many a metaphor for human
doings. All the ordinary forest trees, the oak, the elm, the pine, the
willow, come in with the easy handling of one who knew them from boyhood.
Every bird, the rook, the chough, the throstle, the ousel-cock or
blackbird, the nightingale,

    “The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
    The plain-song cuckoo gray”—

all find familiar notice; and perhaps of these we might select the lark
as his favorite, to judge by the frequency of allusion to it.

Though garden flowers—such garden flowers as were cultivated in his
time—are not passed over, yet much more noteworthy is the loving way in
which Shakespeare dwells, or rather makes his characters dwell, on the
field-flowers. Almost every wild-flower that is to be found at this day
in the meadows and woods by Avon side looks out from some part of other
of his poetry. But this love for flowers, it has been noted, he puts in
the mouth, not of his strong heroic characters, his Henry V. or Othello,
but in the lips of his more feminine ones. It is the sentimental Duke in
“Twelfth Night” who exclaims—

    “That strain again; it had a dying fall.
    Oh! it came o’er my ear like the sweet south,
    That breathes upon a bank of violets,
    Stealing, and giving odor”—

just such a bank as may be seen any April day under the Warwickshire
hedge-rows. Every one remembers poor Ophelia and her flowers, the flowers
with which Arviragus promises to sweeten the sad grave of Fidele; and,
above all, the wonderful scene in the “Winter’s Tale” where Perdita
presiding at the sheep-shearing feast sorts the flowers according to the
age of the guests, “flowers of winter, rosemary and rue,” to the elders,
to men of middle age flowers of middle summer—

    “Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram,
    The marigold, that goes to bed with the sun,
    And with him rises weeping.”

And for her fairest friend—

    “I would I had some flowers o’ the spring that might
    Become your time of day;
    Daffodils, violets, and pale primroses.”

Lastly, the song which winds up “Love’s Labor Lost,”—with what lyric
sweetness it condenses how much of flowery spring and of nipping winter
into a few easy lines! In this as in all other mentions of wild-flowers
in Shakespeare, it has been remarked how true he is to time and season,
giving to each flower its proper season and haunt, and sorting them
all with the careless ease of one to whom they were among the most
familiar things. In this he contrasts with the artistic but not accurate
assortment of flowers in the well-known passage of “Lycidas,” where
Milton groups in one posy flowers belonging to different seasons.

On the whole, though Shakespeare never set himself formally to study or
describe external Nature, yet his dramas are full of her presence and her
works—not taken from books or daintily tricked out by art, but idealized
from his memory well stored with country scenes. Again, these are given,
not in elaborate descriptions, but in rapid strokes, and side-glances,
vivid, penetrating, intense, thrown off from the heat of an imagination
brooding mainly over human interests and emotions. And perhaps after all
that view of Nature is the truest, healthiest, manliest, which does not
pore or moralize over her appearances, but keeps them in the background,
putting man into the foreground and making him the central object. As Man
and Nature stand over against each other, and are evidently made each
for each, it may be that not apart from Man, with his emotions and his
destiny, can Nature be rightly conceived and portrayed.


MILTON.

When we pass from the images of Nature that abound in Chaucer and in
Shakespeare to those which Milton furnishes, the transition is much the
same as when we pass from the scenery of Homer to that of Virgil. The
contrast is that between natural free-flowing poetry, in which the beauty
is child-like and unconscious, and highly cultured artistic poetry, which
produces its effects through a medium of learned illustration, ornate
coloring, and stately diction. In the one case Nature is seen directly
and at first hand, with nothing between the poet and the object except
the imaginative emotion under which he works. In the other, Nature
is apprehended only in her “second intention,” as logicians speak,
only as she appears through a beautiful haze, compounded of learning,
associations of the past, and carefully selected artistic colors. With
Milton, Nature was not his first love, but held only a secondary place in
his affections. He was in the first place a scholar, a man of letters,
with the theologian and polemic latent in him. A lover of all artistic
beauty he was, no doubt, and of Nature mainly as it lends itself to
this perception. And as is his mode of apprehending Nature, such is the
language in which he describes her. When he reached his full maturity
he had framed for himself out of the richness of his genius and the
resources of his learning a style elaborate and splendid, so that he
stands unique among English poets, “our one first-rate master in the
grand style.” As an eminent living French writer says,—“For rendering
things he has the unique word, the word which is a discovery,” and
“he has not only the image and the word, he has the period also, the
large musical phrase, somewhat laden with ornaments and intricate with
inversions, but bearing all along with it in its superb undulation. Above
all, he has something indescribably serene and victorious, an unfailing
level of style, power indomitable.” This admirable description of M.
Scherer applies mainly to Milton’s style, as it was fully elaborated
in his great epic. And the thought has sometimes occurred, whether
this magnificently elaborated style can be a fit vehicle for rendering
truly the simplicity, the refreshingness of Nature,—whether the poet’s
art, from its very opulence, must not color too much the clearness and
transparency of the external world. However this may be, it is certain
that it is not to his maturer poems, with their grandeur of style, that
we look for his most vivid renderings of scenery, but to those early
poems, which had more native grace of diction and less of artistic
elaboration. Nowhere has Milton shown such an eye for scenery as in
those first poems, “L’Allegro,” “Il Penseroso,” “Lycidas,” and “Comus,”
composed before he was thirty, just after leaving Cambridge, while he
was living under his father’s roof at Horton, in Buckinghamshire.
During the five years of country life, the most genial of all his
years, amid his incessant study of the Greek and Latin poets, and other
self-improvement, his heart was perhaps more open than at any other time
to the rural beauty which lay around him. “Comus” and “Lycidas” both
contain fine natural imagery, yet somewhat deflected by the artistic
framework in which it is set. In the latter poem, in which Milton,
adapting the idyllic form of Virgil, fills it with a mightier power,
classical allusion and mythology are strangely, yet not unharmoniously,
blended with pictures taken from English landscape. Every one remembers
the splendid grouping of flowers which he there broiders in. Of this
catalogue it has been observed that, beautiful as it is, it violates the
truth of nature, as it places side by side flowers of different seasons
which are never seen flowering together. It is in his two “descriptive
Lyrics” that we find the clearest proofs of an eye that had observed
Nature at first hand and for itself. In the poem descriptive of mirth,
it has been observed that the mirth is of a very sedate kind, not
reaching beyond a “trim and stately cheerfulness.” The mythological
pedigrees attached both to mirth and to melancholy strike us now as
somewhat strange, if not frigid; but, with this allowance, Milton’s
richly sensuous imagination bodies forth the cheerfulness, as he wished
to portray it, in a succession of images unsurpassed for beauty. In the
lines descriptive of these images, Art and Nature appear perhaps more
than in any other of Milton’s poems in perfect equipoise. The images
selected are the aptest vehicles of the sentiment; the language in which
they are expressed is of the most graceful and musical; while the natural
objects themselves are seen at first hand, set down with their edges
still sharp, and uncolored by any tinge of bookish allusion. Aspects of
English scenery, one after another, occur, which he was the first poet to
note, and which none since could dare to touch, so entirely has he made
them his own. The mower whetting his scythe,—who ever hears that sound
coming from the lawn in the morning without thinking of Milton? “The
tanned haycock in the mead;” the cottage chimney smoking betwixt two aged
oaks; the moon

              “As if her head she bowed,
    Stooping through a fleecy cloud;”

the shower pattering

            “On the ruffling leaves,
    With minute drops from off the eaves;”

the great curfew-bell heard swinging “over some wide watered
shore;”—these are all images taken straight from English landscape which
Milton has forever enshrined in his two matchless poems.

Of these two poems, describing the bright and the thoughtful aspects of
Nature, my friend Mr. Palgrave, in his exquisite collection of English
Lyrics, “The Golden Treasury,” has observed that these are the earliest
pure descriptive lyrics in our language, adding that it is a striking
proof of Milton’s astonishing power that these are still the best, in a
style which so many great poets have since his time attempted.

When, after a poetic silence of nearly thirty years, Milton, old, blind,
and fallen, as he thought, on evil days, addressed himself again to
poetry, in his two Epics, and in his Classic Drama, he gave vent to all
that was lofty and sublime in his severe nature, but he returned no more
to rural description. Immense scholarship, experience of men and of
affairs, ripe meditation on things human and divine,—all these he brought
to his later work; but the simple love of Nature, such as it was in his
earlier poems, has disappeared, or is overlaid by his learning.[15] The
description of the garden of Eden, in the fourth book of “Paradise Lost,”
is magnificent, but vague. The pomp of language and profusion of images
leaves on the imagination no definite picture. You have, it is true,
“in narrow room Nature’s whole wealth,” but it does not satisfy, as
many a humbler but real scene described with a few strokes satisfies.
Such landscapes in poetry, entirely projected by the imagination and
answering to no scene on earth, are, like the composition pictures,
which some painters delight in, only splendid failures.

There is, however, another use made of Nature in those later poems, which
may be called the geographical use of it, in which Milton has no rival.
His vast reading enabled him to bring together similes and illustrations
from every land—from China, India, Tartary, Cape of Good Hope; nor from
these only, but from old Rome, Greece, Syria, Babylon. Such images from
many lands, so rich, varied, and grandly worded, form one of the most
permanent attractions of “Paradise Lost” and “Paradise Regained.” The
one real inspired creation of scenery, if scenery it can be called,
which “Paradise Lost” contains, is the description of Hell. The primeval
elements of the world are drawn upon, the unmeasurable abyss of fire,
the frozen cataract, every thing vast that is to be found on earth is
here. From things of earth too are drawn the images that set forth the
appearance of the inhabitants—the fallen angels like scathed oaks or
pines on a blasted heath—Satan himself like leviathan “slumbering on the
Norway foam,” and many another image from Nature taken to shadow forth
things supernatural or infernal.

But if we wish to find in Milton the pure breath of the country, the
fragrance of the fields, it is to his early poems we must return. In
these, scholar and man of letters though he was, learning and art had
not excluded Nature, but with his eye still resting on actual sights of
the country, he describes them with a native lightness and grace which
his classic style only makes more expressive. During the life of Milton,
other though lesser poets had given expression to the love of Nature.
Such were William Browne, author of “Britannia’s Pastorals,” and Andrew
Marvell, whose “Poems in the Country” contain here and there graceful
expression of rural things.

But after Milton died (1674), rural life and Nature, for more than half a
century, disappeared from English poetry.




