CHAPTER II


“All this happened about two years before the day when Davidson, sitting
in this very room, talked to my friend.  You will see presently how this
room can get full.  Every seat’ll be occupied, and as you notice, the
tables are set close, so that the backs of the chairs are almost
touching.  There is also a good deal of noisy talk here about one
o’clock.

“I don’t suppose Davidson was talking very loudly; but very likely he had
to raise his voice across the table to my friend.  And here accident,
mere accident, put in its work by providing a pair of fine ears close
behind Davidson’s chair.  It was ten to one against, the owner of the
same having enough change in his pockets to get his tiffin here.  But he
had.  Most likely had rooked somebody of a few dollars at cards
overnight.  He was a bright creature of the name of Fector, a spare,
short, jumpy fellow with a red face and muddy eyes.  He described himself
as a journalist, as certain kind of women give themselves out as
actresses in the dock of a police-court.

“He used to introduce himself to strangers as a man with a mission to
track out abuses and fight them whenever found.  He would also hint that
he was a martyr.  And it’s a fact that he had been kicked, horsewhipped,
imprisoned, and hounded with ignominy out of pretty well every place
between Ceylon and Shanghai, for a professional blackmailer.

“I suppose, in that trade, you’ve got to have active wits and sharp ears.
It’s not likely that he overheard every word Davidson said about his
dollar collecting trip, but he heard enough to set his wits at work.

“He let Davidson go out, and then hastened away down to the native slums
to a sort of lodging-house kept in partnership by the usual sort of
Portuguese and a very disreputable Chinaman.  Macao Hotel, it was called,
but it was mostly a gambling den that one used to warn fellows against.
Perhaps you remember?

“There, the evening before, Fector had met a precious couple, a
partnership even more queer than the Portuguese and the Chinaman.  One of
the two was Niclaus—you know.  Why! the fellow with a Tartar moustache
and a yellow complexion, like a Mongolian, only that his eyes were set
straight and his face was not so flat.  One couldn’t tell what breed he
was.  A nondescript beggar.  From a certain angle you would think a very
bilious white man.  And I daresay he was.  He owned a Malay prau and
called himself The Nakhoda, as one would say: The Captain.  Aha!  Now you
remember.  He couldn’t, apparently, speak any other European language
than English, but he flew the Dutch flag on his prau.

“The other was the Frenchman without hands.  Yes.  The very same we used
to know in ’79 in Sydney, keeping a little tobacco shop at the lower end
of George Street.  You remember the huge carcase hunched up behind the
counter, the big white face and the long black hair brushed back off a
high forehead like a bard’s.  He was always trying to roll cigarettes on
his knee with his stumps, telling endless yarns of Polynesia and whining
and cursing in turn about ‘_mon malheur_.’  His hands had been blown away
by a dynamite cartridge while fishing in some lagoon.  This accident, I
believe, had made him more wicked than before, which is saying a good
deal.

“He was always talking about ‘resuming his activities’ some day, whatever
they were, if he could only get an intelligent companion.  It was evident
that the little shop was no field for his activities, and the sickly
woman with her face tied up, who used to look in sometimes through the
back door, was no companion for him.

“And, true enough, he vanished from Sydney before long, after some
trouble with the Excise fellows about his stock.  Goods stolen out of a
warehouse or something similar.  He left the woman behind, but he must
have secured some sort of companion—he could not have shifted for
himself; but whom he went away with, and where, and what other companions
he might have picked up afterwards, it is impossible to make the remotest
guess about.

“Why exactly he came this way I can’t tell.  Towards the end of my time
here we began to hear talk of a maimed Frenchman who had been seen here
and there.  But no one knew then that he had foregathered with Niclaus
and lived in his prau.  I daresay he put Niclaus up to a thing or two.
Anyhow, it was a partnership.  Niclaus was somewhat afraid of the
Frenchman on account of his tempers, which were awful.  He looked then
like a devil; but a man without hands, unable to load or handle a weapon,
can at best go for one only with his teeth.  From that danger Niclaus
felt certain he could always defend himself.

“The couple were alone together loafing in the common-room of that
infamous hotel when Fector turned up.  After some beating about the bush,
for he was doubtful how far he could trust these two, he repeated what he
had overheard in the tiffin-rooms.

“His tale did not have much success till he came to mention the creek and
Bamtz’s name.  Niclaus, sailing about like a native in a prau, was, in
his own words, ‘familiar with the locality.’  The huge Frenchman, walking
up and down the room with his stumps in the pockets of his jacket,
stopped short in surprise.  ‘_Comment_?  _Bamtz_!  _Bamtz_!’

“He had run across him several times in his life.  He exclaimed:
‘_Bamtz_!  _Mais je ne connais que ca_!’  And he applied such a
contemptuously indecent epithet to Bamtz that when, later, he alluded to
him as ‘_une chiffe_’ (a mere rag) it sounded quite complimentary.  ‘We
can do with him what we like,’ he asserted confidently.  ‘Oh, yes.
Certainly we must hasten to pay a visit to that—’ (another awful
descriptive epithet quite unfit for repetition).  ‘Devil take me if we
don’t pull off a coup that will set us all up for a long time.’

“He saw all that lot of dollars melted into bars and disposed of
somewhere on the China coast.  Of the escape after the _coup_ he never
doubted.  There was Niclaus’s prau to manage that in.

“In his enthusiasm he pulled his stumps out of his pockets and waved them
about.  Then, catching sight of them, as it were, he held them in front
of his eyes, cursing and blaspheming and bewailing his misfortune and his
helplessness, till Niclaus quieted him down.

“But it was his mind that planned out the affair and it was his spirit
which carried the other two on.  Neither of them was of the bold
buccaneer type; and Fector, especially, had never in his adventurous life
used other weapons than slander and lies.

“That very evening they departed on a visit to Bamtz in Niclaus’s prau,
which had been lying, emptied of her cargo of cocoanuts, for a day or two
under the canal bridge.  They must have crossed the bows of the anchored
_Sissie_, and no doubt looked at her with interest as the scene of their
future exploit, the great haul, _le grand coup_!

“Davidson’s wife, to his great surprise, sulked with him for several days
before he left.  I don’t know whether it occurred to him that, for all
her angelic profile, she was a very stupidly obstinate girl.  She didn’t
like the tropics.  He had brought her out there, where she had no
friends, and now, she said, he was becoming inconsiderate.  She had a
presentiment of some misfortune, and notwithstanding Davidson’s
painstaking explanations, she could not see why her presentiments were to
be disregarded.  On the very last evening before Davidson went away she
asked him in a suspicious manner:

“‘Why is it that you are so anxious to go this time?’

“‘I am not anxious,’ protested the good Davidson.  ‘I simply can’t help
myself.  There’s no one else to go in my place.’

“‘Oh!  There’s no one,’ she said, turning away slowly.

“She was so distant with him that evening that Davidson from a sense of
delicacy made up his mind to say good-bye to her at once and go and sleep
on board.  He felt very miserable and, strangely enough, more on his own
account than on account of his wife.  She seemed to him much more
offended than grieved.

“Three weeks later, having collected a good many cases of old dollars
(they were stowed aft in the lazarette with an iron bar and a padlock
securing the hatch under his cabin-table), yes, with a bigger lot than he
had expected to collect, he found himself homeward bound and off the
entrance of the creek where Bamtz lived and even, in a sense, flourished.

“It was so late in the day that Davidson actually hesitated whether he
should not pass by this time.  He had no regard for Bamtz, who was a
degraded but not a really unhappy man.  His pity for Laughing Anne was no
more than her case deserved.  But his goodness was of a particularly
delicate sort.  He realised how these people were dependent on him, and
how they would feel their dependence (if he failed to turn up) through a
long month of anxious waiting.  Prompted by his sensitive humanity,
Davidson, in the gathering dusk, turned the _Sissie’s_ head towards the
hardly discernible coast, and navigated her safety through a maze of
shallow patches.  But by the time he got to the mouth of the creek the
night had come.

“The narrow waterway lay like a black cutting through the forest.  And as
there were always grounded snaggs in the channel which it would be
impossible to make out, Davidson very prudently turned the _Sissie_
round, and with only enough steam on the boilers to give her a touch
ahead if necessary, let her drift up stern first with the tide, silent
and invisible in the impenetrable darkness and in the dumb stillness.

“It was a long job, and when at the end of two hours Davidson thought he
must be up to the clearing, the settlement slept already, the whole land
of forests and rivers was asleep.

“Davidson, seeing a solitary light in the massed darkness of the shore,
knew that it was burning in Bamtz’s house.  This was unexpected at this
time of the night, but convenient as a guide.  By a turn of the screw and
a touch of the helm he sheered the _Sissie_ alongside Bamtz’s wharf—a
miserable structure of a dozen piles and a few planks, of which the
ex-vagabond was very proud.  A couple of Kalashes jumped down on it, took
a turn with the ropes thrown to them round the posts, and the _Sissie_
came to rest without a single loud word or the slightest noise.  And just
in time too, for the tide turned even before she was properly moored.

“Davidson had something to eat, and then, coming on deck for a last look
round, noticed that the light was still burning in the house.

“This was very unusual, but since they were awake so late, Davidson
thought that he would go up to say that he was in a hurry to be off and
to ask that what rattans there were in store should be sent on board with
the first sign of dawn.

“He stepped carefully over the shaky planks, not being anxious to get a
sprained ankle, and picked his way across the waste ground to the foot of
the house ladder.  The house was but a glorified hut on piles, unfenced
and lonely.

“Like many a stout man, Davidson is very lightfooted.  He climbed the
seven steps or so, stepped across the bamboo platform quietly, but what
he saw through the doorway stopped him short.

“Four men were sitting by the light of a solitary candle.  There was a
bottle, a jug and glasses on the table, but they were not engaged in
drinking.  Two packs of cards were lying there too, but they were not
preparing to play.  They were talking together in whispers, and remained
quite unaware of him.  He himself was too astonished to make a sound for
some time.  The world was still, except for the sibilation of the
whispering heads bunched together over the table.

“And Davidson, as I have quoted him to you before, didn’t like it.  He
didn’t like it at all.

“The situation ended with a scream proceeding from the dark, interior
part of the room.  ‘O Davy! you’ve given me a turn.’

“Davidson made out beyond the table Anne’s very pale face.  She laughed a
little hysterically, out of the deep shadows between the gloomy mat
walls.  ‘Ha! ha! ha!’

“The four heads sprang apart at the first sound, and four pairs of eyes
became fixed stonily on Davidson.  The woman came forward, having little
more on her than a loose chintz wrapper and straw slippers on her bare
feet.  Her head was tied up Malay fashion in a red handkerchief, with a
mass of loose hair hanging under it behind.  Her professional, gay,
European feathers had literally dropped off her in the course of these
two years, but a long necklace of amber beads hung round her uncovered
neck.  It was the only ornament she had left; Bamtz had sold all her
poor-enough trinkets during the flight from Saigon—when their association
began.

“She came forward, past the table, into the light, with her usual groping
gesture of extended arms, as though her soul, poor thing! had gone blind
long ago, her white cheeks hollow, her eyes darkly wild, distracted, as
Davidson thought.  She came on swiftly, grabbed him by the arm, dragged
him in.  ‘It’s heaven itself that sends you to-night.  My Tony’s so
bad—come and see him.  Come along—do!’

“Davidson submitted.  The only one of the men to move was Bamtz, who made
as if to get up but dropped back in his chair again.  Davidson in passing
heard him mutter confusedly something that sounded like ‘poor little
beggar.’

“The child, lying very flushed in a miserable cot knocked up out of
gin-cases, stared at Davidson with wide, drowsy eyes.  It was a bad bout
of fever clearly.  But while Davidson was promising to go on board and
fetch some medicines, and generally trying to say reassuring things, he
could not help being struck by the extraordinary manner of the woman
standing by his side.  Gazing with despairing expression down at the cot,
she would suddenly throw a quick, startled glance at Davidson and then
towards the other room.

“‘Yes, my poor girl,’ he whispered, interpreting her distraction in his
own way, though he had nothing precise in his mind.  ‘I’m afraid this
bodes no good to you.  How is it they are here?’

“She seized his forearm and breathed out forcibly: ‘No good to me!  Oh,
no!  But what about you!  They are after the dollars you have on board.’

“Davidson let out an astonished ‘How do they know there are any dollars?’

“She clapped her hands lightly, in distress.  ‘So it’s true!  You have
them on board?  Then look out for yourself.’

“They stood gazing down at the boy in the cot, aware that they might be
observed from the other room.

“‘We must get him to perspire as soon as possible,’ said Davidson in his
ordinary voice.  ‘You’ll have to give him hot drink of some kind.  I will
go on board and bring you a spirit-kettle amongst other things.’  And he
added under his breath: ‘Do they actually mean murder?’

“She made no sign, she had returned to her desolate contemplation of the
boy.  Davidson thought she had not heard him even, when with an unchanged
expression she spoke under her breath.

“‘The Frenchman would, in a minute.  The others shirk it—unless you
resist.  He’s a devil.  He keeps them going.  Without him they would have
done nothing but talk.  I’ve got chummy with him. What can you do when
you are with a man like the fellow I am with now.  Bamtz is terrified of
them, and they know it.  He’s in it from funk.  Oh, Davy! take your ship
away—quick!’

“‘Too late,’ said Davidson.  ‘She’s on the mud already.’

“If the kid hadn’t been in this state I would have run off with him—to
you—into the woods—anywhere.  Oh, Davy! will he die?’ she cried aloud
suddenly.

“Davidson met three men in the doorway.  They made way for him without
actually daring to face his glance.  But Bamtz was the only one who
looked down with an air of guilt.  The big Frenchman had remained lolling
in his chair; he kept his stumps in his pockets and addressed Davidson.

“‘Isn’t it unfortunate about that child!  The distress of that woman
there upsets me, but I am of no use in the world.  I couldn’t smooth the
sick pillow of my dearest friend.  I have no hands.  Would you mind
sticking one of those cigarettes there into the mouth of a poor, harmless
cripple?  My nerves want soothing—upon my honour, they do.’

“Davidson complied with his naturally kind smile.  As his outward
placidity becomes only more pronounced, if possible, the more reason
there is for excitement; and as Davidson’s eyes, when his wits are hard
at work, get very still and as if sleepy, the huge Frenchman might have
been justified in concluding that the man there was a mere sheep—a sheep
ready for slaughter.  With a ‘_merci bien_’ he uplifted his huge carcase
to reach the light of the candle with his cigarette, and Davidson left
the house.

“Going down to the ship and returning, he had time to consider his
position.  At first he was inclined to believe that these men
(Niclaus—the white Nakhoda—was the only one he knew by sight before,
besides Bamtz) were not of the stamp to proceed to extremities.  This was
partly the reason why he never attempted to take any measures on board.
His pacific Kalashes were not to be thought of as against white men.  His
wretched engineer would have had a fit from fright at the mere idea of
any sort of combat.  Davidson knew that he would have to depend on
himself in this affair if it ever came off.

“Davidson underestimated naturally the driving power of the Frenchman’s
character and the force of the actuating motive.  To that man so
hopelessly crippled these dollars were an enormous opportunity.  With his
share of the robbery he would open another shop in Vladivostok, Haïphong,
Manila—somewhere far away.

“Neither did it occur to Davidson, who is a man of courage, if ever there
was one, that his psychology was not known to the world at large, and
that to this particular lot of ruffians, who judged him by his
appearance, he appeared an unsuspicious, inoffensive, soft creature, as
he passed again through the room, his hands full of various objects and
parcels destined for the sick boy.

“All the four were sitting again round the table.  Bamtz not having the
pluck to open his mouth, it was Niclaus who, as a collective voice,
called out to him thickly to come out soon and join in a drink.

“‘I think I’ll have to stay some little time in there, to help her look
after the boy,’ Davidson answered without stopping.

“This was a good thing to say to allay a possible suspicion.  And, as it
was, Davidson felt he must not stay very long.

“He sat down on an old empty nail-keg near the improvised cot and looked
at the child; while Laughing Anne, moving to and fro, preparing the hot
drink, giving it to the boy in spoonfuls, or stopping to gaze motionless
at the flushed face, whispered disjointed bits of information.  She had
succeeded in making friends with that French devil.  Davy would
understand that she knew how to make herself pleasant to a man.

“And Davidson nodded without looking at her.

“The big beast had got to be quite confidential with her.  She held his
cards for him when they were having a game.  Bamtz!  Oh!  Bamtz in his
funk was only too glad to see the Frenchman humoured.  And the Frenchman
had come to believe that she was a woman who didn’t care what she did.
That’s how it came about they got to talk before her openly.  For a long
time she could not make out what game they were up to.  The new arrivals,
not expecting to find a woman with Bamtz, had been very startled and
annoyed at first, she explained.

“She busied herself in attending to the boy; and nobody looking into that
room would have seen anything suspicious in those two people exchanging
murmurs by the sick-bedside.

“‘But now they think I am a better man than Bamtz ever was,’ she said
with a faint laugh.

“The child moaned.  She went down on her knees, and, bending low,
contemplated him mournfully.  Then raising her head, she asked Davidson
whether he thought the child would get better.  Davidson was sure of it.
She murmured sadly: ‘Poor kid.  There’s nothing in life for such as he.
Not a dog’s chance.  But I couldn’t let him go, Davy!  I couldn’t.’

“Davidson felt a profound pity for the child.  She laid her hand on his
knee and whispered an earnest warning against the Frenchman.  Davy must
never let him come to close quarters.  Naturally Davidson wanted to know
the reason, for a man without hands did not strike him as very formidable
under any circumstances.

“‘Mind you don’t let him—that’s all,’ she insisted anxiously, hesitated,
and then confessed that the Frenchman had got her away from the others
that afternoon and had ordered her to tie a seven-pound iron weight (out
of the set of weights Bamtz used in business) to his right stump.  She
had to do it for him.  She had been afraid of his savage temper.  Bamtz
was such a craven, and neither of the other men would have cared what
happened to her.  The Frenchman, however, with many awful threats had
warned her not to let the others know what she had done for him.
Afterwards he had been trying to cajole her.  He had promised her that if
she stood by him faithfully in this business he would take her with him
to Haïphong or some other place.  A poor cripple needed somebody to take
care of him—always.

“Davidson asked her again if they really meant mischief.  It was, he told
me, the hardest thing to believe he had run up against, as yet, in his
life.  Anne nodded.  The Frenchman’s heart was set on this robbery.  Davy
might expect them, about midnight, creeping on board his ship, to steal
anyhow—to murder, perhaps.  Her voice sounded weary, and her eyes
remained fastened on her child.

“And still Davidson could not accept it somehow; his contempt for these
men was too great.

“‘Look here, Davy,’ she said.  ‘I’ll go outside with them when they
start, and it will be hard luck if I don’t find something to laugh at.
They are used to that from me.  Laugh or cry—what’s the odds.  You will
be able to hear me on board on this quiet night.  Dark it is too.  Oh!
it’s dark, Davy!—it’s dark!’

“‘Don’t you run any risks,’ said Davidson.  Presently he called her
attention to the boy, who, less flushed now, had dropped into a sound
sleep.  ‘Look.  He’ll be all right.’

“She made as if to snatch the child up to her breast, but restrained
herself.  Davidson prepared to go.  She whispered hurriedly:

“‘Mind, Davy!  I’ve told them that you generally sleep aft in the hammock
under the awning over the cabin.  They have been asking me about your
ways and about your ship, too.  I told them all I knew.  I had to keep in
with them.  And Bamtz would have told them if I hadn’t—you understand?’

“He made a friendly sign and went out.  The men about the table (except
Bamtz) looked at him.  This time it was Fector who spoke.  ‘Won’t you
join us in a quiet game, Captain?’

“Davidson said that now the child was better he thought he would go on
board and turn in.  Fector was the only one of the four whom he had, so
to speak, never seen, for he had had a good look at the Frenchman
already.  He observed Fector’s muddy eyes, his mean, bitter mouth.
Davidson’s contempt for those men rose in his gorge, while his placid
smile, his gentle tones and general air of innocence put heart into them.
They exchanged meaning glances.

“‘We shall be sitting late over the cards,’ Fector said in his harsh, low
voice.

“‘Don’t make more noise than you can help.’

“‘Oh! we are a quiet lot.  And if the invalid shouldn’t be so well, she
will be sure to send one of us down to call you, so that you may play the
doctor again.  So don’t shoot at sight.’

“‘He isn’t a shooting man,’ struck in Niclaus.

“‘I never shoot before making sure there’s a reason for it—at any rate,’
said Davidson.

“Bamtz let out a sickly snigger.  The Frenchman alone got up to make a
bow to Davidson’s careless nod.  His stumps were stuck immovably in his
pockets.  Davidson understood now the reason.

“He went down to the ship.  His wits were working actively, and he was
thoroughly angry.  He smiled, he says (it must have been the first grim
smile of his life), at the thought of the seven-pound weight lashed to
the end of the Frenchman’s stump.  The ruffian had taken that precaution
in case of a quarrel that might arise over the division of the spoil.  A
man with an unsuspected power to deal killing blows could take his own
part in a sudden scrimmage round a heap of money, even against
adversaries armed with revolvers, especially if he himself started the
row.

“‘He’s ready to face any of his friends with that thing.  But he will
have no use for it.  There will be no occasion to quarrel about these
dollars here,’ thought Davidson, getting on board quietly.  He never
paused to look if there was anybody about the decks.  As a matter of
fact, most of his crew were on shore, and the rest slept, stowed away in
dark corners.

“He had his plan, and he went to work methodically.

“He fetched a lot of clothing from below and disposed it in his hammock
in such a way as to distend it to the shape of a human body; then he
threw over all the light cotton sheet he used to draw over himself when
sleeping on deck.  Having done this, he loaded his two revolvers and
clambered into one of the boats the _Sissie_ carried right aft, swung out
on their davits.  Then he waited.

“And again the doubt of such a thing happening to him crept into his
mind.  He was almost ashamed of this ridiculous vigil in a boat.  He
became bored.  And then he became drowsy.  The stillness of the black
universe wearied him.  There was not even the lapping of the water to
keep him company, for the tide was out and the _Sissie_ was lying on soft
mud.  Suddenly in the breathless, soundless, hot night an argus pheasant
screamed in the woods across the stream.  Davidson started violently, all
his senses on the alert at once.

“The candle was still burning in the house.  Everything was quiet again,
but Davidson felt drowsy no longer.  An uneasy premonition of evil
oppressed him.

“‘Surely I am not afraid,’ he argued with himself.

“The silence was like a seal on his ears, and his nervous inward
impatience grew intolerable.  He commanded himself to keep still.  But
all the same he was just going to jump out of the boat when a faint
ripple on the immensity of silence, a mere tremor in the air, the ghost
of a silvery laugh, reached his ears.

“Illusion!

“He kept very still.  He had no difficulty now in emulating the stillness
of the mouse—a grimly determined mouse.  But he could not shake off that
premonition of evil unrelated to the mere danger of the situation.
Nothing happened.  It had been an illusion!

“A curiosity came to him to learn how they would go to work.  He wondered
and wondered, till the whole thing seemed more absurd than ever.

“He had left the hanging lamp in the cabin burning as usual.  It was part
of his plan that everything should be as usual.  Suddenly in the dim glow
of the skylight panes a bulky shadow came up the ladder without a sound,
made two steps towards the hammock (it hung right over the skylight), and
stood motionless.  The Frenchman!

“The minutes began to slip away.  Davidson guessed that the Frenchman’s
part (the poor cripple) was to watch his (Davidson’s) slumbers while the
others were no doubt in the cabin busy forcing off the lazarette hatch.

“What was the course they meant to pursue once they got hold of the
silver (there were ten cases, and each could be carried easily by two
men) nobody can tell now.  But so far, Davidson was right.  They were in
the cabin.  He expected to hear the sounds of breaking-in every moment.
But the fact was that one of them (perhaps Fector, who had stolen papers
out of desks in his time) knew how to pick a lock, and apparently was
provided with the tools.  Thus while Davidson expected every moment to
hear them begin down there, they had the bar off already and two cases
actually up in the cabin out of the lazarette.

“In the diffused faint glow of the skylight the Frenchman moved no more
than a statue.  Davidson could have shot him with the greatest ease—but
he was not homicidally inclined.  Moreover, he wanted to make sure before
opening fire that the others had gone to work.  Not hearing the sounds he
expected to hear, he felt uncertain whether they all were on board yet.

“While he listened, the Frenchman, whose immobility might have but
cloaked an internal struggle; moved forward a pace, then another.
Davidson, entranced, watched him advance one leg, withdraw his right
stump, the armed one, out of his pocket, and swinging his body to put
greater force into the blow, bring the seven-pound weight down on the
hammock where the head of the sleeper ought to have been.

“Davidson admitted to me that his hair stirred at the roots then.  But
for Anne, his unsuspecting head would have been there.  The Frenchman’s
surprise must have been simply overwhelming.  He staggered away from the
lightly swinging hammock, and before Davidson could make a movement he
had vanished, bounding down the ladder to warn and alarm the other
fellows.

“Davidson sprang instantly out of the boat, threw up the skylight flap,
and had a glimpse of the men down there crouching round the hatch.  They
looked up scared, and at that moment the Frenchman outside the door
bellowed out ‘_Trahison_—_trahison_!’  They bolted out of the cabin,
falling over each other and swearing awfully.  The shot Davidson let off
down the skylight had hit no one; but he ran to the edge of the cabin-top
and at once opened fire at the dark shapes rushing about the deck.  These
shots were returned, and a rapid fusillade burst out, reports and
flashes, Davidson dodging behind a ventilator and pulling the trigger
till his revolver clicked, and then throwing it down to take the other in
his right hand.

“He had been hearing in the din the Frenchman’s infuriated yells
‘_Tuez-le_! _tuez-le_!’ above the fierce cursing of the others.  But
though they fired at him they were only thinking of clearing out.  In the
flashes of the last shots Davidson saw them scrambling over the rail.
That he had hit more than one he was certain.  Two different voices had
cried out in pain.  But apparently none of them were disabled.

“Davidson leaned against the bulwark reloading his revolver without
haste.  He had not the slightest apprehension of their coming back.  On
the other hand, he had no intention of pursuing them on shore in the
dark.  What they were doing he had no idea.  Looking to their hurts
probably.  Not very far from the bank the invisible Frenchman was
blaspheming and cursing his associates, his luck, and all the world.  He
ceased; then with a sudden, vengeful yell, ‘It’s that woman!—it’s that
woman that has sold us,’ was heard running off in the night.

“Davidson caught his breath in a sudden pang of remorse.  He perceived
with dismay that the stratagem of his defence had given Anne away.  He
did not hesitate a moment.  It was for him to save her now.  He leaped
ashore.  But even as he landed on the wharf he heard a shrill shriek
which pierced his very soul.

“The light was still burning in the house.  Davidson, revolver in hand,
was making for it when another shriek, away to his left, made him change
his direction.

“He changed his direction—but very soon he stopped.  It was then that he
hesitated in cruel perplexity.  He guessed what had happened.  The woman
had managed to escape from the house in some way, and now was being
chased in the open by the infuriated Frenchman.  He trusted she would try
to run on board for protection.

“All was still around Davidson.  Whether she had run on board or not,
this silence meant that the Frenchman had lost her in the dark.

“Davidson, relieved, but still very anxious, turned towards the
river-side.  He had not made two steps in that direction when another
shriek burst out behind him, again close to the house.

“He thinks that the Frenchman had lost sight of the poor woman right
enough.  Then came that period of silence.  But the horrible ruffian had
not given up his murderous purpose.  He reasoned that she would try to
steal back to her child, and went to lie in wait for her near the house.

“It must have been something like that.  As she entered the light falling
about the house-ladder, he had rushed at her too soon, impatient for
vengeance.  She had let out that second scream of mortal fear when she
caught sight of him, and turned to run for life again.

“This time she was making for the river, but not in a straight line.  Her
shrieks circled about Davidson.  He turned on his heels, following the
horrible trail of sound in the darkness.  He wanted to shout ‘This way,
Anne!  I am here!’ but he couldn’t.  At the horror of this chase, more
ghastly in his imagination than if he could have seen it, the
perspiration broke out on his forehead, while his throat was as dry as
tinder.  A last supreme scream was cut short suddenly.

“The silence which ensued was even more dreadful.  Davidson felt sick.
He tore his feet from the spot and walked straight before him, gripping
the revolver and peering into the obscurity fearfully.  Suddenly a bulky
shape sprang from the ground within a few yards of him and bounded away.
Instinctively he fired at it, started to run in pursuit, and stumbled
against something soft which threw him down headlong.

“Even as he pitched forward on his head he knew it could be nothing else
but Laughing Anne’s body.  He picked himself up and, remaining on his
knees, tried to lift her in his arms.  He felt her so limp that he gave
it up.  She was lying on her face, her long hair scattered on the ground.
Some of it was wet.  Davidson, feeling about her head, came to a place
where the crushed bone gave way under his fingers.  But even before that
discovery he knew that she was dead.  The pursuing Frenchman had flung
her down with a kick from behind, and, squatting on her back, was
battering in her skull with the weight she herself had fastened to his
stump, when the totally unexpected Davidson loomed up in the night and
scared him away.

“Davidson, kneeling by the side of that woman done so miserably to death,
was overcome by remorse.  She had died for him.  His manhood was as if
stunned.  For the first time he felt afraid.  He might have been pounced
upon in the dark at any moment by the murderer of Laughing Anne.  He
confesses to the impulse of creeping away from that pitiful corpse on his
hands and knees to the refuge of the ship.  He even says that he actually
began to do so. . .

“One can hardly picture to oneself Davidson crawling away on all fours
from the murdered woman—Davidson unmanned and crushed by the idea that
she had died for him in a sense.  But he could not have gone very far.
What stopped him was the thought of the boy, Laughing Anne’s child, that
(Davidson remembered her very words) would not have a dog’s chance.

“This life the woman had left behind her appeared to Davidson’s
conscience in the light of a sacred trust.  He assumed an erect attitude
and, quaking inwardly still, turned about and walked towards the house.

“For all his tremors he was very determined; but that smashed skull had
affected his imagination, and he felt very defenceless in the darkness,
in which he seemed to hear faintly now here, now there, the prowling
footsteps of the murderer without hands.  But he never faltered in his
purpose.  He got away with the boy safely after all.  The house he found
empty.  A profound silence encompassed him all the time, except once,
just as he got down the ladder with Tony in his arms, when a faint groan
reached his ears.  It seemed to come from the pitch-black space between
the posts on which the house was built, but he did not stop to
investigate.

“It’s no use telling you in detail how Davidson got on board with the
burden Anne’s miserably cruel fate had thrust into his arms; how next
morning his scared crew, after observing from a distance the state of
affairs on board, rejoined with alacrity; how Davidson went ashore and,
aided by his engineer (still half dead with fright), rolled up Laughing
Anne’s body in a cotton sheet and brought it on board for burial at sea
later.  While busy with this pious task, Davidson, glancing about,
perceived a huge heap of white clothes huddled up against the corner-post
of the house.  That it was the Frenchman lying there he could not doubt.
Taking it in connection with the dismal groan he had heard in the night,
Davidson is pretty sure that his random shot gave a mortal hurt to the
murderer of poor Anne.

“As to the others, Davidson never set eyes on a single one of them.
Whether they had concealed themselves in the scared settlement, or bolted
into the forest, or were hiding on board Niclaus’s prau, which could be
seen lying on the mud a hundred yards or so higher up the creek, the fact
is that they vanished; and Davidson did not trouble his head about them.
He lost no time in getting out of the creek directly the _Sissie_
floated.  After steaming some twenty miles clear of the coast, he (in his
own words) ‘committed the body to the deep.’  He did everything himself.
He weighted her down with a few fire-bars, he read the service, he lifted
the plank, he was the only mourner.  And while he was rendering these
last services to the dead, the desolation of that life and the atrocious
wretchedness of its end cried aloud to his compassion, whispered to him
in tones of self-reproach.

“He ought to have handled the warning she had given him in another way.
He was convinced now that a simple display of watchfulness would have
been enough to restrain that vile and cowardly crew.  But the fact was
that he had not quite believed that anything would be attempted.

“The body of Laughing Anne having been ‘committed to the deep’ some
twenty miles S.S.W. from Cape Selatan, the task before Davidson was to
commit Laughing Anne’s child to the care of his wife.  And there poor,
good Davidson made a fatal move.  He didn’t want to tell her the whole
awful story, since it involved the knowledge of the danger from which he,
Davidson, had escaped.  And this, too, after he had been laughing at her
unreasonable fears only a short time before.

“‘I thought that if I told her everything,’ Davidson explained to me,
‘she would never have a moment’s peace while I was away on my trips.’

“He simply stated that the boy was an orphan, the child of some people to
whom he, Davidson, was under the greatest obligation, and that he felt
morally bound to look after him.  Some day he would tell her more, he
said, and meantime he trusted in the goodness and warmth of her heart, in
her woman’s natural compassion.

“He did not know that her heart was about the size of a parched pea, and
had the proportional amount of warmth; and that her faculty of compassion
was mainly directed to herself.  He was only startled and disappointed at
the air of cold surprise and the suspicious look with which she received
his imperfect tale.  But she did not say much.  She never had much to
say.  She was a fool of the silent, hopeless kind.

“What story Davidson’s crew thought fit to set afloat in Malay town is
neither here nor there.  Davidson himself took some of his friends into
his confidence, besides giving the full story officially to the Harbour
Master.

“The Harbour Master was considerably astonished.  He didn’t think,
however, that a formal complaint should be made to the Dutch Government.
They would probably do nothing in the end, after a lot of trouble and
correspondence.  The robbery had not come off, after all.  Those
vagabonds could be trusted to go to the devil in their own way.  No
amount of fuss would bring the poor woman to life again, and the actual
murderer had been done justice to by a chance shot from Davidson.  Better
let the matter drop.

“This was good common sense.  But he was impressed.

“‘Sounds a terrible affair, Captain Davidson.’

“‘Aye, terrible enough,’ agreed the remorseful Davidson.  But the most
terrible thing for him, though he didn’t know it yet then, was that his
wife’s silly brain was slowly coming to the conclusion that Tony was
Davidson’s child, and that he had invented that lame story to introduce
him into her pure home in defiance of decency, of virtue—of her most
sacred feelings.

“Davidson was aware of some constraint in his domestic relations.  But at
the best of times she was not demonstrative; and perhaps that very
coldness was part of her charm in the placid Davidson’s eyes.  Women are
loved for all sorts of reasons and even for characteristics which one
would think repellent.  She was watching him and nursing her suspicions.

“Then, one day, Monkey-faced Ritchie called on that sweet, shy Mrs.
Davidson.  She had come out under his care, and he considered himself a
privileged person—her oldest friend in the tropics.  He posed for a great
admirer of hers.  He was always a great chatterer.  He had got hold of
the story rather vaguely, and he started chattering on that subject,
thinking she knew all about it.  And in due course he let out something
about Laughing Anne.

“‘Laughing Anne,’ says Mrs. Davidson with a start.  ‘What’s that?’

“Ritchie plunged into circumlocution at once, but she very soon stopped
him.  ‘Is that creature dead?’ she asks.

“‘I believe so,’ stammered Ritchie.  ‘Your husband says so.’

“‘But you don’t know for certain?’

“‘No!  How could I, Mrs. Davidson!’

“‘That’s all wanted to know,’ says she, and goes out of the room.

“When Davidson came home she was ready to go for him, not with common
voluble indignation, but as if trickling a stream of cold clear water
down his back.  She talked of his base intrigue with a vile woman, of
being made a fool of, of the insult to her dignity.

“Davidson begged her to listen to him and told her all the story,
thinking that it would move a heart of stone.  He tried to make her
understand his remorse.  She heard him to the end, said ‘Indeed!’ and
turned her back on him.

“‘Don’t you believe me?’ he asked, appalled.

“She didn’t say yes or no.  All she said was, ‘Send that brat away at
once.’

“‘I can’t throw him out into the street,’ cried Davidson.  ‘You don’t
mean it.’

“‘I don’t care.  There are charitable institutions for such children, I
suppose.’

“‘That I will never do,’ said Davidson.

“‘Very well.  That’s enough for me.’

“Davidson’s home after this was like a silent, frozen hell for him.  A
stupid woman with a sense of grievance is worse than an unchained devil.
He sent the boy to the White Fathers in Malacca.  This was not a very
expensive sort of education, but she could not forgive him for not
casting the offensive child away utterly.  She worked up her sense of her
wifely wrongs and of her injured purity to such a pitch that one day,
when poor Davidson was pleading with her to be reasonable and not to make
an impossible existence for them both, she turned on him in a chill
passion and told him that his very sight was odious to her.

“Davidson, with his scrupulous delicacy of feeling, was not the man to
assert his rights over a woman who could not bear the sight of him.  He
bowed his head; and shortly afterwards arranged for her to go back to her
parents.  That was exactly what she wanted in her outraged dignity.  And
then she had always disliked the tropics and had detested secretly the
people she had to live amongst as Davidson’s wife.  She took her pure,
sensitive, mean little soul away to Fremantle or somewhere in that
direction.  And of course the little girl went away with her too.  What
could poor Davidson have done with a little girl on his hands, even if
she had consented to leave her with him—which is unthinkable.

“This is the story that has spoiled Davidson’s smile for him—which
perhaps it wouldn’t have done so thoroughly had he been less of a good
fellow.”

Hollis ceased.  But before we rose from the table I asked him if he knew
what had become of Laughing Anne’s boy.

He counted carefully the change handed him by the Chinaman waiter, and
raised his head.

“Oh! that’s the finishing touch.  He was a bright, taking little chap, as
you know, and the Fathers took very special pains in his bringing up.
Davidson expected in his heart to have some comfort out of him.  In his
placid way he’s a man who needs affection.  Well, Tony has grown into a
fine youth—but there you are!  He wants to be a priest; his one dream is
to be a missionary.  The Fathers assure Davidson that it is a serious
vocation.  They tell him he has a special disposition for mission work,
too.  So Laughing Anne’s boy will lead a saintly life in China somewhere;
he may even become a martyr; but poor Davidson is left out in the cold.
He will have to go downhill without a single human affection near him
because of these old dollars.”

                                * * * * *

_Jan._ 1914

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

    THE LONDON AND NORWICH PRESS LIMITED, LONDON AND NORWICH, ENGLAND




Footnotes


{188}  The gallows, supposed to be widowed of the last executed criminal
and waiting for another.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITHIN THE TIDES***


******* This file should be named 1053-0.txt or 1053-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/5/1053



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


