CHAPTER XXVIII.

CONTINGENCY OF CORPOREAL RELATIONS.


199. Position in place is the relation of a body to other bodies.
Is this relation necessary? I distinguish: conditionally, yes;
essentially, no. God has established this relation, and therefore it is
necessary; but God might have ordered it otherwise, and can even now
change it, without varying the essence of things.

If we admit, as we must, a correspondence between the subjective and
the objective, or between the appearance and the reality, we cannot
deny that the relations of bodies are constant, and this constancy must
proceed from some necessity. But that the existing order is subject
to fixed laws, does not prove that these laws have their root in the
essence of things, in such a manner that, supposing the existence of
objects, their relations could not have been very different from what
they actually are.

200. In order to assert that the existing order of the universe is
intrinsically necessary, we must know the essence of things; but this
is not possible for us, because objects are not immediately present to
our understanding, and we see them only under one aspect, that which
places them in relation with our sensitive faculties. The best proof of
our ignorance of the essence of bodies is the great division of opinion
on this subject. Some maintain that the essence of bodies is extension
or dimensions; and others that extension is merely an accident, not
only distinct, but even separable from corporeal substance.

The great obscurity in which the investigation of the constitutive
elements of bodies is involved, proves that their essence is unknown
to us, and that we know nothing of them except their relation to our
sensibility.

201. It is not necessary that the aspect under which being is presented
to us should contain its whole nature. To say that bodies contain
nothing besides what we perceive in them, is to make our faculties
the type of things in themselves, a ridiculous pretension in a being
which finds its activity limited at every step and is almost always
passive in its relations to bodies, and which, in order to exercise
its faculties externally, is forced to submit to the laws of the
external world, or else to encounter obstacles which are absolutely
insurmountable.

If we are ignorant of the essence of bodies we can have no certain
knowledge of what is intrinsically necessary in them; with the
exception of composition, which even the sensible order presents to
us, and which we cannot take from bodies without seeming to run into
a contradiction. Simplicity and composition in the same object are
incompatible and contradictory.

202. Hence, in all that pertains to the relations of bodies we must
abstain from judging absolutely, and speak only conditionally. We may
say: "This happens now; this must happen according to the order now
established;" but we cannot say: "This happens, and it is absolutely
necessary that it should happen." The transition from the first
proposition to the second, implies the knowledge of what no man can
know, that the aspect under which the external world is presented to us
is the image of its essence.

203. One of the greatest errors of Descartes was, that he did not make
sufficient account of this difference: he placed the essence of bodies
in dimensions, which is to confound the real world with the phenomenal,
and to take one aspect of things for their nature. It is true that
whatever affects us has extension, and that extension is the basis of
the relations of our sensibility with the external world; but it does
not follow that the essence of this world is nothing more than what
is presented to us in its dimensions. We might as well say that the
essence of man is the lines which mark his form.

204. The different aspects under which the external world is presented
to our senses, ought to prevent us from confounding what is absolute
in it with what is relative. A man deprived of one sense would not
reason well if he should conclude that the world has no other aspects
than those which he perceives. What do we know of the manner in which
objects are presented to pure spirits, or of the many other phases
which they might offer to our sensibility?

Let us then leave nature its secrets; and let us not limit omnipotence
by saying, that the order of the world is so intrinsically necessary
that its present relations cannot be changed without contradiction.
When we examine the possibility of a new order of relations between
the beings which we call bodies, let us not settle the question too
quickly, taking for our only type of the possible the vain impotence
of our faculties. What should we think of a blind man who should laugh
at those who see, if he heard them speak of the relations of objects
as seen? Yet we present the same spectacle to a pure spirit when we
talk of the impossibility of an order different from what our senses
perceive.

205. The principles of physical science are in great part conditional;
for they are true only on the supposition of the reality of the data
furnished by experience. If position and relation to place are not
essential to bodies, distance and motion are conditional facts true
only under certain suppositions. All the natural sciences, as we have
seen, are reduced to the calculation of extension and motion; they
do not reach the essence of things, but are limited to one aspect,
that presented by experience. In these sciences there is consequently
nothing strictly absolute; in this respect, they are far below
metaphysics, which knows things that are absolutely necessary. A
further explanation of this doctrine is required, and will be given in
the following chapters.




