CHAPTER XXXII.

POSSIBILITY OF THE PENETRATION OF BODIES.


245. The more we meditate on the corporeal world, the more we discover
the contingency of many of its relations, and the consequent necessity
of recourse to a higher cause which has established them. Even those
properties which seem most absolute cease to appear so when submitted
to the examination of reason. What more necessary than impenetrability?
Yet from the moment it is carefully analyzed, it becomes reduced
to a fact of experience not founded on the nature of things, which
consequently may exist or cease to exist without any contradiction.

246. Impenetrability is that property of bodies by which two or more
cannot be in the same place at the same time. For those who do not
make pure space a reality independent of bodies this definition has no
meaning; for if place like pure space is nothing, to speak of _the same
place_ abstracted from bodies, is to speak of nothing. In that case,
impenetrability can only be a certain relation either of bodies or of
ideas.

247. Above all, we must distinguish the real order from the purely
ideal. We may consider two kinds of impenetrability; physical
impenetrability, and geometrical impenetrability. The physical is that
which we see in nature; the geometrical that which is found in our
ideas. Two balls of metal cannot be in the same place: this is physical
impenetrability. The ideas of the two balls present two extensions
which mutually exclude each other in the sensible representation: this
is geometrical impenetrability. If we imagine two balls which perfectly
coincide, they are no longer two, but only one; and if we imagine one
ball to occupy a part of the other, we have a new figure, or, rather,
one is considered as a portion of the other, and is consequently
contained in the idea of the other, as a small ball inside of a larger
ball. On either supposition the balls are regarded as penetrating
each other in whole or in part; but by penetration is here meant
only that there are certain parts in one, considered as pure space,
which the other, also considered as pure space, occupies. Geometrical
impenetrability exists only when the two objects are supposed to be
separated, and only inasmuch as they are separated; in which case
impenetrability is absolutely necessary, because penetration would
be to confound what is by the supposition separated, and would imply
separation and non-separation, which are contradictory. Therefore,
geometrical impenetrability is no argument in favor of physical
impenetrability; for the former exists only in case it is presupposed
or required under pain of contradiction. The same would occur in
reality; for if we suppose two bodies separated, they cannot be in the
same place whilst they are separated, without a manifest contradiction.
On this point, therefore, the ideal teaches us nothing as to the real.

248. Can penetration exist in reality? Can one ball of metal, for
example, enter another ball of metal, as we make one geometrical ball
enter another? We are not treating of the regular order of things which
is repugnant to such suppositions, but of the essence of things. On
this supposition, I maintain that there is no contradiction in making
bodies penetrable, and that an analysis of this matter proves that the
impenetrability of bodies is not essential.

We have seen that the idea of place as pure space is an abstraction.
It is therefore an entirely imaginary supposition on which we give to
every body a certain extension to fill a certain place, necessarily,
and in such a manner that it is impossible for it to admit another body
into the same place at the same time. The position of bodies in general
is the sum of their relations; the particular extension of each body is
only the sum of the relations of its parts among themselves, until we
come by an infinite division to unextended or infinitesimal points.

The sum of the relations of indivisible or infinitesimal beings
constitutes what we call extension and space, and all that is contained
in the vast field of sensible representation. Who can assure us that
these relations are not variable? Is our experience, perhaps, the limit
of the nature of things? Evidently not. The universe was not planned
after our experience, but our experience is obtained from the universe.
To say that it contains, and can contain only what our experience sees
in it, is to make the _me_ the type of the universe; to affirm that
its laws are derived from us, that they are emanations from our being.
Foolish pride of an imperceptible atom, which appears for an instant
on the great theatre of nature, and goes out like a spark of fire;
foolish pride for a spirit which, despite its great idea of its own
importance, feels that it is unable to withdraw itself from these laws
and phenomena, which it pretends to consider as its own creation!




CHAPTER XXXIII.

A TRIUMPH OF RELIGION IN THE FIELD OF PHILOSOPHY.


249. There are two things in extended objects: multiplicity and
continuity. The first is absolutely necessary to extension; it supposes
distinct parts, and that which is distinct cannot be identical without
evident contradiction. The continuity represented in the sensible
impression is not essential to extension, because it is only the
result of a union of relations inseparable in the present order of
sensibility, but not absolutely necessary in the order of reality.
Transcendental philosophy rising above sensible representations,
and leaving phenomena to enter on the contemplation of beings in
themselves, nowhere discovers the necessity of these relations, and
is obliged to consider them as simple facts which might cease to be
without any contradiction. In this manner the correspondence of the
phenomenon with the reality is saved, and the internal world harmonized
with the external, but the subjective conditions of the former are
not all transferred to the latter in such a way as to make what is
necessary for our representations, absolutely necessary in itself.

250. Arrived at this point of transcendental philosophy, the mind
beholds new worlds unfolded to its view. We rejoice to say that this
discovers to us a new proof of the divinity of the Catholic religion,
and teaches us to distrust that proud philosophy which finds a
contradiction in every thing which it cannot understand.

251. There is a mystery which the Church celebrates with august
ceremonies, and the Christian adores with faith and with love. The
unbeliever sees the holy Tabernacle, and exclaims, in the pride of his
ignorance: "Here is a monument of superstition; here man adores an
absurdity."

As the present is a work of philosophy, not of theology, I might
pass over without answering the objections of infidelity, but the
occasion seems so well suited for the solution of some difficulties
brought by light and superficial thinkers, that I am unwilling to pass
them in silence. The nature of the work requires me to be brief in
this discussion, though the subject is too important to be entirely
omitted; the more so, as Catholic writers on philosophy have given
their explanations on these points in what they considered the most
seasonable place, and most frequently when treating of extension.

252. That the mystery of the Eucharist is a supernatural fact
incomprehensible to man, and inexplicable by human words, is confessed
by Catholics and acknowledged by the Church. We cannot, therefore, give
a philosophical reason to explain this secret; no one was ever so vain
as to attempt it. We can only examine whether the mystery is absurd
and intrinsically contradictory; for if it were, it would not be a
truth but an error, because divine omnipotence does not extend to what
is absurd. The question is, whether the fact, although beyond the laws
of nature, is intrinsically possible; for then it belongs to the field
of criticism. If the incredulous man admits God, he must admit his
omnipotence; the discussion must then be, not whether God can perform
this miracle, but whether he has performed it.

253. The objections brought against the Eucharist may be reduced to the
following: a body exists without the conditions to which other bodies
are subject; it produces none of the sensible impressions which we
receive from other bodies; and is in many places at the same time. To
answer these objections, let us first determine our ideas.

254. The doctrines explained in the theory of sensations in this
volume, show how false it is to say that the Eucharist is impossible.
Under the sacred species is a body which does not affect our senses;
here is a miracle, but not an impossible thing. I have shown that
there is no necessary relation between bodies and our sensibility. The
connection which now exists cannot be explained by any intrinsical
property of spirits and bodies; we must, therefore, recur to a higher
cause which freely established these relations. The same cause can
suspend them. From this point of view the question becomes this: Can
the power of God make a body which shall not produce the phenomena of
sensibility, and suspend the laws which he was free to establish? Thus
presented, the question cannot bear two answers. It must be answered in
the affirmative, or the omnipotence of God is denied.

255. Those who attempt to show the impossibility of our dogma, must
prove the following propositions:

I. Passive sensibility is so essential to bodies that they cannot lose
it without destroying the principle of contradiction.

II. The relations of our organs [to] objects are intrinsically
immutable.

III. The transmission of the impressions of the organ to the sensitive
faculties of the soul is equally essential, and can fail under no
supposition.

If they do not prove the truth of these three propositions, all the
objections founded on the phenomena of sensibility fall to the ground.
If one only is not proved, all the objections are solved; for it is
evident that the phenomena of sensibility may be altered by three
causes:

I. By the absence of the dispositions necessary to the body, that it
may be the object of sensibility.

II. By the interruption of the ordinary relations between our organs
and the body.

III. By the failure of the transmission of the impressions of the organ
to the sensitive faculties.

Consequently, if one of the first propositions is false, the doubter is
reduced to silence.

256. Whoever should attempt to prove these three propositions, not only
would fail, but the attempt would prove his ignorance of the phenomena
of sensibility, and that his philosophy on this point is the notions of
the vulgar. It is not necessary to be a philosopher, it is sufficient
to have acquired a very slight knowledge of philosophy to see that
such an attempt would suppose a complete ignorance of the history of
philosophy. At any rate, I need not insist on this point; for I have
treated these questions at length in the last two books of this volume.

257. The solution there given ought to suffice to answer satisfactorily
the objection founded on the particular state of a body without the
conditions of extension which we find in others. From the moment
that we suppose the correspondence of a body with our senses to be
suspended, as these are the only means by which we are informed of
what passes in the external world, it is impossible for us to affirm
that there is any absurdity in that of which we have no experience. We
perceive extension only by sensation, therefore we can say nothing in
relation to the extension of an object of which we have no sensation.
But although this answer should cut short all objections, I shall not
confine myself to this alone.

258. What is extension? In reality it is the sum of the relations of
the beings which compose the extended object. These relations, as I
have proved, are not intrinsically necessary: therefore God can alter
them. Thus this question comes to the same point as the preceding:
can the power of God suspend, alter, or entirely take away relations
which are not intrinsically necessary? Evidently it can. The difficulty
then is not as to what could have been, but as to what is. Again we
find ourselves out of the field of philosophy in that of facts, or the
examination of the motives of credibility.

259. The other objection founded on the impossibility of body being in
several places at the same time, though in appearance more difficult,
amounts to the same as the former. To be in a place, as we now
understand it, is to have a particular extension, with the ordinary
form and relations with respect to the extension of other bodies. If
we suppose a body with extension subject to other conditions, without
the ordinary relation to the extension of other bodies, we destroy the
supposition on which we base the impossibility of a body being at the
same time in several places. Therefore, as we have proved that the
omnipotence of God can alter and even take away these relations, there
is no contradiction in admitting the destruction of the results which
proceed from these relations.

260. This is why the distinction of the scholastics between two
classes of extension: _in ordine ad se, et in ordine ad locum_,
or quantitative and sacramental extension, though to the eyes of
a superficial philosophy it might appear to be an empty subtlety,
invented for the purpose of avoiding the difficulty, is nevertheless
a profound observation, confirmed by the analysis of the reality and
the phenomenon in the sensible order. I do not mean by this to say
that when this distinction was made in the schools, they understood
perfectly all the truth and philosophical nicety which it involves; nor
that the distinction was always accompanied by the critical analysis
which belongs to it. At present I abstract the merit of the men and
regard only the thing. The less philosophical intelligence we suppose
in those who used the distinction, the more admirable appears that
religion which inspires its defenders with fruitful thoughts which
the ages to come might unfold. The philosophical schools disputed
warmly on extension, on accidents, and on the sensitive faculties: the
Catholic dogma taught a truth which was contrary to all appearances,
it stimulated them to examine more profoundly the distance of the
phenomenon from the reality, the difference between the contingent
and the necessary; the mystery which the Church taught introduced
into philosophy questions which without it would probably never have
occurred to man's understanding.

261. Bacon expressed a profound truth when he said that a little
philosophy carried its possessor from religion, and a great deal of
philosophy leads him to it. A careful study of the objections brought
against Christianity, lays bare a truth confirmed by the history of
eighteen centuries; the most weighty objections against Catholicity,
instead of proving any thing against it, involve a proof which confirms
it. The secret for discovering this proof, is to go to the bottom of
the objection, and examine it under all its aspects. Original sin is a
mystery, but it explains the whole world; the Incarnation is a mystery,
but it explains the traditions of the human race; faith is full of
mysteries, but it satisfies one of the greatest necessities of reason;
the history of the creation is a mystery, but this mystery clears up
chaos, throws light on the world, and is the key to the history of
mankind; all Christianity is a collection of mysteries, but these
mysteries are connected by a secret union with all that is profound,
grand, sublime, or beautiful in heaven or earth; they are connected
with the individual, with the family, with society, with God, with the
understanding, with the heart, with languages, sciences, and art. The
investigator who rejects religion and even seeks means to oppose it,
finds it at the entrance as at the outlet of the mysterious ways of
life; at the cradle of the infant as in the shadow of the tomb; in time
as in eternity; explaining every thing by a word; listening unmoved to
the wanderings of ignorance and the sarcasms of unbelief, patiently
awaiting till the course of ages shall acknowledge its truth, which
existed before all ages.




