CHAPTER XVIII.

SOLUTION OF LAMENNAIS' OBJECTION.


106. From the preceding observations we shall now deduce an important
consequence,--the solution of the difficulty presented by Lamennais.
The existence of new senses would involve new sensations, it is true;
but they would not disturb the harmony of those we already have. We
have shown that bodies affect our organs in a different manner, and
produce impressions different from those of the five senses; but this
does not disturb the agreement of our sensations, nor change our ideas.
Consequently, the supposition of Lamennais would not involve the
disorder which he suspects.

107. Sensations in themselves are mere affections of the soul, and have
no external object which corresponds to them except the existence and
extension of bodies. Therefore a new order of sensations would only be
a new order of affections, which would in nowise alter our ideas.

From what we have hitherto said, it is easy to see that the supposition
of Lamennais is already realized; for there are sensations different
from those of the five senses; therefore this supposition does not
contradict the nature and order of our ideas, nor the certainty of our
knowledge.

A musical instrument beautifully fashioned has charms for the ear, the
eye, and the touch, none of these impressions destroys the other; if we
suppose it placed in new relations with our organs, so as to produce in
the soul new impressions, why is it impossible that they should accord?
Does the melody of its sound cease because our soul experiences new
affections whose nature has no connection with it? Certainly not. Why
then fear the overthrow of our knowledge by the introduction of a new
order of sensations? Why give such importance to a supposition, the
effects of which we can very well calculate, and which, if we examine
the phenomena of our present sensations, we find already realized?

108. It is true that we know of no other means of placing ourselves
in contact with external objects than the five senses; but it is
equally true, that this contact existing, the impressions in the soul
correspond mysteriously to the external objects; so that, while we
observe the sensations by which the communication is established, it is
still impossible for us to explain them.

Let us examine the magical effects of music. They are of two orders;
the purely auditive, and the intellectual or moral. The first stop
at the ear, the second pass to the brain and to the heart; and one
may be admirably organized for the former, yet unable to appreciate
the latter. Two persons listen to a sonata, both hear the _material_
music, but the intellectual and moral effects are not the same on both.
Both perceive the least defect in the time or in the instrument, both
admire the art of the composer, both are charmed; but while the heart
of one is unmoved, the brain and the heart of the other are bounding
with delight, the power of his fancy is multiplied, thoughts and images
crowd upon his mind, as though he had caught inspiration from the
magic notes of the music. His heart is transported with tenderness,
melancholy, hatred, love, anger, generosity, and courage. He is
under a magical influence which, moves him in spite of himself; the
vibrations of a chord have raised in his heart a mysterious tempest
which the might of reason can hardly quiet.

109. From this we must conclude, that besides the ordinary relations
between objects and the organs of the senses, there are other relations
still more intimate and more delicate between these objects and our
organic system, and that these latter are as certain as the former.
In them there is greater variety of individuals, and the conditions
necessary to produce determinate results are less known, but there
can be no doubt of their existence, and this in the eyes of sound
philosophy is sufficient to dissipate those absurd suppositions which
would pretend to undermine the edifice of our knowledge.

110. Thus, then, the objection is answered, which says: "If we had
another sense, what would it tell us?" Nothing which would destroy the
certainty of our knowledge, or the nature and order of our ideas. The
only new result would be _one more_ added to the many ways in which
objects now affect us. The same thing would happen to us as to a man
who after being deprived of the sense of smell, should suddenly regain
it: he would have one sensation more; the same thing would happen to
us as to a man who experiences a new sentiment which he had not known
before: he has one affection more. New impressions have their own rank,
neither interfering with, nor changing those which previously existed.




BOOK THIRD.

EXTENSION AND SPACE.




CHAPTER I.

EXTENSION INSEPARABLE FROM THE IDEA OF BODY.


1. Having seen that among the objects of our sensations, extension
alone has any external existence for us as any thing more than a
principle of causality, let us now try to understand what extension is.

The idea of extension seems to be inseparable from that of body; at
least, I am unable to conceive a body without extension. Take away
extension, and the parts disappear, and with them all that has relation
with our senses; there is no longer an object, or, if the object
remains, it is something altogether different from what is contained
in the idea of body. Imagine an apple, for instance, from which you
suddenly take away extension. What will remain of it?

I am not now going to examine whether Descartes is right when he says,
that the essence of body consists in extension; all that I here assert
is that a body cannot be conceived without extension. I do not affirm
the identity of two things, but only the inseparability of two ideas in
our mind. It is not an opinion, but a fact asserted by consciousness,
which is now under discussion.

Abstracting extension, I can conceive, it is true, a substance, or, to
speak more generally, a being; but, then, there is no idea of body,
unless we confound this idea with, that of substance or of being, in
general.

2. All our notions of bodies are obtained through the senses, but
without extension no sensation is possible; for without it there can
be no color, no sound, no touch, no smell, and no taste; therefore,
without extension there remains only something of which we have no
idea, a vague notion which cannot enable us to distinguish one object
from another, a pure abstraction, and nothing more.

3. To solve the difficulties which attend the separation of the two
ideas of extension and of body, it is necessary to determine the
essence of body. When we can distinguish the essence of a body from its
extension, the difficulty will be overcome, but not until then.

4. In order to understand the reason of this inseparability, it
is necessary to remember what was said before, that extension is
the basis of all other sensations; it is the _substratum_ which is
confounded with none, depends on none of them in particular, yet is an
indispensable condition of them all.

I look at an apple, and examine the mutual relations of the sensations
which it produces.

It is evident that though I abstract the smell, I do not thereby
destroy any of the other sensations which it causes. Though it lose its
odor, it is still extended, colored, it has a taste, and may produce
a sound. I may also, in like manner, abstract its taste, its color,
and all that relates to the sight, but I have still an object which is
tangible, and consequently extended, figured, and possessed of all its
other properties which affect the touch.

If instead of abstracting what relates to the sight, I abstract what
belongs immediately to the touch, I may do this without destroying the
other sensations; for I can still see the apple, its extension, form,
and color.

I may even go farther, and strip the apple of all its sensible
qualities, of its taste, smell, color, hardness, and whatever the
senses can perceive, still there remains extension, not indeed
sensible, but conceivable. Extension exists abstracted from its
visibility, since it exists for the blind man: abstracted from its
tangibility, since it exists for the sight; abstracted from odor,
taste, and sound, since it exists for those who are deprived of these
sensations, so long as they have sight or touch.

5. Here a difficulty arises. There seems to be a mistake in what
we have said of the existence of extension abstracted from other
sensations; for, although in making this abstraction we conceive
ourselves to be deprived of these sensations, still we retain the
_imagination_ of them; thus, when I strip the apple of all light and
color, it is still extended; but that is because I still imagine a
color, or, if I make a strong effort to destroy the color, it appears
to me like a black object, on a ground of greater or less darkness,
distinct from the apple. Does not this prove that there is an illusion
in such abstractions, and that there is no complete abstraction, since
the reality which we abstract is succeeded by the imagination of the
same qualities, or of others which supply their place, so as to make
the extension perceptible?

This objection is specious, and it would be difficult to give a
satisfactory answer if the existence of men deprived of sight did not
instantly dissipate it. No such imagination is possible in the case
of a blind man, for him there is no color, no shade, no light, no
darkness, nor anything which relates to sight, and still he conceives
extension.

6. But at least, some one will answer, it must be confessed that the
idea of extension is necessarily dependent on the sensations of touch;
blind men also possess this sense, and by it they acquire the idea of
extension. Therefore the idea of extension is inseparable from the
sensations of touch. This argument is no better than the other; for,
although we may acquire the idea of extension by the sense of touch,
and this sense is all that is required to produce it, it is not true
that this idea can only be acquired by touch. I have already proved
that sight is sufficient of itself alone to produce the idea of the
three dimensions which constitute a solid or extension in its full
complement. But here I do not need the idea of a solid, that of a
surface is sufficient; the extension of a surface is inseparable from
sight. There is no sight without color, or light of some kind or other,
and this cannot even be imagined without a surface.

I have another argument. Geometricians, doubtless, conceive extension,
and yet they abstract all its relations to sight or touch; therefore,
there is no necessary connection between them.

In any object submitted to the sight, what quality relating to the
touch is necessary in order to produce the idea of extension? If we
examine it closely, we shall find that there is none. Let us take a
liquid; is its fluidity the necessary quality? No; for when congealed
extension remains. Is it heat or cold? No; for without destroying
its extension we may change its temperature as much as we please,
no alteration is perceptible. Whatever quality relative to touch we
may take, we shall find that it may be varied, modified, or entirely
destroyed, without visibly affecting the extension.

It often happens that we have a clear and definite idea of the
extension of an object without knowing any thing of its qualities in
relation to touch. I see an object at a distance, I distinguish its
color and its form, but I know not of what material it is, whether
it is of marble, or wood, or wax, nor whether this material is hard
or soft, moist or dry, warm or cold. I do not even know if it is
tangible, as in the case of figures formed by vapors which are
imperceptible to the touch.

7. Without extension there can be neither sight, nor touch, nor any
other sensation. As to taste, it is clear that it requires touch, and
cannot exist without it. Our assertion is less clear with regard to
sound and smell; for, although we cannot separate these sensations from
the idea of extension as they always involve this idea in one way or
another, we do not know how it would be with a man who was deprived of
all the other senses, and retained only those of smelling and hearing.
But without speculating on this hypothesis, it is enough to know:

I. That nothing which is not extended can act upon our organs, unless
by means wholly unknown to us, and which would give no idea of what we
understand by body.

II. That even supposing the sensations of smelling and hearing to be
possible without the idea of extension, they would in that case be only
simple phenomena of our being, and would not place us in communication
with the external world, as we now perceive it; because, if we should
not know that they proceeded from another cause, we could have no more
consciousness of them than that which we have of the _me_; and if
we should know it, this cause would be represented to us only as an
agent influencing us, and not by any means as a being having any thing
similar to what we understand by body.

III. That in such a case we should have no idea of our own
organization, nor of the universe; for it is clear that every thing
being reduced to mere internal phenomena, and their relation to the
agents producing them, and the idea of extension wanting, neither the
universe nor our own body would be to us what they now are. What would
the universe,--what would our body be without extension?

IV. That for the present we limit ourselves to the demonstration of
the dependence which in the present system, of things, all sensations
have in relation to extension; and this demonstration holds good, even
though we suppose the man who possesses only the sense of smelling or
that of hearing not to form any idea of extension, and not to need it
in order to experience its sensations.

V. That even on this supposition, the proposition before established,
that the idea of extension is independent of the other sensations,
still remains unassailed.

VI. That the truth which we are principally endeavoring to demonstrate,
that for us the idea of extension is inseparable from that of body,
also stands firm.

8. This inseparability is so certain, that theologians explaining the
august mystery of the Eucharist, distinguish in the extension of bodies
the relations of the parts to each other, and their relation to place,
_in ordine ad se, et in ordine ad locum_; and they say that the sacred
body of our Lord Jesus Christ is in this august Sacrament, by extension
_in ordine ad se_, though not by extension _in ordine ad locum_. This
proves that the theologians saw that it is not possible for man to
lose all idea of extension, without at the same time losing all idea
of body; and thus they invented this ingenious distinction, of which I
shall speak at greater length in another place.




