CHAPTER XVI.

OBSERVATIONS ON KANT'S OPINION.


104. We have already shown that extension considered in us, is
something more than a mere sensation, that it is a true idea, the basis
of some sensations, and at the same time a pure idea. As far as it
relates to sensations, it is the foundation of our sensitive faculties;
and in so far as it is an idea, it is the root of geometry. This is an
important distinction, and we shall find it useful to enable us rightly
to appreciate the value of Kant's opinion of space.

105. All our sensations are, either more or less, connected with
extension; although if we consider sensation _a priori_ by itself,
and independently of all habit, it would seem as though only the
sensations of sight and touch were necessarily connected with an
extended object. It does not seem to me that the loss of these two
senses would necessarily involve the privation of the impressions of
hearing or smelling, or, perhaps, even of taste; for although it is
true that the sensations of touch, such as hardness or softness, etc.,
are always united with the sensations of the palate; it is equally
certain that those sensations are wholly distinct from the sensation
of taste, and we have no reason for asserting that they cannot be
separated from it.

106. Extension, considered in us or in its intuition, may be regarded
as a necessary condition of our sensitive faculties. Kant saw this,
but he exaggerated it when he denied the objective reality of space,
asserting that space is only a subjective condition _a priori_ without
which we cannot receive impressions, the form of phenomena, that is, of
appearances, but nothing in reality. I have already said that space,
as distinguished from bodies, is nothing, but the object of the idea
of space is the extension of bodies; or, rather, this extension is
the foundation from which we deduce the general idea of space, and is
contained in this idea.

107. To say, as Kant does, that space is the form under which the
phenomena are presented to us, and that it is a necessary subjective
condition of their perception, is equivalent to saying that the
phenomena which are presented as extended, require that the mind should
be capable of perceiving extension. This is very true, but it throws
no light on the nature of the idea of space, either in itself or in
its object. "Space," says Kant, "is no empirical conception which is
derived from external experience. For in order that certain sensations
may be referred to something out of me, that is, to something in
another part of space than that in which I am, and in order that I may
conceive them as outside of and near one another, and, consequently,
not only as separated, but also as occupying separate places, the
conception of space must be placed as the foundation. Therefore, the
conception of space cannot be obtained by experience from the relations
of the external phenomenon, but this external experience itself is
possible only by this conception."[48]

[48] Kant, _Transc. Æstœœh._ I. Absch. § 2, 1.

There is a great confusion of ideas here. What are the conditions which
are necessary to the phenomenon of the sensation of the extended? We
are not here treating of the appreciation of dimensions, but merely of
extension as represented or conceived. I do not see how this phenomenon
requires any thing _a priori_, except the sensitive faculty which,
in fact, exists _a priori_, that is to say, is a primitive fact of
our soul in its relations to the organization of the body which is
united to it, and of the other bodies which surround it. Under certain
conditions of our organization, and of the bodies which affect it, the
soul receives the impressions of sight or touch, and with them the
impression of extension. This extension is not presented to the mind in
the abstract, or as separated from the other sensation which accompany
it, but as united with them. The mind does not reflect, then, upon the
position of the objects, but it has an intuition of the arrangement
of the parts. So long as the fact is confined to mere sensation, it
is common to the learned and the unlearned, to the old and the young,
and even to all animals. This requires nothing _a priori_ except
the sensitive faculty, which simply means that a being, in order to
perceive, must have the faculty of perceiving, and should hardly
deserve to be announced as a discovery of philosophy.

109. There is no such discovery in Kant's doctrine of space, for on the
one side he asserts a well known fact, that the intuition of space is
a necessary subjective condition, without which it is impossible for us
to perceive things, one _outside_ of another; and on the other side he
falls into idealism, inasmuch as he denies this extension all reality,
and regards things and their position in space as pure _phenomena_,
or mere appearances. The fact which he asserts is true at bottom;
for it is, in fact, impossible to perceive things as distinct among
themselves, and as outside of us, without the intuition of space; but,
at the same time, it is not accurately expressed, for the intuition
of space is this perception itself; and, consequently, he ought to
have said that they are identical, not that one is an indispensable
condition of the other.

110. Prior to the impressions, there is no such intuition, and if
we regard it as a pure intuition and separated from intellectual
conception, we can only conceive it as accompanied by some
representation of one of the five senses. Let us imagine a pure space
without any of these representations, without even that mysterious
vagueness which we imagine in the most distant regions of the universe.
The imagination finds no object; the intuition ceases; there remains
only the purely intellectual conceptions which we form of extension,
the ideas of an order of possible beings, and the assertion or denial
of this order, according to our opinion of the reality or non-reality
of space.

111. It is evident that a series of pure sensations cannot produce a
general idea. Science requires some other foundation. The phenomena
leave traces of the sensible object in the memory, and are so connected
with each other, that the representation of one cannot be repeated
without exciting the representation of the other, but they produce no
general result which could serve as the basis of geometry. A dog sees
a man stoop, and make a certain motion, and is immediately struck with
a stone, which causes in him a sensation of pain; when the dog sees
another man perform the motion, he runs away; because the sensations of
the motions are connected in his memory with the sensation of pain, and
his natural instinct of avoiding pain inspires him to fly.

112. When these sensations are produced in an intelligent being, they
excite other internal phenomena, distinct from the mere sensitive
intuition. Whether general ideas already exist in our mind, or are
formed by the aid of sensation, it is certain that they are developed
in the presence of sensation. Thus, in the present case we not only
have the sensitive intuition of extension, but we also perceive
something which is common to all extended objects. Extension ceases
to be a particular object, and becomes a general form applicable
to all extended things. There is then a perception of extension in
itself, although there is no intuition of the extended; we then begin
to reflect upon the idea and analyze it, and deduce from it those
principles, which are the fruitful germs from the infinite development
of which is produced the tree of science called geometry.

113. This transition from the sensation to the idea, from the
contingent to the necessary, from the particular fact to the general
science, presents important considerations on the origin and nature of
ideas, and the high character of the human mind.

Kant seems to have confounded the imagination of space with the idea
of space, and notwithstanding his attempts at analysis, he is not so
profound as he thinks, when he considers space as the receptacle of
phenomena. This a very common idea, and all that Kant has done is to
destroy its objectiveness, making space a purely subjective condition.
According to this philosopher, the world is the sum of the appearances
which are presented to our mind; and just as we imagine in the
external world an unlimited receptacle which contains every thing, but
is distinct from what it contains, so he has placed space within us as
a preliminary condition, as a form of the phenomena, as a capacity in
which we may distribute and classify them.

114. In this he confounds, I say, the vague imagination with the idea.
The limit between the two is strongly marked. When we see an object we
have the sensation and intuition of extension. The space perceived or
sensed is, in this case, the extension itself perceived. We imagine a
multitude of extended objects, and a capacity which contains them all.
We imagine this capacity as the immensity of the ethereal regions, a
boundless abyss, a dark region beyond the limits of creation. So far
there is no idea, there is only an imagination arising from the fact
that when we begin to see bodies we do not see the air which surrounds
them, and the transparency of the air permits us to see distant
objects, and thus from our infancy we are accustomed to imagine an
empty capacity in which all bodies are placed, but which is distinct
from them.

But this is not the idea of space; it is only an imagination of it, a
sort of rude, sensible idea, probably common to man and the beasts. The
true idea, and the only one deserving the name, is that which our mind
possesses when it conceives extension in itself, without any mixture of
sensation, and which is, as it were, the seed of the whole science of
geometry.

115. It should be observed that the word representation as applied to
purely intellectual ideas must be taken in a purely metaphorical sense,
unless we eliminate from its meaning all that relates to the sensible
order. We know objects by ideas, but they are not represented to us.
Representation, properly speaking, occurs only in the imagination
which necessarily relates to sensible things. If I demonstrate the
properties of a triangle, it is clear that I must know the triangle,
that I must have an idea of it; but this idea is not the natural
representation which is presented to me like a figure in a painting.
All the world, even irrational animals have this representation, yet we
cannot say that brutes have the idea of a triangle. This representation
has no degrees of perfection, but is equally perfect in all. Any
one who imagines three lines with an area enclosed, possesses the
representation of a triangle with as much perfection as Archimedes; but
the same cannot be said of the idea of a triangle, which is evidently
susceptible of various degrees of perfection.

116. The representation of a triangle is always limited to a certain
size and figure. When we imagine a triangle, it is always with such
or such extension and with greater or smaller angles. The imagination
representing an obtuse angled triangle sees something very different
from an acute or right angled triangle. But the idea of the triangle
in itself is not subject to any particular size or figure; it
extends to all triangular figures of every size. The general idea of
triangle abstracts necessarily all species of triangles, whilst the
representation of a triangle is necessarily the representation of a
triangle of a determinate species. Therefore the representation and the
idea are very different, even in relation to sensible objects.

117. It is the same with space. Its representation is not its idea. The
representation is always presented to us as something determinate, with
a clearness like that of the air illuminated by the sun, or a blackness
like the darkness of night. There is nothing of this sort in the idea,
or when we reason upon extension and distances.

The idea of space is one; its representations are many. The idea is
common to the blind man and to him who sees. For both it is equally the
basis of geometry, but the representation is very different in these
two. The latter represents space as a confused reproduction of the
sensations of sight; the blind man can only represent it as a confused
repetition of the sensations of touch.

The representation of space is only indefinite, and even this
progressively. The imagination runs over one space after another, but
it cannot at once represent a space without limits; it can no more do
this than the sight can take in an endless object. The imagination is
a sort of interior sight, it reaches a certain point, but there it
finds a limit. It can, it is true, pass beyond this limit, and expand
still farther, but only successively, and always with the condition of
encountering a new limit. Space is not represented as infinite, but as
indefinite, that is to say, that after a given limit there is always
more space, but we can never advance so far as to imagine an infinite
totality. It is the contrary with the idea; we conceive instantaneously
what is meant by infinite space, we dispute on its possibility or
impossibility, we distinguish it perfectly from indefinite space, we
ask if it has in reality limits or not, calling it in the first case
finite, in the latter infinite. We see in the word indefinite the
impossibility of finding limits, but at the same time we distinguish
between the existence of these limits, and finding them. All this shows
that the idea is very different from the representation.

To regard space as a mere condition of sensibility is to confound the
two aspects under which extension should be considered, as the basis of
sensations, and as idea; as the field of all sensible representations,
and as the origin of geometry. I have often insisted on this
distinction, and shall never weary of repeating it; because it is the
line which divides the sensible from the purely intellectual order, and
sensations from ideas.




