CHAPTER XXVI.

CHARACTER OF THE RELATIONS OF THE REAL ORDER TO THE PHENOMENAL.


186. Is the agreement of the idea, the phenomenon, and the reality
necessary, is it founded on the essence of things, or has it been
freely established by the will of the Creator?

If the world had no other reality than that expressed by the sensible
representation, if the appearances were an exact copy of the essence
of things, we should have to say that this agreement is unalterable,
that things are what they appear, and that if we suppose them to exist,
it is absolutely necessary that they should be just what they appear;
for nothing can be in contradiction with its constitutive notion. That
which now is extended, would be necessarily extended, and could not but
be extended in the _same manner_ in which it appears to us, and under
the _same conditions_; the relation of bodies to each other would be
necessarily subject to the same phenomenal laws, and all which does not
come under this order would be a contradiction, and beyond the limit of
omnipotence.

187. Bodies are presented to us in the sensible intuition with a
determinate magnitude, and in a certain fixed relation which we
calculate by comparison with an immovable extension, such as we imagine
space. By magnitude, bodies occupy a certain space, determinate,
though changeable by motion; by the relation of magnitudes they occupy
a greater or smaller place, and mutually exclude each other; this
exclusion is called impenetrability. The question to be examined here
is, whether the determination of magnitudes, and their relation in
respect to the occupation of place, are things absolutely necessary, so
that their alteration involves a contradiction, or not. I answer that
they are not.

188. Relation to place considered as a portion of pure space,
means nothing; for I have already shown that this space is only
an abstraction of our understanding, and that in itself it has no
reality,--it is nothing. Therefore the relation to it must be nothing
also, because the relation is destroyed if one of the terms is nothing.
Therefore, the relations of bodies to place can only be the relations
of bodies to one another.

189. This is the principal thing to be noticed in this question.
The understanding gets confused when it begins by supposing space
an absolute nature with necessary relation to all bodies. We must
remember the doctrine of the chapters,[53] where we explained how the
idea of space is generated in us, what object corresponds to this idea
in reality, and how; and we shall easily perceive that the absolute
and essential relations which we think we discover between bodies
and a _vacant and real_ capacity, are illusions of our imagination,
in consequence of our not sufficiently purifying the ideal order by
separating from it all sensible impressions. We cannot understand so
much as the meaning of these questions, if we do not make an attempt at
this separation as far as is possible to our nature. If this is done,
then the questions proposed in the following chapters will appear very
philosophical, and their solution will seem probable, if not true; but
they must seem absurd, if we confound the pure intellectual order with
the sensible. We cannot admit the idealism which destroys the real
world; but the empiricism which annihilates the ideal order, is equally
objectionable. If we cannot rise above the sensible representations,
let us renounce philosophy, give up thinking, and confine ourselves to
sensation.

[53] XII., XIII., XIV., and XV.




CHAPTER XXVII.

WHETHER EVERY THING MUST BE IN SOME PLACE.


190. Is it necessary that whatever exists should be in some place?
This question may seem strange, but it is profoundly philosophical.
_To be_ is not the same as _to be in a place_. To be, whether taken
substantively as signifying to exist, or copulatively, as expressing
the relation of the predicate to the subject, does not involve the
idea of being in a place. The relation of an object to place is not
necessary to it; for it is not contained in the notion of object. It is
something added to the object, whether it is given to the object with
more or less foundation by ourselves, or the object has it in reality
by communication from some other.

The imagination can represent nothing which does not occupy a place,
but the understanding may conceive things that are not situated in
any place. When we reflect on the essence of objects, what position
does our mind give them? The intellectual act is always accompanied
by sensible representations, which sometimes assist it, and sometimes
embarrass and confuse it; but in either case the act of the
understanding is always distinct from these representations.

191. There is no reason for saying that every thing must occupy a
place. The imagination cannot see how any thing can exist otherwise,
but the understanding finds no absurdity in it, and it is in accordance
with the principles of philosophy. If place considered in itself is
only a part of space terminated by a surface, and space abstracted from
bodies is nothing, the relation to place or to points in space must be
nothing. We must have bodies in order to have a term of the relation;
therefore, if we suppose a being which has no relation to bodies, it is
not necessary that it should be in any place.

192. The relation of a being to bodies may be of three kinds: that of
commensuration, as is the relation of lines, surfaces, and solids to
each other; that of generation, as we conceive the line generated by
the point; and that of action in general, as we conceive the relation
of pure spirits to matter. The first cannot exist if the object has
no dimensions; for then it cannot be measured; the second can exist
only in unextended or infinitesimal points, from which extension is
generated; therefore these two relations can only exist between bodies,
or their generative elements. Therefore, nothing which is not a body or
an element of body, can occupy _place_ under either of these aspects.
As to the third relation, that of action of a cause upon a body, it
may be found in all agents capable of acting upon matter; but it is
evident that the position which results from this, is something very
different from that which we conceive in bodies or their elements; it
is something of a wholly distinct order, and belongs rather to the pure
idea of causality than to the intuition of space.

193. We can conceive a being which is not a body, nor an element of
body, and which does not exercise any action on bodies; in this case,
this being has none of the three relations of which we have spoken,
consequently it is not in any place, and to say that it is here, or
that it is there, that it is near or distant, would be using words
without meaning.

194. Viewed from the point of this doctrine, the following questions
are easy to answer:

Where must a pure spirit be which has no relation of causality nor
influence of any kind upon the corporeal world? Nowhere. The answer
will not seem strange to one who understands that the question is
absurd. In the case supposed, there is no _where_, for this involves a
relation and there are no relations here.

Where would the pure spirits be if the world did not exist? Nowhere,
unless we have a mind to say they would be in themselves. But, the word
_to be_ does not mean the position of which we are speaking here, but
only the existence of the spirit, or its identity with itself.

Where was God before the world was created? _He was_, but he was not in
_any place_; for he has no parts.

195. I wish here to expose an error of Kant. This philosopher believed
that space was conceived by us as a condition of all existence in
general, and on this he founded one of his arguments that space was a
purely subjective form. In the second edition of his _Critic of pure
Reason_, explaining the subjectiveness of space, he seems to hold,
that we do not even conceive things in the pure intellectual order,
without referring them to space. He observes that in natural theology,
when treating of things which cannot be the object of intuition either
for us or for themselves, we are very careful not to attribute to
this intuition or manner of perception time and space, which are the
conditions of human intuition. "But," he adds, "by what right do we
proceed thus, when time and space have already been established as
the forms of things in themselves, and conditions of their existence
_a priori_, subsisting still after all else has been annihilated by
thought? As conditions of all existence in general, they must be the
conditions of the existence of God. If we do not make space and time
the objective forms of _all_ things, it _only remains_ for us to make
them the subjective forms of our mode of intuition, as well internal
as external." Kant is right in saying that space and time ought not
to be considered as real forms, not susceptible of annihilation, and
therefore necessary and eternal; but I do not see the necessity of the
disjunctive by which he asserts that if we do not make space and time
the objective forms of _all_ things, we must make them the subjective
forms, and that, otherwise, we should make space and time conditions of
the existence of God.

196. We regard space as an actual condition of things, which occupy
place, but not of all things. We conceive existence in pure spirits
without the necessity of any relation to place, and, consequently,
independent of all position in space.

On this point, as on all relating to the pure intellectual order, we
find in the theologians doctrines which are highly important, and
deserve to be consulted by all who wish to go deeply into philosophical
questions. The author of the _Critic of Pure Reason_ would have found
there some observations which would have cleared up the difficulties
which embarrassed him. He would have found how incorrect it is to
say that space is a condition of the existence of all things, in the
beautiful as well as profound theory by which many of the scholastics
explain the presence of God in the corporeal world, and the presence of
the angels in different places, their motion from one point to another
without passing through the intermediate points, and the manner in
which the soul is wholly in the whole body and in every part of the
body. In these works, unfortunately so little consulted, the German
philosopher would have learned that the presence of a spirit in a
place is something different from the presence of a body, and has no
relation to the intuition of space, whether regarded as the basis of
sensible representations or as a geometrical idea.

197. St. Thomas[54] asks if God is in all things, and answers that he
is. In proving this assertion he does not consider the necessity of
every thing being in some place, but on the contrary seems rather to
forget the idea of space, and regards only causality.

[54] _Sum. Theol._ P. I., Q. viii., Art. 1.

"As God," he says, "is being itself by his essence, created being must
be his effect, as to burn is the effect of fire. But God causes this
effect in things not only when they begin to be, but as long as they
are preserved in being; thus the light is caused in the air by the sun
as long as air remains illuminated. As long therefore as things retain
their being, God is necessarily present to them, according to the
manner in which they have their being. But being is that which is most
internal, and most closely inherent in every thing because it is the
form of all that is in it, God therefore is in all things internally."

To be situated in space is to be contained in it; so, at least, we
conceive whatever we consider situated in space. St. Thomas rejects
this meaning as applied to spiritual beings, and says, that although
corporeal beings are contained in things, spiritual beings on the
contrary contain the things in which they are.

In the second article he asks whether God is in all places (_ubique_);
and, he says, that as God is in all things, giving them being and
the power of acting, so he is in all places giving them being and
capacity (_virtutem locativam_). He states as an objection that
incorporeal things are not in any place, and answers in the following
philosophical words: "Incorporeal things are not in place by the
contact of measurable quantity, like bodies; but by the contact of
activity (_virtutis_)." Then explaining how the indivisible can be in
different places, he says: "The indivisible is of two kinds; first,
it is the limit of the continued, as a point in permanent things, and
a moment in successive things. The indivisible in permanent things,
cannot be in different parts of place or in different places, because
it has a determinate position; and in the same manner the indivisible
in action or in motion cannot be in different parts of time, because
it has a determinate order in action or motion. But there is another
indivisible which is _beyond all kind of continuation_, and in this
sense incorporeal substances, as God, the angels, and the soul, are
called indivisible. The indivisible in this manner, is not applied to
the continued as _any thing which belongs to it_, but only as reaching
it by its activity; therefore as its activity may extend to one or
many, to the small or to the great, it may be in one place or in many
places, in a small place or in a great place."

What can be clearer, relatively to the intuition of space, than that
when any thing is in a place it cannot be out of that place? But the
holy Doctor, rising above sensible representations, boldly maintains
that God may be whole in the whole, and in every part of the whole,
as the soul is whole in every part of the body. And why? Because
what is called totality in corporeal things relates to quantity, but
the totality of incorporeal things relates to essence, and cannot be
measured by quantity, and is not confined to any place.

In the _Treatise on the Angels_,[55] he says that the expression to be
in place is used equivocally (_œquivoce_),[56] when applied to angels
and bodies. Bodies are in place by the contact of measurable quantity,
but angels by virtual quantity, that is to say, by the action which
they may exercise upon a body. We cannot, therefore, say that an angel
has a position in the continued (_quod habeat situm in continuo_). In
the _Treatise on the Soul_[57] he maintains that the soul is whole
in every part of the body. He distinguishes the totality of essence
from the totality of quantity, and makes use of an argument similar
to that which he used with respect to the angels. The more we reflect
on this doctrine the more profound it appears; those who have made
light of it, have shown that they never penetrated beyond the surface
in all that concerns the relations of spiritual to corporeal things.
It is generally dangerous to laugh at opinions held by great men;
for if they are not certain, they have, at least, powerful arguments
in their favor. Nothing is more contrary to sensible representations
than the possibility of any thing being in different places at the
same time, but we shall find nothing more in conformity with the
principles of sound philosophy than this possibility, after we have
profoundly analyzed the relations of extension with unextended things,
and discovered the difference between the position of quantity and the
position of causality.

[55] _Sum. Theol._ Q. LII., Art. I.

[56] Dialecticians understand by an _equivocal_ term one which in
different things has an entirely different meaning. They give as an
example the term LION which is applied _equivocally_ to an animal, or
a constellation. Æquivoca sunt quorum nomen commune est, et ratio per
nomen significata, simpliciter diversa, is the scholastic definition.

[57] _Sum. Theol._ Q. lxxvi., Art. 8.

198. From these doctrines it may be concluded, that to be in space
is not a general condition of all existences, even according to the
manner of existences; for we can conceive existences without relation
to any place. Many have confounded imagination with understanding
on this point, and believed that what is impossible for the former
is equally so for the latter. It is certain that we can _imagine_
nothing without referring it to points of space, and even in purely
intellectual objects there is always a sensible representation, but
the understanding regards these representations as false and does
not conform to them. As imagination is a sort of continuation of
sensibility, or an internal sense, and the basis of sensations is
extension; it is impossible for us to exercise this internal sense,
without the presence of space, which, as we have shown, is only the
idea of extension in general. Position in space is consequently a
general condition of all things, as perceived by the senses, but not as
perceived by the intellect.




