CHAPTER XXI.

PURE INTELLIGIBILITY OF THE EXTENDED WORLD.


152. Objects in themselves do not change their nature, by the
variety of appearances which they produce in us. A polygon turning
with rapidity has the appearance of a circle; the stars appear like
small points; and considering the various classes of objects, we
may observe that there is a great variety of appearances depending
on circumstances. The nature of a being does not consist in what it
appears, but in what it is. Suppose there were no sensitive being
in the world, the present order of sensibility would disappear; for
without sensitive beings there would be no representations. What would
the world be in that case? This is a great problem of metaphysics.

153. A pure spirit,--the existence of which we must always suppose;
for, though all finite beings were annihilated, there would still
remain the infinite being which is God,--a pure spirit would know
the extended world _just as it is in itself_, and would not have
the sensible representations either external or internal, which we
have. This is certain, unless we mean to attribute imagination and
sensibility to pure spirits, and even to God himself.

On this supposition I ask, what would a pure spirit know of the
external world? or, to speak more properly, since the existence of
such a spirit is certain and its intelligence infinite, what does this
spirit know of the external world?

154. That which this spirit knows of the world is the world, because
he cannot be deceived. But this spirit does not know the world under
any sensible form. Therefore the world may be known without any of the
forms of sensibility, and consequently may be the object of a pure
intelligence.

There is no difficulty on this point in what regards sensations. It is
only necessary that we should say that the pure spirit knows perfectly
the principle of causality which resides in the object, and produces
the impressions which we experience. There is no need of attributing to
the intelligent spirit any sensation of the thing understood.

This question is more difficult when we come to explain what relates
to extension. For, if we say that the spirit only knows the principle
of causality of the subjective representation of the extended, it
follows that there is no true extension in the objects, because the
spirit sees all that there is, and if the spirit does not see it, it
is because it is not. We fall into Berkeley's idealism; an external
world without extension is not the world of common sense, but the
world of the idealists. If, on the other hand, we say that this pure
spirit does know extension, we seem to attribute to the spirit sensible
representation; because the extension represented seems to involve
sensible representation. What is an extension with lines, surfaces, and
figures? And these objects, as we understand them, are sensible; if,
however, they be taken in another sense, the extension of the world
will be of another nature, it will be something of which we have no
idea; and here again we fall into idealism.

155. To solve this difficulty, which is really a serious one, it is
necessary to recollect the distinction on which I insisted so earnestly
between extension as sensation and extension as idea. The former can
become subjective only in a sensible being; the second may be, and
is, subjective in a purely intellectual being. Extension as sensation
is something subjective, it is an appearance; its object exists in
reality, but without including in its essence any thing more than
is necessary in order to produce the sensation. Extension as idea is
also subjective; but it has a real object which corresponds to it, and
satisfies all the conditions of the idea.

156. Does not this theory seem to establish two geometries? We must
distinguish. The scientific and the pure ideal geometry will remain the
same, save the difference of the intelligences which possess it. But
notwithstanding this difference, what is true in one is true in the
other. Empirical geometry as the representative part of geometry will
be different: we have the idea only of our own.

157. In fact we observe two parts in geometry even in ourselves; the
one purely scientific, the other of sensible representation. The
former includes the connection of ideas; the latter the images and
particular cases by means of which we make the ideas sensible: the
first is the ground; the second is the form. But although the two
are different, we cannot separate them entirely: we cannot have the
geometrical idea without the sensible representation, we understand
it only _per conversionem ad phantasmata_, as say the scholastics.
Thus the two orders of geometry, the sensible and the intellectual,
though different, are always joined in us; whether because the pure
geometrical idea arises from the sensible, or is excited by it, or
because this is perhaps a necessary primitive condition imposed on our
mind by its union with the body.

158. This shows how the pure geometry may be separated from the
sensible, and how it may exist in pure intellectual beings, without any
of the forms which represent the geometrical idea in sensible beings.

159. But what becomes of extension in itself and stripped of all
sensible form? When we speak of extension stripped of all sensible
form, we do not mean to deprive it of its capacity to be perceived
by the senses, we merely abstract the relations of this capacity to
sensible beings. Extension is then reduced, not to an imaginary space,
nor to an eternal and infinite being, but to an order of beings, to
the sum of their constant relations subject to necessary laws. What
then are these relations? I know not. But I know that they exist and
that these necessary laws exist. That they exist in reality I know by
experience, which gives testimony of their existence; that they are
possible, I know on the authority of my ideas, the connection of which
forces my assent to their intrinsical evidence.

160. That this evidence touches but one aspect of the object, is true;
that there are many things in the object which we do not know, is
likewise true; but this only proves that our science is incomplete, not
that it is illusory or false.

161. It is difficult for us to conceive the pure intelligibility of
the sensible world, both because our ideas are always accompanied by
representations of the imagination, and because we try to explain it by
simple addition and subtraction of parts, as though all the problems
of the universe could be reduced to expressions of lines, surfaces,
and solids. Geometry plays an important part in all that regards the
appreciation of the phenomena of nature; but when we want to penetrate
to the essence of things, we must lay aside geometry and take up
metaphysics.

There is no more seductive philosophy than that which reduces the
world to motions and figures, but at the same time there is none
more superficial. A slight reflection on the reality of things shows
the insufficiency of such a system. For, though the imagination be
satisfied with it, the understanding is not, and it takes a noble
revenge on its unfaithful companion, when, forcing the imagination to
fix itself upon objects, the understanding sinks it in an ocean of
darkness and contradiction. Those who laugh at the forms, the acts, the
forces, and other such expressions used with more or less exactness
in different schools, ought to reflect that even in the physical
world there is something more than is perceived by the senses; and
that even sensible phenomena cannot be explained by mere sensible
representations. Physical science is not complete until it calls to its
aid metaphysics.

The best proof of this will be found in the next chapter, where we
shall see the imagination entangled in its own representations.




