CHAPTER XVII.

INABILITY OF KANT'S DOCTRINE TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
EXPERIENCE.


118. I think that Kant's _Transcendental Æsthetics_, or theory of
sensibility, is not sufficiently transcendental. It is too much
confined to the empirical part, and does not rise to the height which
we should expect from the title. The problem of the possibility of
experience which Kant proposed to solve, either is not at all touched
by his doctrine, or else it is solved in a strictly idealist sense.
It leaves the problem untouched, if we consider only what relates to
observation; for he only repeats what we already knew in establishing
the fact of the _exteriority_ of things; it solves the problem in a
strictly idealist sense, inasmuch as these things are only considered
as phenomena or appearances.

119. A purely subjective space either does not explain the problems
of the external world, or it denies them in denying all reality. What
progress has philosophy made by affirming that space is a purely
subjective condition? Before Kant, did we, perchance, not know that we
had perception of external phenomena? The difficulty was not in the
existence of this perception attested by consciousness; but in its
value to prove the existence of an external world, in relation with it.
The difficulty was in the objective, not the subjective part of the
perception.

120. To say that the perception is nothing more than a condition of
the subject, is to cut the knot instead of untying it. It does not
explain the manner of the possibility of experience, but denies this
possibility.

What is experience if there is only the subject? There will be the
_phenomenon_ or _appearance_ of objectiveness, but nature is then only
a mere appearance, and there is nothing in reality which corresponds
to our experimental perceptions. We then have experience reduced to
the perception of appearances; and as even this purely phenomenal
experience is only possible by virtue of a purely subjective condition,
the intuition of space; all experience remains purely subjective, and
we find ourselves holding the system of Fichte, admitting the _me_ as
the primitive fact, the development of which constitutes the universe.
Thus the system of Fichte follows from Kant's doctrine; the former has
only carried out the principles of his master.

121. In order to make the connection between the two doctrines still
clearer, we shall make some further reflections on Kant's system. If
space is something purely subjective, a condition of the sensibility
and of the possibility of experience, it follows that the mind instead
of receiving any thing from the object, creates whatever is in the
object, or rather, whatever we consider as in it. Things in themselves
are not extended; extension is only a form with which the mind clothes
them. In the same manner, they are not colored, sonorous, tasteful,
or odorous, except inasmuch as we transfer to them that which is
in ourselves alone. Every thing being reduced to mere appearances,
there is in the external world not even the principle of causality of
subjective extension; the mind gives it to objects, does not receive
it from them. These objects are pure phenomena; and, consequently, the
soul only sees what it contains in itself, it knows no other world than
that which is its own creation. Thus, we see the real world spring from
the _me_; or, rather, the real world is only the ideal creation of the
mind. On this supposition, the laws of nature are only the laws of our
own mind, and instead of seeking for the types of our ideas in nature,
we ought to regard our ideas as the generative principle of all that
exists, or seems to exist; and the laws of the universe are merely the
subjective condition of the _me_ applied to phenomena.

122. Some of the disciples of Kant show no fear of his idealist
tendencies; in fact they accept them without any hesitation, as may be
seen by the comparisons which they use in explaining his doctrine. If
a seal be applied to a piece of soft wax, it will leave its impression
on the wax; if we suppose the seal to be capable of perception, it
would see its mark on the wax, and attribute to the object what it had
itself given it. If a vase full of water were capable of perception,
it would attribute to the water the form, which in reality is only the
form of the vase itself, and is communicated from it to the water. In
a similar manner the mind constructs the external world, giving to it
its impression and form, and then believing it has received from the
external world what it has itself communicated to it.

123. Still we must confess that Kant, in the second edition of his
_Critic of Pure Reason_, rejects these conclusions, and expressly
combats idealism. There is no necessity of examining how far the second
edition contradicts the first: it is sufficient for me to inform the
reader that this contradiction exists, and that in the first edition
there are expressions which so plainly lead to idealism, that it is
impossible not to be surprised on finding the same author in the second
edition of his work strongly opposing the idealist system. I have
pointed out the consequences of the doctrine; if the author understood
it in a different sense from that which his words expressed, this is
merely a personal, not a philosophical question.(31)




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE PROBLEM OF SENSIBLE EXPERIENCE.


124. The great problem of philosophy does not consist in the
explanation of the possibility of experience; but in establishing the
reason of the consciousness of experience, as experience. Experience in
itself is a fact of our soul attested by consciousness, but _to know_
that this fact is a fact of experience, is something very different
from mere experience; for, by knowing this, we pass from the subjective
to the objective, referring to the external world what we experience
within us.

We refer objects to different points of space, and regard them as
outside of, and distinct from, each other: to say that the instinct by
which we so regard them is a condition of the subject and of sensible
experience is to establish a sterile fact. The difficulty is in knowing
why we have this instinct; why the representation of an extension is in
our soul; and why this subjective extension in a simple being should
be presented to our perception as the image of something external and
really extended.

125. Transcendental esthetics may determine the following problems:

I. To explain what is the subjective representation of extension,
abstracted from all that is objective.

II. Why this representation is found in our soul.

III. Why a simple being contains in itself the representation of
multiplicity, and an unextended being the representation of extension.

IV. Why and how we pass from ideal to real extension.

V. To determine how far we may apply to extension what is true of the
other sensations, which are considered as phenomena of our soul,
having no external object like them, and no other correspondence with
the external world than the relation of effects to their cause.

126. What is the subjective representation of extension, abstracted
from all that is objective? It is a fact of our soul; no further
explanation is possible; he that has it, knows what it is; he that has
it not, does not, except intelligences of a higher order, which know
what this representation is, without experiencing it as we do.

127. I do not pretend that it is possible to explain why the
representation of extension is found in our soul; we might as well ask
why we are intelligent and sensible beings. The only reason _a priori_
which we can give, is that God has so created us. This representation
may be found in us, and it is so found, for we experience it; but this
internal experience is the limit of philosophy; immediate observation
can go no farther back. Reason raises us to the knowledge of a cause
which created us, but not to a phenomenon which is the source of the
phenomena of experience.

128. Why a simple being contains in itself the representation of
multiplicity, and an unextended being the representation of extension,
is the problem of intelligence, which, because it is intelligence, is
one and simple, and capable of perceiving multiplicity and composition.

129. We pass from ideal to real extension by a natural and irresistible
impulse, which is confirmed by the assent of reason. This has been
demonstrated in the first book, and also in the second when treating of
the objectiveness of sensations.

130. Of the five problems the last remains. We must determine how far
we may apply to extension what is true of the other sensations, which
are considered as phenomena of our soul, having no external object like
them, and no other correspondence with the external world than the
relation of effects to their cause.

131. The solution of this problem settles the question for or against
the idealists. If we may apply to extension what is true of the other
sensations, idealism triumphs, and the real world, if it exists, is a
being which has no resemblance to the world which we think.

I have proved in treating of sensations[49] that extension is something
real, and independent of our sensations, and I have shown[50] that it
represents multiplicity and continuity. This is sufficient to overthrow
idealism, and also to explain, to a certain extent, what extension
consists in; but as the idea of space, which is closely connected
with extension, had not then been examined, it was not possible for
us to rise above the order of phenomena and regard extension under a
transcendental aspect, examining it in itself, abstracted from all its
relations with the world of appearances. This is what I propose to do
in the following chapters.

[49] Bk. II., Chs. VII., VIII., and IX., and Bk. III., Ch. IV.

[50] Bk. II., Ch. VIII., and Bk. III., Ch. VI.

132. We come now to a more cragged path; we have to distinguish the
reality from appearance; our understanding, which is always accompanied
by sensible representations, must now depart from them, and place
itself in opposition to a condition to which it is naturally subjected
in the exercise of its functions.




