CHAPTER XIX.

EXTENSION ABSTRACTED FROM PHENOMENA.


133. That which is extended is not one being only; it is a collection
of beings. Extension necessarily contains parts, some outside of, and
consequently distinct from, others. Their union is not identity; for,
the very fact that they are united, supposes them distinct, since any
thing is not united with itself.

It would seem from this that extension in itself and distinguished from
the things extended, is nothing; to imagine extension as a being whose
real nature can be investigated is to resign one's self to be the sport
of one's fancy.

Extension is not identified in particular with any one of the beings
which compose it, but it is the _result_ of their union. This is
equally true whether we consider extension composed of unextended
points, or of points that are extended but infinitely divisible.
If we suppose the points unextended, it is evident that they are
not extension, because extended and unextended are contradictory.
Neither are these points identified with extension, if we suppose
them extended; for extension implies a whole, and a whole cannot be
identified with any of its parts. If a line be four feet long, there
cannot be identity between the whole line and one of its parts a foot
long. We may suppose these parts, instead of a foot, to be only an inch
in length, and we may divide them _ad infinitum_, but we shall never
find any of these parts equal to any of its subdivisions. Therefore,
extension is not identical with any of the particular beings which
compose it.

134. The idea of multiplicity being involved in the idea of extension,
it would seem that extension ought to be considered, not as a being in
itself, but as the result of a union of many beings. This result is
what we call continuity. We have already seen[51] that multiplicity
is not sufficient to constitute extension. It enters into the idea of
number, and yet number does not represent any thing extended. We also
conceive a union of acts, faculties, activities, substances, and beings
of various classes, without conceiving extension, and yet multiplicity
is a part of all these conceptions.

[51] Bk. II. Chap. VIII.

135. Therefore continuity is necessary, in order to complete the idea
of extension. What, then, is continuity? It is the position of parts
outside of, but joined to other parts. But what is the meaning of
the terms, _outside of_, and _joined to_? Inside and outside, joined
and separated, imply extension, they presuppose that which is to be
explained; the thing to be defined enters into the definition in the
same sense in which it is to be defined. Exactly; for, to explain the
continuity of extension is the same as to show the meaning of the terms
inside and outside, joined and separated.

136. We must not forget this observation, unless we wish to accept the
explanations which are found in almost all the books on the subject.
To define extension by the words _inside_ and _outside_, is not to add
any thing, under a philosophic aspect; it is merely to express the
same thing in different words. Without doubt this language would be
the simplest, if all we wanted was to establish the phenomenon only,
but philosophy will not be satisfied with it. It is a practical, not
a speculative, explanation. The same may be said of the definition
of extension by space or places. What is extension?--the occupation
of place:--but, what is a place?--a portion of space terminated by
certain surfaces:--what is space?--the extension in which bodies
are placed, or the capacity to receive them. But even admitting the
existence of space as something absolute, what is the capacity of
bodies to fill space? Who does not see that this is to define a thing
by itself, a vicious circle? The extension of space is explained by the
capacity of _receiving_; the extension of bodies by the capacity of
_filling_. The idea of extension remains untouched; it is not defined,
it is merely expressed in different words, but which mean the same
thing.

To suppose the existence of space as something absolute, does not help
the question, and is, besides, an entirely gratuitous supposition.
To take the extension of space as a term by relation to which we may
explain the extension of bodies, is to suppose that to be found which
we are looking for.

We run into the same error if we try to explain the words inside and
outside, by referring them to distinct points in space, we should
define a thing by itself; for, we have the same difficulty with respect
to space to determine the meaning of inside and outside, joined and
separated, and contiguous and distant. If we presuppose the extension
of space as something absolute, and try to explain other extensions by
relation to this, we only make the illusion more complete. We have to
explain extension in itself, the extension of space must be explained
as well as the rest; to presuppose it is to assume the question already
solved, not to solve it.

137. Extension in relation to its dimensions seems to be independent
of the thing extended in the same place. An extension may remain
absolutely fixed with the same dimensions, notwithstanding the change
of place of the thing extended. If we suppose a series of objects to
pass over a fixed visual field, the things extended vary incessantly,
but the extension remains the same. If we suppose a very large object
to pass before a window, it changes continually; for the part which we
see at the instant A is not the part which we see at the instant B, but
the extension has not varied in its dimensions. This regards surfaces
only, but the same doctrine may be applied to solids. A space may be
successively filled with a variety of objects, but its capacity remains
the same. There is no identity between the object and the extension
which contains it; for any number of objects of the same size may
occupy the same place; neither is the air, or any surrounding object,
identified with the extension; for these, too, may change without
affecting the extension in which the object is contained.

138. Though the dimensions remain fixed while the objects vary, it does
not follow that extension is purely subjective, even though we suppose
that the objects which vary cannot be distinguished. If the contrary
were maintained, the change of the dimensions would prove them to be
objective; and the argument might be retorted against our adversaries.
That the dimensions are fixed shows that different objects may produce
similar impressions; and therefore we can form an idea of a determinate
dimension or figure, without reference to the particular object to
which it does, or may correspond. No one will deny that we have the
representation of dimensions, without necessarily referring them to any
thing in particular; but what we wish to determine is, whether these
dimensions exist in reality, and what is their nature, independently of
their relations to us.

139. If we admit that continuity has no external object either in
pure space or in bodies, what becomes of the corporeal world? It is
indeed to a collection of beings which in one way or another, and in a
certain order, act upon our being.

The difficulties against the realization of phenomenal continuity
are not destroyed by appealing to the necessities of the corporeal
organization of sensible beings. If any one should ask how external
beings can act upon us, and affect our organs, if they have not in
them the continuity with which they are presented to us; such a one
would show that he does not understand the state of the question. For
it is evident that if we should take from the external world all real
continuity, leaving only the phenomenal, we should at the same time
take it from our own organization, which is but a part of the universe.
There is here a mutual relation and sort of parallelism of phenomena
and realities which mutually complete and explain each other. If the
universe is a collection of beings acting upon us in a certain order,
our organization is another collection of beings, receiving their
influence in the same order. Either both are inexplicable, or else the
explanation of one involves the explanation of the other. If that order
is fixed and constant, and its correspondence remains the same, nothing
is changed, no matter what hypothesis is assumed in order to explain
the phenomenon.

140. The object of our searches here, is the reality subject to the
condition of explaining the phenomenon, and not contradicting the order
of our ideas.

It might be objected to those who take from the external world the
phenomenal or apparent qualities of continuity, that they destroy
geometry, which is based on the idea of phenomenal continuity. But this
objection cannot stand; for it supposes the idea of geometry to be
phenomenal, whereas it is transcendental. We have already shown that
the idea of extension is not a sensation, but a pure idea, and that the
imaginary representations by which it is made sensible are not the
idea, but only the forms with which the idea is clothed.

141. All phenomenal extension is presented to us with a certain
magnitude; geometry abstracts all magnitude. Its theorems and problems
relate to figures in general abstracted absolutely from their size,
and when the size is taken into consideration it is only in so far
as relative. Of two triangles of equal bases that which has greater
altitude has the greater surface. Here the word _greater_ relates to
size, it is true; but to a relative, not to any absolute size; the
question is not of the magnitudes themselves, but of their _relation_.
Consequently, the theorem is equally true whether the triangles are
immense, or infinitely small. Therefore, geometry abstracts absolutely
all magnitudes considered as phenomena, and makes use of them only
in order to assist the intellectual perception by the sensible
representation.

142. This is an important truth, and I shall explain it further when
combating Condillac's system in the treatise on ideas, where I shall
show that even the ideas which we have of bodies neither are, nor can
be, a transformed sensation. According to these principles, geometry
is a science which makes its pure ideas sensible by a phenomenal
representation. This representation is necessary so long as geometry
is a human science, and man is subject to phenomena; but geometry in
itself and in all its purity has no need of such representations.

143. In order that this doctrine may seem less strange, and may be more
readily accepted, I will ask, whether pure spirits possess the science
of geometry? We must answer in the affirmative; for, otherwise we
should be forced to conclude that God, the author of the universe and
greatest of geometricians, does not know geometry. Does God, then, have
these representations, by the aid of which we imagine extension? No;
these representations are a sort of continuation of sensibility which
God has not; they are the exercise of the internal sense, which is not
found in God. St. Thomas calls them _phantasmata_, and says they are
not found in God, or in pure spirits, nor even in the soul separated
from the body. Therefore, the science of geometry is possible, and does
really exist without sensible representations, and, consequently, we
may distinguish two extensions, the one phenomenal, and the other real,
without thereby destroying either the phenomenon or the reality, so
long as we admit the correspondence between them; so long as we do not
break the thread which unites our being with those around us; so long
as the conditions of our being harmonize with those of the external
world.(32)




