CHAPTER XXII.

INFINITE DIVISIBILITY.


162. The divisibility of matter is a question that torments
philosophers. Matter is divisible because it is extended, and there is
no extension without parts. These parts are extended or are not: if
they are, they are again divisible; if they are not, they are simple,
and in the division of matter we must come to unextended points.

This last consequence can be avoided only by recourse to the infinite
divisibility of matter, and even this is a means of escaping the
difficulty rather than a true solution. I intimated elsewhere[52] that
infinite divisibility seems to suppose the very thing which it denies.
Division does not make the parts, it supposes them; that which is
simple cannot be divided; therefore, the parts which may be divided
pre-exist in the infinitely divisible composition.

[52] Chap. v.

Let us imagine God to exert his infinite power in dividing, will he
exhaust divisibility? If you say no, you seem to place limits to his
omnipotence; if you say yes, we shall have arrived at simple points,
as otherwise the divisibility would not be exhausted.

Even supposing that God does not make this division, his infinite
intelligence certainly sees all the parts into which the composite
is divisible; these parts must be simple, or else the infinite
intelligence would not see the limit of divisibility. If you answer
that this limit does not exist, and therefore cannot be seen, I reply
that we must then admit an infinite number of parts in each portion
of matter; there would, in this case, be no limit of divisibility,
because the number of parts would be inexhaustible; but this infinite
number would be seen by the infinite intelligence, as it is, and all
these parts would be known as they are. The difficulty still remains;
these parts are simple or composite; if simple, the opinion which we
are opposing does, at least, admit unextended points; if composite,
the same argument may be repeated; they are again divisible. We shall
then have a new infinite number in each one of the parts of the first
infinite number; but as this series of infinities must be always known
to the infinite intelligence, we must come to simple points, or else
say that the infinite intelligence does not know all that there is in
matter.

It does not mend the matter to say that the parts are not actual but
only possible. In the first place, possible parts are existing parts,
because, if the parts are not real, there must be real simplicity, and
consequently, indivisibility. Secondly, if they are possible, they may
be made to exist by the intervention of an infinite power; and then
what are these parts? they are either extended or unextended, and the
matter returns to where it was before.

163. Some say that a mathematical quantity, or a body mathematically
considered, is infinitely divisible, but that natural bodies are not,
because their natural form requires a determinate quantity. This is the
explanation which was given in the schools; but it is very clear that
there is no ground for affirming that these natural bodies require a
certain quantity, beyond which division is impossible. This cannot be
proved either _a priori_ nor _a posteriori_: not _a priori_, because we
do not know the essence of bodies, and cannot say that there is a point
where the natural form requires the limit of divisibility; neither can
it be proved _a posteriori_, because the means of observation at our
disposal are so coarse, that it is impossible for us to reach the last
limit of division and discover a part which cannot be divided. Besides,
when we reach this quantity beyond which division cannot go, we have a
true quantity, by the supposition; if it is quantity it is extended; if
it is extended it has parts; if it has parts it is divisible. Therefore
there is no reason for saying that there is any natural form which
limits division.

164. The distinction between a natural and a mathematical body is
not admissible in what relates to division. This is a result of the
nature of extension, which is real in natural bodies, and ideal in
mathematical. That the parts in natural bodies are not actual but
possible, may be understood in two ways; it may mean that they are
not actually separated; or, that they are not distinct. That they are
not separated has no bearing on the question; for division may be
conceived without separating the parts. But, if they are not distinct,
the division is impossible; for it cannot even be conceived where the
things are not distinct.

165. This distinction seems to have originated in the attempt to avoid
the necessity of admitting infinite divisibility in natural bodies.
But the difficulty still remaining with regard to mathematical bodies,
the philosophical mystery still subsists. It consists in this, that
no limit can be assigned to division so long as there is any thing
extended; and, on the other hand, if, in order to assign this limit,
we come to simple points, then it is impossible to reconstitute
extension. The difficulty arises from the very nature of extended
things, whether realized or only conceived; the real order escapes
none of the difficulties of the ideal. If ideal extension cannot be
constituted out of unextended points, neither can real extension; if
ideal extension has no limit to its divisibility until we come to
simple points, the same is also true of real extension; for in both it
is a result of the essence of extension, and inseparable from it.




