CHAPTER XIII.

CHESELDEN'S BLIND MAN.


75. Cheselden's blind man, of whom Condillac spoke, in confirmation
of his opinions, presents no phenomenon upon which they can rest.
This blind person was a youth of thirteen or fourteen years of age,
upon whom Cheselden, a distinguished London surgeon, performed the
operation of removing cataracts, first from one eye, then from the
other. He could before the operation tell day and night, and in a very
strong light distinguish, white, black, and red. This is an important
circumstance, and merits attention. The phenomena the most remarkable,
and having the most relation to the question now before us, were the
following:

I. When he began to see, he believed that objects touched the external
surface of his eye. This would seem to show that sight alone cannot
enable us to judge of distances; but, after close examination,
we shall clearly see that the argument is not conclusive. No one
will pretend that sight, in the first moment of its exercise, can
communicate equally clear and distinct ideas to us, as when experience
has accustomed us to compare its different impressions. This is the
same with touch as with sight. A blind person, from his frequent
custom of guiding himself, in many of his movements by sensations of
touch alone, comes to know the position and distances of objects with
wonderful precision. If we suppose a man deprived of the sense of
touch suddenly to acquire it, neither will he at first judge with the
same certainty the objects of this sense as after having exercised
it. Experience teaches that the sense of touch is capable of a high
degree of perfection. We see it in blind persons at its highest point;
and probably the lowest point of its perfection, in the first moments
of its exercise, would greatly resemble that of sight at the instant
of being freed from the cataracts; objects would be presented to it
likewise in confusion; and the subject experiencing them could not
well appreciate their differences until practice had taught him how to
distinguish and classify.

With respect to distance, it is to be observed, that this blind person
of Cheselden, so far from having the habit of appreciating it, had
false ideas upon it. As he was not totally blind, the light, which he
perceived through the cataracts, was sufficient to even enable him to
distinguish between white, black, and red, which seemed to him to touch
his eye. We may form some idea of this by observing what happens to
us if we close our eyes in a very strong light. Hence he ought, when
he gained his sight, to have imagined that the new sight was the same
as the old, and, consequently, that nothing had happened but a simple
change of object. A person totally blind would have better shown the
power of sight to appreciate distances; for he would have had no habit
either favorable or unfavorable to their knowledge.

II. It cost him much trouble to conceive that there were other objects
beyond those he saw; he could not distinguish limits; every thing
seemed to him immense. Although he knew by experience that his chamber
was smaller than the whole house, he could not conceive how he could
see this.

From these facts Condillac draws a confirmation of his system. We are
astonished that he should pretend to found an entire philosophy upon
such data. We submit the following considerations to the reader:

76. The subject is here a youth of thirteen or fourteen years, and
consequently without any habit of observation. He would naturally
express very confusedly the impressions he received in so new and
strange a situation.

The organ of sight must, when exercised for the first time, be
exceedingly weak, and consequently perform its sensitive functions
only in a very imperfect way. We ourselves repeatedly experience that
we cannot, if we suddenly pass from darkness to light, especially if
it be a very strong light, distinguish objects, but we see every thing
in great confusion; what then would happen to a poor child, when at
the age of thirteen years, he for the first time opens his eyes to the
light?

According to Cheselden's own account, objects were presented to him in
such confusion that he could not distinguish them, no matter what their
size or shape. This confirms what we have just said, that the partial,
if not the sole cause of the confusion, was that the organ did not
produce impressions well, because if these had been properly produced,
he would have been able to distinguish the limits of the different
colors; for, in simple sensation, to see is to distinguish.

We are also told that he could not recognize by sight the objects
which he knew by touch. But this only proves that not having been
able to compare the two orders of sensations, he could not know what
corresponded in one to the impressions of the other. By touch he would
have known a spherical body; but as he was still ignorant of the
impression which a globe makes on the eye, it is clear that if any one
should show him a ball which he had handled a thousand times, he would
not even have suspected that the object seen was the same which he had
touched. This leads me to another observation which I consider very
important.

77. The child on whom these experiments were made was obliged to
express his sensations in the visual order, in a language which he did
not understand. For any one who is deprived of one of the senses must
be absolutely ignorant of all the ideas which have their origin in
that sensation. Hence it follows that he knows nothing of the language
relating to that sense, and the ideas which he joins to the words
are entirely different from what those who possess that sense mean
to express. The blind man will speak of colors and the impressions
produced by sight, because he hears others speak of these things; but
for him the word to see does not mean to see, light is not light, nor
color color, as we understand them, but they express different ideas
which he has formed according to the circumstances, in conformity with
the explanations he has heard. What importance then should we attach to
what a child may say who, besides the thoughtlessness natural to his
age, is placed in a situation new to him, and required to express his
ideas in a language which he does not know? He is asked, for example,
if he can distinguish a greater object from another which is smaller,
without considering that the words greater and smaller as he understood
them, inasmuch as they expressed abstract ideas, or were referred to
the sensations of touch, were altogether new to him when applied to
objects seen, since he had no means of knowing what was meant when
referred to a sensation which he experienced for the first time. If
within a circle, a number of smaller circles of a different color were
described, he would see the smaller circles within the circumference of
the greater; but if asked if one appeared greater than the rest, or if
he could distinguish the limits which, separated the smaller circles
from each other, he could not but give very absurd answers, which the
observers might perhaps take as the expression of curious phenomena.
They speak to him of figures, lines, extremities, size, position, and
distances in relation to sight, and as he is ignorant of this language,
yet knows not that he is ignorant of it, he must necessarily talk in a
very strange manner. A more attentive and profound observer would have
perceived the same misunderstanding as when a deaf man disputes without
hearing what was said.

These remarks are further confirmed by the contradiction in the account
of Cheselden. The oculist tells us that the child could not distinguish
the objects, even those which differed most in form and size: but that
he found those most agreeable which were the most regular. He must
then have distinguished them; for otherwise, the sensation could not
have been more or less pleasing. And here in choosing an alternative
in this contradiction, we must hold that he distinguished the objects,
since there is a strong argument in its favor. When two objects,
the one regular, the other irregular, were presented to him, and he
was questioned as to their resemblance and difference, he must have
answered so absurdly as to create the suspicion that he could not
distinguish them. The reason of this is, that besides the confusion of
sensations, to which he was always more or less subject, he was also
ignorant of the language, and although he distinguished the objects
plainly, still he could not understand what he was asked, nor express
what he felt. But when examined as to the nature of the impression
and whether it was pleasing or otherwise, he found himself on a field
common to all sensations, the ideas of pleasure and displeasure were
not new to him, and he could say without confusion, this pleases me;
that is displeasing to me.

To sum up what I have said, I believe that the phenomena of Cheselden's
blind man, only prove that sight, like all the other senses, needs a
certain education, that its first impressions are necessarily confused,
that the organ acquires the proper strength and precision only after
long practice, and finally, that the judgments formed in consequence,
must be very incorrect until comparison, joined with reflection, has
taught how to rectify inaccuracies.[37]

[37] See Book 1, § 56.




