CHAPTER VII.

SPACE.--NOTHING.


42. It may have been remarked in the preceding chapters that the
idea of extension is always united with that of space, and when we
endeavor to determine the _real_ nature of the former, we encounter the
questions which relate to the latter. It is not possible to explain
one, while the other remains in obscurity. It is for this reason that
I have concluded to examine carefully the questions concerning space
under its ideal as well as under its real aspect; since only in this
manner is it possible to determine clearly the nature of extension.

43. Space is one of those profound mysteries which the natural order
presents to man's weak understanding. The deeper he examines it the
more obscure he finds it; the mind is buried in the darkness which
we imagine to exist beyond the bounds of the finite, in the abyss of
immensity. We know not if what we behold is an illusion or a reality.
For a moment we seem to have found the truth, and then we discover that
we have stretched our arms to embrace a shadow. We form arguments
which in any other matter would be conclusive, but are not so here,
because they are in direct contradiction to others equally conclusive.
We seem to have reached the limit which the Creator has put to our
investigations; and in endeavoring to pass beyond it, our strength
fails, for we find ourselves out of the element which is natural to our
life.

When certain philosophers pass rapidly over the questions relating to
space, and flatter themselves with explaining them in a few words,
we can assure them that either they have not meditated much upon
the difficulty which these questions involve, or else they have not
understood them. It was not so that Descartes, Malebranche, Newton, or
Leibnitz proceeded.

To descend this bottomless abyss is not to lose time in useless
discussion; even though we should not find what we seek, we obtain
a most precious result, for we reach the limits assigned to our
intellect. It is well to know what may be known and what cannot; for
from this knowledge philosophy draws high and valuable considerations.
Moreover, though we have small hope of success, we cannot pass over
without examining an idea that is so closely connected with all our
knowledge of corporeal objects, that is to say, extension. There must
be a motive of investigation since all philosophers have investigated
it, and who can say that after long ages of efforts the truth is not
perhaps reserved as the reward of constancy?

44. What then is space? Is it something real or only an idea? If an
idea is there any object in the external world which corresponds to it?
Is it a pure illusion? And is the word space without meaning?

If we do not know what space is, let us at least fix the meaning of the
word, and thus determine in some measure the state of the question. By
space we understand the extension in which we imagine bodies to be
placed, or the capacity to contain them to which we attribute none of
their qualities except extension.

Let us suppose a glass to be hermetically sealed, and the interior to
remain empty by the annihilation of what it contained; this cavity
or capacity which in our way of understanding it may be occupied by
a body is a part of space. Let us imagine the world to be an immense
receptacle in which all bodies are contained; let us suddenly make
it empty and we have a cavity equal in space to the universe. If we
imagine beyond the limits of the world a capacity to contain other
bodies, we have an unlimited or imaginary space.

Space appears to us at first sight, if not infinite, at least
indefinite. For in whatever part we conceive a body to be placed, we
also conceive the possibility of its moving, describing any class of
lines, or taking any kind of direction and departing indefinitely from
its first position. Therefore we imagine no limit to this capacity, to
these dimensions. Therefore space appears to us as indefinite.

45. Is space a pure nothing? Some philosophers maintain that abstracted
from the surface of bodies, and considered as a mere interval, it is
a pure nothing. At the same time they admit that it is only owing to
space that two bodies are really distant from each other, and add that
if we suppose the whole world, with the exception of one body only, to
be reduced to nothing, this body could move and change its place. I am
confident that this opinion involves irreconcilable contradictions. To
say _extension-nothing_ is a contradiction in terms, and the opinion of
these philosophers is reduced to this expression.

46. If every thing in a room be reduced to nothing, it seems impossible
for the walls to remain distant from each other; for the idea of
distance implies a medium between the two objects; and nothing, being
nothing, cannot be the medium required. If the interval is nothing,
there is no distance. To attribute properties to nothing, is to destroy
all ideas,--to affirm that a thing may be and not be at the same
time,--and consequently to overthrow the foundation of human knowledge.

47. To say that if the contents were annihilated, a negative space
would remain, is only to play with words without touching the
difficulty to be solved. This negative space is either something or
nothing; if it is something, the opinion we are opposing is false; if
it is nothing, the difficulty remains the same.

48. But, it may be said, although nothing remains between the surfaces,
they still retain the capacity of containing something. To this I
reply, that this capacity is not in the surfaces themselves, but in
their distance from each other; for if it were in the surfaces, they
would still preserve it, no matter how they may be placed, which is
absurd. We have not therefore advanced a single step. We must explain
what this capacity, or this distance, is; and this is still untouched.

49. Perhaps it may be said that annihilating all that is contained
between the surfaces, does not destroy the volume which they form, and
the idea of this volume implies the idea of capacity. But I reply, that
the idea of volume involves that of distance, and there is no distance
if this distance is a pure nothing.

50. In our efforts to surmount these difficulties, another seemingly
specious solution offers, but if we examine it we shall find it as weak
as the others.

Distance, it might be said, is a mere negation of contact, but negation
is a pure nothing; therefore this nothing is what we seek. I say
this solution is as weak as the others; for, if distance is only the
negation of contact, all distances must be equal, because negation
cannot be greater or less. The negation of contact is the same whether
the surfaces are a million leagues or only the millionth part of an
inch distant from each other. This negation, therefore, explains
nothing, and the difficulty still remains.

51. Not only is the idea of distance not explained by the idea of
contact, but on the contrary, the idea of contact can only be explained
by the idea of distance. Contiguity is explained by immediate union
of two surfaces; we say that they touch each other because there is
nothing between them, or there is no distance. The idea of contact does
not involve the qualities which relate to the senses, nor the action
which one body may exercise upon another which touches it, as impulse
or compression. Contiguity is a negative, and purely geometrical,
idea, and implies only the negation of distance. Contiguity cannot be
greater or less; it is all that it can be when there is a true negation
of distance. Two objects may be more or less distant, but they cannot
touch more or less, with respect to the same parts. There may be
contact of more points, but not more contact of the same points.

52. If we attribute distance and capacity to space, the argument in
favor of its reality becomes still stronger. Let us suppose an empty
sphere two feet in diameter. Within there is only space; if space is
nothing there is nothing in it.

Is motion possible in this empty sphere? It does not seem that there
can be any doubt of this. There is a movable body, an extension
greater than the extension of the body, and a distance to be passed
over. We may add to this, that if motion were not possible, it would
not be possible to make the sphere empty, or after making it empty,
to fill it. Neither emptying nor filling the sphere can be done
without motion of bodies in the interior of the sphere, and motion of
a body in another body is only possible in space, because bodies are
impenetrable, and also because, when the sphere is filled after it is
empty, the body which enters does not meet another body; and when the
sphere is made empty, the body which passes out, moves over the space
which it abandons, and in which nothing remains after it has passed out.

Therefore, supposing the sphere empty, there may be motion in it. But
if the space contained in the sphere is a pure nothing, the motion also
is nothing, and consequently does not exist. Motion can neither exist
nor be perceived without a distance passed over. If, therefore, the
distance is nothing, there is no motion. If we say that the body has
passed over half of the diameter, or one foot, what does this mean? If
the space is nothing, it can mean nothing. I see no reply which can be
made to these arguments, which are all based on the axiom, that nothing
has no properties.

53. However great may be the difficulties opposed to the reality of
space, they are not so great as those which are brought against the
opinion, which, while granting extension to space, still regards it
as a pure nothing. The former, as we shall soon see, are produced by
certain inaccuracies in our way of conceiving things, rather than by
arguments founded on the nature of things; whilst those objections
which we have brought against the opinion denying the reality of space,
are founded on the ideas which are the basis of all our knowledge,
and on this evident proposition: nothing has no properties. If this
proposition is not admitted as an established axiom, the principle of
contradiction falls, and all human knowledge is destroyed. For, it
would be a plain contradiction, if nothing could have any properties
or parts; if any thing could be affirmed of nothing, or could be moved
in nothing; if a science like geometry could be founded upon nothing;
or if all the calculations which are made on nature are referred to
nothing.




