CHAPTER XV.

ILLUSION OF FIXED POINTS IN SPACE.


96. Since space is only the extension of bodies, and there is no
space where there are no bodies, it follows that the extension which
we conceive distinct from bodies, with fixed points and dimensions,
immovable in itself, and the receptacle of all that is movable, is a
pure illusion, and there is nothing in reality corresponding to it.

In order to explain this doctrine and at the same time to solve certain
objections which may be made, it will not be out of place to analyze
the idea which we form of fixedness in relation to space. Because
there are certain immovable points in the world in relation to which
we conceive directions, we form the idea that these points are fixed,
and in relation to them and because of them we imagine fixedness,
immobility, as one of the properties which distinguish this ideal
receptacle which we call space. The four cardinal points, East, West,
North, and South, have had a great influence in producing this idea.
Still it is easy to show that there is no such thing and that it is a
pure illusion.

97. We shall first destroy the fixedness of East and West. Supposing
the earth to have a diurnal motion of rotation on its axis, as
astronomers now hold, the points of East and West, so far from being
fixed, are continually changing their position. Thus, supposing an
observer at the point A of the earth, East to him will be the point B,
and West the point C. If the earth revolves on its axis, the East and
West of the observer will be successively at the points M, N, P, Q,
etc. of the heavenly arch. Although we suppose this arch fixed, East
and West have no fixed meaning.

If we deny the rotation of the earth, the appearances will be the same
as though this rotation existed; and the most that we can say is that
this fixedness is an appearance. Besides, if we suppose the earth to be
at rest, and the heavens to move round it, it is still more impossible
to determine the fixed points of East and West; for, in this case, the
points in the heavens to which we refer them are in continual motion.

We repeat that all this is a mere appearance. If a man who knows not
that the earth is spherical, but imagines it to be a plane surface,
walks from West to East, he will believe that these two points are
immovable, although they are continually changing. He would still
imagine that he was going farther from the place where he started,
although, after passing over the whole circumference of the earth, he
would find himself where he was at first.

98. North and South seem to present greater difficulty, by reason of
their fixedness in relation to us; still it is easy to show that this
is not absolute, but only apparent. Let N and S represent the north
and south poles. If we imagine the earth and the heavens to turn at
the same time from south to north, it is evident that the fixedness
of the points N and S would not exist, and yet the observer A would
believe that every thing was immovable, because the appearances would
be absolutely the same.

To an observer travelling from the equator toward either pole, the pole
would rise over the horizon, while to another who remains in the same
place, the pole would be at rest.

Even in relation to the same position on the earth the altitude of the
pole changes, by the variation of the angle formed by the plane of the
ecliptic with the plane of the equator, which variation is according
to some calculations 8″ in a century, according to others 0″.521 in a
year, or 52′.1″ in a century.

99. It follows from these reflections that the position of bodies
is not absolute, but relative; that one body might exist alone, but
then it would have no position, as this is entirely a relative idea,
and there is no relation in this case, because there is no point of
comparison; and that absolutely speaking there is no such thing as
_above_ or _below_; for although we imagine these to be fixed points,
this imagination is only a comparison which we make between two points:
below being that point toward which we gravitate, and above the
opposite. Thus in the antipodes above is what we call below, and below
what we call above.

100. Direction is impossible without points to which it can be
referred. Therefore, without the existence of bodies, directions are
purely ideal, and if only one body existed, it could have no directions
out of its own extension.

101. Here arises a difficulty apparently serious, but in reality of
little weight. If only one body existed, could God give it motion? To
deny it seems to limit the omnipotence of God; and to concede it is to
destroy all that has been said against space distinct from bodies.

This objection derives its seeming importance from a confusion of
ideas, which is caused by not understanding the true state of the
question. Is this motion _intrinsically impossible_, or is it not? If
it is impossible, there is no reason why we should be afraid to say
that God cannot produce it: for omnipotence does not extend to things
which are contradictory. If the possibility of this motion is admitted,
then we must return to the questions on the nature of space, and
examine whether the reasons on which this impossibility is founded are,
or are not, valid.

The questions relating to omnipotence are out of place here, and this
difficulty can be solved without them. If the impossibility of the
motion is demonstrated, it is no limitation of the omnipotence of
God to say that he cannot produce it, no more than it is when we say
that he cannot make a triangle a circle. If the impossibility is not
demonstrated, then the question of omnipotence does not come in at all.

102. Neither does the argument founded on the existence of vacuum
destroy the doctrine which we have established. Natural philosophers
generally admit vacuum, and suppose it necessary for the explanation of
motion, condensation, rarefaction, and other phenomena of nature. But
to this I reply as follows:

I. The opinions of Descartes and Leibnitz are of weight in what relates
to nature, whether experimental or transcendental, and neither of them
admitted a vacuum.

II. No observation can prove its existence, because disseminated vacuum
would occupy such small spaces that no instrument could reach them, and
also because observation can only be made on those objects which affect
our senses, and we know not but what there may be bodies which, on
account of their excessive tenuity, are not perceptible by the senses.

III. We can determine nothing certain concerning the internal
modifications of matter in motion, condensation, and rarefaction, until
we know the elements of which it is composed.

IV. It is not strange that we are unable to comprehend the phenomena
which seem incompatible with the denial of matter: for we can neither
understand infinite divisibility, nor how extension can be composed of
unextended points.

V. The existence of vacuum is a metaphysical question which does not
belong to the regions of experience, and is not affected by the system
of the sciences of observation.

103. By making the idea of space consist in abstract or generalized
extension we reconcile all that is necessary, absolute, and infinite
in it with its objective reality. This reality is the extension of
bodies, while necessity and infinity are not found in the bodies
themselves, but in the abstract idea. Objects themselves are confined
to the sphere of reality, and are, therefore, limited and contingent.
The objectiveness of the abstract idea includes both the existent and
the possible, and has, therefore, no limits, and is not subject to any
contingency.




