CHAPTER XXV.

HARMONY OF THE REAL, PHENOMENAL, AND IDEAL ORDERS.


178. We may consider two natures in the external world, the one real,
the other phenomenal; the first is particular and absolute, the second
is relative to the being which perceives the phenomenon; by the first
the world is, by the second it _appears_. A pure intellectual being
knows the world as it _is_; a sensitive being experiences it as it
_appears_. We can discover this duality in ourselves; in so far as we
are sensitive beings, we experience the phenomenon, but in so far as
intelligent, although we do not know the reality, we attempt to reach
it by reasoning and conjecture.

179. The external world in its real nature, abstracted from the
phenomenal, is not an illusion. Its existence is known to us not by
phenomena only, but by principles of pure intelligence which are
superior to all that is individual and contingent. These principles,
based on the data of experience,--that is, on sensations the existence
of which we know from consciousness, assure us that the objectiveness
of sensations, or the reality of the external world, is a truth.

180. This distinction between the essential and the accidental, and
between the absolute and the relative, was admitted in the schools.
Extension was considered not as the essence, but as an accident
of bodies; the relations of bodies to our senses are not founded
immediately on their essence, but on their accidents. Matter and
substantial form united constitute the essence of bodies; the matter
receiving the form, and the form actuating the matter. Neither the
matter nor the substantial form can be immediately perceived by the
senses, because this perception requires the determination of figure
and other accidents distinct from the essence of body.

Therefore the scholastics distinguished sensible objects into three
classes; particular, common, and accidental, _proprium, commune, et
per accidens_. The particular is that which appears immediately to
the senses, and is only perceived by one of them, as color, sound,
taste, and smell. The common is that which is perceived by more than
one sense, as figure, which is the object of sight and of touch. The
accidental is that which is not directly perceived by any of the
senses, but is hidden under sensible qualities, by means of which
it is discovered, as are substances. The sensible _per accidens_ is
connected with sensible qualities; but they do not present it to the
understanding as an image presents the original, but as a sign the
signified. Hence they did not consider the sensible _per accidens_ as
proceeding from the _species_ and reducing the sensitive faculty to
act: it was intelligible rather than sensible.

181. In the corporeal universe considered _in its essence_, there
is no necessity of supposing any thing resembling the sensible
representation, but we must suppose the object to correspond to the
idea; for otherwise we should have to admit that geometrical truths may
be contradicted by experience.

182. Although extension is an order of beings of which we cannot form
a perfect conception, because we cannot purify our ideas from all
sensible form, still this order must correspond to our ideas, and even
to our sensible representations, so far as is necessary to prove the
truth of the ideas.

It is evident that although the phenomenal order is distinct from the
real, it depends on it, and is connected with it by constant laws.
If we suppose that there is no parallel between the reality and the
phenomenon, and that the reality has not all the conditions necessary
to satisfy the demands of the phenomenon, there can be no reason why
the phenomena should be subject to constant laws, and why experience
should not suffer continual confusion. Without a fixed and constant
correspondence between the reality and the appearance, the world
becomes a chaos to us, and all regular and constant experience becomes
impossible.

183. Let us examine this at greater length. One of the elementary
propositions of geometry says: "When two straight lines intersect each
other, the opposite or vertical angles, which they form, are equal."
In order to demonstrate this, I must have the internal intuition of
two lines intersecting each other. But the geometrical proposition is
not confined to any particular intuition, but embraces all that can be
imagined, without any limit to their number, or any determination as to
the measure of the angles, the length of the lines, or their position
in space.

Here the pure idea extends to an infinity of cases, whereas the
sensible intuition represents them only one at a time, and isolated
if represented successively. The understanding is not limited to the
affirmation of this relation between the ideas, but applies it to the
reality, and says: Whenever the conditions of this ideal order are
realized, that which I see in my ideas is true in reality, and the
relation expressed will be more or less exact in proportion to the
exactness of the realization of the conditions; the more delicate
the real lines are, that is, the more they approach the condition of
right lines, the nearer will the relation of the two angles approach
to perfect equality. This conviction is founded on the principle of
contradiction, which would be false if the proposition were not true;
and it is confirmed by experience, so far as it touches the conditions
of the ideal order.

184. What is there in reality which corresponds to this proposition? An
existing or real line is an order of beings; two lines which intersect
each other are two orders of beings with a determinate relation; the
angle is the result of this relation, or, rather, it is the relation
itself; the equality of the opposite angle is the correspondence of
these relations in the ratio of equality by the continuation of the
same order in another sense. These relations between the orders and the
beings, and the correspondence of these orders to each other, is what
corresponds in reality to the pure geometrical idea, or to the idea
separated from all sensible representation. Since the relations of the
idea have their corresponding objects in the relations of the reality,
geometry exists not only in the ideal order, but also in the real.
Since the phenomenon or sensible representation is subject to the same
conditions as the idea, because the order of phenomena presents certain
relations of the same nature as the relations of the idea and the fact;
the idea, the phenomenon, and the reality agree, and it is explained
why the intellectual order is confirmed by experience, and experience
receives with confidence the direction it gives.

185. This harmony must have a cause; we must look for a principle which
is the sufficient reason of this wonderful agreement between things so
distinct. Here new problems arise which overwhelm the understanding,
but at the same time expand and invigorate it by the grandeur of the
spectacle presented to its view, and the immensity of the field opened
to its investigations.




