CHAPTER XXIX.

SOLUTION OF TWO DIFFICULTIES.


206. Must not the theory which supposes the relations of bodies to be
variable, put an end to all the natural sciences? Can there be science
without a necessary object? and can there be a necessity which is
compatible with variability?

The natural sciences have two parts: one physical, and the other
geometrical. The first supposes the data furnished by experience;
the second forms its calculations relative to these data. Change the
relations of external beings, and the data will be different, you will
have a new experience producing a new physical science: the calculation
will be the same, only new results will be obtained from the new data.
The difficulty thus disappears. All the physical sciences are based on
observation, all their combinations are made from data furnished by
experience; therefore the physical sciences are not wholly absolute,
but they have a part which is conditional. The theory of universal
gravitation is developed as a body of geometrical science, but it
starts from the data furnished by experience. Destroy these data and
from a body of physical science it becomes a body of pure geometry. In
mechanics, the problems of the composition and decomposition of forces
have a physical signification, inasmuch as they presuppose the data of
experience; suppress these data and there remains only a composition of
lines which mean nothing when we call them forces. Therefore mechanics
is only a system of geometrical applications.

207. Here another difficulty arises which is apparently more serious
than the other. If the relations of bodies are not essential, but are
subject to variation; if our calculations upon them are not founded
upon data which are intrinsically necessary, it seems that geometry
is destroyed, or limited in such a way to the ideal order, that it
cannot be sure that on descending to the field of experience it will
not find that false which it regarded as true, and that true which it
reputed false. For example, the distances of bodies are calculated by
considerations of geometry: if the relation of distance is variable,
and a body may be in many places at the same time, geometry turns out
false. Such a supposition is no more than the application of the
foregoing theory; for, if the relations are variable, this variation
may affect distance, which is only a relation. I said this difficulty
was more serious than the other, because it leaves the field of
experience, and attacks the order of our ideas, an order which we
must hold to be indestructible, unless we wish to give up our reason.
What would become of our reason if geometry were contradicted by the
reality? what would become of an order of ideas in contradiction
to facts? Still I repeat that the force of this difficulty is only
apparent, and if analyzed will be found of no more weight than the
objection which we have already answered.

A body which is a hundred yards distant from another, cannot be only
one yard distant; geometry would be opposed to it. But if the relations
of bodies are variable this proposition can mean nothing with respect
to the reality. Therefore geometry is false. I admit the consequence;
but the principle on which it is based involves a supposition contrary
to my theory. If you alter or destroy the relations of bodies, you
destroy distance, which is a relation, consequently you cannot have
a distance of one hundred yards, nor of one yard, nor any distance
at all, and if there is no distance there is no contradiction. If,
then, you ask how great is the distance between them, your question is
absurd; for it supposes a distance, whereas there is no distance at all.

208. This solution rests on a fundamental principle which we ought
never to lose sight of. Geometrical truth is true in reality when the
conditions of geometry exist in reality; if these conditions do not
exist, there is no real geometry. There is nothing strange in this:
in fact, the same occurs in the purely ideal order; even there,
geometry rests on certain postulates, without which it is impossible.
Two triangles with the same base and altitude are equivalent to each
other. This is a true proposition, but only on the supposition that
there are those orders of points which are called lines, and that the
lines form angles, and are united at three points. If these relations
are not presupposed, the geometrical theorem has no meaning.

209. Geometry in itself, or in the purely ideal order, is founded
on the principle of contradiction. The truth of this principle
being absolutely necessary, that of geometry is equally so. But the
principle of contradiction, like all purely ideal principles, abstracts
existence, and is applied to nothing in practice, unless we suppose
some fact to support it. Yes and no at the same time are impossible;
but the principle determines nothing for or against either of the
extremes. It only affirms that one excludes the other; if we suppose
_yes_, it excludes _no_, and if we suppose _no_, it excludes _yes_;
that is to say, it always needs a condition, a datum which only
experience can furnish.

It is the same with geometry. All its theorems and problems refer to
the ideal field within us, where there are certain conditions which
lead to certain results, by virtue of the principle of contradiction:
whenever the conditions exist, the results are true; but if the former
fail the latter are false. Ideal sciences consider the _connection_ of
conclusions with principles in the order of possibility, but take no
note of facts. If the connection is admitted the science is true.




CHAPTER XXX.

PASSIVE SENSIBILITY.


210. Active sensibility, or the faculty of perceiving by the senses,
has been a subject of great dispute among philosophers. Passive
sensibility, or the capacity of an object to be perceived, is a
question of not less interest.

Can every thing which exists be perceived by the senses?

Before answering this question, let us remember that to be perceived by
the senses may be understood in two ways: First, it may mean, to cause
an impression in a sensitive being; and secondly, to be the immediate
object of sensible intuition. The first is true of every being capable
of producing the impression; the second is true only of those beings
which unite the conditions which the intuition supposes.

211. To produce an impression is simply _to cause_; and causality is
not repugnant to simple beings. There is, therefore, no absurdity in
supposing that pure spirits can produce sensible impressions: were it
otherwise God could not act upon our soul, causing an impression in
it, without the mediation of bodies. This causality cannot be called
passive sensibility; the being which has it is not perceived by the
senses. The relation of the sensation to the being which produces it
would be only that of an effect to its cause.

212. To be the immediate object of sensible intuition, is to be
presented to this intuition as an original to the copy. Under this
view, only the extended can be perceived by the senses; that is to
say, multiplicity combined with continuity is an absolutely necessary
condition of our sensitive faculties in relation to external objects.

213. In this manner, it is a manifest contradiction to say that the
simple can be sensible. Instinct and reason force us to suppose a real
object of sensible intuition. This intuition is referred to the object
as to something essentially composite, belonging to the order which
we call continuity. If we make this object simple, it ceases to be
sensible; and we both affirm and deny its sensible objectiveness. It is
a contradiction to suppose a faculty in act, and at the same time to
deprive it of the conditions to which its action is necessarily subject.

214. It may be said, that there is no necessity of transferring to the
object the conditions of the subject, and therefore a simple object may
be presented to the senses. But this is to elude the question at issue.
For, either the sensible intuition is referred to the object, or it is
not; if it is, the object cannot be simple; if it is not, we fall into
idealism, which we have so often combated in the course of this work.

215. If you answer, that our soul, which is simple, has the
representation of the composite, I reply, that the objective
representation is not the same thing as the subjective perception of
the composite; nor the presentation of the object as multiple the
same thing as the perception of the multiple. Our soul perceives the
multiple, and for this reason must itself be one, or it could not
perceive that which is multiple. So much for the subjective; as to the
objective, we must remark, that our sensible representations do not
always proceed from real objects; but they always refer to objects
which are at least possible; that is to say, the intuition is never
entirely void; and when it has no object in reality, it finds one in
possibility.

216. The external world, as involving multiplicity, or a collection of
many beings, and as susceptible of this order which we call continuity,
may be the object of sensible intuition, as we experience in reality.
But this passive sensibility is not intrinsically necessary to it:
I mean that God could so have disposed the collection of beings
constituting the universe as not to be sensible. This is based on the
variability of the relations of bodies; for, it is evident that if
these relations did not exist, or were not subject to the conditions
required by sensible representation, this representation would be
impossible, and the world not sensible.

217. Experience confirms this conclusion which is obtained from
transcendental philosophy. We find a slight alteration continually
changing sensible bodies into insensible, and making sensible those
that were insensible. The condensation of the air makes it visible; and
its rarefaction invisible. A liquid body is tangible, but it ceases to
be so when converted into vapor. The same variety which is caused by
the alteration of the object may also proceed from a modification of
the organ. A proof of this is found in what happens to the sight when
aided by certain instruments. If, then, these transitions from sensible
to insensible are now possible, without infringement of the fundamental
laws of the relations of bodies, why could there not be a radical
change in these relations which should make bodies wholly insensible?

218. By the variation of the relations of the beings which compose
the corporeal universe, the sensible might become insensible; and, on
the other hand, there are many insensible beings which by a different
arrangement might be made sensible. To a certain extent we have
something besides idle conjectures on this matter: facts speak; in
proportion as the field of experience is expanded, new phenomena are
discovered; thus magnetic attraction, electricity, and galvanism, have
been added to experimental science.

In these phenomena there are agents at work which are not perceptible
to the senses; why may they not be disposed in such way as to be
perceived like other bodies? Where is the limit of these agents? We
know not; but reasoning from analogy we may believe that there are many
others whose existence is not known to us.

The perfection of a sensitive organ by means of instruments, is an
arrangement by which we vary the ordinary system of the relations
of our body to those around us. This perfectibility is indefinite,
and the farther we advance, the greater do we find its extension. It
is therefore probable, that in the universe there are many beings
which are imperceptible to our senses, but which a modification of
our organs, or a change of some of the laws of nature would render
sensible. What a vast field of bold conjectures and sublime meditations!




