CHAPTER XVII.

EXISTENCE OF NEW SENSES.


98. Is it certain that we have only five ways of sensation? I have
some doubts on this point. In order to present them with the greatest
clearness, and solve the questions which they raise, it is well to
settle the meaning of the terms.

What is sensation? In the ordinary acceptation of the word, it is the
perception of the impression transmitted to us by one of the organs of
the five senses. Thus understood it is clearly limited to the action
of the organs, but if considered as expressing a certain class of
animal phenomena, it is the experiencing of any affection produced by
an impression of the organism. Even in common use the word sensation
in its broadest signification is not restricted to the impressions
of the five senses, and although we make a great difference between
_sentiment_ and _sensation_; still we are often forced to confound
them, and to use the word _sensation_ to express things which have
nothing whatever to do with the five senses. Thus we say: "The news
made a great sensation;" "I cannot resist the force of such strong
sensations," etc., in which cases it is evident that there is no
reference to seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, or touching, but to a
different order of affections of the soul.

99. I said we were forced to use the word in the broader meaning;
it is the truth which forces us. For, to the eyes of philosophy,
the phenomenon of sensation consists in the production in the soul
of a particular affection determined by an impression on an organ;
and of whatever order this affection may be, and whatever organ may
be affected, the animal phenomenon is substantially the same. The
difference is in the class of affections and of the organ which is
their medium, the essence of the phenomenon does not change. And if by
sensations we understand such distinct orders of affections as those of
sight and of touch, why may we not include other impressions caused by
any other organ, whatever that organ may be?

100. Whatever use we may make of the word sensation, it is certain that
we experience many affections caused by organic impressions, besides
those of the five senses. What are passions but affections of the soul,
springing from organic impressions? Does not the mere presence of an
object often excite love, anger, pity, joy, grief, and many other
sentiments of the soul?

You may say there is an essential difference between the impressions of
the senses and those of the passions, that the former are independent
of all previous idea and reflection, which the latter more or less
presuppose. Thus, when an object is present to our open eyes, we
cannot but see it and always in the same manner; and yet this object
will excite in us at one time one passion, at another time another, and
sometimes none; and almost always with great difference in the degree
of its intensity. Moreover it is not only the mere presence of the
object which causes an affection, but certain conditions are necessary,
for example; the remembrance of a benefit or of an injury, etc., from
which it is easy to see that there is an essential difference between
the two classes of impressions.

101. If we reflect well upon this objection we shall find that though
it is specious and under many aspects true, it contradicts nothing
which I have asserted. I did not deny that the new impressions were
subject to very different conditions from those that govern the five
senses; but on the contrary I have all along supposed a difference
not only in the class of impressions and the diversity of the organ,
but also in the manner in which the organ is affected, and the
circumstances in which the sensation is produced in the soul. I only
contended that the animal phenomenon was substantially the same, that
we find in it the three things which constitute its nature; a corporeal
object; an organ affected by this object; and an impression produced in
the soul. Because this impression cannot exist without the aid of this
or that idea, this or that recollection, it does not follow that the
phenomenon does not exist, or that it is not the same; it is merely to
impose a new condition, and nothing more.

102. But there is no necessity of admitting that some previous idea
or reflection is requisite in order that the sight of the object may
produce certain impressions in the soul;--daily experience proves
the contrary. How is it that the presence of an object charms in an
instant a tender and perhaps innocent heart? Whence then arises that
sudden fascination which is preceded by no idea, accompanied by no
affection, and is scarce voluntary? Not from the thought of gross
enjoyments; for perhaps he of whom I speak knows not their existence
until he experiences this emotion; he feels for the first time in his
breast a trouble unknown before. We must therefore recur to an organic
affection similar to that which we find in the other senses. Certain
conditions of age and temperament may be requisite, one object may have
been necessary, among a thousand, in particular circumstances, of which
the soul can give no account to itself though affected by them; yet it
is still true that there is an external object, an affection of the
organism, and an impression in the soul, all connected together by a
mysterious, but undeniable bond.

It is easy to discover a series of strong impressions in the phenomena
relating to reproduction; but although they presuppose the action of
some one of the five senses, they nevertheless belong to a different
order. No physiological studies are necessary to prove that these
affections depend on the organization, and that they are greatly
influenced by age, health, temperament, food, climate, and the seasons.

103. There is a difference between sentiments and sensations which,
though it does not change the fact physiologically and psychologically
considered, still greatly modifies it in its intellectual and moral
relations. The passions are commonly excited by an animate and sensible
object, whence it would seem that there is more communication between
mind and mind, between soul and soul, than there is between one body
and another. The sad and mournful appearance not only of a man, but
even of an animal, immediately excites in our breast the sentiment of
compassion, because it expresses the suffering of a living being. This
only proves that nature has mysterious ways by which it transmits to us
the knowledge of hidden things; but this transmission is made by the
medium of a body which affects in some way our organic constitution.
There is here, if you please, a more admirable, more penetrating,
and more spiritual a magic than that of the senses alone; but the
difference is in the degree, not in the nature of the phenomena.

It is certain that living beings, and those of the same species in
particular, are in a constant communication which mutually excites
their affections, and that these affections frequently suppose a
mysterious correspondence with unknown agencies. Physical nature
is full of fluids whose qualities are daily becoming known through
scientific observation. The phenomena of electricity and galvanism have
revealed secrets of which we had no suspicion before. Who can tell
by what means the functions of this vast and complicated system of
animal life, spread over the universe, are performed? It is probable
that there are profound secrets in the correspondence and relation of
organisms and in the way in which they influence one another yet to
be discovered; perhaps they will remain forever veiled to the eyes of
mortality.

104. Is it true that sensible beings can alone excite the passions?
or have not inanimate causes repeatedly affected our organs? Why are
we sometimes joyful and sometimes sad, at some times peaceful and at
others irritable, when we have had no communication with any living
being? It is clear that this depends on the affections of our organism,
and has no relation to the state of other sensible beings.

105. Therefore, besides the impressions caused by the five senses,
there are others which proceed from purely corporeal and inanimate
objects. Besides the phenomena of ordinary sensations, there are others
which differ from them only in the kind of impression and the organ
affected; and there is no more difference between these sensations
and the former than there is between the impressions of one and those
of another of the five senses. Therefore it is not correct to say that
there are only five kinds of sensation.




