CHAPTER IV.

REALITY OF EXTENSION.


27. We now come to more difficult questions. Is extension any thing in
itself, abstracted from the idea of it? If any thing, what is it? Is it
identified with bodies, or is it confounded with space?

I have proved[39] that extension exists outside of ourselves, that it
is not an illusion of the senses; and this solves the first question,
whether extension is any thing.

[39] Book II. Ch. ix.

Whatever may be its nature or our ignorance on this point, there is in
reality something which corresponds to our idea of extension. Whoever
denies this truth must be content to deny every thing except the
consciousness of himself, if indeed he does not experience doubts even
of this too. Whatever idealists may assert, there is not, nor ever was
a man who in his sound judgment seriously doubted the existence of an
external world. This conviction is for man a necessity against which it
is vain to contend.

This external world is for us inseparable from that which is
represented by the idea of extension. It either does not exist, or
else it is extended. If we could be persuaded that it is not extended,
it would not be difficult to convince us that it does not exist. For
my part, I find it just as difficult to imagine the world without
extension as without existence, and if I could be made to believe its
extension an illusion, I should easily believe its existence also an
illusion.

28. It is to be observed that although we confess our ignorance of the
internal nature of extension, it is still necessary to admit that we
know something of it; its dimensions, namely, and what serves as the
basis of geometry. The difficulty is not in knowing what extension
is geometrically considered, but what it is in reality. We know the
geometrical essence, but what we want to ascertain is, whether this
essence realized is something which is confounded with some other real
thing, or is only a quality which we know without knowing the being to
which it belongs. Without this distinction we should deny the basis of
geometry; for, it is evident that if we should not know the essence of
extension in the aforesaid manner, we could not be sure that we are not
building in the air when we raise upon the idea of extension the whole
science of geometry.

29. Thus then under this aspect, we are certain that extension exists
outside of us, and that there are true dimensions. This idea is a
necessary consequence of the idea of the external world, as we said
before. The dimensions in the external world must be subject to the
same principles as those which we conceive, or the very idea which we
have formed of the external world is reversed. I do not mean by this
that a real circle may be a geometrical circle, but only that what is
true of the second must be true of the first also, in proportion as
it is constructed with greater or less exactness. Beyond what can be
formed by the most perfect and exact instruments, I can conceive,
without passing from the order of reality, a circle or any other
figure, as near as I please to the geometrical idea. The sharpest
instrument can never mark an indivisible point, nor draw a line without
breadth; but this surface, on which the point is marked, on the line
drawn, being infinitely divisible, I can conceive a case in which the
reality will come infinitely near to the geometrical idea.

30. Astronomy and all the physical sciences rest on the supposition
that real extension is subject to the same principles as ideal
extension; and that experience comes closer to theory in proportion
as the conditions of the second are more exactly fulfilled in the
first. The art of constructing mathematical instruments, which has been
brought in our day to a surprising perfection, regards the ideal as the
type of the real order; and progress in the latter is the approximation
to the models of the former.

Theory directs the operations of practice, and these in their turn
confirm by the result the foresight of theory. Therefore, extension
exists not only in the ideal order, but also in the real; and it
is something, independently of our ideas; and geometry, that vast
representation of a world of lines and figures, has a real object in
nature.

How far the real corresponds with the ideal, we shall examine in the
next chapter.




CHAPTER V.

GEOMETRICAL EXACTNESS REALIZED IN NATURE.


31. The disagreement which we discover between the phenomena and the
geometrical theory makes us apt to think that reality is rough and
coarse, and that purity and exactness are found only in our ideas.
This is a mistaken opinion caused by want of reflection. The reality
is as geometrical as our ideas; the phenomenon realizes the idea in
all its purity and vigor. Be not startled by this seeming paradox; for
it will soon appear to you a very true, reasonable, and well-grounded
proposition.

We shall first prove that the ideas which are the elements of geometry
have their objects in the real world, and that these objects are
subject to precisely the same conditions as the ideas. This proved, it
clearly follows that geometry in all its strictness exists as well in
the real as in the ideal order.

32. Let us begin with a point. In the ideal order, a point is an
invisible thing, it is the limit of a line and its generating element,
and it occupies a determinate position in space. It is the limit of a
line; for when we take away its length, we have a point remaining which
we are forced to regard as the limit of the line unless we destroy it
entirely so as to have nothing left. The more the line is shortened
the nearer it approaches to a point, yet can never be identified with
it until its length is wholly suppressed. The point is the generating
element of the line; for we form the idea of lineal dimension by
considering a point in motion. The occupation of a determinate position
in space is another indispensable condition of the idea of a point, if
we wish to use it in geometrical figures. The centre of a circle is a
point in itself indivisible, it fills no space; but in order that it be
of any use as centre, we must be able to refer all the radii to it, and
this is impossible unless it occupy a determinate position equidistant
from all points of the circumference. As a general rule, geometry acts
upon dimensions, and these dimensions require points in which they
commence, points through which they pass, and points in which they
end, and by which distances, inclinations, and all that relates to
the position of lines and planes, are measured. Nothing of all this
can be conceived unless the point, although not extended, occupies a
determinate position in space.

33. Does there exist in nature anything which corresponds to the
geometrical point, and unites all its conditions with as great
exactness as science in its purest idealism can desire? I believe there
does.

Philosophers have adopted different opinions as to the divisibility
of matter. Some maintain that there are unextended points in which
the division ends, and that all composite bodies are formed of these.
Others assert that it is not possible to arrive at simple elements,
but the division may continue _ad infinitum_ continually approaching
the limit of composition, but never reaching it. The first of these
opinions is equivalent to the admission of geometrical points realized
in nature; the second, though apparently less favorable to this
realization, must come to it at last.

Unextended molecules are the realization of the geometrical point, in
all its exactness. They are the limit of dimension, because division
ends with them. They are the generative elements of dimension,
because they form extension. They occupy a determinate position in
space, because bodies with all their conditions and determinations
in space are formed of them. Therefore, from this opinion, held by
eminent philosophers like Leibnitz and Boscowich, it follows that the
geometrical point exists in nature in all the purity and exactness of
the scientific order.

The opinion which denies the existence of unextended points, admits, as
it necessarily must admit, infinite divisibility. Extension has parts,
and therefore is divisible; these parts, in their turn, are either
extended or not extended; if unextended, the supposition fails, and
the opinion of unextended points is admitted; if extended, they are
divisible, and we must either come at last to unextended points, or
continue the division _ad infinitum_.

I remarked above that, although less favorable to the real existence of
geometrical points, this opinion as well as the other does acknowledge
their realization. The parts into which the composite is divided are
not created by the division, but exist before the division, and without
them the division would be impossible. They do not exist because they
may be divided, but they may be divided because they exist. This
opinion therefore, does not expressly admit the existence of unextended
points, but it admits the possibility of eternally coming nearer to
them, and this not only in the ideal, but also in the real order;
because the divisibility is not affirmed of the ideas, but of the
matter itself.

Although our experience of division is limited, divisibility itself
is unlimited. A being endowed with greater powers than we possess,
might carry the division further than we are able to do. Our ability
to divide is limited, but God, by his infinite power, can push the
division _ad infinitum_, and His infinite intelligence sees in an
instant all the parts into which the composite may be divided.

Omitting the difficulties which attend an opinion which seems to
suppose the existence of what it denies, I will ask if geometry can
require more rigorous exactness than is found in the points to which
infinite power can come, if we suppose it to exercise its eternal
action in dividing the composite; or, in other words, can there be
any more strictly geometrical points than those seen by an infinite
intelligence in an infinitely divisible being? This not only satisfies
our imagination and our ideas of exactness, but goes even beyond.
Experience teaches us that to _imagine_ an unextended point is not
impossible; and to _think_ it in the purely intellectual order, is only
to conceive the possibility of this infinite divisibility, and to be
suddenly placed at the last limit,--a limit which must still be far
distant from that to which, not abstraction, but the sight of infinite
intelligence can reach.

If the geometrical point exists, the geometrical line also exists; for
it is only a series of unextended points; or, if we are unwilling to
acknowledge these, a series of extremes to which division infinitely
continued at last arrives. A series of geometrical lines forms a
surface; and a union of surfaces forms a solid, the ideal order
agreeing with reality in its formation as in its nature.

34. This theory of the realization of geometry extends equally to all
the natural sciences. It is an error to say, for example, that the
reality does not correspond to the theories of mechanics. It should
rather be said that it is not the reality that is at fault, but the
means of experimenting; the blame should not be imputed to the reality,
but rather to the limitation of our experience.

The centre of gravity in a body, is the point where all the forces
of gravitation in the body unite. Mechanics supposes this point to
be indivisible, and in accordance with this supposition, establishes
and demonstrates its theorems, and solves its problems. Here stops
the mechanician, and the machinist begins, who can never discover the
strict centre of gravity supposed in the theory. Experience disagrees
with the principles, and we ought to correct the former by adhering to
that which is determined by the latter. Is this because the centre of
gravity does not exist in nature with all the exactness which science
supposes? No; the centre exists, but the means of finding it are
wanting. Nature goes as far as science; neither remains behind; but our
means of experience are unable to keep up with them.

The mechanician determines the indivisible point in which the centre
of gravity is situated, supposing the surface without thickness,
lines without breadth, and the length divided at a determinate point
of space, which has no extension. Nature entirely fulfills these
conditions. The point exists, and the reality should not be blamed
for the limitation of our experience. The point exists in either of
the hypotheses mentioned above. The first, which favors unextended
points, admits the existence of the centre of gravity in all its
scientific purity. The other is not so decided, but it says to us: "Do
you see this molecule, this little globe of infinitesimal diameter,
the smallness of which the imagination cannot represent? Make it still
smaller, by dividing it for all eternity, in decreasing geometrical
progression, and you will always be coming nearer the centre of gravity
without ever reaching it. Nature will never fail; the limit will ever
retire from you; but you will know you are approaching it. Within this
molecule is what you seek. Continue to advance, you will never reach
it,--but what you want is there." In this case I do not see that the
reality falls short of scientific exactness; no mechanical theory
imagined or conceived can go farther.

35. These reflections place beyond all doubt that geometry with all
its exactness, and theories in all their rigor, exist in nature. If we
could follow it in our experience, we should find the real conformed
to the ideal order, and we should discover that when experience is
opposed to theory, it is not the latter which is wrong, but the
limitation of our means makes us lay aside the conditions imposed by
the theory. The machinist who constructs a system of indented wheels
finds himself obliged to correct the rules of theory, on account of
friction, and other circumstances, proceeding from the material which
he employs. If he could see with a glance the bosom of nature, he would
discover in the friction itself a new system of infinitesimal gearing
which would confirm with wonderful exactness those very rules which a
rude experience represents to him as opposed to reality.

36. If the universe is admirable in its masses of gigantic immensity,
it is not less so in its smallest parts. We are placed between two
infinities. Man in his weakness, unable to reach either one or the
other, must content himself with feeling them, hoping that a new
existence in another world will clear up the secrets which are now
veiled in impenetrable darkness.




