CHAPTER XXXI.

POSSIBILITY OF A GREATER SPHERE IN ACTIVE SENSIBILITY.


219. Having treated of passive sensibility in the order of possibles,
a similar question naturally arises with respect to the active
sensibility of beings subject to different conditions from those of our
soul while united to the body.

I speak only of possibility, for, limited to what experience teaches
us, we know not what may be in the sphere of beings with which we have
no communication. Whatever we know of them is by divine revelation; and
the object of revelation is not to teach us philosophy, but virtue.

220. To examine how far active sensibility is possible in an order
different from that of our experience, not only raises curious and
interesting questions, but it also gives an opportunity to explain
by new reflections, the nature of this phenomenon in its relations to
bodily organization. There is a special reason why we should seek to
investigate this question. It consists in the interest inspired by
every thing which relates to a state of existence into which we must
soon enter. Short are the moments allotted to man to dwell in this
world. We all hasten with astonishing rapidity to the final instant
when the fragile organization which envelops our mortal spirit shall
dissolve, and crumble into dust,--when the being which feels, thinks,
and wills within us, shall pass to a new state, and be separated from
the bodily organization. What will then be its faculties? This is a
question which we cannot be indifferent to; for it concerns us, and the
state of our future existence.

221. If we are asked whether a pure spirit is capable of sensible
perception, we must answer negatively; because we are treating of
active sensibility, which is not possible without the mediation of a
body. I believe that some explanation of the question may be given. But
we must first of all determine the meaning of the words. Sometimes we
understand by a pure spirit, one which is not united to a body; but,
more strictly speaking, the term is confined to a spirit which neither
is united to a body, nor destined to this union. Thus the human soul is
a spirit, but not a pure spirit; for it is either actually united to a
body or is destined to this union.

It might appear at first sight that as we are limiting ourselves to
the sphere of possibility, there is no difference between the two
acceptations of the term; for, if it is not essentially repugnant to
the soul when separated from the body, to have sensible intuition, it
will not be so to other spirits. The parity is not certain; still, for
the present, when speaking of pure spirits in general, I shall include
souls separated from bodies.

222. What do we understand by sensing? This word may mean two things.
It may mean the receiving of an impression by means of bodily organs;
or it may mean simply the experiencing of the impression, independently
of the bodily organ. For example: I see an object. Here is the
affection called _seeing_, and the mechanism by which the object
transmits light to the retina, and a certain impression to the brain.
These are two very different things; the first is a fact of my mind;
the second a modification of my body.

223. If by sensing is meant the receiving of the impression of a bodily
organ, it is clear that a spirit which has no body cannot sense; but
if by it is meant only the subjective affection abstracted from the
medium by which it is produced or communicated, then the question is
different, and the existence or non-existence of bodies cannot affect
its answer either affirmatively or negatively.

224. The question then becomes this: Can a pure spirit have the various
affections and representations which we call sensible?

Simplicity is not opposed to the sensitive faculty. Our soul senses,
and still it is simple. The body aids it in the exercise of the
sensitive faculties; but this aid is instrumental, not, however, in
such a manner that the soul senses _by the body_, as an action is
performed by means of the instrument. That which senses is the soul
itself, and the instrumental action of the body consists in providing
certain conditions from which sensation follows, by a physical or
occasional influx. Therefore, the simplicity of a pure spirit is no
argument against the sensitive faculties. Such an argument would prove
too much; consequently, it proves nothing.

225. Hence there would be no _intrinsical_ repugnance in God
communicating to a pure spirit sensitive faculties; whether
representative like those which place us in relation with the corporeal
world, or purely subjective, like those of pleasure or pain.

226. Although in the present order these functions depend on certain
conditions to which bodies are subject, considered in themselves,
inasmuch as they are a modification of the soul, they have no essential
relation to the corporeal world. It would therefore seem contrary to
the principles of sound philosophy to say, that the soul separated
from the body could not experience affections similar to those it has
in this life. If this is not repugnant to the soul in its separate
existence, why should it be so to other spirits?

The sensitive faculties are a sort of inferior order of perception.
We see them in beings united to bodies, but they are not exercised
immediately by a bodily organ. So far from contradicting simplicity,
they require it; and therefore we have seen[58] that matter is
incapable of sensation. Many grave philosophers are of opinion that the
causality of bodies with respect to sensations, is only occasional.
This opinion is founded on the difficulty of explaining how a composite
being can produce affections of any kind in a simple being. Instead
of a repugnance between simplicity and the sensitive faculties, there
is, on the contrary, a necessary connection. No composite being can be
sensitive.

[58] B. II., Ch. II.

227. Perhaps it may now be thought that there is no longer any doubt of
the possibility of sensation independently of the bodily organs; and
that to hold the contrary, it would be necessary to maintain that God
can not produce immediately that which he produces by means of second
causes. The observations which we have made may seem to have exhausted
the matter, but if we reflect on it, we shall find that we have scarce
entered on it.

It must not be forgotten that we are examining the possibility of
sensitive faculties, in relation to one attribute only, that of
simplicity. This greatly limits the question, as it leaves it to be
solved under one aspect only. Simplicity is a negative property. When
we say that any thing is simple, we deny that it has parts, but we
affirm none of its properties; we say what it is not, not what it is.
Therefore, in maintaining that sensitive faculties are not repugnant to
a pure spirit, we ought to restrict the proposition; we should express
our meaning more exactly, if instead of saying "sensitive faculties are
not repugnant to a pure spirit," we should say, "sensitive faculties
are not repugnant to the _simplicity_ of a pure spirit."

228. This last observation seems to me to present the question in its
true point of view. Any other expression of it seems only to confuse
ideas and raise problems which we have not sufficient data to solve.
In fact, how do we know but what the repugnance which does not exist
between sensibility and simplicity, may exist between sensibility and
some attribute which we know nothing about? This argument is not valid
for the human soul, because we already know that the soul is capable of
sensing; but it is valid for other spirits, whose essence is unknown to
us, and the character of whose perceptive faculties experience has not
discovered to us.

229. One of the distinctive marks of sensitive perception is the
reference to individual objects, not in what concerns their essence,
but inasmuch as they are arranged in a certain order, the variations
of which do not affect their internal nature. Extension itself, which
both instinct and reflection teach us to regard as objective, is rather
a result of the relations of the beings which form the composite
extended object, than those beings themselves. The sensitive faculties
are the lowest grade in the order of perception. Their sole function
is to make known to their possessor a certain arrangement of external
objects, but they teach him nothing concerning the nature of those
objects. Pure spirits are a grade higher in the scale of perceptive
beings, and one of the characteristics of intelligence is, that it
penetrates to the inward nature of things. Therefore it might easily
happen that the sensible faculties are repugnant to intelligences of
a higher order than ours, not by reason of their simplicity, but on
account of the different manner of their perception.

230. Reasoning by analogy from what takes place within ourselves, we
are confirmed in this opinion. Sensible representations are often
powerful auxiliaries to purely intellectual perception; but they just
as often embarrass and confuse it. In meditating on very abstract
matters sensible representations are a hinderance to the understanding,
from which we should be glad to free ourselves. Every one has
experienced this to be so. They are like shadows which come between
the eye of the intellect and the object: the necessity of continually
removing them delays and weakens our perception. Thus, we propose, for
example, to think of causality. No sensible representation should find
place in this idea in the abstract, yet in spite of all our efforts
the representation haunts us. At one time it is the word _causality_,
written or spoken; at another, the image of a man doing something,
or of any other agent. The sensible representation is always in our
way, and we cannot free ourselves from its presence. The understanding
is forced to repeat continually to itself, "This is not the idea of
causality; it is only an image, a comparison, an expression;" in order
to defend itself against illusions, which would make it confound the
particular with the universal, the contingent with the necessary, the
phenomenal with the real.

231. We must conclude from this that a repugnance of sensitive
faculties to the nature of a pure spirit, might proceed from the
character of its intelligence, which by reason of its perfection
rejects the duality of perception which exists in us. The object of
the understanding is the essence of the thing understood, _quidditas_,
as the scholastics called it. Sensible representations tell us nothing
of this essence. They offer only one aspect of things, and even this
is limited to the perception of extension; for as regards the other
sensations, they are a subjective fact which instinct and reason teach
us to attribute to external causes, rather than a perception of the
real disposition of things.

232. This suggests another observation which supports the conjecture
that the elevation of intelligence above a certain degree makes it
incompatible with sensitive faculties. Sensations would tell us nothing
even of this aspect and disposition of things if they did not have
extension for their basis. To what should we reduce the corporeal world
if we supposed it unextended? Since extension, as we have shown,[59]
although the basis of some sensations, is not the direct and immediate
object of sensation; that which in the sensitive faculties makes us
perceive something of the reality of objects, is not strictly sensible.
Therefore, if it is the character of intellectual perception to know
the reality of the object, the more elevated an intelligence is the
farther it will be from sensation, and there may be a subject in which
intellectual faculties are incompatible with sensitive faculties.

[59] Ch. II.

233. We shall better understand the force of this observation by
casting a glance at the scale of beings, and noting the difference in
them in proportion to their perfection. The isolation of a being is a
mark of its imperfection. The lowest idea of an object is that which we
form when we conceive it absolutely limited to existence, completely
inert, without either internal or external activity. A stone has
existence and a determinate form; it is what it was made, and nothing
more; it preserves the form which was given to it, but it has no
activity to communicate with other beings, no consciousness of what it
is; in all its relations it is passive; it receives but cannot give.

234. In proportion as beings rise in the scale of perfection, this
isolation ceases; active properties are combined with the passive;
such we conceive to be the corporeal agents, which, although they do
not reach the category of _living beings_, take an active part in the
production of phenomena in the laboratory of nature. In these beings we
find besides what they _are_, what they _can do_; their relations with
other beings are many and varied; their existence is not confined to
the circle of their own existence; but it expands and is communicated
in some way to others.

235. In organized beings we find a more expansive nature. Their life
is a continual expansion. The living being extends in a measure beyond
the limits of its own existence; for it bears within it the germs of
its reproduction. Its existence is not for itself alone, but for others
also. It is only an imperceptible link in the great chain of nature;
but the vibrations of this link are felt in the remotest confines of
the universe.

236. Life is still more extended when it becomes sensation. The
sensitive being contains in himself, as it were, the universe. By the
consciousness of its affections, it places itself in new relations
with all that acts upon it. Perception is immanent, that is to say,
it remains in the subject, but with the subjective is combined the
objective, by which the universe is reflected on a point. Being does
not then exist in itself alone, it becomes in some manner other things.
There is a profound truth in the expression of the scholastics:
"That which knows is the thing known." There is a certain order in
sensations; they are more perfect in proportion as they are less
subjective; the most noble are those which place us in communication
with objects considered in themselves,--those which are not limited
to the experience of what the objects cause in us, but include the
knowledge of what the objects are.

237. Extension is the basis of the objectiveness of sensations, but it
is not the direct and immediate object of sensation. Although extension
teaches us something of the reality of beings as regards a certain
arrangement of them among themselves, it is not so much the object of a
sensitive faculty as of intelligence. Here sensation ceases and science
commences. Science is not satisfied with what the objects appear. It
penetrates to the reality; the understanding does not stop with the
subjective, but passes to the objective, and when it cannot reach the
reality, it wanders in the regions of possibility.

238. Thus we see that the perfection of beings is in proportion to
their expansion. Accordingly as they are more perfect, they go farther
out of their own sphere, and exercise a more extended activity. Hence
the highest degree of perception is the least subjective; the lowest is
sensation, which is limited to the experience of the sentient subject.
Intelligence which is the highest degree, abstracts experience, and
gives its whole attention to reality, its proper object.

239. If we could know the intimate nature of pure spirits, perhaps we
should find that the sensitive faculties are altogether incompatible
with the elevation of their intelligence, and that the analogy founded
on the nature of our perceptions has no value when applied to a more
perfect order of intelligence. However this may be, we must admit that
the question would have been solved in a very incomplete way, if we had
limited it to the single aspect of simplicity. These observations on
the nature of intelligence ought to make us very cautious in affirming
to be possible, what we should perhaps see to be impossible, if our
knowledge of the nature of things were greater.

240. So far we have spoken only of the _intrinsical possibility_; what
shall we say of the reality? This is a question of fact which can only
be solved on data which our experience is unable to furnish, as we are
not in immediate communication either with souls separated from bodies,
or with pure spirits.

241. If we wish to look for an argument to prove that pure spirits
and souls after they are separated from bodies, have no sensitive
faculties, we shall find it in the consideration of the end to which
these faculties are destined, better than by attempting to discover
the essence of things. The body, to which the soul is united in this
life, is an organization subject to the general laws of the corporeal
universe. In order that the soul may rightly exercise its functions,
it must be in constant communication with its own body and the bodies
around it; it must have sensible intuition of the relations of
bodies; it must be notified by pain of any disorder which occurs in
its body, and guided by the sentiment of pleasure as by an instinct
which, directed and moderated by reason, may point out to it what is
profitable or necessary. When the soul is no longer united to the body,
there is no reason why it should have these affections, as it does not
require to be directed in its acts. As this applies equally to pure
spirits, we may form a conjecture as to the cause of the difference
which there must be between the state of our soul in this life, and
that of spiritual beings which are not united to bodies.

This argument, deduced from the final cause, is not to be considered as
a proof; at best it is only a conjecture: for we do not know how far
the soul in its separate existence, or pure spirits, may be in relation
with bodies; and consequently, we do not know whether these sensible
affections would be useful or necessary for ends of which we have no
conception. And even supposing that neither the soul nor pure spirits
have any relations with bodies, we are far from sure that sensible
affections would be useless to them. On the contrary, so far as we can
form an opinion on the subject, it seems that to take from the soul its
imagination and sensation, would be to deprive it of two of its most
beautiful faculties; for they not only assist the understanding, but
are often a strong motive of its acts.

242. It is difficult for us to form an idea of pleasure or pain,
without sensible affections. In the purely intellectual will, we
conceive only _willing_ and _not willing_, acts of a most simple
relation, which do not have for us the same meaning as a pleasant or
unpleasant affection. We often wish a thing in which we experience
pain; and as often find pleasure in what we do not wish. Therefore to
wish and not to wish do not imply pleasure and displeasure, but are
independent of these affections and may exist in opposition to them.

243. It might be said that the cause of this discord is in the
disagreement of the sensitive with the intellectual faculties. This
is true, but it proves nothing against what I have been saying. The
purely intellectual will, in opposition with the sensible affections,
does not involve pleasure or exclude pain. The will triumphs, it is
true, but it does so by virtue of its freedom. Its triumph is like
that of a master obliged to exact obedience by severe punishment, who
experiences pain at the very time when he is obtaining the execution of
his commands. Who can tell, then, whether the will, after this life,
will be accompanied by affections similar to those which it now has,
but purified from the grossness of the body which weighs down the soul?
I see no intrinsical impossibility in it. If questions of philosophy
could be solved by sentiment, I should not hesitate to express my
opinion that this fair and noble union of faculties which we call the
heart, does not go down to the grave, but flies with the soul to the
regions of immortality.

244. As to the imagination,--that mysterious faculty which not only
gives life to the real world, but possesses an inexhaustible activity
in creating new worlds of its own, displaying before the eyes of the
soul rich and splendid panoramas; why should it desert the soul on
its separation from the body? Why may not the harmony of nature be
perceived in a similar manner hereafter? Let us not advance opinions
on secrets of which we are ignorant, but, at the same time, let us
beware of setting bounds to the omnipotence of God. Sound philosophy
should not multiply opinions beyond measure; but neither should
it circumscribe within the limits of human reason the sphere of
possibility.




