CHAPTER XI.

FENELON'S OPINION.


72. Clarke's opinion is very similar to that of Fenelon, who in his
_Treatise on the existence and attributes of God_, explains immensity
in a very surprising manner. He says: "After considering the eternity
and immutability of God, which are the same thing, I ought to examine
his immensity. Since he is by himself, he is sovereignly, and since he
is sovereignly, he has all being in himself. Since he has all being
in himself, he has without doubt extension; extension is a manner of
being, of which I have an idea. I have already seen that my ideas upon
the essence of things, are real degrees of being, which actually exist
in God, and are possible out of him, because he can produce them.
Therefore, extension is in him; he can produce it outside of himself,
only because it is contained in the fulness of his being."

To a certain extent the words of Fenelon may be explained in a sense
which most theologians would not reject. They distinguish two classes
of perfections; those which involve no imperfection; such as wisdom,
holiness, and justice; and those which involve imperfection, as,
for example, all which belong to bodies, extension, form, etc. The
former, which are also called perfections _simpliciter_, are in God
_formaliter_; that is to say, just as they are, because their nature
involves no kind of imperfection, and, therefore, in God, they do not
diminish nor tarnish his infinite perfection. Those of the second
class, which are called perfections _secundum quid_, are in God not
_formaliter_; for the imperfection which they involve is repugnant to
his infinite perfection, but _virtualiter_ or _eminenter_; that is to
say, that all the perfection, all the being which they contain is in
God, who is infinite perfection, infinite being; and God can produce
them exteriorly by his creative omnipotence. But inasmuch as they
pre-exist in an infinite being, they are freed from all limitation and
imperfection, and identified with the infinite essence, and have a mode
of being far superior to what they are in reality. This is expressed by
the term _eminenter_.

Among these perfections _secundum quid_, extension has always been
numbered.

73. If the illustrious Archbishop of Cambrai had held to this sense, we
should have nothing to say in relation to his doctrine, but the words
which follow seem to show that he inclined to the opinion of those who
maintain that space is the immensity of God.

"Whence, then," he adds, "is it that I do not call him extended and
corporeal? It is because there is an extreme difference, as I have
already remarked, between attributing to God all that is positive in
extension, and attributing to him extension with a limit or negation.
_He that places extension without limits changes extension into
immensity_; he who places extension with limits, makes a corporeal
nature." From these words it might be believed that Fenelon did not
distinguish the two modes of being of extension as theologians do; but
he gives to God all that is positive in extension, though he gives
it to him without limit. From this it would seem to follow that God
is really extended, although his extension is infinite. With all the
respect due to the illustrious shade of one of the greatest ornaments
of the Catholic Church, and one of the greatest men of modern times, I
must say that such an opinion does not seem to me to be sustainable. A
God really extended though with an infinite extension is not God. That
which is extended is essentially composite; God is essentially simple.
Therefore, God and extension are contradictory.

74. But let us hear the illustrious prelate continue the explanation
and defence of his opinion. He says: "From the moment that you place
no limit to extension, you take from it figure, divisibility, motion,
and impenetrability;--figure, because this is only a mode of limiting
by surfaces;--divisibility, because, as we have seen, that which
is infinite cannot be diminished, therefore, it cannot be divided,
and consequently, it is not _composite_ and divisible;--motion,
because, if you suppose a whole, which has no parts nor limits,
it cannot move beyond its place, because there can be no place
beyond the true infinite; neither can it change the arrangement and
situation of _its parts_, because it has _no parts_ of which it is
composed;--impenetrability, in fine, because impenetrability can only
be conceived by conceiving two limited bodies, one of which is not the
other, and cannot occupy the same space as the other. There are no two
such bodies in infinite and indivisible extension; therefore there is
no impenetrability in this extension. These principles established,
it follows that all that is positive in extension is in God, although
God has no figure, is not movable, divisible, or impenetrable, and
consequently is not palpable, nor measurable."

From this passage it is very evident that Fenelon was far from
imagining a composite God, a God with parts. He expressly denies it
more than once in these few lines. Not less was to be looked for from
his deep penetration and the purity of his doctrines; but, although
this saves the rectitude of his intention, it does not satisfy
philosophical exactness. For my part, I honestly confess that if
extension is to be taken in its true sense, I cannot conceive how
taking away its limits destroys its parts. On the contrary, I should
rather say that an infinite extension would have infinite parts. If it
is infinite it will have no figure; because figure involves a limit;
but if it be true extension, it is a sort of immense field on which all
imaginable figures may be traced. It will have no essential figure of
its own, but it will be the recipient of all figures, the inexhaustible
sea from which they all arise. That which is traced in it, will be in
it; the points which terminate the figures must be in it. Is not this
to have parts, composition? Infinite extension could have no figure,
not because it has no parts, or is simple, but because it has infinite
parts, because its composition is infinite.

I agree that an infinite extension would not be divisible, if by
dividing, is meant separating; because in that immense fulness
everything would be in its position with infinite firmness. So also
we imagine space, the place of all motion, with its parts immovable,
the field of all separation, with its parts inseparable; but we are
treating of division, not of separation. If there is true extension, it
is divisible; we conceive space with its parts inseparable, but still
divisible; for we measure them, count them, and it is by relation to
them that we form an idea of the size, distance, and motion of bodies.

74. Such clear and conclusive reflections could not fail to present
themselves to the mind of the illustrious philosopher; but he seems
to have preferred inconsequence or obscurity of language to the fatal
corollaries of his first proposition. He said plainly and without any
restriction, that all that is positive in extension, except the limit,
is in God. He had asserted that extension with limits is corporeal, and
that to change extension into immensity it was only necessary to take
away its limits. He consequently attributed to God a true, although
infinite, extension, and then wishing to explain and strengthen
his doctrine he tells us that this extension has no parts. What is
extension without parts? Who can conceive it? Does not extension
necessarily imply an order of things of which some are outside of
others. It has been always so understood. To speak of an extension
without parts is to speak of an extension improperly so called. When
speaking of such extension it is not enough to say it has no limits,
it should be added that it is of an entirely different nature, that
the word extension is used in another sense. Fenelon seemed to know
this, when, notwithstanding the obscurity of his former expressions,
elevated on the wings of his religion and his genius, he says: "God is
in no place, as in no time; for his absolute and infinite being _has
no relation to place or time_, which are but limits and restrictions
of being. To ask if he is beyond the universe, if he exceeds its
extremities in length, breadth, and depth, is as absurd a question as
to ask if he was before the world, and if he will still be when the
world is no more. As there is neither past nor future in God, so there
is neither hither nor thither. As his absolute permanence excludes all
measure of succession, so also his immensity excludes all measure of
extension. He has not been, he will not be, but _he is_. In the same
manner, to speak properly, he is not here, he is not there, he is not
beyond such a limit, but he is, absolutely. All expressions which
place him in relation to any term, or fix him in a certain place, are
improper and unbecoming. Where then is he? He is. He is in such a
manner that we must not ask where. That which only half is, or with
limits, is a certain thing in such a way that it is nothing else. But
God is not any particular and restricted thing. He is all; he is being;
or better and more simply, _he is_. For the fewer words we use, the
more we say. _He is._ Beware of adding any thing to this."

76. While reading these magnificent words, I am carried away by the
elevation and grandeur of his ideas of God and of his immensity, and
I forget the objections to the first proposition, which, if not false
or inexact, is not, to say the least, expressed with all the clearness
that could be desired. Still, I do not hesitate to maintain that his
opinion coincides with Clarke's; although the illustrious writer,
Christian, and poet, seem to merit a pardon for the philosopher.




