CHAPTER XXIII.

UNEXTENDED POINTS.


166. There are two strong arguments against the existence of unextended
points: the first is, that we must suppose them infinite in number, for
otherwise it does not seem possible to arrive at the simple, starting
from the extended: the second is, that even supposing them infinite in
number they are incapable of producing extension. These arguments are
so powerful as to excuse all the aberrations of the contrary opinion,
which, however strange they may seem, are not more strange than the
simple forming extension, and the smallest portion of matter containing
an infinite number of parts.

167. It does not seem possible to arrive at unextended points unless by
an infinite division. The unextended is zero in the order of extension,
and in order to arrive at zero by a decreasing geometrical progression
it must be continued _ad infinitum_. Mathematical calculation presents
a sensible image of this. When two parts are united they must have a
side where they touch, and another where they are not in contact.
If we separate the interior side from the exterior we have two new
sides, one which touches and another which does not. Continuing the
division the same thing happens again; we must, therefore, pass
through an infinite series in order to arrive at the unextended,
which is equivalent to saying that we shall never arrive there. To
continue the division _ad infinitum_ we must suppose infinite parts,
and consequently the existence of an actual infinite number. From the
moment that we suppose this infinite number to exist it seems to become
finite, since we already see a limit to the division, and also other
numbers greater than it. Let us suppose that this infinite number of
parts is found in a cubic inch; there are numbers which are greater
than this which we suppose infinite; a cubic foot, for example, will
contain 1,728 times the infinite number of parts contained in the cubic
inch.

Thus the opinion of unextended points seeking to avoid infinite
division, runs into it; just as its adversaries trying to escape from
unextended points are forced to acknowledge their existence. The
imagination loses itself and the understanding is confused.

168. The other objection is not less unanswerable. Suppose we have
arrived at unextended points, how shall we reconstitute extension? The
unextended has no dimensions; therefore, no matter how many unextended
points we may take, we can never form extension with them. Let us
imagine two points to be united, as neither of them alone occupies
any place, neither will they both together. We cannot say that they
penetrate each other; for penetration cannot exist without extension.
We must admit that these parts being zero in the order of extension,
their sum can never give extension, no matter how many of them we may
add together.

169. It is certain that a sum of zeros can give only zero for the
result, but mathematicians admit that there are certain expressions
equal to zero, which multiplied by an infinite quantity will give a
finite quantity for the product. 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 + N × 0 = 0; but if we
take 0/M = 0, and multiply it by the expression M/0 = 0, we shall have
(0/M) × (M/0) = (0 × M)/(M × 0) = 0/0 which is equal to any finite
quantity, which we may express by A. This is shown by the principles of
elementary algebra only; if we pass to the transcendental we have dz/dx
= o/o = B; B expressing the differential coefficient which may be equal
to a finite value. Can these mathematical doctrines serve to explain
the generation of the extended from unextended points? I think not.

It is evident that, multiplication being only addition shortened, if
an infinite addition of zeros can give only zero; multiplication can
give no other result, although the other factor be infinite. Why then
do mathematical results say the contrary? This contradiction is not
true, but only apparent. In the multiplication of the infinitesimal by
the infinite we may obtain a finite quantity for product, because the
infinitesimal is not regarded as a true zero, but as a quantity less
than all imaginable quantities, but still it is something. If this
condition were wanting, all the operations would be absurd, because
they would turn upon a pure nothing. Shall we therefore say that the
equation, dz/dx = o/o, is only approximate? No; for it expresses the
relation of the limit of the decrement, which is equal to B only
when the differentials are equal to zero. But as geometricians only
consider the limit in itself, they pass over all the intervals of the
decrement, and place themselves at once at the point of true exactness.
Why then operate on these quantities? Because the operations are a
sort of algebraic language, and mark the course that has been followed
in the calculations, and recall the connection of the limit with the
quantity to which it refers.

170. Unity which is not number produces number; why then cannot points
without extension produce extension? There is a great disparity between
the two cases. The unextended, as such, involves only the negative
idea of extension; but in unity, although number is denied, this
negation does not constitute its nature. No one ever defined unity
to be the negation of number, yet we always define the unextended to
be that which has no extension. Unity is any being taken in general,
without considering its divisibility; number is a collection of
unities; therefore the idea of number involves the idea of unity, of
an _undivided_ being, number being nothing more than the repetition
of this unity. It belongs to the essence of all number that it can be
resolved into unity; it contains unity in a determinate manner. But the
extended can not be resolved into the unextended, unless by proceeding
_ad infinitum_, or else by some process of decomposition which we know
nothing of.




