CHAPTER XII.

CAN SIGHT ALONE GIVE US THE IDEA OF A SURFACE?


64. I have, I believe, made the inferiority of touch to sight and
hearing palpable, and have, consequently, shown the extravagance of
endeavoring to make it the basis of all cognitions, to found upon it
the certainty of the judgments to which our other senses lead us, and
to make it a supreme judge to decide in the last appeal upon the doubts
that may arise.

I hold it to be manifestly untrue that we cannot make the transition
from the internal to the external world, or from the existence of
sensations to that of the objects causing them, otherwise than by means
of touch; for not only have I combated the principal, or rather the
solitary reason upon which it is pretended to found this privilege,
but I have also demonstrated the mode of making this transition
with respect to all the senses, reasoning from the very nature and
connection of internal phenomena.

I have likewise said and proved that the sensation of extension is the
only one that is representative, and that in all others there was only
a relation of causality, that is, a connection of some sensation or an
internal phenomenon with an external object, without our transferring
to this any thing resembling what we experienced in that.

65. There are two senses which inform us with certainty of extension,
sight and touch. We shall not now inquire if that be a true _sensation_
which we have of extension, or if it be an _idea_ of a very different
order, resulting from the sensation. I propose hereafter to examine
this point, but shall now confine myself to comparing sight with touch
only as tending to give us the sensation of extension, or, if you will,
to furnish us with what is necessary to form an idea of it.

We cannot but see that extension lies within the domain of touch, and
that, too, whether it be considered only as a surface, or also as a
solid. The same faculty cannot be denied to sight, so far as surfaces
are concerned; for it is impossible to see if at least a plane be not
presented to the eye. A point without extension cannot be painted
upon the retina, but the instant an object is painted, it has painted
parts. We can by no effort of our imagination, conceive colors without
extension; for what is color without a surface over which it may extend?

66. So hostile was Condillac to the sense of sight that he was
unwilling to allow it even the faculty of perceiving extension in
surfaces; but as he is of all philosophers the one who has most
contributed to the propagation and establishment of this opinion, we
will examine his doctrine and its fundamental reasons. We have only
to read the chapters in which he explains it, to see that he was
not himself very confident of its truth, but that he felt himself
contradicted by both experience and reason.

In his _Traité des Sensations_,[36] where he examines the ideas
of a man limited to the sense of sight, he says that colors are
distinguished by the sight because they seem to form a surface of which
the eyes occupy a part, and then asks: "Will our statue, judging itself
to be at one time many colors, perceive itself as a sort of colored
surface?" We must bear in mind that, according to Condillac, the statue
confined to one sense will believe itself the sensation, that is, it
will think that it is the odor, the sound, or the taste, according
as the sense of smell, hearing, or taste, is the sense in exercise;
for which reason, if a surface enter into the sensation of sight, the
statue ought to believe itself a colored surface. I shall not examine
the correctness of these observations, but shall confine myself to the
main point, which is the relation of sight to a surface.

[36] P. 1. C. xi.

67. According to Condillac, the statue will never believe itself a
colored surface, that is, although it may perceive the color, it will
not perceive the surface. Let the philosopher himself speak, for
his own words will suffice to condemn his opinion, and to show the
uncertainty with which he advanced it, or else the obscurity under
which it labors: "The idea of extension supposes the perception of many
things, _some distinct from others_. _This perception we cannot deny
to the statue_, for it feels that it is repeated outside of itself as
many times as there are colors modifying it. When it is the red, it
feels itself _outside_ of the green; when the green, it feels itself
_outside_ of the red, and so with other colors." Some may imagine
that, conformably to these principles, Condillac goes on to establish
that sight gives us the idea of extension, since it makes us perceive
things, some _outside_ of others, in which, according to him, the idea
of extension exactly consists. But he does not; far from following
the true road, he miserably loses his way; he not only violates the
principle he has just laid down, but notably changes the state of the
question. He continues: "But in order to have a distinct and precise
idea of magnitude, it is necessary to see how the things perceived,
some outside of others, are connected, how they mutually terminate,
and how they are all enclosed in the limits which bound them." This, I
repeat, is to change the state of the question; we are not now treating
of a distinct and precise idea, but simply of an idea. How far the idea
of extension given by sight is perfect, is another question; although
it is manifest that if sight can give us an idea of extension, it will
come by continual exercise to render this idea more perfect.

68. The statue, in Condillac's opinion, could not perceive itself to
be circumscribed by any limit, because it could know nothing beyond
itself; but did he not just now tell us that the statue would believe
itself different colors; that some of these were outside of others;
and that when it would be one, it would perceive itself outside of the
others? Does this not imply not only one but many limits?

This difficulty did not altogether escape Condillac; for after having
asked if the _me_ of the statue, when modified by a blue surface,
bordered with white, would not believe itself a limited blue color,
he says: "At first sight we were inclined to believe that it would;
but the contrary opinion is much more probable." But why? "The statue
cannot perceive itself extended by this surface, save inasmuch as
each part modifies it in the same way; each part should produce
the sensation of blue color; but if it is alike modified by a foot
of this surface and by an inch, it cannot perceive itself, in this
modification, to be one magnitude rather than another. Therefore it
does not perceive itself as magnitude; therefore the sensation of
color does not involve the idea of extension." It is easy to see that
Condillac either supposes what is in debate, or else says nothing to
the point. According to him, the statue is alike modified by a foot
of colored surface and by an inch. If by this he means that the two
modifications are identical under all aspects, he supposes the very
thing he ought to have proved; for this is precisely the point in
dispute, whether surfaces differing in magnitude do, or do not, produce
different sensations. If he means, as his words seem to indicate, that
the sensation as color, and solely as color, is the same in a foot of
colored surface as in an inch, he utters, indeed, an incontestable
truth, but one not at all to his purpose. Undoubtedly, the sensation
of blue, as blue, is the same in different magnitudes, and no one ever
thought of denying it. But this is not the question: it is whether, the
color remaining one and the same, the sensation of sight is modified
differently, according to the variety of magnitude of the colored
surface. Condillac denies it, but in an uncertain and hesitating way.
We believe his negation to be so groundless that the direct contrary
may be proved.

69. I would ask Condillac if he can have color without surface; if an
object without extension can be painted upon the retina; if we can even
conceive a color without extension. No one of these is possible, sight
is therefore necessarily accompanied by extension.

70. Condillac places the idea of extension in some things being
presented to us outside of others. This, as he him self confesses, is
verified in the sensation of color; therefore the sight of what is
colored must produce the idea of extension. Condillac's subterfuge
here is an exceedingly weak one. He pretends that it is necessary, in
order to have the idea of extension, to have that of its limits. But
first of all, we have shown from his own doctrine that these limits
are perceived by the senses; besides it is a very strange pretension
to attribute to sight the faculty of giving us the idea of unlimited
extension, and to deny to it that of producing the idea of limitation;
as if there did not by the very fact of our seeing what is extended,
rise within us the idea of limitation, if from no other cause, from
the very limitation of our organ; or as if an unlimited were not more
inconceivable than a limited sensation.

But suppose the limits not be perceived by the senses, does unlimited
extension therefore cease to be extension? Is it not rather extension
of the highest order? Does the idea of space without end, because
unlimited, cease to be an idea of extension?

71. Two colored circles, one an inch, and the other a yard in diameter,
are placed before our eyes; will the effect produced upon the retina
be the same in both, abstraction made from all sensation of touch?
Evidently not; experience shows the contrary, and the reason is founded
on the laws of the reflection of light, and on mathematical principles.
If the impressions are different, the difference will be perceived;
therefore the difference of magnitude can be appreciated.

We will now suppose some one in spite of reason and experience to
persist in maintaining that the sensation of the two circles will be
the same in order to make the extravagance, even the ridiculousness
of this opinion palpable. Let us imagine the two circles to be of a
red color, and terminated by a blue line; and now placing the less
upon the greater circle so as to bring their centres together, we ask,
will not the eye cast upon the figure see the less within the greater
circle? Will not the blue line that terminates the circle of an inch in
diameter be sure to be contained within the blue line that terminates
the other circle of a yard in diameter? But what else is the perception
of extension than the perception of some parts beyond others? Is it
not to perceive the difference of magnitude, to perceive some greater
than others, and containing them? Evidently it is. The sight therefore
perceives magnitude; therefore it perceives extension.

72. We may still further confirm this truth. Experience teaches, and
did it not exist, reason would still teach that there must be a limit
to the field of sight, according to our distance from the object. Thus,
when we fix our sight upon a wall of great extent we do not see it all,
but only a part. Now suppose an object of given magnitude to be within
the range of sight, but not so great as to cover the surface embraced
by the eye. According to Condillac's system, there can be no difference
in the perception, provided the color be the same; whence, it will
follow, that the sensation will be just the same, whether the object
occupy the whole, or only an exceedingly minute part, of the visual
field. It will likewise follow, that, if this visual field be, for
example, a great white curtain a hundred yards square, and the object a
piece of blue cloth a yard square, the sensation will be just the same
whether the blue cloth be one inch or ninety yards square.

73. These arguments, which must have occurred at least confusedly
to Condillac, made him hesitate in his expressions, and even use
contradictory language. We may have already observed this in
the passages cited, but we shall see it yet more clearly in the
following:--"We have no term to express with exactness the sentiment
that the statue modified by many colors at one time has of itself; but
in fine, it knows that it exists in many ways, and perceives itself in
a certain mode _as a colored point beyond which_ are others, in which
it turns to find itself; and under this point of view, it may be said,
that it _perceives itself extended_." He had before said, that color
did not seem extended to the statue, until, sight being instructed by
touch, the eye became accustomed to refer the one simple sensation to
all the points of the surface: and in the very next line, as we have
just seen, he asserts the contrary; the statue now perceives itself
to be extended, and the ideologist discovers no way of avoiding the
contradiction, but to warn us that the sentiment of extension will
be vague because it wants limits. This is a contradiction which we
have already made evident. But whence this want of limits? If various
figures of different colors, green, red, etc., be supposed to be upon
a visual field of a hundred yards square of white surface, the sight
will, as is evident, perceive the limits of these figures; where, then,
did Condillac discover that illimitation of which he talks?

74. Although it is very true that even if the sensation of color were
to involve that of extension, it would not therefore follow that it
would produce it in us, because we do not take from sensations all the
ideas they contain, but those only which we know. This does not at all
affect the present question. We do not treat of what we can take from
the sensation, but of what is in it. If Condillac maintains that we may
take the idea of extension from the sensation of touch, by what right
does he deny the same faculty with respect to sight, supposing the idea
of extension to be contained in both sensations?

If I mistake not, this is a tacit confession of the falseness of his
opinion. The idea of extension is in the sensation of sight, but we
cannot take it thence. Why not? Because it is vague. But then what
is to prevent exercise, involving comparison and reflection, from
rendering it distinct? The difficulty consists in acquiring it in one
way or another; to perfect it is the work of time.

Undoubtedly the first sensations of sight will not have that exactness
which they have after much exercise; but the same is true of the sense
of touch. This sense is perfected like the others; it like them needs
to be educated, so to speak; and those born blind, who, by force of
concentration and labor, come to possess it to an astonishing degree of
delicacy, offer us a manifest proof of this truth.




