CHAPTER III.

SCIENTIFIC FRUITFULNESS OF THE IDEA OF EXTENSION.


13. In order to understand the superiority of the idea of extension
over mere sensations; or rather, in order to understand that there is
a true idea of extension considered in itself, and that there is no
such idea of the direct and immediate objects of sensation, I wish to
call attention to the fact that among all the objects of the senses,
_extension alone gives origin to a science_.

This is a very important fact;--to explain it as it deserves, I shall
establish the following propositions:


FIRST PROPOSITION.

Extension is the basis of geometry.


SECOND PROPOSITION.

Not only is extension the basis of geometry, but all that we know
of the nature of bodies may be reduced to the manifestations,
applications, and modifications of extension, with the addition of the
ideas of number and time.


THIRD PROPOSITION.

Whatever we know of sensations that deserves the name of science is
included in the modifications of extension.


FOURTH PROPOSITION.

We can form no fixed idea of corporeal objects, nor make any
observation on the sensible world, unless we are guided by the rule of
extension.

These four propositions are nothing more than the enunciation
of certain facts, the mere exposition of which is a sufficient
demonstration.

14. Extension is the basis of geometry. This is evident, since geometry
treats only of dimensions, and the idea of dimension is essential to
extension.

When geometry treats of figures, it is still extension which it is
treating of; for figures are only extension with certain limitations.
The quadrilateral contains two triangles. To distinguish them, it is
only necessary to draw their limit, which is the diagonal. The idea of
figure is merely the idea of limited extension, and the figure is of
this or that kind according to the nature of its limits. Consequently,
the idea of figure is nothing new superadded to extension; but merely
its application.

Moreover, limit or termination is not a positive idea; it is a pure
negation. If I have extension and wish to form all the figures
possible, I need not conceive any thing new, but only abstract what I
have already; I do not add, but take away. Thus in the quadrilateral
I obtain the conception of the triangle by abstracting one of the two
equal parts into which it is divided by the diagonal. In the same
manner I deduce the quadrilateral from a pentagon by abstracting the
triangle formed by a line drawn from one of its angles to either of the
opposite angles. These observations apply to all geometrical figures.

The idea of extension is like an immense ground on which we have only
to _draw limits_ in order to obtain whatever we want.

It does not follow from this that the understanding cannot proceed
by addition or the synthetic method; for, just as the subtraction
of one of the parts of the quadrilateral formed a triangle, so
also the addition of two triangles with an equal side will produce
a quadrilateral. And in the same way points produce lines, lines
surfaces, and surfaces solids. In all these cases the idea of figure
is that of limited extension, since the quantities which constitute it
are merely extension with certain limitations.

15. An observation here presents itself to my mind, which I think must
throw great light upon the question which we are now discussing. If we
compare the two methods by which the idea of figure is obtained; the
synthetic, or that of composition or addition, and the analytic, or
that of subtraction or limitation, we shall find that the second is
more natural than the other; because that which the analytic method
produces is permanent in the figure and essential to it, whilst the
synthetic only seems to constitute it, and as soon as it is thus
constituted the marks of its formation are obliterated.

An example will make this clearer. In order to conceive a rectangle
I have only to limit indefinite space by four lines in a rectangular
position; that is, to _affirm_ a part, and _deny_ the rest. The lines
are nothing in themselves, and represent only the limit beyond which
the space included in the rectangle cannot pass. To abstract this
limitation or denial of all that is not contained in the surface of the
rectangle, would be to destroy the rectangle. Therefore, the denial
in which this method consists is always permanent, the manner of the
production of the idea is inseparable from the idea itself.

But if, on the other hand, I proceed to form the rectangle by addition
or by joining the hypotheneuse of two right-angle triangles, the
ideas of the two component parts are not necessary to the idea of
the rectangle after its formation. I can conceive the rectangle even
abstracting the diagonal.

Thus, then, it is demonstrated that the idea of extension is the only
basis of geometry, and that this idea is an immense field on which,
by means of limitation or abstraction, we can obtain all the figures
which form the object of geometry. Figures are only extension limited,
a positive extension accompanied by a negation, and consequently
whatever is positive in geometry is extension.

16. We cannot doubt that, whatever we know of the nature of bodies, may
be reduced to certain modifications or properties of extension, if we
observe that the entire object of the natural sciences is the knowledge
of the motion or of the different relations of things in space, which
is nothing more than the knowledge of the different kinds of extension.

Statics is occupied in determining the laws of the equilibrium of
bodies, but in what way? Does it penetrate into the nature of the
causes? No; it only determines the conditions to which the phenomenon
is subject, and the only ideas which enter into these conditions are
the _direction of the force_, that is to say, a _line_ in space, and
the velocity, which is the relation of space to time.

The idea of time is the only idea which is here joined with that of
extension. In another place I shall prove that time, separated from
things, is nothing, and consequently, although this idea is here joined
to that of extension, it does not interfere with the truth of what I
have established. In statics, all that relates to other sensations is
counted as nothing; in order to solve the problems of the composition
and decomposition of forces, we abstract all color, smell, and other
sensible qualities of bodies in motion. What has been said of statics
applies equally to dynamics, hydrostatics, hydraulics, astronomy, and
to all sciences which regard motion.

17. Here an objection may be made. That with the ideas of time and
space, we seem to combine another which is distinct from them, and
necessary, in order to complete the idea of motion, and this is the
idea of a body moved. It is not time, nor is it space, for space is
not moved, therefore it is distinct from them.

To this I reply, first, that I am speaking of extension, and not of
space alone, which it is important to remember, for what I shall
afterwards say; and secondly, that science regards the thing moved as a
point, and this is sufficient for all its purposes. Thus in the systems
of forces there is a point of application for each of the component
forces, and another for the resultant. This point is not regarded as
having any properties, but is in relation to motion what the centre
is in relation to a circle. Every thing is related to it, yet it is
nothing in itself, except inasmuch as it occupies a definite position
in space. It may change according to the quantity and direction of
the forces, it may run over or describe a line in space with greater
or less velocity, and the line may be of this or that class, and
accompanied by various conditions. If a body be impelled by two forces,
B and C, acting upon a point A, science considers in the body only the
point through which the resultant of the forces B and C passes, and
abstracts all the other points of the body which, being joined to the
point A, move with it.

18. When I say that the natural sciences go no farther than the
consideration of extension, I only mean to exclude the other
sensations, but not ideas; for it is clear that the ideas of time and
number are combined with the idea of extension. This is so true in
mechanics, in this sense at least, that all its theorems and problems
are reduced to geometrical expressions, and even the idea of time is
expressed by lines.

In every force there are three things to be considered: the direction,
point of application, and intensity. The direction is represented by a
line, and the point of application by a point in space. The intensity
is represented only in the effect which it can produce, and this
is expressed by a line, the length of which expresses the intensity
of the force. The effect of the intensity which is represented by a
line includes the time also; for the measure of a motion cannot be
determined until we know its velocity, which is merely the relation
of space to time. Therefore, although the idea of time is combined
with that of extension, the result is expressed by lines, that is, by
extension.

19. There is another circumstance still which shows the fruitfulness
of the idea of extension. It is that in the expression of the laws of
nature, it reaches cases which are beyond the idea of number. If we
suppose two equal rectangular forces, AB and AC, acting on the point A,
the resultant will be AR. Now, if we consider AR to be the hypotheneuse
of a right-angled triangle, AR^2 = AB^2 + AC^2, extracting the square
root AR = √(AB^2 + AC^2). If we suppose each of the component forces
equal to 1, AR = √(1^2 + 1^2) = √2, a value which can neither be
expressed in whole numbers nor in fractions, but which is represented
by the hypotheneuse.

20. In the physical sciences, such words as force, cause, agent, etc.,
are frequently used, but the ideas which these terms express are a part
of science only inasmuch as they are represented by effects. This is
not because true philosophy confounds the cause with the effect, but
as physical science regards only the phenomenon in all that relates to
the cause, it limits itself to the abstract idea of causality, which
presents nothing determinate, and consequently is not the object of its
scientific labors. The system of universal attraction has immortalized
the name of Newton, and he begins by confessing his ignorance of the
cause of the effect which he explains. When we go beyond the phenomena
and the calculations to which they give rise, we enter the field of
metaphysics.

21. The natural sciences consider certain qualities of bodies which
have no relation to extension, as, for example, heat and light, and
this might seem to be a refutation of what we have said of extension.
Still this objection disappears when we examine in what manner science
takes note of these qualities, and instead of overthrowing our thesis,
the result will strengthen, extend, and explain it.

Heat is not measured by the sensation which it produces in us. If we
enter a room where the temperature is very high, we experience a strong
sensation of heat, which gradually grows weaker, while the temperature
remains the same. If we reach our hand to a friend we experience a
sensation of heat or cold, in proportion as his hand is warmer or
colder than our own.

Heat and cold are measured, not in themselves, nor in relation to our
sensations, but in the effect which they produce. These effects are
included in the modification of extension; for the thermometer marks
the temperature by a greater or less elevation of the mercury in a
_line_. Its degrees are expressed by parts of a line, on which they are
marked.

I know that what is measured is distinct from extension; but, its
measurement is only possible by relation to extension, and by attending
to effects which are modifications of extension. Thus, the temperature
at which water boils is 212°, and this is discovered by the motion of
the water, and has relation to extension. So, also, the rarefaction
and condensation of bodies are modifications of extension, since these
states consist in the occupation of greater or less space, or in the
increase or diminution of their dimensions.

22. All that science teaches us of light and colors relates to the
different directions and combinations of the rays of light. Our
observation goes no farther than sensation. We know that we can combine
the rays in different manners, and direct them, so as to modify our
sensation, but this is nothing more than the scientific knowledge of
extension in the medium which we make use of, and of the sensation
experienced in consequence. All beyond this is entirely unknown.

23. We may say the same of all other sensations, that of touch
included. What is that quality of bodies which we call hardness? the
resistance which we encounter when we touch them? But abstracting
sensation, which only produces the consciousness of itself, what do we
find? Impenetrability. And what do we understand by impenetrability?
The impossibility of two bodies occupying the same space at the
same time. Here, then, we meet with extension. If, by hardness, we
mean the cohesion of molecules, in what does cohesion consist? In
the juxtaposition of parts in such manner that they cannot, without
difficulty, be separated. But, to be separated, is to be made to occupy
a place different from that which was before occupied. Here, too, we
find the idea of extension.

Of sound we know nothing scientifically, except as relates to extension
and motion. The musical scale is expressed by a series of fractional
numbers representing the vibrations of the air.

24. These examples demonstrate the third of the above propositions,
that whatever we know of sensations that deserves the name of science,
is included in the modifications of extension.

25. It is the same with the fourth proposition, that without the idea
of extension, we can have no fixed idea of any thing corporeal, no
fixed rule in relation to phenomena, but are like blind men. If, for
an instant, we abstract the idea of extension, it is impossible for us
to take a step in advance. The examples already adduced in order to
demonstrate the second proposition, render further explanation here
unnecessary.

26. Although extension is essentially composed of parts, there is in it
something fixed, unalterable, and, in some manner, simple. There may be
more or less extension, but not different kinds. One right line may be
longer or shorter than another, but its length is not of a different
species. One surface may be larger than another, a solid of a certain
kind greater than another of the same kind, but not in a different
manner.

When I say that in the idea of extension objectively considered there
is a _certain sort_ of simplicity, I do not mean that there is any
thing _entirely_ simple; for I have just said that its _object_ is
_essentially_ composite. Neither do I abstract its essential elements,
which are the three dimensions, nor any idea which it involves, as its
limitability, or capacity to be limited in various ways. All I wish to
show is that in all the different figures these fundamental notions are
sufficient, that they are never modified, but always present the same
thing to the mind.

Let us compare a right line with a curve. A right line is a direction
which is always constant; the curve a direction which is always
varied. A direction always varied is a collection of _right directions
infinitely small_. Therefore, the circumference of a circle is
considered as a polygon of an infinite number of sides. The curve is
therefore formed by the variety of directions reduced to infinitesimal
values. This theory which explains the difference of the right line and
the curve, is evidently applicable to surfaces and solids.

Let us compare a quadrilateral with a pentagon; all that the second has
which the first has not is one side more in perimeter, and in area the
space contained in the triangle formed by a line drawn from one of its
angles to either of the opposite angles. The lines are of the same
kind, the surfaces differ only in the ways in which they terminate. But
termination is the same as limitation. Therefore, all that is essential
to the idea of extension, that is, direction and limitability, remain
always the same and unchangeable.

This intrinsical constancy is indispensable to science. That which
is mutable, may be the object of perception, but not of scientific
perception.




