CHAPTER VI.

REMARKS ON EXTENSION.


37. If extension is something as we have proved; what is it?

We find extension in bodies and also in space because in both we
find that which constitutes its essence, which is dimension. Is the
extension of bodies the same as the extension of space?

I see and hold in my hand a pen: it is certainly extended. It moves,
and its extension moves with it. The space in which its motion is
executed remains immovable. At the instant A the extension of the pen
occupies the point A′; at the moment B the same extension of the pen
occupies the part B′ of space which is distinct from the part A′;
therefore neither the part A′ of space nor the part B′ is identified
with the extension of the body.

This seems to have all the force of a demonstration; but to make
it more clear and more general, I will put it into the form of a
syllogism. Things which are separated or may be separated are distinct;
but the extension of bodies may be separated from any part of space;
therefore the extension of bodies and the extension of space are
distinct. I said that this reasoning seems to have all the force of a
demonstration, but it is nevertheless subject to serious difficulties.
These difficulties cannot be understood without a profound analysis of
the idea of space, and therefore I shall reserve my opinion until this
has been treated of in the following chapters.

38. Is the extension of a body the body itself? I cannot conceive a
body without extension, but this does not prove that extension is the
same thing as the body. My soul has acquired a knowledge of the body
by means of the senses. These senses have _awakened_ in me the idea of
extension; but they have told me nothing of the intrinsic nature of the
body perceived.

In those beings which we call bodies we find the power of producing in
us impressions very distinct from that of extension. From two bodies of
equal extension we receive very different impressions, therefore there
is in them something besides extension. If extension was their only
quality, this being equal, the effect would be the same; but experience
teaches us that it is not so.

Moreover we conceive extension in pure space where there is no
body. The idea of body implies the idea of mobility, while space is
immovable. It implies the power of producing impressions; the extension
of space has not of itself this power.

Therefore the simple idea of extension does not include even in our
cognitions the whole idea of a body. We do not know in what the essence
of body consists; but we know that in the idea which we have of it
there is something more than extension.

39. When it is said that a body is inconceivable without extension
it is not meant that extension is the constitutive notion of the
essence of body. This essence is unknown to us, and therefore we
cannot know what does or does not belong to it. The true meaning of
this inseparability of the two ideas of extension and body is this:
As we have no knowledge _a priori_ of bodies, but whatever we know
of them, their existence included, we derive through the senses, all
that we think or imagine concerning them must presuppose that which is
the basis of our sensations. This basis, as we have already seen, is
extension; without it there is no sensation, and consequently without
it a body ceases to exist for us, or is reduced to a being which we
cannot distinguish from others.

I will explain my ideas. If I strip bodies of extension and leave
them only the nature of a being which causes the impressions which I
receive; this being is the same, so far as I am concerned, as a spirit
which should produce the same impressions. I see this paper, and it
causes in me the impression of a white surface. There is no doubt that
God could produce in my mind the same sensation without the existence
of any body. Then supposing that I knew that no external extended
object corresponded to my sensation, which was caused by a being acting
upon me, it is evident that there would be two distinct things in my
mind. First, the phenomenon of sensation, which under all hypotheses
is the same; and secondly, the idea of the being which produced it,
which is only the idea of a being distinct from myself, acting upon me,
which in relation to the external world, would involve two ideas; those
of distinction and causality.

I now take from the paper extension, and what remains? The same as
before. 1. An internal phenomenon, made known by consciousness. 2. The
idea of a being the cause of this phenomenon.

I do not know whether this must always be a body; but I know that
the idea of a body, as I understand it, includes something more than
this. I know that being is not in relation to myself distinguishable
from other beings, and that if there is any thing in its nature to
distinguish it from them, it is something unknown to me.[40]

[40] See Ch. I.

40. This is the sense in which I say that we cannot separate the idea
of extension from the body. But from this it must not be inferred that
the things themselves are identified; perhaps, even, a more profound
knowledge of matter would show us that instead of being identical, they
are entirely distinct. We have seen that it is so with their ideas, and
this is a sign that it is so in reality.

41. We have few ideas as clear as that of extension geometrically
considered; every attempt to explain it is useless; we know it more
perfectly by mere intuition than whole volumes could make it known to
us. It is so clear an idea, that on it is founded a whole science,
the most extensive and evident which we possess, that of geometry.
Therefore there is reason to believe that we know the true essence of
extension, since we know its _necessary_ properties, and even base
a whole science on this knowledge. Yet we do not discover in this
idea, either impenetrability or any of the properties of bodies; but
rather on the contrary, we find a capacity indifferent to them all. We
conceive extension penetrable as easily as impenetrable, empty or full,
white or green, with properties by which it can be placed in relation
with our organs, as easily as without them. We can conceive extension
in a body acting on another body, or in pure space; in the sun which
enlightens and warms the world, or in the vague dimensions of an empty
immensity.




