CHAPTER XIII.

NEW DIFFICULTIES.


84. If space is the extension of bodies, it follows that extension has
no recipient, that is to say, no place in which it can be situated.
This seems to be in direct contradiction to our most common ideas; for
when we conceive any thing to be extended, we conceive the necessity of
a place equal to it in which it can be contained and situated.

This difficulty, which seems so serious at first, immediately vanishes
if we deny that every extended thing needs a place in which it may be
situated. What is this place? It is an extension in which the thing
may be contained. Does this extension also require another extension
in which it may be placed, or does it not? If it does, then the same
question may be asked of this new place in which the other place is
contained, and so on _ad infinitum_. This is evidently impossible, and
therefore we must admit that it is false that all extension requires
another extension in which it may be placed. Just as the extension of
space does not require another extension, so the extension of bodies
does not require space. There is no disparity between the two cases.
Therefore the necessity of a place for every extension is merely
imaginary, and is opposed to reason. Extension, therefore, may exist in
itself, and there is no reason why the extension of bodies may not also
exist in this manner.

85. What in this case would be the meaning of changing place? It would
simply mean that bodies change their respective position. This is the
explanation of motion.

Suppose three bodies, A, B, and C, to be situated in space. Their
respective distances are the bodies which are interposed between them.
The change which a new position causes, is motion.

86. Therefore, if there were only one body there could be no motion.
For motion is necessarily the passing over a distance, and, there is no
distance when there is only one body.

This seems at first absurd, because it is opposed to our way of
thinking and imagining; but if we carefully examine this way of
thinking and imagining, we shall see that the phenomena of our mind are
in accordance with this theory.

Motion has no meaning for us, we do not feel or perceive it, when we
cannot refer it to the position of different bodies among themselves.
If we sail down a river, shut up in the cabin of the vessel which bears
us on, we really move, though we have no perception of this motion.
We know that we move when watching the objects on the shore, we see
that they are continually changing. Even then, the motion seems to be
in the objects around us, not in ourselves, and the phenomena would
be absolutely the same with respect to us, if, instead of the objects
being at rest, and the vessel in motion, the vessel should be at rest
and the objects in motion, supposing the motion of the objects to be
properly combined.[47]

[47] See Book II., Chap. xv.

Therefore, take away the agitation, which is all that informs us of
our own motion, and we are unable to distinguish whether the motion is
in us or in the objects; and we are naturally more inclined to refer
the motion to them than to ourselves. When the vessel that carries us
leaves the port, we know very well that it is not the port which moves,
and yet the illusion is complete, the port seems to retire from us.

Hence motion for us is only the change of the respective position of
bodies. If we had not experienced this change, we should have no idea
of motion. Thus no one denies that the phenomena of diurnal motion are
the same, whether the heavens revolve around us from east to west, or
the earth turns on its axis from west to east.

Therefore, the motion of only one body is a pure illusion; and there is
no proof of the argument founded on it which is brought to oppose our
doctrine of space.

Hence, also, the whole universe considered as only one body, is
immovable, motion takes place only in its interior.

87. But one of the strangest results of this theory is the _a
priori_ demonstration that the universe can only be terminated in a
certain manner, to the exclusion of a multitude of figures which are
essentially repugnant to it.

According to the doctrine which we have put forth, if we suppose only
one body to exist, it cannot have any part of its surface so disposed
that the shortest line from any one point to another shall pass outside
of the body. For, as we suppose only one body, _outside_ of it is pure
nothing; and can, therefore, contain no distances which can be measured
by lines. This excludes a multitude of irregular figures, and thus we
find geometrical regularity growing out of a metaphysical idea.

Hence if only one body were in existence, it would be impossible for
it to have any angles entering into it. For, its figure requires that
the point A, the vertex of the angle, should be at the distance A D
from the point D, the vertex of another angle. This distance cannot
exist, for there is no distance where there is no body. Therefore,
the distance would exist and not exist at the same time, which is
contradictory. It would also be an absurdity, because the capacities
marked by the angles would not be filled.

The observation of nature confirms the former result, inasmuch as its
tendency is always to terminate every thing with curved lines and
surfaces. The orbits of the stars are curves, and the stars themselves
terminate in curve surfaces. The great irregularities which are
observed in their surfaces might seem to destroy this conclusion,
but it must be remembered the limit of the figure is not in these
irregularities, but in the atmosphere which surrounds them, and which,
being a fluid, can have no irregularities of surface.

88. Another consequence, as strange as the former, is, that we are
obliged to admit the existence of a perfect geometrical surface, and
this _a priori_.

If, where there is no body, distance is metaphysically impossible,
this must be just as true in small as in great things, and even in
infinitesimals. This is also a reason of the impossibility of vacuum.
It is evident that a surface is not perfect when some of its points go
farther out than others, so that the less they go out from the surface
the more perfect it becomes. As there are no such points in the last
surface of the universe, this surface is the realization of geometrical
perfection.

We have demonstrated that it is impossible for the surface to have any
angles entering into it; it is equally impossible for it to have any,
even the least, prominence. The difference is only in greater or less,
which does not affect the metaphysical impossibility. It is, therefore,
demonstrated that in the ultimate surface of the universe there is no
irregularity, but that its surface is geometrically perfect.




