CHAPTER II.

EXTENSION NOT PERCEPTIBLE AS THE DIRECT AND IMMEDIATE OBJECT OF
SENSATIONS.


9. Extension has the remarkable peculiarity of being perceived by
different senses. As regards sight and touch this is evident; it is
also true as far as concerns the other senses. We perceive taste in
different parts of the palate, and we refer sound and smell to distinct
points in space, and this involves the idea of extension.

But what is more strange is, that although extension is the
indispensable basis of all sensations and therefore perceived by all
the senses, it is, in itself, and separated from every other quality,
imperceptible to them all. The eye perceives only light, and the ear
sound, the palate taste, the smell odor, and the object of touch is
that which is warm or cold, moist or dry, solid or liquid, etc. None
of these objects is extension, none _in particular_ is necessary for
the perception of extension; for we constantly find it separated from
each of these qualities, and yet it is still perceptible. No one _in
particular_ is necessary for the perceptibility of extension, but some
one is indispensable; for, unless accompanied by some one of them, it
is imperceptible to the senses.

Hence, extension is a necessary condition of our sensations, but is
not itself perceived by the senses. Still it is not therefore unknown,
and this brings me to some other reflections which take us out of the
phenomenal into the transcendental order, and give rise to very serious
and difficult questions, which have hitherto been insolvable, and it is
to be feared must ever remain so.

10. We have seen that extension in itself is not the direct object of
sensation. What, then, is it? What is its nature?

There are two things which may be considered in the idea of extension:
that which it is in us, and that which it represents to us; or, in
other words, its relation to the subject, and its relation to the
object. The first being subject to immediate observation, inasmuch as
it exists within us, is difficult but not impossible to explain. The
second is more difficult, and almost impossible to explain, because it
is a very abstract and transcendental idea, and also requires a series
of arguments, the thread of which may be broken without the one who
reasons perceiving it.

11. Extension in us is not a sensation, but an idea. Sometimes we
imagine it under a sensible form, confounding it with a determinate
object; at other times we picture it to ourselves as a vague
obscurity in which bodies are placed; but these are only fictions of
the imagination. A man born blind can have none of these internal
representations, and yet he forms a very good conception of extension.
We ourselves in thinking of extension abstract all these forms under
which we imagine it.

Two different sensations, those of sight and touch, produce the same
idea of extension. This is conclusive proof that extension is rather
intelligible than sensible.

Whatever may be the relation of extension to sensation, we cannot
deny that it is an idea if we reflect that it is the foundation of
the whole science of geometry. Thus, although we form various images
of extension, they are only the particular forms with which the mind
clothes the idea, if we may use the expression, according to the
circumstances of the case. That which is fundamental and essential in
the idea, is of a different and higher order, and has nothing in common
with the applications which the mind makes in order to explain and
apply it. This idea includes dimensions, but not determined or applied;
they are mere conceptions which represent nothing in particular.

12. The idea of extension is a primitive fact of our mind. It is not
produced by sensations, but precedes them, if not in time, at least
in the order of being. There is no ground for asserting that the idea
of extension exists in the mind prior to the first impression of the
senses, but unless extension serves as their basis these impressions
are inconceivable. Whether this idea is innate or developed, or
produced in the mind by the impressions, there can be no doubt that it
is distinct from them, necessary to them, and independent of any one of
them in particular.

It may be that when these impressions are first received extension
may not be known as a separate idea; but it is certain that it
is afterwards separated and stripped of the corporeal form, and
spiritualized, and that this phenomenon may be occasioned but not
caused by the sensation.

In sight, abstracting extension, there is color, but we cannot discover
in it any thing from which we can produce so fruitful an idea as
that of extension. Even at first we see that the color itself is not
perceptible without extension, and so far from extension being produced
by color, it is on the contrary an indispensable condition without
which color cannot be perceived.

Colors as the objects of sensation are only individual phenomena,
which have no connection with one another nor with the general idea of
extension. What has been said of them will equally apply to all the
impressions of touch.




