CHAPTER XII.

WHAT SPACE CONSISTS IN.


77. Descartes' opinion wholly confounds space and bodies, making the
essence of bodies consist in extension, and asserting that wherever
there is space, there is body. This opinion we have seen to be void of
all reasonable foundation. Perhaps he would come nearer the truth who
should say, that in reality space is nothing more than the extension
of bodies, without reference to the question whether extension does or
does not constitute the essence of bodies, and denying its infinity.

78. Let us examine this last opinion. Analyzing the origin of the idea
of space, we find that it is merely the idea of extension taken in
the abstract. If I hold before my eyes an orange, I may, by means of
abstractions, arrive at the idea of a pure extension, equal to that
of the orange. In order to do this, I begin by abstracting its color,
taste, smell, and all its qualities which affect the senses. I then
have left only an extended being, and if I take from it its mobility,
it is reduced to a part of space equal to the size of the orange.

It is plain that the same abstraction is possible in relation to the
universe, and the result will be the idea of all the space which the
universe occupies.

79. Here I shall answer an objection which might be made to this
explanation of the idea of space, and thereby take advantage of
this opportunity to throw some light upon the origin of the idea of
infinite, or imaginary space.

The difficulty is this. If we form the idea of space by the mere
abstraction of the qualities which accompany extension, we can only
conceive a space equal to the size of the body from which we have
abstracted all its sensible qualities. The abstraction made upon an
orange can only give a space equal to the size of the orange, and that
made upon the universe can only give a space equal to what we conceive
in the universe. Consequently, we can never, by this means, obtain the
idea of a space without limits which always presents itself to our mind
when we think of space considered in itself.

The solution of this difficulty is in the truth that abstraction
rises from the particular to the general. From the idea of gold, by
abstracting those properties which constitute gold, and attending
only to those which it possesses as metal, I arrive at the much more
general idea of _metal_, which belongs not only to gold, but to all
other metals. By this abstraction I pass the limit which separates
gold from other metals, and form an idea which extends to all, neither
specifying, nor excluding any. If from the idea of metal I abstract all
that constitutes metal, and attend only to what constitutes _mineral_,
I pass another limit, and arrive at a still more general idea. Thus
passing successively the idea of inorganic, of body, and of substance,
until I come to the idea of being, I thus form the most general idea
possible, and which includes every thing.[46]

[46] I take no notice in this place of the different manner in which
the idea of being is applicable to God and to creatures.

Thus passing over the limits which distinguish and, as it were,
separate objects, abstraction rises to the most general. If we apply
this doctrine to the abstractions made upon bodies, we shall discover
the reason of the illimitability of the idea of space.

When after the abstractions made upon the orange, I have left only the
idea of _its_ extension, the abstraction has not reached the highest
point possible; for my conception is not that of extension in itself,
but only of the extension of the orange; I conceive _its_ extension,
not _extension_ itself. But if I abstract all that makes this extension
the extension of the orange, and attend only to extension in itself,
then the idea of figure disappears, the extension expands indefinitely,
it is impossible for me to assign any term to it, for any limit would
make it a determinate, a particular extension, not extension in itself.
Then the frontiers of the universe, so to speak, disappear; for
however great the universe may be, it is limited, and can give only a
particular extension, not extension itself. This is the manner in which
the idea of imaginary space seems to be formed.

80. An observation of the phenomena of the imagination will confirm
what we have explained by the mere order of intelligence. When I
_imagine_ the extension of an orange, I imagine it with a limit, with
this or that color, and with these or those qualities; since it is
not possible for me to imagine a figure without lines which terminate
it. This limit in the imagination is distinct both from the extension
which it encloses, and from the extension which it excludes. If it
were not so distinguished, we could not imagine it as limit, and it
would not answer its object, which is to enable us to distinguish that
which it encloses. Therefore, the abstraction is not complete. In the
imagination there is always something determinate, which is the limit
or the lines which constitute the limit. Destroy these limits, and the
imagination expands, until it becomes lost in a sort of dark, unbounded
abyss, such as we imagine beyond the universe.

A very simple example will make this explanation clearer. Our
imagination may be compared to a black board on which a figure is
marked with chalk. When we see the white line on the board which forms
the figure, we see the figure also; but if we rub out the line, there
remains only the uniform figure of the board. If we suppose the lines
which terminate the black board to be indefinitely withdrawn, we shall
look in vain for a figure; we see only a black surface indefinitely
extended. There is a sufficient parity between this and the manner in
which the imagination pictures to itself an endless space.

81. The idea of an abstract extension which is limited, is a
contradiction. Limit takes from extension generality; and generality
destroys the limit. There can, therefore, be no abstract idea of
limited extension; but when we form an idea of extension in the
abstract, we conceive it as unlimited, and the imagination attempting
to follow the understanding, pictures to itself an indefinite space.

82. Summing up this doctrine, and deducing its inevitable consequences,
we may say:

I. That space is nothing else than the extension of bodies.

II. That the idea of space is the idea of extension.

III. That the different parts conceived in space are the ideas of
particular extensions, from which we have not taken their limits.

IV. That the idea of infinite space is the idea of extension in
general, abstracted from all limit.

V. That indefinite space arises necessarily from the imagination,
which destroys the limit in attempting to follow the generalizing march
of the understanding.

VI. That where there is no body there is no space.

VII. That what is called distance is only the interposition of a body.

VIII. That if every intermediate body be taken away, distance ceases;
there is then contiguity, and, consequently, absolute contact.

IX. That if there were only two bodies in existence, it would be
metaphysically impossible for them to be distant from each other.

X. That all vacuum, of whatever kind, or however obtained, is
absolutely impossible.

83. These are the consequences which follow from the principle
explained in this chapter.

If the reader ask me what I think of them and of the principle on which
they are based, I frankly confess that, although the principle seems
true and the conclusions legitimate, still the strangeness of some of
them, and yet more so with regard to others which I shall point out as
we come to them, makes me suspect that there is some error concealed in
the principle, or else the reasoning which deduces these consequences
contains some defect which is not easy to discover. I do not put
forth a settled opinion, so much as a series of conjectures, with the
arguments in their favor. The reader may see by this what sense I
attach to the word _demonstration_, when in the sequel he sees it often
employed in treating of the deduction of certain consequences which
are exceedingly strange, although, in my opinion, deserving a careful
attention. I say this not only to explain what is passing in my own
mind, but also to warn the reader against too great confidence on these
points, whatever may be the opinion which he adopts. Before commencing
these investigations on space, I remarked that the arguments on both
sides seemed equally conclusive; which shows that the human reason
has reached its bounds, and makes us suspect that this investigation
is beyond the sphere to which the mind is restricted by a primary
condition of its nature.

However this may be, let us continue to conjecture; and although we
cannot pass beyond certain limits, let us exercise the understanding
by examining them in their full extent. Thus, if we were placed on
a very elevated ground with deep precipices on all sides, we should
take pleasure in walking around the circumference, and gazing upon the
immense depth under our feet.

I shall now proceed to deduce other results, and to solve as far as
possible the difficulties which arise, making some applications, the
immense importance of which produces uncertainty and causes fear.




