CHAPTER XVI.

POSSIBILITY OF OTHER SENSES.


91. Lamennais writes: "Who can say that a sixth sense would not disturb
the harmony of the others by a contrary impression? On what foundation
could he deny it? If we suppose other senses different from those which
nature gave us, might not our sensations and our ideas be different?
Perhaps a slight modification in our organs would be sufficient to ruin
our whole science. Perhaps there are beings so organized that their
sensations are wholly opposed to ours, and what is true for us is false
for them, and reciprocally. For, if we examine the matter closely, what
necessary connection is there between our sensations and the reality?
And if there were such a connection, how could the senses make it known
to us?"[38]

[38] Essai sur l'Indifference, Tome II., Part III., Ch. I.

The questions which these words raise are of the highest importance and
merit a serious examination.

92. Is there any intrinsical impossibility of an organization different
from ours, and an order of sensations different from those which we
experience? It seems not; and if this impossibility exists, it is
unknown to man.

Whatever opinion we adopt as to the manner in which external objects
act upon the soul by means of the organs of the body, there is no
necessary relation, nor even analogy, between the object and the effect
which it produces in us.

A body receives upon its surface rays of the fluid which we call
_light_, these rays are reflected upon the retina, which is another
surface in communication with the brain. So far all is well, and
easily understood. There is a fluid which moves, goes from one surface
to another, and may cause this or that purely physical effect on the
cerebral matter; but what connection is there between this and the
impression of a distinct order which we call _seeing_, an impression
which is neither the fluid nor the motion, but an affection of which
the living and thinking being, the _me_ is intimately conscious?

If, instead of the luminous fluid and its mechanism, we suppose
another, as, for example, the air which vibrates upon the tympanum,
what _essential_ reason is there why this should not produce a
sensation similar to that of sight? It must be confessed that it is
impossible to assign an _essential_ reason. To one who has no idea of
our present organization, both phenomena are equally incomprehensible.

93. What has been said of sight and hearing may be applied to the other
senses. In all there is a bodily organ affected by a body; we see the
surfaces placed one before or under the other, we see motions of one
kind or another; but how can we pass over the immense distance which
separates these physical phenomena from the phenomenon of sensation?
For my part, I see no way to do it; this point is a barrier to the
human intellect; all appearances indicate that there is no connection
between these two orders of phenomena except what the will of the
Creator has _freely_ established; if there is any necessary connection,
this necessity is a secret to man. Examine the textures which receive
the impression of the objects, the material substance which composes
the nervous system which is the organ of sensations, and say what
relation you can find between the physical phenomena of this matter and
the wonderful harmony of sensible phenomena.

94. Still greater will be the difficulty if you consider that, although
protected from any injury, the organs cease to produce sensations from
the moment they are deprived of communication with the substance of
the brain. The phenomena of light are produced in the cavity of the
skull amid the most profound darkness; and all the wonderful magic
of sensations by which the magnificent spectacle of the universe
is presented to our mind, which plunges the soul into raptures at
the sound of music, and which produces such varied and delightful
sensations of taste and odors, all arises in the brain, a whitish,
rude, and unformed substance, from the appearance of which no one could
imagine it destined to such noble functions.

95. Why is it that when the nerve A, in communication with the brain is
affected, we experience the sensation which we call _seeing_, or if the
nerve B is affected, the sensation which we call _hearing_, and so of
the other senses? There may be a reason, but, at least, we do not know
it; and it is probably no other than the free will of the Creator.

Here, it is true, philosophy confesses its weakness, but, at the same
time, it shows its power; for it sees the immense distance which
separates these phenomena, between which there can be no point of
communication but what is established by the Almighty. When there are
second causes, it is the merit of philosophy to discover them; but when
there are none, its merit is in rising to the first cause. A confession
of its ignorance is sometimes a more sublime act of reason than the
impotent effort of an unbounded pride. If the perception of profound
truths exalts the intellect, is not the intellect exalted in perceiving
its own ignorance, which is sometimes a profound truth?

96. The existence of another sense is, then, possible; at least, we see
no impossibility of it. If the deaf man who has no idea of sound, and
the blind man who knows not what color is, would be foolish to deny
the possibility of those sensations of which they are deprived, can
we, with any more show of reason, assert the impossibility of an order
of sensations different from what we possess? If we examine the system
of sensations by the light of reason, we can discover no essential
dependence between the sensations and their respective organs, nor
between the organs and the objects and circumstances by which they are
affected. Why does the impression of the light upon my eyes cause in me
a particular sensation, which cannot result from the same impression
on a different part of my body? Why may not the brain receive the same
impression in various forms? Why must this fluid which we call _light_,
and no other, produce the impression? Why may not this same sensation
of _seeing_ proceed equally from other affections of the brain? A
violent blow on the head produces the sensation of many luminous
points, whence the common expression of "seeing stars by daylight."
We must confess that philosophy knows nothing of these secrets, that
as yet it has not been able to penetrate them, and it can give no
answer to these questions. It sees an order of facts, but no necessary
connection between them, or rather, judging from its ideas of mind and
body, every thing induces it to believe that these phenomena in our
life depend solely on the will of our Creator.

97. If an entirely new order of sensations is possible, there may be
beings with six or seven senses. The imagination cannot conceive their
nature; but reason sees in them no impossibility.




