CHAPTER XXIV.

A CONJECTURE ON THE TRANSCENDENTAL NOTION OF EXTENSION.


171. The arguments for or against unextended points, for or against
the infinite divisibility of matter seem equally conclusive.
The understanding is afraid that it has met with contradictory
demonstrations; it thinks it discovers absurdities in infinite
divisibility, and absurdities in limiting it; absurdities in denying
unextended points, and absurdities in admitting them. It is invincible
attacking an opinion, but its strength is turned into weakness as
soon as it attempts to establish or defend any thing of its own. Yet
reason can never contradict itself; two contradictory demonstrations
would be the contradiction of reason, and would produce its ruin;
the contradiction can, therefore, only be apparent. But who shall
flatter himself that he can untie the knot? Excessive confidence on
this point is a sure proof that one has not understood the true state
of the question, and such vanity would be punished by the conviction
of ignorance. With all these reserves I now proceed to make a few
observations on this mysterious subject.

172. I am inclined to believe that in all investigations on the
first elements of matter, there is an error which renders any result
impossible. You wish to know whether extension may be produced from
unextended points, and the method which you employ consists in
imagining them already approached, and then trying to see if any part
of space can be filled by them. This seems to me like trying to make a
denial correspond to an affirmation. The unextended point represents
nothing determinate to us except the denial of extension; when,
therefore, we ask if this point joined with others like it can occupy
space, we ask if the unextended can be extended. Our imagination makes
us presuppose extension in the very act in which we wish to examine
its primitive generation. Space, such as we conceive it, is a true
extension; and, as has been shown, is the idea of extension in general;
to imagine, therefore, that the unextended can fill space, is to change
non-extension into extension. It is true that this is precisely what is
required, and in this consists the whole difficulty; but the error is
in attempting to solve it by a juxtaposition which makes these points
both unextended and extended, an evident contradiction.

173. In order to know how extension is generated, it would be necessary
to free ourselves from all sensible representations, and from all
ideas which are in the least degree affected by the phenomenon, and to
contemplate it with an eye as simple, a look as penetrating, as that
of a pure spirit. It would be necessary to take from all geometrical
ideas all phenomenal forms, all representations of the imagination,
and present them to the imagination purified from all mixture with the
sensible order. It would be necessary to know how far extension, real
continuity, agrees with the phenomenal. It would, in fine, be necessary
to eliminate from the object perceived, all that relates to the subject
which perceives it.

174. In extension, as we have already seen, there are two things to
be considered; multiplicity, and continuity. As to the first, there
is no objection to supposing that it may be the result of unextended
points, since number results from various units whether they are
simple or composite. But the difficulty is with regard to continuity,
which sensible intuition clearly presents to us as the basis of the
representations of the imagination, but the nature of which is a
puzzle to the understanding. It may perhaps be said that continuity,
abstracted from the sensible representation, and considered only in
the transcendental order, is, in its reality and as it appears to a
pure spirit, nothing more than the constant relation of many beings,
which are of a nature to produce in a sensitive being the phenomenon of
representation, and to be perceived in the intuition which we call the
representation of space.

According to this hypothesis extension in the external world is real,
not only as a principle of causality of our impressions, but also as
an object subject to the necessary relations which we conceive.

175. But, then, it will be asked, is the external world such as
we imagine it? To this we must answer, in accordance with what we
have said when treating of sensations, that it is necessary to take
from sensations all that is subjective, and which by an innocent
illustration we look upon as objective; we may then say that extension
really exists outside of us and independent of our sensations;
considered in itself, it exists free from all sensible representation,
and in the same manner in which a pure spirit may perceive it.

176. We see no objection which can reasonably be made to this theory
which affirms the reality of the corporeal world, at the same time that
it settles the difficulties of idealism. To give my opinion in a few
words, I say: That extension in itself, exists such as God knows it,
and in the cognition of God there is no mixture of any of the sensible
representations which always accompany man's perception. That which is
positive in extension is multiplicity, together with a certain constant
order; continuity is nothing more than this constant order, in so far
as sensibly represented in us, it is a purely subjective phenomenon
which does not at all affect the reality.

177. We may even assign a reason why sensible intuition has been given
to us. Our soul is united to an organized body,--that is to say, a
collection of beings bound together by constant relation to each other
and to the other bodies of the universe. In order that the harmony
might not be interrupted, and that the soul which presides over this
organization might rightly exercise its functions, there was need of
a continued representation of this collection of the relations of our
own and other bodies. This representation must be simultaneous and
independent of intellectual combinations; for otherwise the animal
faculties could not be exercised with the promptness and perseverance
which the satisfaction of the necessities of life demands. Therefore
it is that all sensible beings, even those which have not reason, have
been endowed with this intuition of extension or space: which is like
an unlimited field on which the different parts of the universe are
represented.




