CHAPTER XX.

ARE THERE ABSOLUTE MAGNITUDES?


144. The preceding doctrine will seem much more probable if we reflect
that all purely intellectual perceptions of extension may be reduced
to the knowledge of order and relation. There is nothing absolute in
the eyes of science, not even of mathematical science. The absolute, in
relation to extension, is an ignorant fancy which the observation of
the phenomena is sufficient to dissipate.

In the order of appearances there are no absolute magnitudes; all are
relations. We can not even form an idea of a magnitude, unless with
reference to another which serves for a measure. The absolute is found
only in number, and never in extension; a magnitude is absolute, not
in itself, but only by being numbered. A surface two feet square,
presents two distinct ideas; the number of its parts, and the kind of
parts. The number is a fixed idea, but the kind is purely relative. I
will try to make this clearer.

145. When I speak of a surface four feet square, the number four is a
simple, fixed, and unchangeable idea; but I can explain a square foot
only by relations. If I am asked what is a square foot, I can answer
only by comparison with a square rod or a square inch; but if I am
again asked what is a square rod or a square inch, I am again forced
to recur to other measures which are greater or smaller; I can nowhere
find a fixed magnitude.

146. If there were some fixed measure it might be some dimension
of the body, my hand, or foot, or arm. But who does not see that
the dimensions of my body are not a universal measure, and that the
hands, or feet, or arms, of all men are not equal? And even in the
same individual they are subject to a thousand changes more or less
perceptible. Shall we take for our fixed measure the radius of the
earth, or of a heavenly body? But one has no claim to preference before
the other. Every one knows that astronomers take sometimes the radius
of the earth, and sometimes the radius of its orbit as the unity of
measure. If we suppose these radii to be greater or smaller, can we not
equally in either case take them as the measure? They are preferred
because they do not change.

But even astronomers regard these magnitudes as purely relative, and at
one time consider them infinitely large, at another infinitely small,
according to the point of view from which they look at them. The radius
of the earth's orbit is considered infinite in comparison with a small
inequality on the earth's surface, and infinitely small when compared
with the distance of the fixed stars.

We can form no idea of these measures except by comparison with those
in constant use. What idea should we have of the magnitude of the
radius of the earth if we did not know how many million measures it is
equal to? What idea should we have in turn of these measures if we had
nothing constant to which we could refer them?

147. There is something absolute in magnitudes, it may be objected;
for a foot is a certain length which we both see and touch, and cannot
be greater or smaller; the surface of a square yard is in like manner
something definite which we see and which we touch; and the same may
be applied to solids. There is no necessity of going farther to find
that which is so clearly presented to us in sensible intuition. This
objection supposes that there is something fixed and constant in
intuition; this is false. I appeal to experience.

It is probable that men see the same magnitudes very differently
according to the disposition of their eyes. No one is ignorant that
this happens when the objects are at a distance; for, then, one sees
clearly what another cannot even distinguish; to one it is a surface,
while to another it is not even so much as a point. We all know what a
great variety there is in the size of objects when looked at through
differently graduated glasses. From all this we conclude that there is
nothing fixed in phenomenal magnitude; but that every thing is subject
to continual changes.

When we look through a microscope objects which were before invisible,
take large dimensions; and as the microscope may be infinitely
perfected, it is not absurd to suppose that there are animals to whom
what is invisible to us appears larger than the whole earth. The
construction of the eye may also be considered in an inverse sense, and
as infinite perfection is also possible in this case, it is possible
that magnitudes which to us are immense may be invisible to other
beings. To this eye of colossal vision the terrestrial globe would
perhaps be an imperceptible atom. This is no more than what happens by
the interposition of distance; immense masses in the firmament seem to
us to be only small specks of light.

148. It must now be very evident that there is nothing absolute in
magnitudes of sight; but that all is relative, and that objects
appear to us greater or less, according to habit, the construction
of our organs, and other circumstances. The variety of appearances
is in accordance with philosophy; since no necessary relation can
be discovered between the size of the organ and the object. What
connection is there between a narrow surface like the retina of our eye
and the immense surfaces which are painted on it?

149. From sight we may pass to touch, but we find no reason of the
fixity of phenomenal magnitude. The sense of touch gives us the ideas
of magnitudes by relation to the time it takes to pass over them, and
to the velocity of our motion. The ideas of time and velocity are
also relative; they refer to the space passed over. When we measure
velocity we say that it is the space divided by the time; in measuring
time we say that it is the space divided by the velocity; and we
measure space by multiplying the velocity by the time. All these ideas
are correlative, and are measured by each other, and by their mutual
relations. This shows that these ideas have nothing absolute; their
whole character is that of a relation which is incomplete, or rather
does not exist, if one of the terms is wanting.

150. We shall find it equally impossible to determine these measures
by the impressions which the motion causes in us. If for example we
propose to measure the degree of velocity, by the agitation which
we feel in our body, we shall find that the measure varies with the
agitation, but this agitation depends on the degree of force exerted,
and still more on the strength of the subject. Thus a little child is
obliged to run till he is almost out of breath, to keep up with his
father who is walking fast.

The impossibility of any fixed measure by means of impressions will
be still more apparent if we compare the motion of a horse with the
motion of a microscopic animal. The distance which a horse would pass
over almost without any sensible motion, would require the microscopic
animal to display its whole activity, and run perhaps a whole day.
The horse would scarce believe he had changed his place, whereas the
poor animalcule would at night be overcome by fatigue like one who has
travelled a long journey. Compare now the motion of the horse with the
motion of those fabulous giants who piled up mountains to scale the
heavens; a single step of one of those giants would be a long distance
for the horse to travel.

151. Art seems to be in accordance with science on this point. In art,
size is nothing, the only thing which is regarded is the proportion
or relation. A skilful miniature represents a person as clearly as a
painting the size of life. The same principle is applied to all the
objects embraced by art, the artistic thought never refers directly to
the size; proportion, the _relative_ is all that is attended to; the
absolute counts for nothing. We see the system of relations transferred
to the order of appearances, inasmuch as they affect the faculties
susceptible of pleasure; reason is thus admirably harmonized with
sentiment, in the same manner as we have found intellect harmonized
with the senses.




