CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONCLUSION AND SUMMING UP.


262. Before passing to another subject, let us fix our attention for a
few moments on the nature and origin of the idea of extension. We shall
thus collect the fruit of the preceding investigations, and prepare the
way for those which follow.

The scientific fruitfulness of this idea to our mind proves how
distant sensible impressions are from intellectual perception. We
cannot know whether this idea existed in our mind before the sensible
impression; if it did exist we were not conscious of it, and in this
respect it is affirming a gratuitous proposition to say that it is an
innate idea. What we can safely say, is, that there are two distinct
orders of internal phenomena, that sensation could not have produced
the idea, that this idea is immeasurably superior to the external
impression, or even the internal sensitive intuition, and that if it
did not already exist in the mind, it was not produced by sensation as
an effect is produced by its cause.

263. Here we make an important transition from the order of sensations,
to the order of ideas, and discover in our mind a new class of facts.
It matters little whether these facts exist before the impression,
or result from its presence. In the first case, we see in the mind
a deposit of germs which need only the warmth of life in order to
be developed; in the second, we find in the mind a fertility which
produces these germs. In either case we find a being of a privileged
nature, a sublime being which by a single leap rises above the region
of matter, and awakened by the external impression, arises to a new
life which this world cannot contain.

264. In this sense there are innate ideas; ideas which sensation could
not have produced. In this sense all general and necessary ideas are
innate; for sensation could not produce them. Sensation is never any
thing more than a phenomenon, a particular and contingent fact, and
consequently incapable of producing general ideas, or the ideas of the
necessary relations of being. Sight, or the imaginary representation
of a triangle, is a contingent phenomenon which tells us nothing of
the necessary relations of the sides and angles to each other. In
order to perceive these relations, this necessity, something else is
required. This something else, call it innate ideas, force, fecundity,
or activity of the mind, or any thing you please, exists, and could not
have been produced by sensation, but belongs to a higher order distinct
from sensible phenomena.

265. After such long investigations of the phenomena of sensation, we
at last find an idea; it is the idea of extension, the foundation of
all the mathematical sciences and of their application to the laws of
nature.

The human mind, in all its relations with the material world, seems to
have one great idea, that of extension, which, modified in infinite
ways, is the origin of all the sciences which relate to matter. The
whole material world rests on this idea, and all knowledge of material
objects proceeds from it. It is a pure idea in its necessary relations
and in its necessary branches. It is a light given to the lord of
creation that he may know and admire the prodigies of nature.

266. We find the same wonderful simplicity amidst so complicated a
multiplicity in another order of ideas. Hence we infer that the whole
edifice of the sciences and all human knowledge are founded on a small
number of ideas, perhaps on two alone. These ideas are not sensible
representations, they are the objects of pure intuitions; they cannot
be decomposed, but they may be applied to an infinite variety of
things; they are not explained by words, as a union including various
conceptions; by them a mind acts on another mind, not to teach it any
thing, but to make it concentrate its activity in order to note what
it contains within itself, and learn, in a certain measure, what it
already knows.

Try to explain extension, the idea by which we perceive this order
which we cannot express in words, but on which we found sensible
experience and geometrical science, and you can find no expression.
Will you define it to be "parts outside of parts?" But what are
_parts_, and what does _outside_ mean, if you have not the idea
of extension? Take any extended thing, make your mind concentrate
itself and exercise its activity in generalization. Is this triangle
a quadrilateral? No. Are they both extended? Yes. Is this surface a
solid? No. Are they both extended? Yes. Are all triangles different
from quadrilaterals? Yes. Have all surfaces and solids extension? Yes.
How do you pass from one fact to all the facts of the same kind, from
the contingent to the necessary? Have you explained what extension is?
No. Have you shown what there is common to all these different things?
No. All that you have done then is to arouse the activity of your mind,
and to make it direct its attention to the general idea of extension,
and the mind applies this idea to various things which are different,
yet have something in common, it applies the different modifications of
this idea to various things which have something in common, and finds
them different. You have not taught the truths of geometry to the mind,
but have awakened them in it, whether they already existed in it, or
the mind had the faculty of producing them.

267. Let us now collect the result of the investigations we have made.
I do not give an equal value to all the propositions which follow. I
have explained my opinion of each in its proper place, but I consider
it well to sum them all up here in order to assist the understanding
and help the memory.

I. There is immediate certainty of our relations with beings distinct
from us.

II. There is certainty of the existence of an external world.

III. The external world in relation to us, is only an extended
being which affects us, and is subject to constant laws which we may
determine.

IV. We have the idea of extension.

V. The idea of extension is excited by sensations, but it is not
confounded with them.

VI. The idea of extension is the basis of all our cognitions of bodies.

VII. The idea of extension should not be confounded with the imaginary
representation of extension.

VIII. An extended space which is nothing real, is an absurdity.

IX. Space is nothing real distinguished from the extension of bodies.

X. Where there are no bodies, there are no distances.

XI. Motion is the change of the positions of bodies among themselves.

XII. There is not and cannot be vacuum of any kind.

XIII. The idea of space is the idea of extension in the abstract.

XIV. The imagination of an unlimited space is only an attempt of
the imagination to follow the understanding in the abstraction of
extension. It also arises from our habit of seeing through transparent
mediums, and moving in fluids whose resistance is not perceptible.

XV. As all that we know of bodies is, that they are extended and affect
us, whatever has these two conditions is to us a body.

XVI. But as we do not know the essence of bodies, we do not know
whether a body can exist without extension.

XVII. Neither do we know what modifications the extension of one body
may be subject to, with respect to others.

XVIII. The elements of which bodies are composed are unknown to us.

XIX. The approximation of some bodies to others, and the gravitation
which results from it, seem to be the necessary effect of their present
relations.

XX. The necessity of approximation does not suffice to explain the laws
of motion, or their beginning, or their continuation.

XXI. The idea of space is not an absolutely necessary condition of
sensation.

XXII. The idea of extension has a real objectiveness.

XXIII. The transition from the subjective to the objective in relation
to extension is a primitive fact of our nature.

XXIV. Therefore bodily phenomena have a real existence outside of us.

XXV. Therefore a real certainty, scientific as well as phenomenal,
arises from the testimony of the senses.

XXVI. Reason justifies the instinct of nature when it examines the
relation of subjectiveness with objectiveness in sensations.

XXVII. Geometry considers extension in the abstract; but with the
certainty that when the principle exists in the real order, the
consequences cannot fail to be produced, and that the consequences will
be more or less exact in proportion as the principle is more or less
exactly realized.

XXVIII. Notwithstanding our certainty of the existence of the external
world we do not know its essence.

XXIX. We do not know what this world is when seen by a pure spirit.

XXX. Sensible intuition, to which our geometry relates, does not
constitute the essence of scientific knowledge, and may be separated
from it.

XXXI. A change in the relations of corporeal beings among themselves,
and with our sensitive faculties, is not intrinsically impossible.


NOTES TO BOOK FIRST.


ON CHAPTER I.

(1) We must distinguish between certainty and truth: there are intimate
relations between them, yet they are very different things. Truth is
the conformity of the intellect with the object. Certainty is a firm
assent to a real or apparent truth.

Certainty is not truth, but it must at least have the illusion of
truth. We may be certain of what is false, but not unless we believe it
to be true.

There is no truth so long as there is no judgment; for without judgment
there is only perception, but no comparison of the idea with the thing;
and without comparison there can be neither conformity nor discrepancy.
If we conceive a mountain a thousand miles high, we conceive a thing
that does not exist; but we do not err so long as we do not assert the
existence of the mountain. If we affirm it, there is opposition between
our judgment and the reality: this constitutes error. The object of
the intellect is truth; therefore, we at least require the illusion
of truth in order to be certain: our intellect is weak; hence its
certainty is liable to error. The first is a law of the intellect, the
second a proof of its frailty.

Philosophy, or, rather, man, cannot rest content with appearances,
but demands reality; if any one be convinced that he has only the
appearance, or if he even doubt of it, he loses his certainty, for it
admits appearances only on condition of their being disguised.


ON CHAPTER II.

(2) Even Pyrrho did not doubt of every thing as some pretend; he
admitted sensations so far as passive, and resigned himself to the
consequences of these impressions, and yielded to the necessity of
conforming in practice to what they indicated. No one ever yet denied
appearances: it is reality that is disputed; some hold that man must be
content with saying _it appears_; others that he can go so far as to
say _it is_. It is useful to preserve this distinction, as it prevents
confusion of ideas in the history of philosophy, and conduces to render
clear the question of certainty. Thus of the three questions: is there
certainty? on what is it founded? how is it acquired? the first is
resolved alike by all the schools, so far as it relates to a fact of
our soul: by only admitting appearances, they admit the certainty of
them.


ON CHAPTER III.

(3) In order to form clear ideas of the development of the
understanding, and the other faculties of our soul, the reader may
refer to what we advanced in our work, entitled _The Criterion_, and
particularly to the chapters I., II., III., XII., XIII., XIV., XVIII.,
and XXII.


ON CHAPTER IV.

(4) We subjoin the passages from St. Thomas on the unity and
multiplicity of ideas, to which we referred in the text. We believe the
friends of solid and profound metaphysics will read them with great
pleasure.

"In omnibus enim substantiis intellectualibus, invenitur virtus
intellectiva per influentiam divini luminis. Quod quidem in primo
principio est unum et simplex, et quanto magis creaturæ intellectuales
distant a primo principio, tanto magis dividitur illud lumen, et
diversificatur, sicut accidit in lineis a centro egredientibus. Et inde
est quod Deus per suam essentiam omnia intelligit: superiores autem
intellectualium substantiarum, etsi per plures formas intelligant,
tamen intelligunt per pauciores et magis universales et virtuosiores ad
comprehensionem rerum propter efficaciam virtutis intellectivæ, quæ est
in eis. In inferioribus autem sunt formæ plures et minus universales,
et minus efficaces ad comprehensionem rerum, in quantum deficiunt a
virtute intellectiva superiorum. Si ergo inferiores substantiæ haberent
formas in illa universalitate, in qua habent superiores, quia non sunt
tantæ efficaciæ in intelligendo, non acciperent per eas perfectam
cognitionem de rebus, sed in quadam communitate, et confusione, quod
aliqualiter apparet in hominibus. Nam qui sunt debilioris intellectus,
per universales conceptiones magis intelligentium, non accipiunt
perfectam cognitionem, nisi eis singula in speciali explicentur. (P.
1^n, Q. 89^2, A. 1°.)

"Intellectus quanto est altior et perspicacior tanto ex uno potest
plura cognoscere. Et quia intellectus divinus est altissimus, per
unam simplicem essentiam suam omnia cognoscit; nec est ibi aliqua
pluralitas formarum idealium, nisi secundum diversos respectus divinæ
essentiæ ad res cognitas; sed in intellectu creato multiplicatur
secundum rem quod est unum secundum rem in mente divina, ut non
possit omnia per unum cognoscere; ita tamen quod quanto intellectus
creatus est altior, tanto pauciores habet formas ad plura cognoscenda
efficaces. Et hoc est quod Dio. dicit, 12, cœ. hier. quod superiores
ordines habent scientiam magis universalem in inferioribus. Et in
lib. de causis dicitur, quod intelligentiæ superiores habent formas
magis universales; hoc tamen observato, quod in infimis angelis sunt
formæ adhuc universales in tantum, quod per unam formam possunt
cognoscere omnia individua unius speciei: ita quod illa species sit
propria, uniuscujusque particularium secundum diversos respectus ejus
ad particularia, sicut essentia divina efficitur propria similitudo
singulorum secundum diversos respectus; sed intellectus humanus qui
est ultimus in ordine substantiarum intellectualium habet formas
in tantum particulatas quod non potest per unam speciem nisi unum
quid cognoscere. Et ideo similitudo speciei existens in intellectu
humano non sufficit ad cognoscenda plura singularia; et propter hoc
intellectui adjuncti sunt sensus quibus singularia accipiat. (Quodlib.
7, A. 3.)

"Respondeo dicendum, quod ex hoc sunt in rebus aliqua superiora, quod
sunt uni primo, quod est Deus, propinquiora et similiora. In Deo
autem tota plenitudo intellectualis cognitionis continetur in uno,
scilicet in essentia divina, per quam Deus omnia cognoscit. Quæ quidem
intelligibilis plentitudo, in intelligibilibus creaturis inferiori
modo et minus simpliciter invenitur. Unde oportet, quod ea quæ Deus
cognoscit per unam, inferiores intellectus cognoscant per multa; et
tanto amplius per plura, quanto amplius intellectus inferior fuit. Sic
igitur quanto angelus fuerit superior, tanto per pauciores species
universitatem intelligibilium apprehendere poterit, et ideo oportet
quod ejus formæ sint universaliores, quasi ad plura se extendentes
unaquæque eorum. Et de hoc, exemplum aliqualiter in nobis perspici
potest: sunt enim quidam, qui veritatem intelligibilem capere non
possunt; nisi eis particulatim per singula explicatur. Et hoc quidem ex
debilitate intellectus eorum contingit. Alii vero qui sunt fortioris
intellectus, ex paucis multo capere possunt." (P.1^a, Q. 55^a A. 3°.)


ON CHAPTER V.

(5) Here is the idea of Condillac's man-statue explained by himself:
"To gain this object we imagined a statue internally organized like
ourselves, and animated with a mind deprived of every sort of ideas. We
also supposed its exterior composed wholly of marble, to allow it the
use of none of its senses, and we reserved to ourselves the liberty to
open them at our pleasure to the different impressions of which they
are susceptible.

"We thought we ought to commence with _smell_, because of all the
senses this is the one which least contributes to cognitions of the
mind. Next we had to examine the others, and after having considered
them apart and together, we saw the statue become an animal able to
attend to its own preservation.

"The principle that determines the development of its faculties is
simple; even sensations contain it; for, all being of necessity either
agreeable or the contrary, the statue is interested in enjoying some
and shunning others. The reader will now be convinced that this
interest suffices to give occasion to the gradations of the will and
the understanding. Judgments, reflection, desires, passions, are only
sensations variously transformed. This is why it seemed to us useless
to suppose the soul to have received immediately from nature all the
sensations with which it is endowed. Nature has given us organs which
show us by pleasure or pain what we ought to seek or to avoid; but here
she stops, and leaves to experience the task of leading us to contract
habits, and finish the work she has commenced.

"This object is new, and shows all the simplicity of the ways of the
Author of nature. Is it not a thing worthy of our admiration thus to
see, from man's sensibility to pleasure or pain, spring up in him
ideas, desires, habits, and talents of various kinds?"--_Traite des
Sensations._ _Dessein de l'ouvrage._

What we admire in Condillac is not his system, but his candor; and
we wonder yet more that, for a time, he should have had numerous
followers of his so poor and superficial system. The author proposes
the difficulty, that as there is in our soul nothing but transformed
sensations, it is strange that brutes, which also have sensations,
should not be endowed with the same faculties as man. Can the reader
imagine what profound reason the French philosopher assigned? We doubt
it very much. It is a curious thought: "the organ of _touch_ is _less
perfect_ in brutes, and consequently it cannot be to them an occasional
cause of all the operations which we observe in ourselves." He did well
to adopt the motto: _nec tamen quasi Pythius Apollo!_


ON CHAPTER VI.

(6) The works of the scholastics are worth reading on these points.
Treating of _the object of science_, they are at once exact and
profound. It is not easy to think of any thing concerning the
classification of truths not explained or indicated by them.


ON CHAPTER VII.

(7) Let us not be thought to judge too severely of the forms adopted
by the German philosophers. It is well known how Madame de Staël
speaks of them; but happily we can cite in our favor a more competent
judge. Schelling, one of the chiefs of German philosophy, says: "The
Germans have so long philosophized among themselves, as to gradually
depart more and more, in their thoughts and their words, from what
is universally intelligible; and the degree of departure therefrom
has almost come at last to be the measure of philosophical ability.
Examples are not wanting to us. As families which separate from general
society, and live wholly among themselves, among other repulsive
singularities, come to use expressions intelligible only to themselves,
so is it with the Germans in philosophy; and after vain efforts to
spread the Kantian philosophy out of Germany, they renounced the
attempt to make themselves intelligible to other nations; they became
accustomed to regard themselves as the chosen people of philosophy,
forgetting that the primary end of philosophy,--an end often neglected,
but not the less to be sought for on that account,--is to gain
universal consent, by making themselves universally intelligible. This
is not to say that we must judge works of thought like exercises in
style; but all philosophy not intelligible to all civilized nations,
and accessible in every language, cannot, for this reason alone, be the
universal and true philosophy."--_Schelling's Judgment of V. Cousin,
and the state of French and German Philosophy in general._ 1834. p. 4.

Schelling flatters himself that German philosophy is about to take a
better course with respect to clearness, and adds: "The philosophical
writer who, for tens of years past, was unable to depart from the terms
and forms of the school, without loss of his scientific reputation, may
hereafter emancipate himself from this restraint. He will seek depth of
thought; and an absolute incapacity to express himself with clearness,
will no longer be regarded as the mark of talent and philosophical
inspiration." We have nothing to add to this passage; we would only
remind its author that: _mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur_.


ON CHAPTER VIII.

(8) The perusal of Schelling's work on Ideal Transcendentalism leaves
no doubt as to his view of this identity, which at bottom neither is
nor can be any thing else than pantheism; yet, for the sake of truth,
we will allow that Schelling seems to have modified his doctrine, or
to have feared its consequences, if we are to consider the indications
found in his discourse at the opening of his course of philosophy,
at Berlin, the 13th of November, 1841. We there find the following
passage, worthy of the attention of all thinking men: "The difficulties
and obstacles of all kinds, against which philosophy contends are
visible, and in vain would we attempt to dissemble them. Never was
there a more powerful reaction against philosophy on the part of real
and active life than at this present epoch; and this proves philosophy
to have penetrated even to the vital questions of society, those
concerning which no one can rest indifferent. So long as a philosophy
is only in the first stages of formation, taking the first steps in its
march, no one cares for it, except philosophers themselves; other men
await the last word of philosophy, since it is important to the general
public only in its results.

"We confess that we ought not to take as the practical result of a
solid and profoundly meditated philosophy whatever it may please any
body to designate as such: were it so, the world would be subjected
to doctrines the most repugnant to sound morality, even such as sap
its foundation. No! No one judges of philosophy by the practical
conclusions drawn by ignorance or presumption. Moreover, lest deception
on this point be possible, the public should reject a philosophy
which has such results, without examining or even judging it in its
principles; it should say that it cannot understand the depth of these
questions, or the artificial and intricate march of the arguments;
but without pausing here it should promptly decide that a philosophy
leading to such conclusions cannot be true in its principles. What the
Roman moralist said of the useful: _nihil utile nisi quod honestum_,
is equally applicable to the investigation of truth: _no philosophy
that respects itself will allow that it leads to irreligion_. Yet
actual philosophy is in such a state, that, however much it promises
a religious result, no one admits it; for deductions drawn from it
convert the dogmas of the Christian religion into a vain phantasmagory.

"As to this, some of its most faithful disciples are openly agreed; be
the suspicion well founded or not, its existence suffices, and this
opinion is established.

"But active life in the last result is always right; and so philosophy
is exposed to great risks. They who war on one philosophy are not far
from condemning all philosophy; they say in their heart, there is no
longer philosophy in the world. I myself am not exempt from these
condemnations, since _it is pretended that it is I, who first gave
impulse to this philosophy which is at present so badly judged of,
because of its religious results_.

"How shall I defend myself? Certainly I would never attack a philosophy
for its last results; but I would judge it in its first principles, as
every philosophical mind should. It is moreover well enough known that
I have shown myself little satisfied with the philosophy of which I
speak.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The moral and spiritual worlds are so divided that any point of union
for an instant should be a motive of satisfaction. Besides to destroy,
is a very sad thing when there is nothing wherewith to replace the
thing destroyed. 'Do it better yourself,' we say to one who can do
nothing but criticize.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I therefore consecrate myself entirely to the mission with which I
am charged; for you I will live; for you I will labor without ceasing
while there remains in me the breath of life, and while He permits
me, without whose permission not a hair can fall from our head, and
yet less a deeply felt word proceed from our mouth. He, without whose
inspiration not one lucid idea can shine on our mind, nor one thought
of truth and liberty illumine our soul."

This passage shows the embarrassment of the German philosopher's
position, and the irreligious consequences attached to his doctrines.
It is consoling to see him pay some homage to truth; but it is
afflicting to see him still pretend to save its inconsequence.


ON CHAPTER IX.

(9) In these latter days there have not been wanting some to count
the illustrious Malebranche among the partisans of pantheism. We
cannot conceive how M. Cousin could say; "Malebranche est avec
Spinoza le plus grand disciple de Descartes. Comme lui il a tiré des
principes de leur commun maître les conséquences que ces principes
renfermaient. Malebranche est à la lettre Spinoza chrétien."
(_Fragments Philosophiques._ T. 2^{me}. p. 167. Ed. 3^{ieme}.) We
repeat that we cannot conceive how any one, who had read ever so little
of the great metaphysician's works, should assert such a paradox. The
slightest glance at his writings suffices to show in them the most
lofty spiritualism united with profound respect for the dogmas of
our most holy religion. When we treat of the various philosophical
systems of the origin of ideas and the problem of the universe, we
shall have other occasions to vindicate the wise and pious author of
the _Investigation de la Verité_. Yet we were unwilling to pass by
the present occasion without doing him the justice to defend him from
imputations, which he would, were he living, repel as intolerable
calumnies. Who would have thought when he wrote those works, on every
page of which we find, God, the mind, the Christian religion, eternal
truth, and original sin, with frequent texts from the sacred Scriptures
and St. Augustine, that he would ever be ranked with Spinoza, with
the absurd epithet of _Christian Spinoza_? Such is at times the sad
lot of great men, thus to be held as chiefs of sects they abhorred.
Malebranche styled Spinoza, _l'impie de nos jours_, and M. Cousin dares
call Malebranche the _Christian_ Spinoza.


ON CHAPTER X.

(10) We are not ignorant of the difficulties to which Leibnitz's
systems are subject; but it is necessary to show that in this great
man's mind the erroneous doctrines of modern Germans had no place. "Et
c'est ainsi," he says, in his Monadologie (No. 38), "que la dernière
raison des choses doit être dans une substance necessaire, dans
laquelle le détail des changmens ne soit qu'eminemment, comme dans la
source, et c'est ce que nous appelons Dieu. Or cette substance étant
une raison suffisante de tout ce détail, lequel est aussi lié partout,
il n'y a qu'un Dieu, et ce Dieu suffit.

"On peut juger aussi que cette substance suprême qui est unique,
universelle, et necessaire, n'ayant rien hors d'elle qui en soit
indépendant, et étant une suite simple de l'être possible, doit être
incapable de limites et contenir tout autant de realité qu'il est
possible.

"D'où il s'ensuit, que Dieu est absolument parfait, la perfection
n'étant autre chose, que la grandeur de la realité positive prise
précisément en mettant à part les limites ou bornes dans les choses qui
en ont. Et là, où il n'y a point de bornes, c'est-à-dire, en Dieu, la
perfection est absolument infinie.

"Il s'ensuit aussi que les créatures ont leur perfections de
l'influence de Dieu, mais qu'elles ont leurs imperfections de leur
nature propre, incapable d'être sans bornes. Car c'est en cela qu'elles
sont distinguées de Dieu.

"Il est vrai aussi, qu'en Dieu est non seulement la source des
existences, mais encore celle des essences, en tant que réelles, ou de
ce qu'il y a de réel dans la possibilité."

In his dissertation on the Platonic philosophy he combats the
pantheistic tendencies of Valentine Weigel, in these words:
"Valentinum Weigelium, qui non tantum vitam beatam peculiari libero
per Deificationem explicat, sed et passim mortem et quietem hujusmodi
commendat, vellem cum aliis Quietistis suspicionem similis sententiæ
non dedisse. * * * Spinoza aliter eodem tendebat; ei una substantia
est, Deus; creaturæ ejus modificationes, et figuræ in cera continue per
motum nascentes et pereuntes. Ita ipsi, perinde ut Almerico, anima non
superest, nisi per suum _esse_ ideale in Deo ut ibi ab æterno fuit.

"Sed nihil in Platone animadverto, unde colligam, animos propriam
sibi substantiam non servare; quod etiam sane philosophanti extra
controversiam est, neque intelligi contraria potest sententia, nisi
Deum et animam corporea fingas, neque enim aliter ex Deo animas,
tanquam particulas divellas; sed talis de Deo atque anima notio,
aliunde absurda est." (Leibnitz. Epist. ad Hanschium de Philos. Platon.)

So far was Leibnitz from deeming the tendency to pantheism an elevated
philosophy, that, as we have just seen, he considered it the result
of a rude imagination. It is very remarkable that under an historical
as under a metaphysical aspect Leibnitz agrees with St. Thomas; both
express the same ideas in very similar words. The holy doctor asks if
the soul is made from the substance of God, and there takes occasion
to examine the origin of the error, and says: "Respondeo dicendum,
quod dicere animam esse de substantia Dei, manifestam improbabilitatem
continet. Ut enim ex dictis patet, anima humana est quandoque
intelligens in potentia, et scientiam quodammodo a rebus acquirit, et
habet diversas potentias; quæ omnia aliena sunt a Dei natura, qui est
actus purus, et nihil ab alio accipiens, et nullam in se diversitatem
habens, ut supra probatum est.

"Sed hic error principium habuisse videtur ex duabus positionibus
antiquorum. Primi enim, qui naturas rerum considerare inceperunt,
imaginationem transcendere non valentes, nihil præter corpora esse
posuerunt. Et ideo Deum dicebant esse quoddam corpus, quod aliorum
corporum judicabant esse principium. Et quia animam ponebant esse de
natura illius corporis, quod dicebant esse principium, ut dicitur
in primo de anima, per consequens sequebatur quod anima esset de
substantia Dei. Juxta quam positionem etiam Manichæi, Deum esse quamdam
lucem corpoream existimantes, quandam partem illius lucis animam esse
posuerunt corpori alligatam. Secundo vero processum fuit ad hoc quod
aliqui aliquid incorporeum esse apprehenderunt; non tamen a corpore
separatum, sed corporis formam. Unde et Varro dixit quod Deus est
anima, mundum intuitu, vel motu et ratione gubernans: ut Augu. narrat 7
de Civit. Dei. Sic igitur illius totalis animæ partem, aliqui posuerunt
animam hominis: sicut homo est pars totius mundi; non valentes
intellectu pertingere ad distinguendos spiritualium substantiarum
gradus, nisi secundum distinctiones corporum. Hæc autem sunt omnia
impossibilia, ut supra probatum est, unde manifeste falsum est animam
esse de substantia Dei." (P. 1^a, Q. 90^a, A. 1^o.)


ON CHAPTER XI.

(11) We often find the intellect identified by the scholastics with
the thing known, even when they treat of created intellects; but this
identity is limited to the purely ideal order, and denotes only the
intimate union of the idea and the intellect. It is well known what
importance they attached to matters and forms; and this distinction
is also applied to the phenomena of intelligence. Although the idea
was considered as a thing distinct from the intellect, yet, as
the intellect is perfected by it, and placed in relation with the
thing represented, they said that the intellect was the same as the
thing known. We must thus explain passages in St. Thomas and other
scholastics, since, although their expressions, if considered in
isolation, would be inexact, they are not so, if regard be had to the
meaning which they attributed to them, and which clearly follows from
their fundamental principles. Thus St. Thomas (Quodlibet. 7 A. 2), to
prove that the created intellect cannot know many things at the same
time, says:

"Sed quod intellectus simul intelligat plura intelligibilia, primo
et principaliter, est impossibile. Cujus ratio est quia _intellectus
secundum actum est omnino, id est, perfecte res intellecta_: ut dicitur
in 3 de anima. _Quod quidem intelligendum est non quod essentia
intellectus fiat res intellecta_ vel species ejus; sed quia complete
informatur per speciem rei intellectæ, dum eam actu intelligit. Unde
intellectum simul plura intelligere primo, idem est ac si res una simul
esset plura. In rebus enim materiabilus videmus quod una res numero non
potest esse simul plura in actu, sed plura in potentia.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Unde patet quod sicut una res materialis non potest esse simul plura
actu, ita unus intellectus non potest simul plura intelligere primo.
Et hoc est quod Alga, dicit, quod sicut unum corpus non potest simul
figurari pluribus figuris; ita unus intellectus non potest simul plura
intelligere. Nec potest dici quod intellectus informatur perfecte
simul pluribus speciebus intelligibilibus, sicut unum corpus simul
informatur figura et colore; quia figura et color non sunt formæ
unius generis, nec in eodem ordine accipiuntur quia non ordinantur ad
perficiendum in esse unius rationis; sed omnes formæ intelligibiles in
quantum hujusmodi, sunt unius generis, et in eodem ordine se habent ad
intellectum, in quantum perficiunt intellectum in hoc quod est esse
intellectum in actu. Unde plures species intelligibiles se habent sicut
figuræ plures, vel plures colores, qui simul in actu in eodem esse non
possunt secundum idem."

By the first passage, we see that the meaning of identity of the
intellect with the thing known, is the same as explained in the
beginning of this note; to wit, the intimate union of the idea
of intelligible species with the intellect, as the form with its
matter,--a form which perfects the intellect, makes it pass from
potentiality to actuality, and places it in relation with the thing
represented.


ON CHAPTER XII.

(12) The doctrine of immediate intelligibility is susceptible of still
further illustration; but as this cannot be clearly done without
examining at length the nature of ideas, which does not pertain to our
present treatise, we shall reserve it for its proper place.


ON CHAPTER XIII.

(13) Enough, perhaps, was not said in the text to enable all readers to
form clear and complete ideas of the representation of causality; but
this doctrine, as regards the first intelligence, is closely allied to
the questions on the foundation of the possibility even of non-existent
things,--questions which we cannot here investigate without reversing
the order of subjects.


ON CHAPTER XIV.

(14) The distinction of geometrical and non-geometrical orders of ideas
is of the utmost importance in ideology. We have given this distinction
in order that the examination of a truth fundamental among purely ideal
truths might not remain incomplete. But its explanation and foundation
will be given in our treatise on the of space and extension.


ON CHAPTER XV.

(15) The word _instinct_, when applied to the intellect, is clearly
taken in a different sense than it is when applied to irrational
animals. It has here no ignoble meaning; and this is in accordance with
the use made of it when divine things are spoken of. One meaning given
it by the dictionary is, "_impulse, or movement of the Holy Ghost, in
speaking of supernatural inspirations_." The Latin, _instinctus_, means
_inspiration_. Thus: "Sacro mens _instincta_ furore."


ON CHAPTER XVI.

(16) The confusion of ideas upon this point originates in that tendency
to unity of which we spoke in our Fourth Chapter. We first suppose
there must be one only principle, and we ask what it is; whereas,
before inquiring what it is, we should ascertain if there be one only,
as is supposed. We have already seen that Fichte's system rested on the
same supposition. Thus the cause of innocent disputes in the schools
may lead to more transcendental errors.


ON CHAPTER XVII.

(17) We have, we think, faithfully interpreted the thought of
Descartes, but lest there should be some doubt as to this, we subjoin
a notable passage from his answer to the objections collected by _Père
Mersenne_ from various philosophers and theologians, against the
Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Meditations.

"When we know that we are something that thinks, this first notion _is
taken from no syllogisms_; and when any one says: _I think, therefore
I am_, or exist, _he does not infer_ his existence from thought, as
_by the force of a syllogism_, but as a thing known by itself; _he
sees it by a simple inspection of the mind_; for if he deduced it from
a syllogism, he would have to know beforehand this major; whatever
thinks, is, or exists. On the contrary, this proposition is manifested
to him by his own sentiment that he cannot think without existing. It
is a property characteristic of our mind to form general propositions
from the knowledge of particular propositions." Descartes does not
always explain himself with this clearness; the objections of his
adversaries made him examine his doctrine more thoroughly, and this
contributed to clear up his ideas.


ON CHAPTER XVIII.

(18) To form an accurate estimate of Descartes' views, let us listen to
his own explanation of his system.

"As the senses sometimes deceive us, I wished to _suppose_ that nothing
of what they make us imagine appeared; as there are men who are
deceived, and make paralogisms even when reasoning upon the simplest
matters of geometry, I judged myself as liable to err as they are,
and I rejected as false all those reasons I had before held to be
demonstrations; and also considering that even the thoughts which we
have while awake may come to us while asleep, although no one of
them may be true, I resolved to _feign_ that all things which had
entered my mind contained no more truth than illusory dreams. But I
immediately observed that, while I wished to think that every thing
was false, it was necessary for me, who thought this, to be something;
and, noting that this truth: I think, therefore I am, was so firm and
secure, that the most extravagant suppositions could not shake it, I
judged that I might, without scruple, receive it as the first truth of
philosophy."--_Discours sur la Méthode._ P. 4^{ieme.}

We said that the doubt of Descartes was a _supposition_, a _fiction_,
and these are the very terms he himself uses. In his reply to the
objections of _Père Mersenne_, we find the following confirmatory
extract: "I have read with great satisfaction your observations upon my
treatise on philosophy, for they show your good-will towards me, your
piety towards God, and your zeal for the advance of his glory. I cannot
but rejoice that you have judged my arguments worthy of your criticism,
but also that you say nothing not easily answerable.

"In the first place, you remind me that I have rejected the ideas
of phantasms of bodies, _not truly, but only by a mere fiction_, in
order to conclude that I am something that thinks, fearing, perhaps,
that I should believe it followed from this that I am only something
that thinks; but I have already shown, in my Second Meditation, that
I agreed with this, and I said: 'But these things, which I _suppose_
not to be, because I do not know them, may not really be any thing
different from me who know them; of this I can say nothing, I have at
present nothing to do with it.'" * * * * * * *

We here see that Descartes did not deny his doubt to be a mere fiction;
he even says that he does nothing but apply a method, the necessity of
which all philosophers admit.

"I pray you," he continues, "to remember that with respect to matters
of the will, I have always made a broad distinction between the
contemplation of truth and the uses of life; as regards the latter, I
am so far from thinking that we must follow only things very clearly
known, that I believe we must not always consider even what is most
probable, but that we must, among things wholly unknown or uncertain,
sometimes choose one, and hold firmly to it, so long as we see no
reason for not doing so, just as if we had chosen it from evident and
certain motives, as I have already explained in the _Discours sur la
Méthode_; but when we treat only of the contemplation of truth, _who
ever doubted that it was necessary to suspend the judgment upon things
that are obscure or not distinctly known_?"

In what, then, consists Descartes' merit? In having _applied_ a
rule known to all, and employed by few, and in so doing at the very
time that prejudices in favor of the Aristotelian doctrine were the
strongest. Descartes plainly says so; his method of doubting is not
new, only the application of it was wanting; for, as regards its
fundamental principle, "who ever doubted that it was necessary to
suspend the judgment upon things that are obscure or not distinctly
known?"

Understanding Descartes' method in this sense, that is, taking the
doubt as a supposition, a mere fiction, it is not opposed to sound
religious and moral principles. The profound philosopher does not seem
to disdain to set his readers at rest upon this point; he ingenuously
shows, in commencing his investigations, that his religious belief was
safe. "Finally, as before undertaking to rebuild the house wherein one
lives, it is not enough to demolish the old one, and provide materials
and workmen, or to exercise one's self in architecture, and to
carefully trace the design of the new house; but it is also necessary
to have another house in which to live, while the new one is building;
so that my actions might not be unresolved, like my judgments, and
that I might, in the meantime, live as happily as possible, I made a
provision for myself; it consists of three or four maxims. The first
is, to observe the laws and customs of my country, _and constantly
to preserve the religion in which, by the grace of God, I have been
instructed from my infancy_. * * * * * * After having assured myself of
these maxims, and laid them aside with _the truths of faith which have
always been first in my belief_, I judged that I might freely reject
the rest of my opinions."--_Discours sur la Méthode_, P. 3^{ieme.}


ON CHAPTER XIX.

(19) With respect to the distinction between the testimony of
consciousness and that of evidence, as in the analysis of the
proposition: I think, therefore I am; there can be no doubt that
Descartes did not express himself with sufficient precision and
exactness. See, for example, this extract: "After this, I considered
in general what is necessary for a proposition to be true and certain;
for, although I had not yet met such a one, I nevertheless thought I
ought to know in what this certainty consisted; and observing that
in the proposition, I think, therefore I am, there is nothing to
assure me of its truth, except the clear perception that in order
to think I must be, I judged that I could take it to be a general
rule that things clearly and distinctly conceived are all true; only
there is some difficulty in ascertaining what things we do distinctly
conceive."--_Discours sur la Méthode._ Partie 4^{me}.


ON CHAPTER XX.

(20) The _apodictical_ certainty of which Kant speaks in the passage
cited, is the result of the intrinsic evidence of ideas, or, in other
words, it is what the schoolmen called metaphysical certainty.


ON CHAPTER XXI.

(21) Besides the questions on the principle of contradiction as the
only foundation of certainty, there are others as to its scientific
utility and importance. We shall, when we come to treat of the idea of
_being_ in general, examine these points at length; wherefore we will
now pass them by.


ON CHAPTER XXII.

(22) We see by a passage from the fourth part of the _Discourse on
Method_, by Descartes, cited in note xv., that besides the principle,
I think, therefore I am, he admitted the principle of the legitimacy
of evidence; for, asking what is necessary in order that a proposition
may be true and certain, he says, that having remarked that if he was
certain of the truth of this proposition (I think, therefore I am),
he was so only because he saw it to be so; he believed that he could
take it to be a general rule _that things known clearly and distinctly
are all true_. This shows two principles, closely connected, although
very unlike, to enter into Descartes' system. The first is the fact
of consciousness of thought; the second is the general rule of the
legitimacy of the criterion of evidence.

It is also to be remarked that there is here some confusion of ideas,
which we have already pointed out. It is not exact to say that the
principle, I think, therefore I am, is evident: the evidence relates to
the _consequence_; but there is, properly speaking, no evidence of the
act of thought, excepting consciousness. Evidence is a criterion, but
not the only one.


ON CHAPTER XXIII.

(23) What we have said of the second proposition of this chapter is
independent of the mode in which the soul and body exercise their
mutual influence. These questions belong elsewhere. This influence is,
in every system, a fact attested by experience; and this is all that is
needed for what we propose to establish here.


ON CHAPTER XXIV.

(24) For the better understanding of what we have said in this chapter
on evidence, it will be well to consider what will be advanced in
chapters XXVI. to XXXI., inclusive.


ON CHAPTER XXV.

(25) What has been said in this chapter shows the truth of what we said
in the twenty-fourth chapter, upon the connection of the different
criteria, and the necessity of not confining one's self to an exclusive
philosophy. Consciousness serves as the basis of the other criteria,
as an indispensable fact; but if we deny the others, we also deny
consciousness.


ON CHAPTERS XXVI., XXVII., AND XXVIII.

(26) Dugald Stewart in his _Elements of the Philosophy of the
Human Mind_, (P. II., C. II., Section 3, §2,) cites a passage from
a dissertation printed at Berlin in 1764, which does not appear
so unreasonable as he pretends. We subjoin it, because the German
philosopher's opinion seems to us the same that we gave in the text.

"Omnes mathematicorum propositiones sunt identicæ et representantur hac
formula, A=A. Sunt veritates identicæ, sub varia forma expressæ, imo
ipsum quod dicitur contradictionis principium vario modo enuntiatum
et involutum; si quidem omnes hujus generis propositiones revera in
eo continentur. Secundum nostram autem intelligendi facultatem ea est
propositionum differentia, quod quædam longa ratiociniorum serie,
alia autem breviore via, ad primum omnium principiorum reducantur, et
in illud resolvantur. Sic. v. g. propositio 2+2=4 statim huc cedit:
1+1+1+1=1+1+1+1; id est, idem est idem; et, proprie loquendo, hoc modo
enuntiari debet,--si contingat adesse vel existere quatuor entia, tum
existunt quatuor entia; nam de existentia non agunt geometræ, sed
ea hypothetice tantum subintelligitur. Inde summa oritur certitudo
ratiocinia perspicienti; observat nempe idearum identitatem; et hæc est
evidentia assensum immediate cogens, quam mathematicam aut geometricam
vocamus. Mathesi tamen sua natura priva non est et propria; oritur
etenim ex identitatis perceptione, quæ locum habere potest, etiamsi
ideæ non repræsentent extensum."


ON CHAPTERS XXX AND XXXI.

(27) We have shown that Dugald Stewart had perhaps in view Vico's
doctrine; but without wishing to bring against him the charge he
brought against his master, Reid, that of resuscitating the doctrines
of the Jesuit Buffier, we would, in order that the reader may judge
with full knowledge of the cause, subjoin a remarkable extract from
the Scotch philosopher, which will show coincidence between some of
his doctrines and those of the Neapolitan. Had Stewart read Vico,
we are inclined to believe that he would not have complained of
the _confusion_ with which various ancient and modern authors have
explained this doctrine.

"The peculiarity of that species of evidence which is called
demonstrative, and which so remarkably distinguishes our mathematical
conclusions from those to which we are led in other branches of
science, is a fact which must have arrested the attention of every
person who possesses the slightest acquaintance with the elements of
geometry. And yet, I am doubtful if a satisfactory account has hitherto
been given of the circumstance in which it arises. Mr. Locke tells us,
that 'what constitutes a demonstration is intuitive evidence of every
step;' and I readily grant, that if in a single step such evidence
should fail, the other parts of the demonstration would be of no value.
It does not, however, seem to me that it is on this consideration that
the demonstrative evidence of the conclusion depends, not even when
we add to it another which is much insisted on by Dr. Reid,--that
'in demonstrative evidence our first principles must be intuitively
certain.' The inaccuracy of this remark I formerly pointed out when
treating of the evidence of axioms; on which occasion I also observed,
that the first principles of our reasonings in mathematics are not
axioms, but definitions. It is in this last circumstance (I mean the
peculiarity of reasoning from definitions) that the true theory of
mathematical demonstration is to be found; and I shall accordingly
endeavor to explain it at considerable length, and to state some of the
more important consequences to which it leads.

"That I may not, however, have the appearance of claiming, in behalf
of the following discussion, an undue share of originality, it is
necessary for me to remark that the leading idea which it contains has
been repeatedly started, and even to a certain length prosecuted, by
different writers, ancient as well as modern; but that, in all of them,
it has been so blended with collateral considerations, although foreign
to the point in question, as to divert the attention both of writer and
reader, from that single principle on which the solution of the problem
hinges. * * * * * * *

"It was already remarked, in the first chapter of this part, that
whereas, in all other sciences, the propositions which we attempt
to establish, express facts real or supposed,--in mathematics, the
propositions which we demonstrate only assert a connection between
certain suppositions and certain consequences. Our reasonings,
therefore, in mathematics, are directed to an object essentially
different from what we have in view, in any other employment of our
intellectual faculties;--not to ascertain truths with respect to
actual existences, but to trace the logical filiation of consequences
which follow from an assumed hypothesis. If, from this hypothesis,
we reason with correctness, nothing, it is manifest, can be wanting
to complete the evidence of the result; as this result only asserts
a necessary connection between the supposition and the conclusion.
In the other sciences, admitting that every ambiguity of language
were removed, and that every step of our deductions were rigorously
accurate, our conclusions would still be attended with more or less of
uncertainty, being ultimately founded on principles which may, or may
not, correspond exactly with the fact." (_Elements of the Philosophy of
the Human Mind._ P. II., C. II., S. 3, § 1.)

This is exactly Vico's doctrine of the cause of the difference in the
degrees of evidence and certainty; although he makes a general system,
in order to explain the problem of intelligence, what the Scotchman
only assigns as a fact to show the reason of mathematical evidence.
Père Buffier (Trait. des prem. Vérités, P. I., C. II.) explains the
same thing with great clearness.

We have said that, considering the indefatigable laboriousness which
distinguishes the Germans, it would not be strange if they had read the
scholastics. In confirmation of this, we notice that Leibnitz urgently
recommends the reading of them, and the more modern Germans are not
likely to forget the advice of so able an author.

Among various passages of Leibnitz, we select the following extract,
because it seems to us rather curious: "Truth is more spread than one
would believe; but it is often colored, also often covered over, and
even weakened, mutilated, and corrupted by additions which spoil it,
or render it less useful. By observing the traces of truth in the
ancients, or, to speak more generally, in all who have preceded us,
we dig gold from dirt, and draw the diamond from its mine, light from
darkness, and this would really be _perennis quædam Philosophia_.

"It may even be said that some progress would be observable in
knowledge. The Orientals have great and beautiful ideas of the
Divinity; the Greeks added reasoning and a form of science; the Fathers
of the Church rejected whatever was bad in Greek philosophy; but the
scholastics labored to usefully employ whatever was acceptable in
Pagan philosophy. I have frequently said: _aurum latere in stercore
illo scholastico barbariei_, and I wish we could find some one versed
in the Irish and Spanish philosophy, to cull from it what is good; I am
sure he would find his labor repaid by many and beautiful truths. There
was once a Swiss who _mathematized_ scholastically; his works are but
little known; although, from what I have seen of them, I should judge
them to be profound and worthy of consideration." (Lettre 3^{ieme} à M.
Remond de Montmort.)

Thus speaks Leibnitz, one of the most eminent men of modern times, and
of whom Fontenelle said: "He led the van in all the sciences." See,
then, if he was wrong in recommending the study of those authors to all
desirous of acquiring a profound knowledge of philosophy. This study,
setting aside its intrinsic utility, is of great advantage in judging,
with knowledge of the cause, a school, which, whatever its worth,
occupies a page in the history of the human mind.


ON CHAPTER XXXII.

(28)The author to whom I allude (317) is Fenelon, who, under the name
of common sense, includes also the criterion of evidence, as may be
seen by this extract: "What is common sense? Does it not consist in
the first notions which all men have of the same things? This common
sense, which always and everywhere is the same, which precedes all
examination, and even holds it in ridicule on certain questions, in
which one laughs instead of examining; which renders man unable to
doubt, no matter how great his efforts may be; this sense which belongs
to all men, which only waits to be consulted in order to discover
itself and show us the _evidence_ or the absurdity of the question, _is
not this what I call my ideas_? Here, then, are these general ideas
or notions which I cannot contradict or examine, but according to
which I examine and judge every thing, so that, instead of replying, I
laugh when any thing is proposed clearly in opposition to what these
_immutable ideas_ represent."--_Existence de Dieu_, P. II., v. 33.

There is no doubt that Fenelon speaks of evidence in this extract,
since, besides using this very term, he refers to immutable ideas; by
common sense he understands the general ideas by which we judge of all
things, or in other words, the ideas from which evidence proceeds.




NOTE TO BOOK SECOND.


ON CHAPTER II.

(29) The immateriality of the souls of brutes is not a discovery of
modern philosophy, the scholastics maintained it, and carried their
ideas on this subject so far as to assert that no vital principle can
be a body. In this sense they taught that even the principle of life,
or the soul of plants, was something superior to the body. St. Thomas
(P. I., Q. LXXV., A. I.) asks, in general, if the soul is a body:
"Utrum anima sit corpus," and answers as follows:

"Respondeo dicendum, quod ad inquirendum de natura animæ, oportet
præsupponere, _quod anima dicitur esse primum principium vitæ_, in iis
quæ apud nos vivunt. Animata enim viventia dicimus, res vero inanimatas
vita carentes; vita autem maxime manifestatur duplici opere, scilicet
cognitionis, et motus. Horum autem principium antiqui philosophi
imaginationem transcendere non valentes, aliquod corpus ponebant,
sola corpora res esse dicentes, et quod non est corpus, nihil esse,
et secundum hoc, animam aliquod corpus esse dicebant. Hujus autem
opinionis falsitas, licet multipliciter ostendi possit, tamen uno
utemur, quo etiam communius et certius patet animam corpus non esse.
Manifestum est enim, quod non quodcumque vitalis operationis principium
est anima; sic enim oculus esset anima, cum sit quoddam principium
visionis, et idem esset dicendum de aliis animæ instrumentis: sed
primum principium vitæ dicimus esse animam. Quamvis autem aliquod
corpus possit esse quoddam principium vitæ, sicut cor est principium
vitæ in animali; tamen non potest esse primum principium vitæ aliquod
corpus. Manifestum est enim, quod esse principium vitæ, vel vivens, non
convenit corpori ex hoc quod est corpus, alioquin omne corpus esset
vivens, aut principium vitæ, convenit igitur alicui corpori quod sit
vivens, vel etiam principium vitæ, per hoc quod est tale corpus. Quod
autem est actu tale, habet hoc ab aliquo principio, quod dicitur actus
ejus. _Anima igitur quæ est primum principium vitæ, non est corpus, sed
corporis actus_, sicut calor qui est principium calefactionis, non est
corpus, sed quidam corporis actus."

Notwithstanding this doctrine, it might still be doubted whether matter
does not enter as a component element in the soul, although the soul
itself is not corporeal, and, therefore, the holy doctor (Ib., A.
5) asks if the soul is composed of matter and form; and here he is
speaking of the soul in general as the principle of life, and not of
the intellectual soul alone. He answers in the negative, as follows:

"Respondeo dicendum, quod _anima non habet materiam_, et hoc potest
considerari dupliciter. _Primo quidem, ex ratione animæ in communi_,
est enim de ratione animæ, quod sit forma alicujus corporis. Aut
igitur est forma secundum se totam, aut secundum aliquam partem sui.
Si secundum se totam, impossibile est quod pars ejus sit materia, si
dicatur materia aliquid ejus in potentia tantum, quia forma, in quantum
forma, est actus. Id autem quod est in potentia tantum, non potest esse
pars actus, cum potentia repugnet actui, utpote contra actum divisa. Si
autem sit forma secundum aliquam partem sui, illam partem dicemus esse
animam, et illam materiam cujus primo est actus, dicemus esse primum
animatum. Secundo specialiter ex ratione humanæ animæ, in quantum est
intellectiva."

Although these passages are clear enough, there is another where it is
expressly asserted that the souls of perfect animals are absolutely
indivisible, so that division can be predicated of them neither _per
se_ nor _per accidens_. He asks, (Q. LXXVI., art. 8,) if the soul in
general is in any part of the body; and he answers, yes: distinguishing
between essential and quantitative totality:

"Sed forma, quæ requirit diversitatem in partibus, sicut est anima, _et
præcipue animalium perfectorum_, non equaliter se habet ad totum et
ad partes; unde _non dividitur per accidens, scilicet per divisionem
quantitatis_. Sic ergo totalitas quantitativa, non potest attribui
animæ, nec per se, nec per accidens. Sed totalitas secunda, quæ
attenditur secundum rationis et essentiæ perfectionem, proprie et per
se, convenit formis."

It seems, however, that this doctrine of St. Thomas met with
opposition, from some persons who could not conceive how the soul of
brutes could be inextensive, as they regarded this as the exclusive
property of the intellectual soul. Cardinal Gaetano, in his comments
on St. Thomas, undertakes his defence. He shows that he understood the
doctrine of St. Thomas concerning the indivisibility of the souls of
brutes, in its strictest sense. He gives the objection in the following
words:

"Dubium secundo est circa candem totalitatem quoniam S. Thomas a
communi opinione discordare videtur hoc in loco, eo quod ponat _præter
animam intellectivam_, aliquam aliam formam in materia _inextensam,
scilicet animam sensitivam animalium perfectorum_, cum tamen vix
possit sustineri, quod anima intellectiva de foris veniens, informet
secundum esse, et sit inextensa."

Instead of more or less plausible interpretations of the text in order
to solve the objection, the learned commentator boldly maintains the
indivisibility of the souls of brutes, and treats almost with contempt
those who think differently:

"Ad secundum dubium dicitur, quod doctrina hic tradita, _est quidem
contra modernorum communem phantasiam, sed non contra philosophicas
rationes, parum est autem de horum aucthoritate curandum_. Cum autem
dicitur, quod sine ratione hoc est dictum, respondetur quod ratio
insinuata est a posteriori, quia scilicet diversam totaliter habet
habitudinem ad totum et partem ipsa forma ex propria ratione. Si enim
habet totaliter diversam habitudinem ad totum et ad partes, _hoc
provenit ex indivisibilitate formæ_. Quia si divideretur forma ad
divisionem totius, jam pars formæ proportionaretur parti corporis, et
cum pars quantitativa formæ sit tota essentia formæ, ergo ipsa forma
secundum rationem suæ essentiæ non habet totaliter diversam habitudinem
ad totum et ad partes: sed utrumque, scilicet tam totum quam partem
respicit, ut proportionatum perfectible. Et confirmari potest ista
ratio, quia forma extensa ex vi solius divisionis, non desinit esse
secundum illam partem quam habet in parte decisa: imo quæ quodammodo
erat per modum potentiæ, perficitur, et fit actu seorsum, ut patet
in formis naturalibus, ergo a destructione consequentis, si ex sola
divisione pars decisa non potest retinere eandem speciem, _ergo non
erat extensa et divisibilis ad divisionem subjecti_. * *

 * * * * * * * *

_Non est ergo sine ratione dictum, quod animæ aliquæ præter
intellectivam sunt tantæ perfectionis quod sunt inextensæ, tam per se
quam per accidens_: quamquam potentiæ omnes earum sint extensæ per
accidens: qualitates enim, sunt corporis partibus accommodatæ."




NOTES TO BOOK THIRD.


ON CHAPTER X.

(30) Leibnitz and Clarke had a very interesting dispute on space,
from which I shall extract a few passages. Leibnitz wrote a letter to
the Princess of Wales, in which he repeated the expression of Newton,
that space was the organ which God uses in his sensations of things.
Leibnitz argued against this opinion, that if God, in order to perceive
things, needs any medium, they do not depend entirely on him, and are
not produced by him.


_Clarke Answered_:

"M. le chevalier Newton ne dit pas que l'espace est l'organe dont Dieu
se sert pour apercevoir les choses; il ne dit pas non plus que Dieu
ait besoin d'aucun moyen pour les apercevoir. Au contraire, il dit
que Dieu, étant présent partout, aperçoit les choses par sa présence
immédiate, dans tout l'espace où elles sont, sans l'intervention ou
le secours d'aucun organe ou d'aucun moyen. Pour rendre cela plus
intelligible, il l'éclaircit par une comparaison. Il dit que comme
l'âme, étant immédiatement présente aux images qui se forment dans le
cerveau par le moyen des organes des sens, voit ces images comme si
elles étaient les choses mêmes qu'elles représentent; de même Dieu voit
tout par sa présence immédiate, étant actuellement présent aux choses
mêmes, à toutes les choses qui sont dans l'univers, comme l'âme est
présente à toutes les images qui se forment dans le cerveau. M. Newton
considère le cerveau et les organes des sens comme le moyen par lequel
ces images sont formées, et non comme le moyen par lequel l'âme voit ou
aperçoit ces images lorsqu'elles sont ainsi formées. Et dans l'univers
il ne considère pas les choses comme si elles étaient des images
formées par un certain moyen ou par des organes, mais comme des choses
réelles que Dieu lui-même a formées et qu'il voit dans tous les lieux
où elles sont sans l'intervention d'aucun moyen. C'est tout ce que M.
Newton a voulu dire par la comparaison dont il s'est servi lorsqu'il
suppose que l'espace infini est, pour ainsi dire, le _sensorium_ de
l'Etre qui est présent partout."

_Leibnitz Replied_:

"Il se trouve expressément dans l'appendice de l'_Optique_ de M. Newton
que l'espace est le _sensorium_ de Dieu. Or le mot _sensorium_ a
toujours signifié l'organe de la sensation. Permis à lui et à ses amis
de s'expliquer maintenant tout autrement, je ne m'y oppose pas.

"On suppose que la présence de l'âme suffit pour qu'elle s'aperçoive
de se qui se passe dans le cerveau; mais c'est justement ce que le P.
Malebranche et toute l'école cartésienne nient et ont raison de nier.
Il faut toute autre chose que la seule présence pour qu'une chose
représente ce qui se passe dans l'autre. Il faut pour cela quelque
communication explicable, quelque manière d'influence. L'espace, selon
M. Newton, est intimement présent au corps qu'il contient, et qui est
commensuré avec lui; s'ensuit-il pour cela que l'espace s'aperçoive de
ce qui se passe dans le corps, et qu'il s'en souvienne après que le
corps en sera sorti? Outre que l'âme étant indivisible, sa présence
immédiate, qu'on pourrait s'imaginer dans le corps, ne serait que dans
un point. Comment donc s'apercevrait-elle de ce qui se fait hors de
ce point? Je prétends d'être le premier qui ait montré comment l'âme
s'aperçoit de ce qui se passe dans le corps.

"La raison pourquoi Dieu s'aperçoit de tout n'est pas sa simple
présence, mais encore son opération; c'est parce qu'il conserve les
choses par une action qui produit continuellement ce qu'il y a de bonté
et de perfection en elles. Mais les âmes n'ayant point d'influence
immédiate sur les corps, ni les corps sur les âmes, leur correspondance
mutuelle ne saurait être expliquée par la présence."


_Clarke Answered_:

"Le mot de _sensorium_ ne signifie pas proprement l'organe, mais le
lieu de la sensation. L'œil, l'oreille, etc., sont des organes, mais
ce ne sont pas des _sensoria_. D'ailleurs M. le chevalier Newton ne
dit pas que l'espace est un _sensorium_, mais qu'il est (par voie de
comparaison) _pour ainsi dire_ le _sensorium_, etc.

"On n'a jamais supposé que la présence de l'âme suffit pour la
perception; on a dit seulement que cette présence est nécessaire afin
que l'âme aperçoive. Si l'âme n'était pas présente aux images des
choses qui sont aperçues, elle ne pourrait pas les apercevoir; mais sa
présence ne suffit pas, à moins qu'elle ne soit aussi une substance
vivante. Les substances inanimées, quoique présentes, n'aperçoivent
rien; et une substance vivante n'est capable de perception que dans
le lieu où elle est présente; soit aux choses mêmes, comme Dieu est
présent à tout l'univers; soit aux images des choses, comme l'âme leur
est présente dans son _sensorium_. Il est impossible qu'une chose
agisse ou que quelque sujet agisse sur elle dans un lieu où elle n'est
pas présente, comme il est impossible qu'elle soit dans un lieu où elle
n'est pas. Quoique l'âme soit indivisible, il ne s'ensuit pas qu'elle
n'est présente que dans un seul point. L'espace fini ou infini es
absolument indivisible, même par la pensée; car on ne peut s'imaginer
que ses parties se séparent l'une de l'autre sans s'imaginer qu'elles
sortent, pour ainsi dire, hors d'elle-mêmes; et cependant l'espace
n'est pas un simple point.

"Dieu n'aperçoit pas les choses par sa simple présence, ni parce qu'il
agit sur elles, mais parce qu'il est non-seulement partout, mais encore
un être vivant et intelligent. On doit dire la même chose de l'âme,
dans sa petite sphère, ce n'est point par sa simple présence, mais
parce qu'elle est une substance vivante, qu'elle aperçoit les images
auxquelles elle est présente, et qu'elle ne saurait apercevoir sans
leur être présente."


_Reply of Leibnitz._

"Ces messieurs soutiennent donc que l'_espace_ est un _être réel
absolu_; mais cela les mène à de grandes difficultés, car il paraît que
cet être doit être éternel et infini. C'est pourquoi il y en a qui out
cru que c'était Dieu lui-même, ou bien son attribut, son immensité.
Mais comme il a des parties, ce n'est pas une chose qui puisse convenir
à Dieu.

"Pour moi, j'ai marqué plus d'une fois que je tenais l'espace pour
quelque chose de _purement relatif_, comme le temps, pour un _ordre
des coexistences_, comme le temps est un _ordre de successions_. Car
l'espace marque, en terms de possibilité, un ordre des choses qui
existent en même temps, en tant qu'elles existent ensemble, sans entrer
dans leurs manières d'exister. Et lorsqu'on voit plusieurs choses
ensemble, on s'aperçoit de cet ordre des choses entre elles.

"Pour réfuter l'imagination de ceux qui prennent l'espace pour une
substance, ou du moins pour quelque être absolu, j'ai plusieurs
démonstrations; mais je ne veux me servir à présent que de celle dont
on me fournit ici l'occasion. Je dis donc que si l'espace était un
être absolu, il arriverait quelque chose dont il serait impossible
qu'il y eût une raison suffisante, ce qui est contre notre axiome.
Voici comment je le prouve. L'espace est quelque chose d'uniforme
absolument; et sans les choses y placées, un point de l'espace ne
diffère absolument en rien d'un autre point de l'espace. Or il suit de
cela (supposé que l'espace soit quelque chose en lui-même outre l'ordre
des corps entre eux) qu'il est impossible qu'il y ait une raison
pourquoi Dieu, gardant les mêmes situations des corps entre eux, ait
placé les corps dans l'espace ainsi et non autrement; et pourquoi tout
n'a pas été pris à rebours (par exemple), par un échange de l'orient
et de l'occident. Mais si l'espace n'est autre chose que cet ordre ou
rapport, et n'est rien du tout sans les corps, que la possibilité,
d'en mettre, ces deux états, l'un tel qu'il est, l'autre supposé à
rebours, ne différeraient point entre eux. Leur différence ne se trouve
donc que dans notre supposition chimérique de la réalité de l'espace en
lui-même. Mais dans la vérité, l'un serait justement la même chose que
l'autre, comme ils sont absolument indiscernables; et par conséquent il
n'y a pas lieu de demander la raison de la préférence de l'un à l'autre.

"Il en est de même du temps. Supposé que quelqu'un demande pourquoi
Dieu n'a pas tout créé un an plus tôt, et que ce même personnage
veuille inférer de là que Dieu a fait quelque chose dont il n'est
pas possible qu'il y ait une raison pourquoi il a fait ainsi plutôt
qu'autrement: on lui répondrait que son illation serait vraie, si le
temps était quelque chose, hors des choses temporelles; car il serait
impossible qu'il y eût des raisons pourquoi les choses eussent été
appliquées plutôt à de tels instants qu'à d'autres, leur succession
demeurant la même. Mais cela même prouve que les instants hors des
choses ne sont rien, et qu'ils ne consistent que dans leur ordre
successif; lequel demeurant le même, l'un des deux états, comme celui
de l'anticipation imaginée, ne différait en rien, et ne saurait être
discerné de l'autre qui est maintenant....

"Il sera difficile de nous faire accroire que, dans l'usage ordinaire,
_sensorium_ ne signifie pas l'organe de la sensation....

"La simple présence d'une substance même animée ne suffit pas pour
la perception; un aveugle et même un distrait ne voit point. Il faut
expliquer comment l'âme s'aperçoit de ce qui est hors d'elle.

"Dieu n'est pas présent aux choses par situation, mais par essence; sa
présence se manifeste par son opération immédiate. La présence de l'âme
est toute d'une autre nature. Dire qu'elle est diffuse par le corps,
c'est la rendre étendue et divisible; dire qu'elle est tout entière en
chaque partie de quelque corps, c'est la rendre divisible d'elle-même.
L'attacher à un point, la répandre par plusieurs points, tout cela ne
sont qu'expressions abusives, _Idola Tribus_."


_Clarke's Answer_:

"Il est indubitable que rien n'existe sans qu'il y ait une _raison
suffisante_ de son existence, et que rien n'existe d'une certaine
manière plutôt que d'une autre, sans qu'il y ait aussi une _raison
suffisante_ de cette manière d'exister. Mais à l'égard des choses
qui sont indifférentes en elles-mêmes, la _simple volonté_ est une
raison suffisante pour leur donner l'existence, ou pour les faire
exister d'une certaine manière; et cette volonté n'a pas besoin d'être
déterminée per une cause étrangère....

"L'espace n'est pas une substance, un être éternel et infini, mais une
propriété ou une suite de l'existence d'un être infini et éternel.
L'espace infini est l'immensité mais l'immensité n'est pas Dieu;[60]
donc l'espace infini n'est pas Dieu. Ce que l'on dit ici de l'espace
n'est point une difficulté. L'espace infini est absolument et
essentiellement indivisible, et c'est une contradiction dans les termes
que de supposer qu'il soit divisé; car il faudrait qu'il y eût un
espace entre les parties que l'on suppose divisés; ce qui est supposer
que l'espace est divisé et non divisé en même temps.[61] ...

[60] In this proposition Clarke is either inexact and obscure, or else
he falls into a serious error. The immensity of God is God himself.
Every attribute of God is God.

[61] Here Clarke confounds _divisibility_ with _separability_. See
chapters X. and XI. of this book.

"Il ne s'agit pas de savoir ce que Goclenius[62] entend par le mot de
_sensorium_, mais en quel sens M. le chevalier Newton s'est servi de
ce mot dans son livre. Si _Goclenius_ croit que l'œil, l'oreille, ou
quelque autre organe des sens est le _sensorium_, il se trompe. Mais
quand un auteur emploie un terme d'art et qu'il déclare en quel sens il
s'en sert, à quoi bon rechercher de quelle manière d'autres écrivains
ont entendu ce même terme? _Scapula_ traduit le mot dont il s'agit ici,
_domicilium_, c'est-à-dire le lieu ou l'âme réside."

[62] Goclenius is the author of a philosophical dictionary quoted by
Leibnitz.


_Reply of Leibnitz:_

"Si l'espace infini est l'immensité, l'espace fini sera l'opposé de
l'immensité, c'est-à-dire la mensurabilité ou l'étendue bornée. Or
l'étendue doit être l'affection d'un étendu. Mais si cet espace est
vide, il sera un attribut sans sujet, une étendue d'aucun étendu. C'est
pourquoi, en faisant de l'espace une propriété, l'on tombe dans mon
sentiment, qui le fait un ordre des choses et non pas quelque chose
d'absolu.

"Si l'espace est une réalité absolue, bien loin d'être une propriété ou
accidentalité opposée à la substance, il sera plus subsistant que les
substances. Dieu ne le saurait détruire, ni même changer en rien. Il
est non-seulement immense dans le tout, mais encore immuable et éternel
en chaque partie. Il y aura une infinité de choses éternelles hors de
Dieu.

"Dire que l'espace infini est sans parties, c'est dire que les espaces
finis ne le composent point, et que l'espace infini pourrait subsister
quand tous les espaces finis seraient réduits à rien. Ce serait comme
si l'on disait, dans la supposition cartésienne, d'un univers étendu
sans bornes, que cet univers pourrait subsister quand tous les corps
qui le composent seraient réduits à rien ...

"Je serais bien aise de voir le passage d'un philosophe qui prenne
_sensorium_ autrement que _Goclenius_.

"Si _Scapula_ dit que _sensorium_ est la place où l'entendement réside,
il entendra l'organe de la sensation interne; ainsi il ne s'éloignera
point de Goclenius.

"_Sensorium_ a toujours été l'organe de la sensation. La glande pinéale
serait, selon Descartes, le _sensorium_ dans le sens qu'on rapporte de
_Scapula_.

"Il n'y a guère d'expression moins convenable sur se sujet que celle
qui donne à Dieu un _sensorium_: il semble qu'elle le fait l'âme du
monde. Et on aurait bien de la peine à donner à l'usage que M. _Newton_
fait de ce mot un sens qui le puisse justifier."


_Clarke's Answer:_

"On revient encore ici à l'usage du mot de _sensorium_, quoique M.
Newton se soit servi d'un correctif lorsqu'il a employé ce mot. Il
n'est pas nécessaire de rien ajouter à ce que j'ai dit sur cela ...

"L'espace destitué de corps est une propriété d'une substance
immatérielle; l'espace n'est pas borné par les corps, mais il existe
également dans les corps et hors des corps. L'espace n'est pas renfermé
entre les corps; mais les corps étant dans l'espace immense sont
eux-mêmes bornés par leurs propres dimensions.

"L'espace vide n'est pas un attribut sans sujet; car par cet espace
nous n'entendons pas un espace où il n'y a rien, mais un espace sans
corps. Dieu est certainement présent dans tout l'espace vide, et
peut-être qu'il y a aussi dans cet espace plusieurs autres substances
qui ne sont pas matérielles, et qui par conséquent ne peuvent être
tangibles ni aperçues par aucun de nos sens.

"L'espace n'est pas une substance, mais un attribut; et si c'est un
attribut d'un être nécessaire, il doit (comme tous les autres attributs
d'un être nécessaire) exister plus nécessairement que les substances
mêmes, qui ne sont pas nécessaires. L'espace est immense, immuable
et éternel; et l'on doit dire la même chose de la durée. Mais il ne
s'ensuit pas de là qu'il n'y ait rien d'éternel hors de Dieu, car
l'espace et la durée ne sont pas hors de Dieu, ce sont des suites
immédiates et nécessaires de son existence, sans lesquelles il ne
serait point éternel et présent partout.

"Les infinis ne sont composés de finis que comme les finis sont
composés d'infinitésimes; j'ai fait voir ci-dessus en quel sens on peut
dire que l'espace a des parties ou qu'il n'en a pas. Les parties dans
le sens que l'on donne à ce mot, lorsqu'on l'applique au corps, sont
séparables, composées, désunies, indépendantes les unes des autres et
capables de mouvement. Mais quoique l'imagination puisse en quelque
manière concevoir des parties dans l'espace infini, cependant, comme
ces parties, improprement ainsi dites, sont essentiellement immobiles
et inséparables les unes des autres, il s'ensuit que cet espace est
essentiellement simple et absolument indivisible."[63]

[63] Here Clarke falls again into the confusion we have spoken of, and
making _divisibility_ the same thing as _separability_, he asserts
contradictory propositions.


_Reply of Leibnitz:_

"Comme j'avais objecté que l'espace pris pour quelque chose de réel
et d'absolu, sans les corps, serait une chose éternelle, impassible,
indépendante de Dieu, on a tâché d'éluder cette difficulté en disant
que l'espace est une propriété de Dieu. J'ai opposé à cela, dans mon
écrit précédent, que la propriété de Dieu est l'immensité; mais que
l'espace, qui est souvent commensuré avec les corps, et l'immensité de
Dieu, n'est pas la même chose.

"J'ai encore objecté que, si l'espace est une propriété, et si l'espace
infini est l'immensité de Dieu, l'espace fini sera l'étendue ou la
mensurabilité de quelque chose finie. Ainsi l'espace occupé par un
corps sera l'étendue de ce corps, chose absurde, puisqu'un corps peut
changer d'espace, mais qu'il ne peut point quitter son étendue.

"J'ai encore demandé: si l'espace est une propriété, de quelle chose
sera donc la propriété, un espace vuide borné, tel qu'on s'imagine dans
le récipient épuisé air? Il ne paraît point raisonnable de dire que cet
espace vuide, rond ou quarré, soit une propriété de Dieu. Sera-ce donc
peut-être la propriété de quelques substances immatérielles, étendues,
imaginaires, qu'on se figure (se semble) dans les espaces imaginaires?

"Si l'espace est la propriété ou l'affection de la substance qui est
dans l'espace, le même espace sera tantôt l'affection d'un corps,
tantôt d'un autre corps, tantôt d'une substance immatérielle, tantôt,
peut-être, de Dieu, quand il est vuide de toute autre substance
matérielle ou immatérielle. Mais voilà une étrange propriété ou
affection, qui passe de sujet en sujet. Les sujets quitteront ainsi
leurs accidents comme un habit, afin que d'autres sujets s'en puissent
revêtir. Après cela comment distinguera-t-on les accidents et les
substances?

"Que si les espaces bornés qui y sont, et si l'espace infini est la
propriété de Dieu, il faut (chose étrange) que la propriété de Dieu
soit composée des affections des créatures; car tous les espaces finis,
pris ensemble, composent l'espace infini.

"Que si l'on nie que l'espace borné soit une affection des choses
bornées, il ne sera pas raisonnable non plus que l'espace infini soit
l'affection ou la propriété d'une chose infinie. J'avais insinué toutes
ces difficultés dans mon écrit précédent, mais il ne paraît point qu'on
ait tâché d'y satisfaire.

"J'ai encore d'autres raisons contre l'étrange imagination que l'espace
est une propriété de Dieu. Si cela est, l'espace entre dans l'essence
de Dieu. Or l'espace a des parties; donc il y aurait des parties dans
l'essence de Dieu, _spectatum admissi_.

"De plus des espaces sont tantôt vuides, tantôt remplis; donc il y aura
dans l'essence de Dieu des parties tantôt vuides, tantôt remplies,
et par conséquent sujettes à un changement perpétuel. Les corps
remplissant l'espace rempliraient une partie de l'essence de Dieu, et y
seraient commensurés; et, dans la supposition du vuide, une partie de
l'essence sera dans le récipient. Ce dieu à parties ressemblera fort au
dieu stoïcien, qui était l'univers entier, considéré comme un animal
divin.

"Si l'espace infini est l'immensité de Dieu, le temps infini sera
l'éternité de Dieu; il faudra donc dire que ce qui est dans l'espace
est dans l'immensité de Dieu, et par conséquent dans son essence; et
que ce qui est dans le temps est dans l'éternité de Dieu. Phrases
étranges, et qui font bien connaître qu'on abuse des termes.

"En voici encore une autre instance. L'immensité de Dieu fait que Dieu
est dans tous les espaces. Mais si Dieu est dans l'espace, comment
peut-on dire que l'espace est en Dieu, ou qu'il est sa propriété?
On a bien ouï dire que la propriété soit dans le sujet; mais on n'a
jamais ouï dire que le sujet soit dans la propriété. De même, Dieu
existe en chaque temps, comment donc le temps est-il dans Dieu, et
comment peut-il être une propriété de Dieu? Ce sont des _alloglossies
perpétuelles_....

"Comme j'avais objecté que l'espace a des parties, on cherche un autre
échappatoire en s'éloignant du sens reçu des termes, et soutenant
que l'espace n'a point de parties; parce que ses parties ne sont
point séparables et ne sauraient être éloignées les unes des autres
par discerption. Mais il suffit que l'espace ait des parties, soit
que ces parties soient séparables ou non; et on les peut assigner
dans l'espace, soit par les corps qui y sont, soit par les lignes ou
surfaces qu'on peut mener....

"On s'excuse de n'avoir point dit que l'espace est le _sensorium_ de
Dieu, mais seulement _comme_ son _sensorium_. Il semble que l'un est
aussi peu convenable et aussi peu intelligible que l'autre....

"Si Dieu sent ce qui ce passe dans le monde, par le moyen d'un
_sensorium_, il semble que les choses agissent sur lui, et qu'ainsi
il est comme on conçoit l'_âme du monde_. On m'impute de répéter les
objections, sans prendre connaissance des réponses; mais je ne vois
point qu'on ait satisfait à cette difficulté; on ferait mieux de
renoncer tout à fait à ce _sensorium_ prétendu."

For the rest of this interesting discussion, I refer the reader to the
works of Leibnitz. These extracts may serve to show what importance
eminent philosophers attributed to the questions on space.


ON CHAPTER XVII.

(31) In order that the reader may form a perfect conception of Kant's
opinion of space, and judge for himself whether there is or not the
contradiction which we have intimated, I extract a few passages from
his works.

"The transcendental conception of phenomena[64] in space is a critical
observation that, in general _nothing_ perceived in space _is any thing
in itself_; that space is, moreover, a form of things, and would belong
to them if considered in themselves; but that objects in themselves are
wholly unknown to us, and those things which we call _external objects,
are only the pure representations of our sensibility_, whose form is
space, and whose true correlative, that is to say, the thing in itself,
is for this reason wholly unknown, and will always remain so; for
experience can tell us nothing of it.

[64] Kant defines phenomenon, "the indeterminate object of an empirical
intuition." He calls empirical intuition, "that which relates to an
object by means of sensation." He understands by sensation, "the
effect of an object on the representative faculty, in so far as we are
affected by it."--_Transcend. Æsthet._ I.

 * * * * * * * *

"It is altogether certain, and not merely possible or probable, that
space and time, as the necessary conditions of all experience, both
internal and external, are purely subjective conditions of all our
intuitions. It is therefore equally certain that _all objects in
relation with space and time, are only simple phenomena and not things
in themselves_, if considered according to the manner in which they
are given us. Much may be said _a priori_ of the form of objects, but
nothing of the thing in itself, which serves as the ground of these
phenomena."--_Transc. Æsth._ I.

This doctrine of Kant's brought upon him the charge of idealism, and
drew from the German philosopher explanations which some look upon as a
manifest contradiction.

Here is how Kant defends himself from idealism: "When I say that in
space and time the intuitions of external objects, and of the mind,
represent these two things as they affect our senses, _I do not mean
to say that objects are a pure appearance_; for in the phenomenon,
the objects, and even the properties which we attribute to them, are
always considered as something really given; but that as this quality
of being given depends only on the manner of perception of the subject
in its relation with the object given, this object as phenomenon, is
different from what it is as object in itself. _I do not say that
bodies merely seem_ to be external, or that my soul _merely seems_ to
have been given me in consciousness. When I assert that the qualities
of space and time (in conformity to which I place the body and the
soul as the condition of their existence) exist only in my mode of
intuition, and not in the objects themselves, I should do wrong to
convert into a mere appearance what I must take for a phenomenon;
but this does not occur, if my principle of the ideality of all our
sensible intuitions is admitted. On the contrary, if an objective
reality is given to all these forms of sensible representations,
every thing is inevitably converted into a pure appearance; for,
if space and time are considered as qualities which, as to their
possibility, must be found in the things themselves, and we reflect
on the absurdities which follow, since two infinite things, which can
neither be substances, nor any thing inherent in a substance, but which
are still something existent, and even the necessary condition of the
existence of all things would still subsist, though all the rest were
annihilated, we cannot blame Berkeley for reducing bodies to a mere
appearance."--_Ibid._ 2d Edition.

In the _Transcendental Logic_ there is also a reputation of idealism.
There Kant establishes this theorem:

"The mere consciousness of my own existence, empirically determined,
proves the existence of objects outside of me in space."

It is not possible for me to give here the doctrines of Kant's
_Transcendental Logic_; it is enough to have given his remarks on the
reality of objects; others call them retractations or contradictions,
and give various causes for them, which, however, do not belong to the
field of philosophy.


ON CHAPTER XIX.

(32) The scholastics always carefully separated the sensible order
from the intelligible. Kant was not the first to discover the
limits which divide the intelligible from the sensible, things in
themselves as objects of the understanding, _noumena_, as he calls
them, from things as represented in sensible intuition, _phenomena_.
The scholastics were so far from regarding sensible representations
as sufficient for intelligence, that they denied that they were
intelligible. The intellect might know sensible things, but it was
necessary for it to abstract them from material conditions. On account
of its limitation, it required the intuition of objects in sensible
representation, _conversio ad phantasmata_; but these intuitions were
not the intellectual act, they were only its necessary conditions.
Hence proceeded the theory of the _intellectus agens_, which some have
laughed at, because they did not understand it. This hypothesis has
strong reasons in its favor, whatever may be its intrinsic value, if,
setting aside the form in which it is expressed, we attend only to its
ideological profoundness.

In reading some passages in Kant's _Transcendental Logic_ on
phenomena and noumena, on the necessity of sensible intuition in pure
conceptions, and the distinction of the intuition from the conception,
and on the sensible and intelligible worlds corresponding to the
sensitive and intellective faculties, we might suppose that the German
philosopher had read the scholastics. True, he departed from their
doctrines, but what of that? The authors from whom we learn the most,
are not always those whose opinions we follow.

In the treatise on ideas, I shall have occasion to explain my opinion
on this point; for the present I shall only make a few extracts from
St. Thomas, the most illustrious representative of the scholastic
philosophy. The reader will find that he clearly explains our necessity
of sensible representations, (_phantasmata_,) and the line which
divides these representations from the purely intellectual order.

"(Pars 1, Q. LXXIX., art. 3.) Sed quia Aristoteles non posuit formas
rerum naturalium subsistere sine materia, _formæ autem in materia
existentes non sunt intelligibiles actu_; sequebatur, quod naturæ, seu
formæ rerum sensibilium, quas intelligimus, non essent intelligibiles
actu. Nihil autem reducitur de potentia in actum, nisi per aliquod
ens actu: sicut sensus fit in actu per sensibile in actu. Oportet
igitur ponere aliquam virtutem ex parte intellectus, quæ faceret
intelligibilia in actu per abstractionem specierum a _conditionibus
materialibus_. Et hæc est necessitas ponendi intellectum agentem.

"(P. 1, Q. LXXIX., art. 4). Ad cujus evidentiam considerandum est,
quod supra animam intellectivam humanam, necesse est ponere aliquem
superiorem intellectum, a quo anima virtutem intelligendi obtineat.

 * * * * * * * *

"Nihil autem est perfectius in inferioribus rebus anima humana.
Unde oportet dicere, quod in ipsa sit aliqua virtus derivata a
superiori intellectu, per quam possit _phantasmata illustrare_. Et
hoc experimento cognoscimus, dum percipimus _nos abstrahere formas
universales a conditionibus particularibus, quod est facere actu
intelligibilia_.

"(P. 1. Q., LXXXIV., art. 1.) Hoc autem necessarium non est: quia
etiam in ipsis sensibilibus videmus, quod forma alio modo est in uno
sensibilium, quam in altero; puta cum in uno est albedo intensior, in
alio remissior, ut cum in uno est albedo cum dulcedine, in alio sine
dulcedine. Et per hunc etiam modum, forma sensibilis alio modo est in
re, quæ est extra animam, et alio modo in sensu, qui suspicit formas
sensibilium absque materia, sicut colorem auri sine auro. Et similiter
intellectus species corporum, quæ sunt materiales et mobiles, recipit
immaterialiter, et immobiliter, secundum modum suum, nam receptum est
in recipiente per modum recipientis. Dicendum est ergo, quod anima per
intellectum cognoscit corpora, _cognitione immateriali, universali et
necessaria_.

"(P. I, Q. LXXXIV., art. 6.) Et ideo ad causandam intellectualem
operationem secundum Aristotelem non sufficit sola impressio
sensibilium corporum, sed requiritur aliquid nobilius, quia agens est
honorabilius patiente, ut ipse dicit. Non autem quod intellectualis
operatio causetur ex sola impressione aliquarum rerum superiorum,
ut Plato posuit, sed illud superius, et nobilius agens, quod vocat
intellectum agentem, de quo jam supra diximus quod _facit phantasmata
a sensibus accepta intelligibilia in actu_, per modum abstractionis
cuiusdam. Secundum hoc ergo, ex parte phantasmatum intellectualis
operatio a sensu causatur. Sed quia phantasmata non sufficiunt immutare
intellectum possibilem, sed oportet quod fiant intelligibilia actu
per intellectum agentem, non potest dici quod sensibilis cognitio
sit totalis, et perfecta causa intellectualis cognitionis, sed magis
quodammodo est materia causæ."


END OF VOL. I.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.

Hyphenation has been standardised.

Variations in spelling, punctuation and accents are as in the original.

Repetition of the titles of Books 2 and 3 has been removed.

Footnotes, identified thus [1], are placed at the end of paragraph.
References to the "Notes on Chapters" are identified thus (1) at the end
of the chapter as in the original.

Page 433, para 154, "There is no need of attributing to the inligent
spirit...." Inligent corrected to intelligent.

Page 486, "II. The relations of our organs [to] objects are
intrinsically immutable." The to has been added.

