CHAPTER XV.

SIGHT AND MOTION.


85. I said that the observer could not distinguish between his own
motion and that of the object; sight alone can not give us a true idea
of motion. Thus in a boat, although we are certain that we are moving,
the motion seems to us to be in the objects along the shore. Also if
the motion of the object and that of the observer are simultaneous,
in the same direction, and with the same velocity, all appearance of
motion is lost. But if there are two objects, one of which moves in the
same direction as ourselves, and the other in the opposite direction,
we perceive only the latter. Thus in a canal boat, the horse which
walks on the bank in the same direction which the boat follows, seems
to move without advancing. Of the two motions of the horse, we perceive
only the vertical, the horizontal escapes us.

The reason of this is clear, we can judge the object only by our
impressions. When the impression varies, we have the idea of motion;
but not otherwise. When the object or the eye is in motion, there is
a succession of impressions on the retina, from which the idea of
motion arises. But if the motion of the eye accompanies the motion of
the object, one cancels the other, the impression on the retina is
constant, and the object does not seem to move.

86. In the same manner if the motion of the object and that of the
eye are simultaneous, but of unequal velocity, we perceive only the
difference; that is to say, if the motion of the eye be represented by
3 and that of the object by 5, the motion of the object will appear as
2, or the difference between 5 and 3. If our motion is more rapid than
the motion of the object, although in the same direction, the object
will appear to move in the opposite direction, as when we sail down a
river faster than the current, the water seems to flow backwards. An
immovable object at the same time seems to move in a direction opposite
to our own with greater velocity than the current; for, here also, of
the two motions we perceive only the difference. The motion of the
boat, which is equal to 5, seems transferred to the fixed object, which
appears to move in the opposite direction with the velocity represented
by 5; and if we suppose the velocity of the current to be equal to 3,
it will have the appearance of moving backwards with a velocity of 5-3,
or 2.

87. From these considerations it would seem to follow that although
sight is sufficient to give us the idea of motion, it is not
sufficient to enable us to distinguish our own motion from that of the
object, but for this we have need of touch. But this is not so; for by
sight alone, we can distinguish the motion of the eye from that of the
object, and if in some cases this is impossible, the same is true of
touch.

We must observe that in the above examples touch is of much less use
than sight in order to preserve us from illusions. How by the aid of
touch alone could we perceive the motion of a boat gliding smoothly
down a river? Sometimes by the help of sight we observe this motion,
especially if we regard the objects along the bank which we pass; but
touch is essentially limited to what affects the body immediately, and
therefore cannot discover motion when the body is not affected by it.

It is also well to observe that we do not refer the motion perceived by
touch to the objects around us until after we have acquired this habit
by means of repeated comparisons. When for the first time the hand is
passed over an object, we are unable to tell whether the hand moves
over the body, or the body under the hand.

The reason of this is that the sensation of motion is essentially
a successive sensation, and this succession exists equally whether
the hand moves or the object. Let us suppose the hand to pass along
an object of a varied surface, we shall experience the variety of
sensations corresponding to the surface; suppose now that the hand
remains motionless, and the object passes under it with the same
velocity, pressure, and friction, the sensations will be the same as
before. Every one must have observed that when leaning on a slippery
object, it is often difficult to tell whether it is the object which
moves, or ourselves. Therefore touch also confirms what we have
advanced, that the distinction between the motion of the member and
that of the object does not arise from simple sensation.

88. In this respect, therefore, touch does not help sight; let us see
if sight alone can enable us to distinguish between the motion of the
eye and that of the object. We have already observed that a single
sensation with respect to one object only is insufficient, but there
is no difficulty in proving that this result may be obtained by the
comparison of different sensations.

Let us suppose the eye at a point A, looking at an object B; the object
will appear at the extremity of the range of the sight as if projected
on a plane. To be more definite we will imagine the object B to be
a column in the middle of a large hall, and the point A a corner of
the same hall. The column will appear to the eye to be a part of the
opposite wall. If the eye changes its position, the column will appear
in another part of the wall; so that if the eye should pass around the
column, it would appear successively on every part of the wall. The
same succession of phenomena would be observed if the eye should remain
fixed and the column should move around it; for it is evident that if
the observer is placed in the centre of the room, and the column moves
around him, the column will appear on all the parts of the opposite
wall. From this we infer that only one sensation of sight, with only
one object, is not enough to determine whether the eye moves or the
object.

But if instead of one object we suppose several moving simultaneously,
it is easy to see how the distinction of motions arises. Let us suppose
that at the same time that the eye sees the column, it also sees
other objects, such as chandeliers, statues, or other columns, placed
between the eye and the opposite wall. If the eye moves every time the
column changes its position on the opposite wall, the other columns,
the chandeliers, statues, everything in the room seems to change its
position; whereas, if the column moves and the eye remains fixed,
the column alone changes its position, while everything else remains
motionless. Therefore sight alone gives us two distinct orders of
phenomena of motion:

I. The first, in which all the objects change their position.

II. The second, in which one object only changes its position.

These two orders of phenomena cannot remain unperceived; for by the
help of reflection excited and enlightened by the repetition of the
phenomena, we must come to the conclusion that when there is an entire
and constant change of all the objects, it is not they that move, but
the eye; and that when only one or a part of the objects change their
position, the rest remaining fixed, it is not the eye that moves, but
the objects which change their position. When everything around us
changes we infer that it is the eye that moves; when one or two change
their position we conclude that they move and not the eye. This is not
merely a supposition, it is the reality. The ideas derived from touch
are essentially limited, and it is therefore impossible that they
should proceed from distant objects which cannot be touched.

89. I believe I have demonstrated that the pretended superiority of
touch is without foundation, and that the opinion which makes this
the basis of our knowledge of external objects, the touch-stone of
the certainty of the sensations transmitted by the other senses, is
an error. Without it we can acquire the certainty of the existence
of bodies; without it we can form the idea of surfaces and solids;
without it we discover motion, and distinguish the motion of the object
from that of the organ which receives the impression. The theory of
sensation here explained, and the results which are deduced from the
relations of the dependence or independence of the phenomena among
themselves, and with our will, may all be applied to the sight as well
as to the touch.

90. Summing up all we have said, we have the following results:

I. We distinguish sleep from waking, even abstracting the objectiveness
of the sensations.

II. We distinguish two orders of phenomena of sensation;--the one
internal, the other external, here also abstracting their objectiveness.

III. The senses give us certainty of the existence of bodies.

IV. Sensations have no type in the external object of what they
represent, except _extension_ and motion.

V. Touch is not the basis or touch-stone of certainty.

VI. All that we know by means of the senses may be reduced to this;
that there are external beings, that is to say, beings placed outside
of ourselves, which are extended, subject to necessary laws, and which
produce in us the effects which we call sensations.




