CHAPTER IX.

OPINION OF THOSE WHO ATTRIBUTE TO SPACE A NATURE DISTINCT FROM BODIES.


62. The preceding considerations seem to me to establish beyond any
question, that space and nothing are contradictory terms. If space is
a capacity with dimensions that can be really measured, it has real
properties, and therefore is distinct from a pure nothing. We have the
idea of space, on it is based a certain and evident science, that of
geometry; this idea is also necessary for the conception of motion. A
pure nothing cannot be the object which corresponds to this idea.

Is space something distinct from the extension of bodies? It is
objected to the opinion which maintains this, that space must be either
body or spirit, and if not body it must be spirit, which is absurd,
since that which is essentially composed of parts, as space is, cannot
be a spirit, which is a simple being.

There are strong arguments against the opinion which attributes to
space a nature distinct from bodies, but I do not attach much weight to
the above objection; for it is only necessary to deny the disjunctive
proposition and the whole argument falls to the ground. How can it be
proved that there is no medium between body and spirit? We know the
essence of neither body nor spirit, and shall we arrogate to ourselves
the right to assert that there is nothing in the universe which is not
comprised under one of two extremes, the nature of which we know not.

63. It may be replied, that there is no medium between the simple and
the composite, any more than between yes and no; and therefore there
is no medium between body which is composite, and spirit which is
simple. I concede that there is no medium between the simple and the
composite, and that whatever exists is one or the other; but I deny
that whatever is composite is body, and whatever is simple is spirit.

These two propositions: every composite is a body, and: every body is
composite, are not identical. There may, therefore, be composites that
are not bodies. Composition, or the possession of parts, is a property
of bodies, but does not constitute their essence, or, at least, we do
not know that it does. If it were so, we should be obliged to embrace
the opinion of Descartes, that extension constitutes the essence of
bodies. How do we know that there may not be things which have parts,
and yet are not bodies?

64. Even the state of the question makes us suppose space to be a
substance, that is, a being subsisting by itself without requiring
another being in which to exist. The difficulty once overcome on this
supposition, it is solved in its most essential and inaccessible point,
and therefore in all others. If we suppose space to be distinct from
bodies, and at the same time a true reality, we must consider it as a
substance, as it exists in itself without any other being in which it
inheres.

65. I said that a simple being is not necessarily a spirit. To explain
this, I need only observe, that to say every spirit is simple, is not
the same as to say every simple being is a spirit. Simplicity is a
necessary attribute of a spirit, but does not constitute its essence.
The idea of simplicity expresses only the negation of parts, and the
essence of spirit cannot consist in a negation.

66. The argument of those who object to this opinion which attributes
to space a nature distinct from bodies, making it an extended
substance, that it must also be infinite, is equally inconclusive.
For even on this hypothesis, there is no reason why a limit may not be
assigned to space. What is there beyond this limit? Nothing. We may, it
is true, conceive a vague extension, but imagination is not reality. We
also imagine an epoch prior to the Creation; if, then, imagination were
an argument in favor of the infinity of the world, it would also be an
argument for its eternity.

The arguments with which I have fought against the opinion that space
is a pure nothing, are not founded on our imaginations, but on the
impossibility of nothing being extended, or having any properties. This
is the principal argument which I have used against those who, while
they hold space to be a pure nothing, maintain the possibility of the
conception or existence of the properties which they attribute to space.




CHAPTER X.

OPINION OF THOSE WHO HOLD SPACE TO BE THE IMMENSITY OF GOD.


67. Overwhelmed by these difficulties, and unable to reconcile the
reality which space offers us with nothing, or to conceive in any thing
created the immobility, infinity, and perpetuity which we imagine in
space, some philosophers have put forth the opinion that space is the
immensity of God. At first sight this seems an extravagant absurdity,
but if we wish fairly to prove the falsity of this opinion, we must
do justice not only to the right intention of those who have defended
it, and the sound explanations which they brought to their assistance,
but also to the reasons which forced them to this extremity, and
which, though certainly not weighty or solid, are far from being so
contemptible as one may imagine.

68. The argument in favor of this opinion may be put in the following
form. Space is something. Before God created the world space existed.
It is not possible to conceive bodies as existing without space in
which they are extended. Before they exist, we conceive this capacity
in which they may be placed, as already existing. Therefore, space is
eternal. There is no motion without space; and in the first instant of
the creation bodies could move and be moved. Though we suppose only
one body in the world, it could be moved; and this motion could be
infinitely continued. Therefore space is infinite. Annihilate now this
body also, and the extension in which it moved will remain; in it new
bodies, new worlds may be created. Therefore space is indestructible.
But an eternal, infinite, and indestructible being cannot be created.
Therefore, space is uncreated. Therefore it is God himself. But it
must be God inasmuch as we conceive him in relation to extension; and,
therefore, space is the immensity of God. Immensity is the attribute
by which God is in every part; it is an attribute which relates to
extension. Space is, therefore, the immensity of God. Only by adopting
this theory can we reasonably admit that space is eternal, infinite,
and indestructible.

69. The objection to this opinion is that it destroys the simplicity of
God. If space is a property of God, it is God; for, whatever is in God,
is God. Therefore, as space is essentially extended, God too must be
extended.

Clarke saw the force of this argument; he was made to feel it by the
arguments of his adversary, Leibnitz; but he answers it very weakly.
He says that space has parts, but they are not separable. But, however
this may be, it is certain that space has parts. True, in the idea
of space we distinguish parts without separating them; but we really
conceive them in it, and we cannot conceive space without them.
Besides, if we should admit this theory, what would become of the
proofs of the immateriality of the soul? If the infinite wisdom is
extended, why may not the human soul with much more reason be so?

Carried away by his favorite idea, Clarke went so far as to write
what we should not have expected from such a man, that: "In questions
of this nature, when we speak of parts, we mean parts that are
_separable_, composite, and disunited like those of matter, which for
this reason is always a compound and never a simple substance. Matter
is not one substance, but a composition of substances. This is why, _in
my opinion, matter is incapable of thinking_. This incapacity does not
proceed from extension, but from the parts being distinct substances,
disunited, and independent of each other."[45] This explanation tends
to destroy the simplicity of thinking beings; for by simplicity has
always been understood the absolute wanting of all parts and not the
absence of this or that kind of parts. Inseparability does not destroy
the existence of parts; it merely asserts the force of cohesion.

[45] Fragment of a Letter.--(I do not know what letter the author here
refers to, but the same opinion in almost the same words may be found
in Clarke's fourth and fifth letters to Leibnitz, _Tr._)

70. It is also to be feared that this doctrine opens the door to
pantheism. It was even objected to Clarke that it made God the soul of
the world, and although he defended himself from this charge, there
still remains an objection which was not proposed to him, and which
is a very serious one. If we say that God is space, or that space is
a property of God, what hinders our saying that God is the world, or
that the world is a property of God? The world is extended; but so is
space. If God and space are not contradictory ideas in the same being,
why are God and the universe contradictory? Clarke says that bodies are
composed of different substances, that they are not one substance; but
it is certain that all we know of bodies is that they are extended, and
that they cause certain impressions in us. Since, then, extension is
not repugnant to God, and much less so the causality of impressions,
there can be no reason against saying that what Clarke calls distinct
substances, are only the parts, or, if he prefers it, the properties
of the infinite substance. Newton went so far as to say that space
was the sensorium of God, and even Clarke maintained against Leibnitz
that Newton's expression might bear a sound interpretation, as it was
intended only as a comparison. But Leibnitz insists so strongly on this
charge that it is plain that he had very great objections to this word.

71. Whatever tends to confound God with nature, or to place him
in constant communication with it, otherwise than by pure acts of
intellect and will, places us on a very slippery declivity, where we
can hardly help being precipitated to the bottom, and at this bottom is
pantheism, which is but a phasis of atheism.(30)




