CHAPTER XIV.

ANOTHER IMPORTANT CONSEQUENCE.


89. I now proceed to deduce the last consequence of the principle
explained above. It is of the greatest importance, and seems to deserve
the careful attention of all those who unite their metaphysical and
physical studies.

The existence of universal gravitation may be demonstrated _a priori_.

Universal gravitation is a law of nature by which some bodies are
directed to others. [We abstract here the manner.] This direction is
metaphysically necessary, if we suppose that there is no distance
where there is no body. For, if this be so, two bodies cannot exist
separated. The law of contiguity is a metaphysical necessity, and
therefore the incessant approaching of some bodies to others is a
continual obedience to this necessity.

The velocity with which they approach must be in the ratio of the
velocity with which the medium departs. The limit of the velocity of
this motion is the relation of space with an indivisible instant, such
as we might suppose if God should suddenly annihilate the intervening
body.

As the solid masses which revolve above our heads would in this case
be submerged in a fluid, supposing this fluid to be of such nature as
easily to change its place, it follows that the stars must be subject
to the law of approximation, because the medium which separates them is
continually retiring in various directions. If we suppose this fluid to
be immovable, the metaphysical necessity of this approximation ceases.

90. This theory seems to lead to the explanation of the mechanism of
the universe, by simple geometrical laws, and destroys what some have
called occult properties, and others forces.

Although it is easy to explain by metaphysical and geometrical ideas,
the fact of gravitation, or the mere tendency of bodies mutually to
approach, it is still very difficult to determine by this order of
ideas the conditions which govern gravitation.

91. If the motion of approximation depended only on the intervening
body, inequality of these bodies would produce unequal motions. It is
impossible to calculate the degree of this inequality in bodies which
are not subject to our observation.

92. Besides this difficulty there is another still greater, which is,
that bodies which move in a medium have no fixed direction, but vary
their motions with the variations of the medium.

If the gravitation of the body A towards the body B, depends only on
the motion of the retiring medium, the gravitation will not be in the
right line AB, but will follow the undulations described by the medium.
This is contrary to experience.

93. From these considerations, it follows that even though the
gravitation naturally arises from the position of the bodies, still
this necessity would not produce the order which exists, if its results
were not subject to certain laws. And, therefore, the phenomena of
nature, although founded on a necessity, would still, admitting the
existence and position of bodies, be contingent in all that relates to
the application of this necessity.

94. Going still deeper into this matter, we find that the tendency to
approximation, although necessary, is not sufficient either to produce
motion or to preserve it.

Whenever one body moves, it is always necessary that another should
follow it, in order to preserve the contiguity; but, there being no
vacuum, there is no reason why any body should move, and consequently,
no cause of motion.

Therefore, geometrical ideas are not sufficient to explain the origin
of motion, but we must look for its cause elsewhere. Contiguity being
a metaphysical necessity, if the body A moves in any direction, the
contiguous bodies B and C must also move; but if the contiguity already
existed, there is no reason why the body A should begin to move, nor,
consequently, why the bodies B and C should follow its motion.

At any instant whatever, if we suppose motion, we must suppose
contiguity; for the state of the question supposes this condition
always present, as being metaphysically necessary. There is then
no reason why the motion should at any time be prolonged; for the
bodies being at every instant contiguous there is no reason for its
continuation. The motion of the body A draws with it the body B; B
draws C, and so on. Now, if the motion of the body B has no other
origin than its contiguity to A, the motion of C has no other origin
than its contiguity to B. The cause of the motion is only not to
interrupt the contiguity; this contiguity always existing as is
absolutely necessary, there is no reason why the motion should begin,
or after it has begun, why it should continue.

95. The laws of nature cannot then be explained by geometrical and
metaphysical ideas, although we suppose approximation to be an
intrinsical necessity of bodies. Under any supposition it is necessary
to seek out of matter a superior cause which impresses, regulates, and
continues motion.




