CHAPTER VIII.

DESCARTES AND LEIBNITZ ON SPACE.


54. If space is something, what is it? Here is the difficulty. To
overthrow the opinion of our adversaries was easy, but to maintain our
position is more difficult.

Can we say that space is only the extension of bodies; that conceived
in the abstract it gives us the idea of what we call pure space; and
that the different points and positions are mere modifications of
extension?

It is easy to see that if space is the extension of bodies, where
there is no body there can be no space, and consequently vacuum is
impossible. This consequence is unavoidable.

This has been the opinion of celebrated philosophers like Descartes
and Leibnitz; but I cannot understand why they both gave the universe
an indefinite extension. It is true that by this means they avoid the
difficulty of the space which we imagine beyond the limits of the
universe; since, if the universe is not limited, there can be nothing
beyond its limits, and therefore, whatever we can imagine, must be
within the universe. But our object is not to avoid difficulties, but
to solve them; and it argues nothing for the soundness of our opinion
that it escapes difficulties.

55. According to Descartes, the essence of body is in extension, and
as we necessarily conceive extension in space, it follows that space,
body, and extension, are three essentially identical things. Vacuum,
as it is generally conceived, that is, an extension without a body, is
then a contradiction; for it is a body, because it is extension, and it
is not a body, because we suppose that there is no body.

Descartes accepts all the consequences of this doctrine. He does not
admit the supposition that if God should annihilate all the matter
contained in a vessel, this vessel could still retain its form.

"We shall observe," he says, "in opposition to this serious error,
that there is no necessary connection between the vessel and the body
which fills it; but such is the invincible necessity of the relation
between the concave figure of the vessel and the extension contained
in this concavity, that it is not more difficult to imagine a mountain
without a valley, than to conceive this concavity without the extension
contained in it, or this extension without a thing extended. Nothing,
as we have often said, cannot be extended. Therefore, if any one should
ask, what would happen if God should destroy the matter contained in a
vessel, without replacing it, we must say that the sides of the vessel
would come so closely together as to touch each other. Two bodies must
touch each other, when there is nothing between them. It would be a
contradiction to assert that these two bodies were separated; that is
to say, that there was a distance between them, if this distance were
nothing, or did not exist. Distance is a property of extension, and
cannot exist without extension."[41]

[41] Descartes, _Principes de la Philosophie_. P. 2, § 18.

56. If Descartes had gone no farther than to maintain that space,
because it contains real distances, cannot be a mere nothing, his
reasoning would seem conclusive. But when he adds that space is body,
because space is extension, and extension constitutes the essence of
body, he asserts what he does not prove.

Because we cannot imagine or conceive a body without extension, it only
follows that extension is a property of bodies without which we cannot
conceive them,--not that it is their essence. To be able to say this,
it would be necessary for us to have the idea of body as we have that
of extension, in order that we might see if they are identical. But all
that we know of bodies is derived through the senses; we are not able
to penetrate into their more intimate nature.

Whence arises the inseparability of the ideas of body and extension?
It arises from the idea which we have of bodies being a confused
idea, since we conceive it to be a substance in certain relations to
ourselves, and causing in us the impressions which we call sensations.
But since the basis of sensations is extension, as we have demonstrated
in a former chapter, this is the only medium by which we are placed in
relation with bodies. When we suppress this basis, by abstracting it,
we retain nothing of body beyond a general idea of being or substance
without any thing to characterize it, or to distinguish it from others.
We find all this in the order of our ideas, but we cannot infer from
this that bodies have no other reality than extension.

57. The same reasoning destroys the opinion of indefinite or infinite
extension. Descartes, explaining his doctrine on the idea of extension,
says: "We shall also know that this world, or the extended matter which
composes the universe, is without limits; for, no matter how far off we
place these limits, we can imagine spaces indefinitely extended beyond
them; and we not only imagine these spaces, but we conceive them as
really existing such as we imagine them, and containing an indefinitely
extended body, as the idea of extension which we conceive in every
space is the true idea which we ought to form of a body."[42]

[42] Descartes, Ibid., § II, p. 21.

In this passage, besides the error in relation to the essence of
bodies, there is a gratuitous transition from a purely ideal or rather,
imaginary order, to the real order. It is certain that wherever I may
imagine the limits of the universe, if I consider them as an immense
arch surrounding it, I still imagine new immensities of space beyond
this arch; but to conclude that the reality is as I imagine it, does
not seem conformed to the rules of good logic. If it is as clear as
Descartes supposes, if it is not only an imagination, but a conception
founded on clear and distinct ideas, how happens it that so many
philosophers see in all this only a play of the imagination?

58. Leibnitz thinks that space is "a relation, an order, not only
between things existing, but also between possible things as if they
existed."[43] He also believes vacuum impossible, but not for the
reason which Descartes gives. These are his words:

[43] Leibnitz, _Nouveaux Essais_. L. II., C. XIII., § 17.

"_Philalethes._--Those who take matter and extension for the same
thing, pretend that the sides of a hollow empty body would touch each
other. But the space which is between the two bodies is enough to
prevent their mutual contact.

"_Theophilus._--I am of your opinion; for, although I do not admit a
vacuum, I distinguish matter from extension, and concede that although
there were a vacuum in a sphere, the opposite poles would not on that
account unite. But I do not believe this is a case which the divine
perfection would permit."[44]

[44] Leibnitz, Ibid., § 21.

59. Leibnitz seems to me to commit what logicians call _petitio
principii_, or, "begging the question." He says that in the case
supposed, the sides would not touch each other, because the space
between them would prevent it; but this is what he had to prove,--the
real existence of this space. This reality is what Descartes denies.

60. If we compare the opinions of Descartes and Leibnitz, we shall see
that both agree in denying to space a reality distinct from bodies, but
basing their denial on very different reasons. Descartes places the
essence of body in extension; where there is extension there is body;
where there is space there is extension; consequently, there neither
is nor can be a vacuum. Leibnitz does not believe an empty capacity
intrinsically absurd, and that he does not admit it is solely because,
in his conception, it is repugnant to the divine perfection. The two
illustrious philosophers started from very different principles, but
arrived at the same conclusion. Descartes rests upon metaphysical
reasons, founded on the essence of things. Leibnitz bases his opinion
on the absolute essence of things only in its relations with the
divine perfection. Empty capacity is a contradiction in the opinion of
Leibnitz, only inasmuch as it is opposed to optimism.

61. It is very remarkable that three so distinguished philosophers
as Aristotle, Descartes, and Leibnitz, should agree in denying the
existence of this capacity which is called space, considered as a being
distinct from bodies, and with the possibility of existing by itself.
The difference of their opinions only proves that at the bottom of
the question there is a difficulty more serious than some ideologists
believe, who explain the idea of space and its generation with the same
ease as though they were treating of the simplest matters.




