BOOK II

WOMAN'S PART IN HUMAN DECADENCE

     I. DECLINE AND FALL OF ANCIENT CIVILISATIONS
        DUE TO FEMINISM                                         95

    II. THE EVOLUTION OF SEX IN ADOLESCENCE                    109

   III. THE EXTINCTION OF SEX IN ADOLESCENCE                   126

    IV. THE WOMAN BRAIN: ITS POWERS AND DISABILITIES           146

     V. MALE AND FEMALE SEX-INSTINCTS AND MORALE
        DIAMETRICALLY DIFFERENT                                166

    VI. FEMINIST DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE DISASTROUS
        TO INFANT-LIFE AND HUMAN FACULTY                       190

   VII. FEMINIST DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE DESTRUCTIVE
        OF WOMANLY ATTRIBUTES, MORALE AND PROGRESS             219

  VIII. DANGEROUS SEPARATION OF WOMEN INTO TWO
        ORDERS: FEMINISTS AND FEMININISTS                      242

    IX. THE IMPENDING SUBJECTION OF MAN                        264


APPENDIX

FURTHER EVIDENCES IN SUPPORT OF BIOLOGICAL AND
MENDELIAN PROPOSITIONS ADVANCED IN BOOK I                      292




BOOK I

WOMAN'S PART IN HUMAN EVOLUTION




CHAPTER I

IMPASSIONED FALLACIES OF FEMINISM

     "The sexual love which has its origin in what is external and
     accidental may easily be turned to hate, a kind of madness that is
     nourished on discord; but that love, on the other hand, is lasting
     which has its source in freedom of soul and in the will to bear and
     bring up children."--_Spinoza._


I

There is no subject save that of Religion about which so much
impassioned fallacy has been spoken and written as has been spoken and
written round the Woman Question.

For more than half a century--since Mill wrote his famous _Subjection_,
indeed--it has become an increasing vogue to regard Woman as a martyr;
more or less sainted, more or less crushed and effaced beneath the
iron-heeled tyrannies, personal, economic, and political, of the
oppressor, Man. And it has been in the spirit of this conviction and in
fervid endeavours--indignant and chivalrous on the part of the one sex,
and still more indignant and but little less chivalrous on the part of
the other--to liberate unhappy victims from a barbarous oppression, that
most of the impassioned fallacy has been spoken and written, and doughty
deeds done.

At the certain cost, therefore, of being stigmatised as a reactionary
(severely qualified), I propose to unmask some of these which I believe
to be baseless obsessions, and to present a wholly new--and, I hope, a
more veracious and inspiring version of the case between the sexes.

To begin with, I assert boldly that the so-called Subjection of Woman,
very far from having been a cruel injustice merely, on the part of man,
has served, on the contrary, as a blessing and an inestimable benefit
not only to herself but to the Race bound up in her. A blessing often
rough and painful in its methods, during epochs when all other methods
were both rough and painful, attended, too, by wrongs and cruelties;
yet, in the main, operating vastly to her well-being and advancement
and, in hers, to those of the Race.


Looking back upon the hard and bloody routes of Evolution whereby the
human Races have attained to present-day developments, we see our
forbears groping blindly, fighting blindly, advancing blindly;
stumbling, falling, picking up again; making new departures only
hopelessly to lose the road; making new departures, now to find it and
trudge on. In all its painful and laborious phases, a terrible and
sordid climb. Yet, nevertheless, in its great annals of Ascent, a noble
and a wondrous March of Progress.

And whether we are Religionists or Evolutionists--or are sufficiently
broad-minded to be both--the history of Life is seen to have been a
history of deathless effort, never ceasing, never waning; renewed with
every generation; intensified by every further acquisition of new power,
as, with every further recognition of new goals and problems, the
ever-increasing Purpose and the ever-increasing perplexity and
complexity of The Purpose revealed itself at every step. It becomes
increasingly clear, moreover, that Creation, or Creative Evolution (to
employ Professor Bergson's phrase), has been the resultant of a
progressive aggregation of Atomic Matter about some vast immanent
_Idea_, slowly and by infinitesimal degrees materialising in the
objective. Very much as bricks are grouped about the pre-conceived plan
of a house, and could not be assembled in the building of the simplest
tool-hut without predetermination of the site of every brick, and of
the relation of every brick to every other.

And in all those past ages of conflict, bringing Order out of Chaos,
Progress out of Order, and an ever-increasing domination of blind Energy
and Inorganic Matter by Mind and Purpose, the fighting male it has been
who, in his conquest of the Earth as in his conquest of other fighting
males, both brute and human, has borne the greater heat and burden of
the day. Women have striven also--toil has been the crux of their
development as of their mates. But men have striven twofold. While women
toiled in the security of homes, the sword, the blunderbuss or
press-gang, or the equivalent of these, according to the epoch, awaited
men and still await them at most street-corners of the arduous male
career.

Women have suffered more, _psychically_; because this way lay their
nature and their human lot. Men have suffered more, _materially_;
because here lay theirs. And since advancement comes by suffering, women
are reaping to-day the harvest of past travail of their sex, in the
higher psychical development which now characterises that sex. During
centuries when men were vastly too hard-pressed by the struggle for
barest existence to have been aware that they possessed souls, women
were privileged to be aware of theirs--by the affliction thereof.

The immediate purpose of this fencing of the women behind the stronger
frames, the stronger wills, and stronger brains of fighting males was
the Racial one, of course. While men battled with environment and with
alien aggressors for their lives and for their food, as for those of the
family, the sheltered women were alike the loom and cradle of the Race.
As well, they made havens, or homes, for the fighters to return to for
sleep and refreshment. They plied a simple, primitive agriculture,
practised a primitive healing art, and otherwise evolved The
Humanities. But since mortal power is limited, power expended in one
direction is power withdrawn from some other. Power spent in battle is
power lost to progress. The woman who, with the instinct for home and as
shelter for her babes, laid the foundations of Architecture in a hut of
mud, was enabled to do this solely by virtue of masculine protection.

It is in peace only that Progress arises, in leisure that The Arts
evolve. And woman, walled in by the lives of the males, found leisure of
body and mind to pluck flowers for the adorning of her hut, to shape
platters of clay, and, later, even for embellishment of these with crude
designs. Thus she was the first artist.

The fighting male was--by necessity--destructive. He invented a club.
The female was--by privilege--constructive. She invented the needle (a
fish-bone, doubtless). And while the male transmitted to offspring his
virile fighting and destructive qualities, woman tempered and humanised
these by incorporating with them her milder traits and artistries of
peace. Lacking the male aggressive and protective faculties, however,
increasing in skill and resource with his ever further Adaptation to
(and of) environment, woman's gentler and humanising aptitudes would
have had neither opportunity for evolution, nor scope for exercise and
further sway.


II

I have been reading an account, by a naturalist, of some phases in the
life-history of crabs. And it is interesting to find even among
creatures so low in the Life-scale (although Darwin regarded these as
the most intelligent of _crustaceae_) that same instinct of protection of
the female which is seen in the higher orders of creation.

A crab, being encased in an unyielding shell, is able to increase its
growth only by "casting" its shell and developing one of larger size
over its increased bulk. During the interval between casting an old
shell and acquiring a new one, the crab in its soft, pulpy condition is
readily injured, or falls prey to its natural enemies. To protect itself
as well as may be, it shelters in rocky crevices or in other available
hiding-places. This shell-casting occurs in both sexes, of course. But
the circumstances under which the change is made differ widely in the
sexes. For while the male-crab has no protector during his defenceless,
shell-less state, his shell is cast a month or more earlier than occurs
in the female; after which he feeds up, in order to be in superior
fighting trim for her protection during her shell-casting phase.
Fishermen describe him as then spreading himself over her as a hen
covers her chicks, and in her defence desperately attacking all comers.
The result of such protection of the female is that, although males are
larger and fiercer, "hen-crabs" are numerous, while males are scarce.

The like is true of nearly every species. The males protect the females.
Even the gorilla, savage and most terrible of beasts, lies at night on
guard beneath the tree in which his mate and offspring sleep. If need
arise, he fights to the death in their defence.

With regard to the chivalrous devotion of male-birds, Olive Schreiner
thus comments in _Woman and Labour_ (an example of that I have ventured
to describe as the "impassioned fallacy" hurtling round the Woman
Question): "Along the line of bird-life and among certain of its
species, sex has attained its highest aesthetic, and one might almost say
intellectual, development on earth ... represents the realisation of the
highest sexual ideal which haunts humanity."

(This however, less, I fear, to accredit the male-sex with chivalry than
to discredit the human male by ornithological comparison!)

       *       *       *       *       *

One does not profess that such protective role of males--beast and bird
and crab--is the outcome of sentiment. It is instinctive, subconscious.
Nature's purpose being to preserve and to perpetuate species, she
achieves this by safeguarding the female. The province of the male in
reproduction is but slight and brief. It exacts so little from him as to
interfere not at all with those other masculine activities which are the
function of his sex.

Whereas, as Professor Lester Ward says, "Woman [and the female of all
species] _is_ the Race." Out of her blood and bone and vital powers she
evolves and fashions it, nurtures and ministers to it.


III

For the preservation of species, two roles are essential: the Male role
of Combat, demanding strength and boldness, resource and
fighting-quality, in order to protect and provide for the female and
offspring; and the Female role of Devotion and Self-surrender, in order
to nurture offspring ante-natally, and, after birth, to nurture and to
tend its helplessness.

Now all but biologists, perhaps, take it as matter-of-course that Love
had its origin in Sex.

Seeing love between the sexes as the strongest and most dominant of the
civilised passions, it is natural to infer that it was born of the
instinctive attraction between male and female, and that this
instinctive attraction, with the growth and expansion of faculty, mental
and temperamental, has evolved to the high and tender issues to be found
in latter-day romantic passion; theme of poets, novelists, artists;
richest and most exquisite of life's emotions; inspiration and motive of
the finest human achievements. A passion which, for a space at least,
transfigures the natures and ennobles the lives of all but the crass and
the sordid.

Nevertheless--Love did not arise out of sex. The sex-relation in primal
men and women held no element of affection; no sympathy, tenderness,
self-sacrifice, or other attribute of Love. On the part of the female,
it was compulsory surrender and the habit of surrender to superior
strength, mitigated, doubtless, by a subconscious instinct to secure
offspring. In the male, it was impulse as tyrannous and selfish as was
the instinct to kill. Like the instinct to kill, a factor in it made for
fitness for survival. There was in it, accordingly, an element of
instinctive selection. But the selection made for survival-fitness
merely in the mate. It owed nothing to sentimental appeal exercised by
one female, and lacking in another. The instinct to mate was implanted
by Nature for the continuation of species. If its observance contained
an element of gratification, it held no more of reciprocity than did the
gratification of that stronger lust, to kill, include a consideration of
the feelings of the prey, or than greed of any other form of possession
extends a grace of reciprocal benefit to the thing acquired.

Modern savages have no conception of sexual love. There are no
love-songs, no courtship, no affection in their matings. The males marry
mainly in order to secure wives to work for them. And they select strong
women because these are best fitted for work. Or they select women who
have some or another small possession. Biological instinct is a factor,
doubtless, but it is not a factor of sentiment.

In his fine book, _Natural Law in the Spiritual World_, Professor
Drummond says:


     "Probably we have all taken for granted that husbands and wives
     have always loved one another. Evolution takes nothing for granted
     ... in the lower reaches of Human Nature, husband and wife do not
     love one another ... for the vast mass of mankind during the long
     ages which preceded historic times, conjugal love was probably all
     but unknown....

     "The idea that the existence of sex accounts for the existence of
     love is untrue. Marriage among early races has nothing to do with
     love. Among savage peoples, the phenomenon everywhere confronts us
     of wedded life without a grain of love. Love then is no necessary
     ingredient of the sex-relation; it is not an outgrowth of passion.
     Love is love and has always been love, and has never been anything
     lower."


Even to-day, despite the evolution of the higher faculties, despite long
centuries of inherited habit and tradition, and despite the circumstance
that in all the nobler types of men and women the sex-instinct is
spiritualised by affection and understanding--Even in this late day of
civilisation, the male sex-instinct may be seen still in all its native
tyranny and selfishness; seeking gratification in sensuality and
cruelty, with callous disregard alike of the welfare as of the suffering
of its victim. In the violation of women and children that occurs both
in peace and in war, the instinct manifests as an impulse of aggression,
and the sex-function as one of brutality or ruthless lust.


IV

Respecting the origin of Mind and Emotion, Charles Darwin said:


     "In what manner the mental powers were first developed in the
     lowest organisms, is as hopeless an inquiry as how life itself
     first originated."


And Huxley:


     "I know nothing, and never hope to know anything of the steps by
     which the passage from molecular movement to states of
     consciousness is effected. The two things are on two utterly
     different platforms, the physical facts go along by themselves and
     the mental facts go along by themselves."


While Dr. Alfred Russel Wallace (the biologist who was working out the
theory of Natural Selection simultaneously with Darwin, both unaware
that the other was working in the same direction) attributes to a
Creative act of God, all the moral and intellectual qualities which have
been super-added in man to those lesser and simpler ones he possesses in
common with the higher animals. Wallace describes this as a "Divine
Influx," and regards it as being wholly distinct and apart from the slow
and gradual processes of Natural Selection.

But yet, in point of fact, what was it that inspired and energised the
earlier processes, if not this same Divine Influx? The simpler processes
must, from their earliest rudimentary beginnings, have been leading up
to the later and more complex. And the later and more complex were,
surely, continuous with the simpler--since Nature abhors miracles, and
works by slow progressive biological sequences.

Nothing shows as more impersonal than a crystal; cold, hard, senseless,
motionless. And yet in crystals is the element of Life, even the power
of reproduction, showing factors of sex already operative in them. While
living bodies, charged with warmth, mobility, sentience, intelligence,
have Inorganic Matter for their basis of construction. And that
Inorganic elements are very far from being the impersonal things they
seem, but are linked by subtle correspondences to living Mind and vital
powers, is shown by their effects on living processes and consciousness.
Given as medicines, digestion (which is a species of rapid evolution
from lower to higher forms of energy) develops such vital inherences
within them as prove their apparent impersonality to contain a principle
continuous not only with living processes, but with the highest
mentality.

Professor Leduc observes in his illuminating book, "The Mechanism of
Life," "_the ordinary physical forces have, in fact, a power of
organisation infinitely greater than has been hitherto supposed by the
boldest imagination_."

Coralline structures and beautiful shells, fungi, leaves, and plants
bearing coloured, flowerlike blooms spring into growth when a formless
fragment of calcium salt is dropped into a chemical solution. And these
"Osmotic growths," artificially produced, possess far greater complexity
of structure and of function than do the simpler living organisms of
Nature.


The evidences of a Vast Stupendous Plan, which every further scientific
discovery still further emphasises, are slowly forcing from our men of
Science the confession that behind the marvellous phenomena their
findings reveal, and which they are powerless to explain, must lie a
Cause, occult and irresistible, an Impulse, all-pervading,
incomprehensible.

Bergson describes an _elan vital_--a living impetus--determining such
phenomena.

In his Presidential address to the British Association at Dublin, in
1908, Professor J. S. Haldane summed up as follows the position of
Physiological Science: "The point now reached is that the conceptions of
Physics and Chemistry are insufficient to enable us to understand
physiological phenomena."

Weismann says: "Behind the co-operating forces of Nature, we must admit
a Cause ... inconceivable in its nature, of which we can only say one
thing with certainty, that it must be theological."

Drummond says: "Evolution is Advolution,--better, it is Revelation--the
phenomenal expression of the Divine, the progressive realisation of the
Ideal, the Ascent of Love."

If, then, we admit Life to be the product of a Divine Influx, whereby
Inorganic Matter has been, by way of evolutionary processes,
increasingly empowered to fructify in living form and faculty, Human
Attributes are seen to be the flower of Spiritual seed, which, sown in
Life, has germinated; has struck roots of biological function into
living flesh and put forth leaves in living traits; has developed in
physiological processes and blossomed in powers of Mind and of body. And
as the stronger and deeper the grip of its roots in the earth, the
taller and nobler the oak towers heavenward, so it must be with human
characteristics. The deeper and more firmly the seedling faculties
strike roots in living function, the fuller and more potent springs the
impulse toward that evolutionary perfection which is the goal of Human
Being.

If, however, living processes are the resultant of a Divine Influx, they
are Spiritual processes. Life is then a manifestation in Matter, of
Spirit. All the developments of Life are Spiritual phenomena, therefore.
The imperfection and evil found in living creatures are not attributes
of Life. They are crudities of rudimentary organisation, or are failures
in or aberrations from the normal development of Life.


V

In the Evolution of Faculty, living traits are seen to have been all the
while attaining to higher power by the differentiation and development
of special organs to subserve their fuller function, their finer
conscious apprehension, and their more complex manifestation on the
material plane.

The brain has been specialised thus to serve as the organ of
Consciousness; the eye, of Vision; the ear, of Hearing; the hand, of
Touch and of manipulation. The lowest organisms possess no such
specialised organs of sense or of consciousness. Nor are they equipped
with special reproductive organs. They reproduce by cleavage; by
budding a small portion of themselves, which, when separated, grows to a
mature organism.

With other differentiations and specialisations of Function and Faculty,
there has developed--for the all-important racial purpose of creating
ever higher and more potent living species--the highly-complex human
reproductive system, which, by its close and subtle nervous alliance
with the brain, has become the medium and the instrument of a new and
irresistible emotion. So that it serves not only for the perpetuation of
a complex species, but, moreover, for the attraction, by natural
affinity, of the mates best suited to one another.

And in course of evolutionary progress, the emotion of Love has been all
the while more and more so leavening and inspiring sex-attraction with
its purer and more tender attributes, that human passion has come to
combine--in those of higher nature--the flame and energy of physical
attraction with the tenderness and devotion of altruistic affection.
With the result that human parenthood, thus quickened and spiritualised,
has become ever further empowered to evolve more highly intelligised,
more beautiful and more efficient types of offspring.


That Passion, pure and simple, has evolved out of the Male sex-instinct
is certain. Even in its chivalrous development of romantic passion, are
found, in transfigured form, that flame and urgence for possession which
manifest crudely and cruelly in the primal male-instinct. Without this
virile ardour, indeed, the sex-relation is but a poor and tepid, or a
cold and sensual thing.

Yet Passion is not Love.

That meekness and forbearance, humility and self-surrender have been
reared in the Female sex-instinct of submission to passion (primarily in
aversion and fear more often than in acquiescence) is equally certain.
And without these chastening factors to temper, soften and anneal, the
sex-relation is a fierce and tyrannous concern. But no more than
passion, is submission Love. Neither in passion nor in submission, pure
and simple, is there joy of surrender or welding communion.

Nevertheless, since every human faculty must have its roots in living
function, and every living function must possess some physical organ in
which its processes occur, from what human function sprang the Love that
is selfless, altruistic and pitiful; soul and inspiration of the most
sacred emotions--self-sacrifice, charity, mercy, devotion, tenderness?
In what nursery of Human Consciousness was this fair and gentle blossom
sown; to spring, to develop, and to make for gracious growth?

Since, although it has come to lend its purity and sweetness to the
Sex-passion, it neither sprang from nor has been reared in sex-instinct,
is it a product of Parental Affection? Is it an evolution of the
self-negation and the tenderness of parents for their children?


VI

Throughout Nature, the parental instinct is seen as a unique
development, detached from and high above all other developments.
Demanding, as it does, the complete surrender and self-denying labours
of one individual in the interests of another, it differs from and
traverses all other dictates. It impels a creature whose every instinct
it had been--whose religion of biological survival it had been,
indeed--to be wholly self-centred in its every aim and action, all at
once to make another creature the focus of its interests and efforts.
Where for a scratch, for a glance, the fierce female would have fallen
tooth and nail upon another, now she surrenders meekly to the pangs of
bringing offspring into life--and straightway licks and suckles the
frail being that has riven her. Where she would furiously have driven
off, or would have killed, another creature that approached her food,
now she gives herself as food for this. Where lesser Fitness for
survival on another's part had been signal for making such her prey, now
Unfitness in the extremest degree claims her devotion and care.

Superfluous to cite cases of maternal altruism. The mildest and most
timid among creatures becomes fierce and courageous in defence of her
young. Style it "merely instinct," if you will. It is none the less
heroic on the part of every individual that obeys it, and does not obey
it blindly and mechanically merely, but employs all her poor wit and
resource to suit her heroism to the special circumstance.


Without care and attention from the moment of its birth, the life of an
infant would be reckoned in hours. The higher the organism, the more and
for the longer period its infancy exacts unceasing devotion and nurture.

Fish and moth and other species of low order are cast off in the egg.
Chicks scramble out of the shell.

The higher their grade in the scale of organisation and intelligence,
the more helpless and incapable young creatures are to feed and to fend
for themselves. Kittens are born blind and helpless, but after a few
days they see and crawl about. The elephant-mother suckles and
safeguards her baby-elephant for two whole years.

Now, were there no purpose in all this--Were it not that such devotion
to offspring serves as impulse and spur to the evolution and development
of faculty in parents, Nature, in planning the complex human species,
would, surely, have endowed the human infant and child with fuller
powers of self-preservation.

Were there other functions and aptitudes the exercise whereof would
better stimulate and foster human progress, it is inconceivable that
children would be, and would be for so long, the helpless, feckless,
dependent mortals that they are.

For ten long lunar months, the human babe is part of its mother; homed
in the nest of her body, warmed by her warmth, fed by her blood. She
breathes for it, digests for it, assimilates for it, exercises for it.
For ten further lunar months, it is dependent upon her for the food by
which it lives. For nearly a year, save for an inept power of creeping,
with but small sense of direction, it requires to be moved and carried
everywhere. For years it must be washed, dressed, combed, laid down to
sleep at night, got up in the morning, taken for rides or for walks,
played with, bidden, chidden; comforted, warmed, cooled; defended,
cherished, instructed--in a hundred ways to be gently and progressively
adapted to life, by way of a more or less highly-specialised
environment. Even when no longer helpless, it must be provided for in
the matters of housing, food, clothing, education. It must be instructed
in a means of livelihood, and started on its young career.

Among the poorer classes the child depends upon its hard-worked parents
for a period varying between twelve and sixteen years. In the
professional classes, the young son and daughter are not fully qualified
for independent existence before the ages of twenty-three or
twenty-five. In ill-health, in brain defect, and in other incapacities,
parents must provide for their offspring for life.

And seeing how the demands of the young, and the response and exactions
of the parents multiply and amplify proportionally with the higher
evolution of both, we are forced to believe that the small
survival-value of the child, owing to its native unadaptedness to
environment, is part of The Plan, and that it subserves some high and
complex purpose in human development.


VII

An essential obligation of Parenthood is, that, in order to fulfil this
duly, the parents require to undergo a wholly new and intrinsic
adjustment of faculty. Having arrived already at a complex adaptation to
a complex civilised environment, in physique and character, in mentality
and habit, now, by a revolutionary reversal of their human progress,
they must re-adapt to the simplest of all creatures and conditions--a
helpless, puling infant in a cradle.

Where they had had a whole world, perhaps, of intellectual interests and
social pursuits to engage them, now they forgather beside a cot
and--according as they are human or are not--lose themselves, brain and
heart and soul, in the puling, impotent thing. They make themselves eyes
and ears, arms and legs for it; carriage, chair and bed. They gaze,
entranced, upon the marvel of the opening and shutting of its eyes. It
yawns; they tremble lest it dislocate a jaw. It sneezes; now they
shudder lest it may have taken cold. It gurgles, and they are
transported to a seventh heaven.

Never has either been equally fluttered at their recognition by an
exalted personage as both exult when flattered by the flicker of an
eyelash that it distinguishes its father from its mother; or either from
its nurse. Both perhaps are self-contained and philosophic beings, yet
its cry distracts them; scatters their composure to the winds. The inept
thing cannot even tell them what it wants. Its cry for food is much the
same as is its cry when it requires to be laid down, or lifted up. When
its milk is not sweet enough, its inarticulate fury is expressed in
notes identical--so far as they can judge--with those of its impotent
wrath when a pin-point pricks it.

But whatsoever the cause, to the winds the parental composure is
scattered, as hither and thither they scurry, distraught, seeking a
reason and a remedy. And this, of course, had been their tyrant's
purpose. He had meant to strike panic in his parents' hearts. He was
vexed or empty, or was otherwise uneasy. And behold the penalties of
those who suffer him to be vexed or empty, or otherwise uneasy!

And whether they are rough, hard-working persons who have neither time
nor taste for fuss and nonsense; whether they are the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Mrs. Archbishop, Sir Isaac and Lady Newton, or the
Emperor and Empress of Japan, it is all the same to Baby. No other uses
have they in his absurd judgment than to obey his slightest gurgle.

And the wonder of the business is that they too--provided they be
normal, wholesome-minded, natural-hearted persons--are of similar
opinion. Even a Professor of Archaeology must feel a twinge of some
emotion when his first baby cuts its first tooth. King Lion himself
suffers it with patience when his cub scratches his royal countenance,
or gets its milk-teeth into his prize-bone.

The whole face of the earth is transformed by the Baby, indeed. And how
much it is transformed for the better! It is not too much to say that it
is humanised, redeemed. The most grudging of curmudgeons murmurs only a
little to surrender his place at the fire to The Baby. The thirsty thief
forbears to drink his infant's milk.

In his great story, _The Luck of Roaring Camp_, Bret Harte has shown,
and has shown as probable, the uplifting and regenerating influence that
"The Luck"--its mother a sinner, its father, Heaven alone knew
who!--exercised upon a rough community of vicious men.

"It wrastled wi' my finger," says one in an awed whisper. To cover
sentiment he adds, "the durn'd little cuss!" But carefully he segregates
the member sanctified by the tiny, satin touch, from the other fingers
of his wicked hand.




