CHAPTER IV

ONE SIDE OF BODY IS MALE, THE OTHER SIDE IS FEMALE

     "Oh, I must feel your brain prompt mine,
       Your heart anticipate my heart,
     You must be just before, in fine,
       See and make me see, for your part,
     New depths of the Divine!"

     _Robert Browning._


I

On further applying the Principle of Duality, as operating in
organisation and heredity, strangely interesting and significant
developments appear.

Because, with the ever further evolution of Form and Faculty as
organisms have risen higher in the scale of life, the bodies of living
creatures are seen to have become further differentiated into two sides;
a right and a left. Anatomically, these two sides appear identical in
structure and in function, although contrary in incidence to one
another. Each is incomplete and impotent without the other.
Nevertheless, paralysis and other diseases show that each is, as it
were, an entity totally distinct from the other. One side may be wholly
helpless and insensitive while its fellow remains sound and efficient.

Complementary and supplementary each to the other, both are, in a sense,
complete. Further and closer comparison of function shows, however, that
although they co-operate in action, they are by no means identical in
power or aptitude.

The right half of the body is, for both sexes, the active and executive
half; quicker and stronger, and in all ways more efficient on the plane
of physics.

The left half is, relatively, passive and inert, is _responsive_,
mainly, to the initiative and requirements of the right half, by which
its powers are overshadowed in every form of direct activity.

As with the two sides of the body, so it is with the two halves of the
brain, which are at the same time the agencies of mentality and the
centres for recording the sensations and for directing the movements of
the two sides of the body. The brain-half which controls the right side
is known as "the Leading half." It is the agent in concrete
intellection, as in physical activity.

While, so far as biologists and psychologists have been able to
discover, the other half of the brain is negative in function--a blank,
as regards concrete intelligence and nervous or muscular initiative. In
disease, it has sometimes been found to undertake, and to perform feebly
and imperfectly, sundry of the duties of its active "Leading" partner.
But inert and inadequate in muscular action, it is negative in
intellection. It has been observed, however, that patients in whom this
brain-half is diseased show signs of moral deterioration. Yet whatsoever
its functions--and the fact that it does not atrophy nor degenerate in
the marvellous structure and complexity which characterise
brain-constitution shows that it functions duly--its operations are
totally dissimilar to, and are, moreover, wholly overshadowed by those
of its active, intelligent partner.


Here again, as in the two sides of the body, appear, surely, the factors
of Dominance and Recessiveness--in other words of Maleness and
Femaleness; of strength and activity upon material planes, and of
inhibition upon these.

Developments which, being in full agreement with one another and with
others, suggest that the two orders of Sex-characteristics (derived from
parents of opposite sex) are centred, respectively, in the two sides of
the body, and in the two brain-hemispheres allied, respectively, with
these. One side of the body, with its allied brain-half, represents the
paternal inherences of the individual; the other, the maternal. If so,
the right side of the body, with its allied Leading, or Dominant,
brain-half is, clearly, of male inherence. While the left side, with its
allied Recessive, or Dormant, brain-half is of female inherence.

The inference is further supported by the fact that the stronger right
side is rather larger and more masculine in form; while left-side limbs
are in normal right-handed persons, more slender and shapely and
delicate--in a word more womanly--than are those of the right.

As regards the face, from one aspect both sides are complete, from
another aspect both are incomplete, without the other. And in
configuration and expression, the two sides of the face differ
appreciably; the left side being more psychical, emotional and
subtle--in a word again more womanly.

In most persons, the hands and ears and eyes of one side differ from
those of the other, both in form and in function. In some persons the
differences are considerable. It happens occasionally, indeed, that the
eye of one side resembles in colour the eyes of one parent, while the
opposite eye bears the colour of those of the other parent.

Strange to say, there are, moreover, in the human male, organs concerned
with the strictly female function of lactation.

Indication of primaeval human hermaphrodites formed one of Darwin's
greatest puzzles, indeed. In his _Descent of Man_, the following passage
occurs:


     "It has been known that in the vertebrate Kingdom one sex bears
     rudiments of various accessory parts appertaining to the
     reproductive system, which properly belong to the other sex....
     Some remote progenitor of the whole vertebrate kingdom appears to
     have been hermaphrodite, or androgynous."


It escaped him as it has escaped later biologists that Man, the highest
of the vertebrates, _is still androgynous_. And this inevitably so,
since, being of bi-sexual parentage, the sex-characteristics of both
parents must be present in him.

In _The Evolution of Sex_, Professors Geddes and Thomson state:


     "Sometimes a fish is male on one side, female on the other, or male
     anteriorly and female posteriorly.... Among invertebrates the same
     has been occasionally observed, especially among butterflies, where
     striking differences in the colouring of the wings on the two sides
     have in some cases been found to correspond to an internal
     co-existence of ovary and testes.... The prettiest cases of
     superficial hermaphrodism occur among insects, especially among
     moths and butterflies, where it often happens that the wings on one
     side are those of the male, on the other, those of the female."


II

Despite the fact that Nature has evolved the complex human races from
the single-celled microscopic _amoeba_ ("Protoplasmic father of Man," as
science has styled this), there are those who regard it as another of
numerous blunders on the part of the Great Mother that the left side of
the body is a more or less passive and powerless member. Accordingly,
the doctrine of Ambidextry has arisen. With the result that its wiser
exponents have abandoned it. Because it has been found that children
trained on Ambidextrous lines develop neurotic symptoms. This occurs
even in cases in which children naturally left-handed are taught to use
the right hand, as is normal.

In a lecture given before The Child-Study Society in London, Mr. P. B.
Ballard, London County-Council Inspector of Schools, stated that
left-handed bowlers send down the ugliest balls, left-handed boxers deal
the most unexpected blows--blows that hurt terribly. To be left-handed,
it seemed, was to be not merely awkward, but to be wicked, moreover. Yet
any attempt to interfere with a child's natural habit is liable to make
him stammer. (The evil bent of left-handed persons has a special
significance in view of my hypothesis of the dissimilar mental functions
of the two brain-hemispheres. The term "sinister" expresses this bent.
The inference is that in such transposition of the normal functions of
the brain-halves, the tempering and humanising influence of the
Woman-half is counteracted.)

Of a group of 545 left-handed children, 1 per cent. of pure left-handers
stammered, against 4.3 per cent, of 399, in course of being taught to
use the right hand, Mr. Ballard further stated. In another group of 207,
the figures were 4.2 per cent, and 21.8 per cent. respectively. Six out
of ten left-handed children who had been taught to use the right hand
were practically cured of stammering after having been allowed to use
the left hand exclusively for eighteen months. There are twice as many
left-handed boys as left-handed girls; and stammering is twice as
prevalent among boys.

All of which indicates normal differences in function of the two sides
of the body--differences suggesting that, as I have surmised, each is
the site and the agency of a principle totally unlike that of the other.


III

Upon referring to Biology--on the processes whereof every development,
both physical and psychical, of living creatures rests--this curious
dual constitution of the body, together with the problems of dual
sex-transmission and inherency, become explicable.

And the solutions are at the same time so simple and inevitable as to be
the strongest possible confirmation of my thesis.


As already stated, living organisms, offspring of two parents, derive
half the source of their structure from one parent, half from the other.

All plants and living creatures evolve their organisation from a single
microscopic cell, precisely as Life itself evolved primarily, and has
developed out of the single-celled, microscopic _amoeba_. The
microscopic cell which develops into a living creature is composed thus
of two halves, or "gametes," to employ the scientific term. One half was
contributed by the father: the other, by the mother. The two have united
to form a whole cell. From such a cell (zygote), half male, half female,
the body of every living organism has sprung.

Now, although these two half-cells unite to form a whole cell, exchange
constituents, and appear to lose their identity each in the other, it
is, in the face of the strange dual constitution of the body, difficult
to doubt that each half actually retains its identity and
sex-inherences, and develops along its own lines (albeit in close
correlation with the other), throughout all the marvellous, intricate,
and complex processes of embryological existence, during which the
zygote is evolving into a living creature, capable of separate and
individual life. And the inherences of these two halves are represented,
at birth, in the respective sides of the body; each being, as it were, a
complete and perfect entity, although inseparably knit in one flesh to
its twin. And throughout all the further intricate and complex processes
whereby the creature comes to maturity, lives, reproduces its species,
and dies, each half preserves its individual inherence alike in
constitution and in function. And yet in the mystical unity of their
commingling duality, they are one flesh.

Each of the parental half-cells contained, marvellously, the potential
moiety of a living personality. But either, alone, would have been but
an incomplete and valueless thing, had it not become united with the
complementary half-cell required to complete it structurally, and to
engender and energise its potentialities. Nevertheless, throughout all
the immature and the mature phases of life, from conception to birth,
and from birth onward to death, the opposite sides of the body represent
normally the opposite sex-inherences of their respective parents. They
are, in humans, the Man and the Woman--two in one--that exist in every
living man and woman. They represent contrary principles; they perform
different functions; they engender and energise dissimilar processes.
One is the centre of the Male characteristics, Dominant upon the
material plane; the other, of the Female characteristics, Recessive
thereon.

Normality and health are the mean and balance, in the individual, of the
complementary and supplementary functions and processes of the opposite
sex-inherences of his, or her, body. Precisely as in the social economy
the complementary and supplementary roles of men and women counterpoise
the aptitudes and determine the effectiveness of human life and action.

The left, Female-half of the body, with its allied half-brain,[1] is
inhibitive, and engenders the evolution and the preservation, physical
and mental, of The Type; sustaining health and vital power by way of the
female attributes of rest and conservation.

The right, Male half, with its allied half-brain, is executive, and
energises the development (Adaptation) of The Type in its relation to
Environment, and, disbursing and applying the vital resources, generates
and differentiates potential faculty in terms of living function.


IV

This hypothesis of the dual constitution and of dual functions of the
two-sided body supplies an explanation, equally simple and inevitable,
of the parental transmission of Sex. _Natura simplex est_, said Newton.
And Du Prel, "Nature is much more simple than we have any conception
of."

Because, as Biology shows, not only does each of the two parents
contribute to offspring, but there being both a right and a left
reproductive gland in members of both sexes, the contribution either
parent supplies must have been derived from one or other of these glands
in them. And if the two sides of the body are of different
sex-inherence, it is only logical to conclude that the contribution the
gland of one side makes will be of different sex-inherence from that of
the other.


Since all forms of Energy have two modes, potential (or latent) and
kinetic (or active), on the plane of physics, this must be true, of
course, of Vital Energy.

Life-energy must be present in all living bodies in the forms,
respectively, of _latent_ Vital Energy and _functioning_ Vital
Energy--energy conserved and available for functioning, and energy
expending itself in the living processes of mentality and action.

An individual is able to move his limbs by power of the _potential_
motion stored, or latent, in the muscle-cells of his limbs. Just as a
locomotive-engine is enabled to travel by power of the _potential_
motion stored in the steam generated in its boiler. And as in the
living organism, so in the engine, the mechanism and the processes that
engender in it the _potential motion_ of steam are wholly distinct from
those which convert this potential motion into _actual motion_.

One is able to think, by power of the _potential_ mentality stored, or
latent, in his brain-cells. For not only the vital processes which
sustain the life of the organism, as those too which enable it to
function in terms of living personality and action, but brain-power also
must exist in the dual forms, respectively, of _potential_ Faculty and
_functioning_ Faculty. So too, Reproductive power. In all of these
appear again the modes of Dominance and Recessiveness, of powers
_positive_ and _manifesting_, and of powers _negative_ and _latent_. And
since the female sex is characterised by traits of repose and
conservation, and the male sex by traits of action, the dual modes of
vital, muscular, cerebral and reproductive energy _in potential_, and of
vital, muscular, cerebral and reproductive energy _in course of
generating function_, range themselves inevitably on the two sides of
the living equation as Sex-characteristics differentiating the male
organisation from that of the female. Thus ranged, they characterise the
two sides of the body as representing, respectively, a right, male side
which is the central agency in function, and a left, female side, which
is the reservoir of the _potential_ of function.

If then the female mode of functioning is the Potential, or Recessive, a
mode of latency, it is to be inferred that the male traits every female
creature inherits from her father will, when incorporated in a body of
female prepotence, pass into the potential, or Recessive, mode; and will
thus become inhibited from developing as male-characteristics.
Nevertheless, this male potential will be preserved in that reproductive
gland which represents the paternal inherences in her, and will be
transmitted, as her contribution to male offspring, in the sex-cells
generated by this gland.

While the female inherences every male derives from his mother will, in
the presence of the Dominant male-characteristics he derives from his
father, retain their latent, or Recessive, mode; and will thus not
emerge as female characteristics. The female inherences will be
preserved, however, in that reproductive gland which represents the
maternal inherences in him; and will be transmitted as his contribution
to female offspring.

It will be seen thus that, as in hybrid plants, so in hybrid creatures
of both sexes, cells of two sexes are generated: in the male, cells
Dominant for maleness and cells Recessive for maleness--female that is;
in the female, Recessive cells, prepotent for femaleness, and Dominant,
or male, cells.

And of these, the Dominant male sex-cells contributed by the male
parent, mating with the Dominant, or male, sex-cells contributed by the
female parent, male offspring results. While the Recessive female
sex-cells contributed by the female parent, mating with the Recessive,
or female, sex-cells contributed by the male parent, female offspring
results.

Furthermore, Dominance being paramount in development, it must be from
the Dominant inherence imparted by residence in a male organisation to
the potential, or Recessive, female Germ-Plasm that the latter derives
the new developmental impulse it transmits to sex-cells. While
Recessiveness being Life and Faculty in the potential mode, it must be
from the Recessive inherence engendered in the Dominant male Germ-Plasm,
by residence in a female organisation, that its Dominance, passing into
latency, derives a new potential of further evolutionary impetus.

The differentiation of living creatures into two sexes, therefore, of
bodies into two sides, of brains into two halves, and of Germ-Plasm into
two reproductive glands, would seem to have had for object the ever
further specialisation and segregation in the individual, for purposes
alike of constitutional organisation and of the evolution of Faculty and
Reproduction, of the two Orders of Contrasting Traits, which I have
assumed to be Maleness and Femaleness, respectively.

From this view-point, the female Sex and Sex-traits are Recessive, or
Potential, always, on the material plane, and manifest increasingly
thereon only by way of ever more complex alliances with male-traits;
which, being positive on the concrete plane, equip the female inherences
for function thereon. Femaleness, or Recessiveness, on its side,
however--being Life-Energy in the potential--is all the while
engendering new potence for Dominance to transform into active, or
functioning, power. While although negative, it is equally potent, on
_its_ side of the equation, to alter the values and manifestations of
Dominance. Just as negative electricity inhibits the positive and
destructive forces of positive electricity, although it does not, of
itself, _manifest directly_.

The Dominant traits of Tallness and Strength, for example, are direct
and _positive_ factors in physical development. Dwarfness and Weakness
are indirect and _negative_ factors therein. Nevertheless, degrees of
Dwarfness or of Weakness must proportionally reduce and modify the
tallness of Tallness or the power of Strength.

But that Recessiveness is not a _minus_ sign merely, as algebraically
understood--but is an essential potence on another, and a psychical
plane, is shown by the lesser height of woman rendering itself as a
Grace; her lesser strength appearing in the new virtue of Gentleness.

That the female provides, for fertilisation, only a single sex-cell,
from the reproductive gland of one or other side, while the male
provides multiple and commingled cells from both sides, supports the
view that sex-cells derived from one side are of opposite sex-inherence
to those from the other side. Otherwise, why two reproductive glands?

The author of _The Causation of Sex_ adduces evidence showing not only
that the two glands are of opposite sex-inherence, but, moreover, that
normally they function alternately; so that now a cell of one, now, of
the other sex, is produced. It is likely, however, that function is
seldom so mechanical, but that personal constitution or nurture modifies
its operations.

That the male cells are multiple in number points to such a struggle of
survival-fitness as ever characterises the more strenuous male destiny.
Not, perhaps, the fittest as regards intrinsic superiority, but that
most compatible with the requirements of the Queen-cell is selected for
mate. Should the Queen-cell be of inferior standard, therefore, then (as
happens in life) not the noblest of type, but that most adapted to
environment secures racial survival.

So that here again, evolutionary racial advance may derive its impulse
from the Female factor.

A singular phenomenon, recorded by the biologist, Roerig, and one which
materially supports my argument, is that disease of the ovaries of a
female deer will cause _male_ antlers to develop in her. Proving a male
organism concealed, or held Recessive, in her, by power of her female
sex-organs normally to inhibit the development of her inherited
male-traits. A strange feature of this abnormal occurrence is that
disease of _one_ ovary only causes antlers to develop on _one_ side
only--and this on the side opposite to that of the diseased gland.

On the other hand, castration of male sheep of the Merino breed (only
the males of which are horned) occasions hornlessness.


V

Male traits being paramount on the plane of concrete function, although
they exist (normally) in Recessive form in the female, it is from the
male inherence of her active right side and its allied brain-half that
she derives her concrete powers alike of body and of brain.

It is obvious, therefore, that when abnormally stimulated by undue
exercise, such male-traits may develop into abnormal dominance.


The left arm of woman is essentially the woman-member. In its
half-passive action of supporting her infant for hours together, it is
stronger for this maternal ministration than is the more active and
doughty right arm of the male. Her left hand is more delicate of form,
gentler and more soothing of motion than her right hand is. It is the
hand she caresses with. While for direct, strong action--masculine
action, that is--the paternal right half of her is dominant, as in the
male. And although in our present-day stages of Evolution, the Recessive
Woman-traits have emerged as definite characteristics, emancipating
themselves from subjection by the Dominant male-traits, it must be
remembered that their impulse and their powers are yet but rudimentary.
Woman is still more male than she is female; her methods being more
masculine still than they are womanly. And this in the degree of her
cruder racial stock, or of the harder conditions (natural or artificial)
of the environment in which she finds herself, demanding more of
masculine proclivity in her--of physical activity and mental
assertiveness--than of her intrinsic Woman-qualities of emotion and
ministry.

Civilisation, foreshadowing evolutionary ideals, discountenances, the
fighting female. Nevertheless, the cruder female _fights_ still with her
male right arm, and the more cultured female, with tongue and tactics.

The intrinsic Woman-qualities, whereof Christianity is the gospel, are
yet in their infancy of development; are yet more ideals for which we
are shaping and waiting than they are realised and abiding facts.

Even their own babes are not secure from the instinct of blows inherent
in the male-muscles of their mothers' right arms, when these are
restrained neither by a woman's tenderness nor by a man's chivalry.
Girl-babies, save those of the rarer higher types, beat their mothers
and nurses only rather less frequently and less fiercely than boy-babies
do.

Later in their life-history, that new impulse to the evolution of the
Woman-traits which characterises their development to womanhood,
normally negatives and further tempers in girls the male instincts of
fight and of sport. But many of our modern amazons, brought up like
boys, are more male than are their brothers. The male fighting-instinct
which moved man to invent a club (destructive) has become so tempered by
the increasingly potent Woman-traits in him that, save when angry or at
war, he is content to turn his club into a golf-stick, a cricket bat, or
tennis racquet; his sword into a plough-share. Whereas, on the contrary,
the Woman-traits which moved woman to invent the needle (constructive)
are becoming so over-ridden by the male in her that modern woman,
artificially masculinised, abhors the needle, and is almost as much
dominated as the other sex is by the male instinct for a weapon in the
hand.


The class, Vertebrates, would seem to represent an adaptation to
environment typically Male; earlier than and contrary in trend to that
of the Mammalia, whereof the impulse was obviously Female.

Increasing vertebration was characterised by such a progressive
differentiation of Male from Female traits as progressively segregated
these in opposite sides of the body; with spinal column and spinal cord
for, respectively, physical and nervous central lines of demarcation.
Thus the Male traits were enabled more and more to detach themselves at
will from Female inhibition, and thereby increasingly to specialise and
exercise those powers of force and fierceness and activity by way of
which species became ever more individuated; aggressive, intelligent,
efficient, in terms of _Fitness_ for the struggle for survival.

Until that later evolution of female adaptation to _Unfitness_, in the
sacrificial function of Lactation, inhibiting and tempering the earlier
male trend, engendered the yet higher order of Mammalia.

(With that intuitive illumination inspiring speech, men and races
lacking in virility are contemptuously described as being
"invertebrate.")


According to this hypothesis, the paternal (and male) inherences of any
mother may be said to be transmitted to the grandson in the direct male
line of her heredity--an unbroken line of Maleness reaching back to its
amoebic origin. While the maternal (and female) inherences of any father
are transmitted, in the direct female line, to the grand-daughter--a
similar line of continuity. The Woman-sex and traits of the grandmother
remain thus for a generation dormant, or Recessive, in the father;
"skipping a generation," as the phrase is. Then, in the third
generation, they re-appear in the grand-daughter; by power of a maternal
contribution in which the female inherence is prepotent. While the
male-sex and traits of the grandfather remain dormant, or potential, in
the mother; likewise "skipping a generation." Then they emerge in the
grandson, by power of a male gamete evoking the inherent male in them.


VI

The attributes of the one sex invested thus in the other, although
normally submerged, form nevertheless a valuable endowment; supplying
supplementary and complementary factors to counterpoise, to energise,
and fructify the powers proper to the sex of the individual.

Man bears throughout life the Woman-potential his mother transmitted to
him. But it is not his to realise. He bears it in trust for his
daughters. He transmits it to his daughters, and in them this potential,
recovering its woman-impulse, evolves to a further degree of
woman-power. The like with mothers and sons.

All of which is supported by the Mendelian doctrine that the mother
transmits "Femaleness" as a Dominant factor to her daughters and as a
Recessive factor to her sons.

But the method whereby this is achieved has remained a mystery.

Professor Punnett says with regard to the phenomenon:


     "The mother transmits to her daughter the dominant faculty of
     femaleness, but to balance this, as it were, she transmits to her
     sons another quality which her daughters do not receive ... among
     human families, in respect to particular qualities, the sons tend
     to resemble their mothers more than their daughters do."


A striking illustration of such transmission by mother to son of a
paternally-derived abnormal inherence _which she herself does not
develop_, is found in so-called "bleeders"; persons who suffer from the
disease, haemophilia. The daughters of a "bleeder" father show no symptom
at all of the affliction, but they, nevertheless, pass on to their sons
this male heritage of the grandfather.

There are numerous other examples of traits and diseases thus "skipping
a generation"--in other words, of lying dormant, or potential, merely;
overshadowed in the constitution and psychology of the sex to which they
do not rightly belong, but developing in a succeeding generation in
offspring of that sex whereof they are a natural trait, or (so to speak)
a natural defect.


Since the woman-half she contributes to their hybrid constitution
engenders the potential of their living processes, the mother may be
regarded as still mothering her children throughout development and
maturity, and to the end of their natural term. Accounting for that
mystical sympathy between mother and child which intuitively informs her
of fatalities occurring to absent sons and daughters--but to sons
pre-eminently. Marvellously, they remain one living flesh so long as
life persists.

During the War, mothers at a distance have known by an intuitive flash,
and have told of the death of sons cut down in battle. One mother
described the sensation she experienced as being precisely _as though
one side of her body had been suddenly torn away_. So too, mothers whose
infants have died during childbirth or shortly after, describe as
persisting for months subsequently a sense as though part of them were
dead.

The father too must function in the hybrid living constitution. With the
immense difference, however, that his part therein is a factor of the
development of traits, not of the mystical functioning of Life. A
notable feature of this paternal heritage is that in women at middle-age
(when the wane of reproductive power releases vital potential from
maternal investments) not only may masculine physical traits emerge, but
there may develop in them notable brain-capacities inherited from the
father. Capacities inherent in them previously, but long inhibited in
action by the normal female brain-Recessiveness.


VII

Every higher evolutionary differentiation results inevitably not only in
progressive mutations in the traits of species, but, as well, in
variations of the reproductive processes of such. When _defects_,
physical or mental, are not reproduced in later generations true to
Mendelian law, however, this is not abnormal, but is beautifully normal.
Normality requires that defect--which is a deviation from The
Normal--shall not be transmitted in any ratio whatsoever, but shall be
corrected in a succeeding generation.

Moreover, when we realise the number and the complexities of human
traits, all struggling to keep The Law, it is only to be expected that
any single characteristic owing to its sex-inherence, may pass into the
potential or Recessive, mode, and may thus vanish for a generation.
Further, by the law of compensation, any trait or determinant, although
itself Dominant, may be dwarfed and submerged by some other Dominant
trait more assertive than itself.

Suppose a father normally larger and stronger than the normally shorter
and weaker mother: Stature and strength being both Dominant and
masculine traits, the traits of such a father, dominating the
development of his sons, should so over-ride the traits of lesser
strength and stature of the mother (in whom strength and stature are
normally Recessive) that his sons will be tall and broad and strong, and
mentally virile. On the other hand, the mother's traits, prepotent in
the development of daughters, will inhibit in these and diminish the
strength and stature of their paternal inherences. Thus, the woman of
pure Recessive (the essential woman) type is smaller, more delicately
organised, and weaker than the male.

By such means, the normal of the relative strength, stature, and mental
qualifications of the sexes is preserved; the specialised
characteristics of both ever further diverging in trend, while at the
same time intensifying their intrinsic attributes.

Suppose, however, a mother who deviates from the normal in having
developed along masculine lines, and who is, accordingly, tall or strong
or mentally virile: Far from supplementing, in her sons, the father's
traits of strength and stature, her sons will be more or less emasculate
in mind or body, or in both. Strength and stature and virile mentality
not being normal to her, these can only have emerged in her and can only
have been exercised by her at cost of the masculine potential she bore
in trust for male offspring. A woman who wins golf or hockey-matches may
be said therefore to energise her muscles with the potential manhood of
possible sons. With their potential existence indeed, since
over-strenuous pursuits may sterilise women absolutely as regards male
offspring.

Thus it is that muscular and otherwise masculine women produce weakling
males. (Giant women--female-Dominants--are incapable of reproduction.)
Tall mothers may produce tall sons, by transmitting to them the single
trait of tallness of the maternal grandfather. But since tallness in
woman is development along masculine lines, and detracts from her
maternal power, the tall son in such case is likely to be defective in
other manly traits. Men are of greater height than women, mainly in
consequence of greater length of leg. The power expended in the male in
length of limb is absorbed in the female into complex pelvic
developments, wherein it is stored as Reproductive potential.

The power thus stored in latency reveals itself in the amazing
evolution, as regards capacity and muscular equipment, by way of which
the maternal _uterus_ so develops during pregnancy as to enable it to
cradle an infant of 9 or 10 lbs. weight, and to deliver this by output
of immense energy--a marvel of biological function and mechanism.

Since the male trait of Tallness may be transmitted by woman from her
father to her son, without manifesting in herself, it is obviously waste
of power for her to develop a characteristic she needs neither for
personal nor for hereditary purposes. Whereas, by further evolving her
own woman-traits of suppleness and grace, she contributes new factors to
those of the male. And so with all the other sex-characteristics.

Mr. Horace G. Regnart, M.A., the well-known breeder of pedigree stock,
states that a bull of marked _masculine_ characteristics sires daughters
of marked _feminine_ characteristics. While the _feminine_ cow bears
sons of strongly _masculine_ type. On the other hand, the daughters of a
"steery" bull (a bull of de-sexed type) are themselves defective in
female characteristics, and bear sons defective in male characteristics.


VIII

Clearly and fully defined, accordingly, as Sex-characteristics are in
proportion as the individual is of high and normal organisation,
obtrusions in the one sex of the traits of the other are as much
stigmata of abnormality as are cleft-palate, webbed feet, or other
deviations from the normal. Because they are reversions to lower types
of organisation in which sex was less highly differentiated than is the
normal of to-day.

Although, with progressive evolution, the Sex-traits are spun ever finer
and finer, and are ever more subtly and inextricably interwoven with
those of the other, normally the threads run true and distinct as do the
threads of warp and woof in textile fabric.

The ever finer spinning of the threads secures an ever closer, subtler
interweaving. Whereby the fabric of human organisation, of character and
Faculty, becomes ever firmer yet more supple, ever stronger yet more
delicate, ever more intense and rich of colour, but nevertheless more
beautifully harmonised and subtilised by half-tones and complex
gradations.

This is the reason why the strongest and most virile men are the most
humane; the sternest are most tender; the greatest are most subtle. So
inextricably interwoven with their virile characteristics are the finer
spun Woman-potencies, as strangely and exquisitely to temper and
sensitise their Manhood's powers.

And it is why the tenderest, most womanly women are the noblest; the
gentlest are the most enduring; the wisest are the sweetest.

But no more than Black can be White, Acid, Alkaline, or the Straight
line a Circle, can Repose be Action, Sternness be Sweetness, Firmness be
Softness, Fierceness be Gentleness; Assertiveness, Selflessness;
Boldness, Modesty. Nevertheless, in the hybrid unfoldment of Contrasting
traits, Softness tempering Fierceness transforms it to Strength;
Sweetness tempering Sternness melts it to Mercy; Assertiveness
reinforcing Selflessness nerves it to Devotion; Firmness preserves
Softness from lapsing to Weakness; Altruism, inspiring Chivalry,
transfigures it to Heroism. But that Fierceness and Strength, Sweetness
and Selflessness, have only intensified as, with further evolution, they
have extended further into Life and Consciousness, is shown when they
tear themselves asunder from their counterpoising attributes. Fierceness
is seen then to be more fierce in complex man--because fierce in so many
more and deeper issues of Life and Consciousness--than is the fierceness
of the gorilla, which manifests largely in muscular savagery; champing
of jaws, and beating on its breast as on a drum.

So too, the emotion of complex woman is more deeply rooted in her, and
is more intense, than is the instinctive emotionalism of the savage
woman which expresses itself mainly in reflex movements and hysterical
outcries.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus down the ages, man, by way of Fatherhood, has endowed woman ever
further with his developing traits of strength and intelligence. Woman,
by way of Motherhood, has endowed man with an ever fuller heritage of
her attributes of selflessness and intuition.

So these poor souls--the Man and the Woman in all men and women--have
climbed the steep ascent together, hand in hand, toward the Light.
Without the other, neither could have come. So tragically drear and
solitary would have been the pilgrimage, save for the spiritual converse
of that mystical comrade.

Only by way of this psychical comradeship, which solaces the one sex by
the inspiration of the other, do men and women win through the
terrestrial travail of the human destiny.

The mystical Man (who is her father in her) when woman would falter and
fail in the fight, whispers, "Courage, dear Girl, go on!"

The mystical Woman (who is his mother in him) goes with her son into the
murk and struggle of temptation, holding her lamp of The Good and The
True and The Beautiful before his blinding eyes.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Owing to an interchange of nervous strands, the right half of the
brain controls the left half of the body; and the converse. Structural
details which need not be considered here, but which have clearly for
purpose the closer and more complex association and co-ordination of the
Contrasting Traits of the two sides of the body.




