CHAPTER II

INCREASING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALE AND FEMALE SEX-CHARACTERISTICS AND
FUNCTIONS ARE THE MAIN FEATURE OF HUMAN ADVANCE

     "The most beautiful witness to the Evolution of Man is the Mind of
     a little child.... It was ages before Darwin or Lamarck or
     Lucretius, that Maternity, bending over the hollowed cradle in the
     forest for a first smile of recognition from her babe, expressed
     the earliest trust in the doctrine of development. Every mother
     since then is an unconscious Evolutionist, and every little child a
     living witness to Ascent."--_Professor Drummond._


I

Tracing the attribute of Love to its source in the parental function, it
becomes clear that this function cannot be dismissed thus in a phrase.

There are two parents. And the parts played by these, respectively, not
only differ widely in their nature, but they are signally
disproportionate in their share of the labours involved. For while the
male bears the brunt of the struggle with environment, for his own and
for survival of his mate and offspring, upon the female falls the
biological stress of pregnancy and lactation, and the material cares of
upbringing.

The reproductive function of the male is but slight and cursory. With
the female lies the tax of havening the embryo before birth, of
nurturing it with her blood and substance, of suffering the drain it
makes upon her vital energy, the burden of its weight; with, finally,
the anguish and the dangers of delivery. And having come through all
this, the subconscious and involuntary sacrifice is replaced by
further--but now voluntary sacrifices. She not only continues to feed it
with her living substance, but she employs brain and wit and bodily
effort in tending, safeguarding and rearing it.

Meanwhile the sire--among the lower creatures, at all events--detaches
himself with lordly indifference from any portion in these later, as he
went free of the earlier obligations. He shares his prey with her and
with their young. He defends them from the natural enemies of all.
Sometimes he condescends to play for minutes with his cubs. But
excepting among birds, the male parent takes little or no part in the
upbringing of his family.

As with Love, so with Fatherhood, we take it as matter-of-course that
this sprang and has evolved to present developments directly out of
natural instinct. But as Love did not evolve out of the sex-instinct,
neither did father-love evolve from a paternal instinct inherent in the
lower animals and in primal man.

Of this, Professor Drummond says:


     "The world was now beginning to fill with Mothers, but there were
     no Fathers, ... while Nature has succeeded in moulding a human
     Mother and a human child, he still wanders in the forest, a savage
     and unblessed soul.

     "This time for him is not lost. In his own way he also is at
     school, and learning lessons which will one day be equally needed
     by humanity. The acquisitions of the manly life are as necessary to
     human character as the virtues which gather their sweetness by the
     cradle; and these robuster elements--strength, courage, manliness,
     endurance, self-reliance--could only have been secured away from
     domestic cares.... The Evolution of a Father is not so beautiful a
     process as the Evolution of a Mother, but it was almost as
     formidable a problem to attack.... If Maternity was at a feeble
     level in the lower reaches of Nature, Paternity was
     non-existent.... When we leave the Birds and pass on to the
     Mammals, the Fathers are nearly all backsliders. Many are not only
     indifferent to their young, but hostile; and among the Carnivora
     the Mothers have frequently to hide their little ones in case the
     father eats them."


In place of saying, therefore, that Love sprang in, and has developed
from the exercise of the parental function, we must say that Love--in
all its higher aspects--sprang and has developed in the _maternal_
function.

But since every attribute, in order to be conscious and realised, is not
only rooted but is reared in living function--out of what living
function did Mother-love evolve? In the exercise of what vital processes
has it been fostered and furthered?

In so far as these involve sacrifice of self in the interests of the
child, the maternal ante-natal processes are processes of
self-surrender. But these, when once incurred, are subconscious and
involuntary. The prospective mother has no choice but to submit to
physiological exactions.

And only a few women--those in whom maternal love is deep beyond the
average--feel affection for their infants before birth.

Since love must have an object upon which to exercise its faculties and
lavish its devotion, it is not, therefore, until the babe is in the
mother's arms that the Love-attribute begins to function. And then the
primal fount of all conscious and voluntary human selflessness and
sacrifice springs afresh in the individual when, in yearning toward the
helpless being in her arms, she wells with tenderness and gives herself
to be its life.

In the altruistic tender yearning of the mother to her babe, whereat her
blood transforms itself to milk, Human Love first sprang and functioned
consciously.

_This is my Body which is given for you.... This is my Blood ... which
is shed for you._

Says Goethe, "There is no outward sign of courtesy that does not rest
on a deep moral foundation." He might have added "and on a great
biological function." Every act of voluntary sacrifice, every impulse of
compassion, mercy, tenderness, devotion, has had its inspiration and its
source in this which is discredited by some as being a merely physical,
and is despised, accordingly, as being an inferior process; this
mystical transmutation of the mother's blood to milk, and the
self-forgetting yearning wherein she yields herself as food for
offspring. By the evolution, upon ever higher planes of consciousness,
of this primarily instinctive sacrifice, not only Motherhood but
Fatherhood too, and the Love-passion between the sexes have been
fructified and purified, and uplifted down the ages. Other acts of
devotion arise out of maternal ministry. But this is the intrinsic
source of all.

Travelling up through all the rudimentary phases of development,
simultaneously and side by side with the male fierce methods for the
Survival of _Fitness_, there was evolving in the female, subconsciously
and secretly, this sacramental impulse which was to inaugurate a new
era--an era wherein charity and ruth were to be born as response to the
claims of _Unfitness_.

The first woman who, of her free-will, gave her breast to her babe was
the Mother of all the Humanities. She it was who prepared the way for
the coming of Christ. By her, Love entered first into human
consciousness.

And by countless generations of such willing tender sacrifice upon the
part of mothers, human love has climbed out of the darkness of blind
subconscious instinct into the Light of a great transfiguration.


It is weighty evidence of the evolutionary impulse inherent in the
function of Lactation, that the development of this maternal trait
engenders species so far higher in organisation and morale than those of
creatures unequipped to suckle offspring, as to set the Mammalia in a
class by themselves in the van of progressive advance. The higher
organisation and morale of such result not only from the
self-surrendering instinct in the mothers of species, but doubtless also
from the superior nutrition promoted in the developing tissues of the
young of species, by the highly-individualised food elements which are
secreted by the maternal living cells.

The vital significance of this new potence in blood to transform itself
to milk for sustenance of offspring is emphasised by the fact that the
Mammalia are warm-blooded creatures. While that this new quickening of
Life by the altruistic parental instinct originates in the female shows
her as medium of that Divine Influx inspiring Creative Evolution, and
evolving faculty by way of living function.


II

The question now arises: If Love and the higher affections had their
origin in the maternal function, how happens it that man, in whom this
capacity is absent, and who is devoid, moreover, of an inherent paternal
instinct, has come, notwithstanding, to possess these higher affections?

One may answer off-hand, with the lightness of the tyro, that these have
been transmitted to him by maternal inheritance.

But complex biological problems are not thus easily explained. Nature
works by processes, not by implications. And the physical functions and
the mental attributes of the sexes are so dissimilar, and have, with
evolution, so diverged by ever further accentuation, that we must seek
for definite biological processes by way of which the male has become
endowed with, and whereby his primal characteristics have been
transformed by the evolution in him of the maternal instinct--under
guise of the wholly new and alien trait of Fatherhood.

A study of Evolution shows the differentiation and intensification of
Sex-characteristics to have been the main feature in Human advance, and
to have been progressively achieved by incalculable centuries of
increasing differentiation and intensification of two opposite orders of
impulse and faculty.

In savages and in all the less civilised races, the personal and
temperamental differences between the sexes are but slight, and last
for no longer than a few years of life. As with other faculties,
Sex-differentiations become ever further intensified and more
complexly defined as development rises in the scale. Man becomes more
man. Woman, more woman. Most notable during the period over which
the human organisation sustains its maximum of condition, these
Sex-characteristics take longer to arrive at their perfection, and are
longer and more fully sustained in the higher races and organisms than
is the case with the lower. Then, with that degeneration of tissue which
sets in with on-coming age, the old man becomes womanish, the old woman
mannish.

It cannot be doubted that human perfection reaches its climax in the
accentuation of the differences between the Sex-characteristics,
physical and mental, of the one sex from those of the other. The best
types of men differ far more from the best types of women than inferior
men and women differ from one another. In body and in attribute, the
sexes are complementary and supplementary. And their dissimilarities are
the measure of their complementary and supplementary values.

Their attraction to one another, their interest and happiness in one
anothers' company, are proportional to the degree in which members of
one sex supply for members of the other, sentiment and qualities lacking
in their own. Mannish women and womanish men are alike incapable of
experiencing and inspiring the love-passion, which charms and
transfigures life for true man and true woman. These unfortunate,
imperfect neuter-persons, because of the deficiency in them of normal
sex attributes and impulse, are shut out from the richest and sweetest,
most sacred emotions of Humanity--precisely as persons of defective
brain are debarred from the richer and fuller appreciations and joys of
consciousness.

And yet, apart and distinct from, although at the root of this abnormal
neuterdom, wherein the traits of one sex are so antagonised by those of
the other that the finest powers of both are nullified--normally,
all men possess latent in them the qualities of Woman; all women
have latent in them the qualities of Man. Otherwise, this third
Neuter-gender--mannish women and womanish men--could not have come into
being.

In crises of life and under other abnormal conditions, the dormant
characteristics of the one sex are seen to emerge in members of the
other, and to become dominant. A woman, in the face of danger, develops
the strength, the courage and the material resource of a man. A man,
when put to it, reveals the gentleness, patience and psychical resource
of a woman. And in neither is this substitution of alien traits
imitative, merely. That it is vital and intrinsic is shown by the fact
that not only mental characteristics, but the body itself becomes
transformed. If the circumstances--exposure to danger, to hard and rough
physical labours or to mental exactions which are the normal of the
male--continue for long, woman's physique, equally with her attributes,
becomes increasingly virile of mode.

A kindred metamorphosis occurs in men. When called upon to exercise for
any length of time the functions of a woman, beside a sick bed, for
example--or, to state it otherwise, when the male in him no longer
receives the stimulus of the natural male role and activities--man's
virile qualities decline. He becomes emasculate.

So too in disease. With the vital powers at low ebb, man's virility
ebbs low. He grows soft and sensitive, uncontrolled and emotional, loses
energy and initiative; lapses in outlook and temperament from the
masculine normal. In abnormal states of physical development, men are
puerile or womanish.

Women, as result of like abnormal undevelopment, or after operative
removal of reproductive organs (_propter quos est mulier_) become
mannish of type. In extreme cases the figure changes to a strong and
sturdy maleness, the voice drops to gruffness; manners and speech become
terse and abrupt, the jaw squares; even moustache or beard may develop.
Such women lose, perhaps, every womanly characteristic; refinement of
form, mental delicacy and sensitiveness, emotion, subtlety. They lapse
to the biological grade, not of cultured, but of rough working men. In
lesser degrees of sex-extinction, such as are seen in many of our modern
girls, de-sexed by masculine training, the subjects are boyish merely;
lean, active, restless, hipless, breastless, lacking all those fair,
delicate artistries of face and form, as likewise the complex
sensibility and emotionalism which are the higher characteristics of
their sex.


III

These and other singularities of the phenomenon indicate that man has,
so to speak, a woman concealed in him; woman has a man submerged in her.
The case suggests the little Noah and his wife of the toy weatherglass.
Under some conditions the man in woman emerges temporarily. Under some
conditions the woman in man reveals herself. But the emergence in the
one sex of the characteristics of the other, when appreciable and
permanent, is abnormal and unpleasing, and is obviously degenerative.

Man is at his best when the woman in him is dominated by his natural
virile traits. Woman is at her best when the man in her is sheathed
within her native womanliness. This way, each is a highly evolved and a
finely-specialised creation.

Nevertheless, such possession, in latency, of the qualities of the
other, not only enhances for members of both sexes the potence of their
own, inspiring and enriching these, but it engenders more perfect
sympathy and understanding between them. The woman in man endues him
with intuitive apprehension of the Woman-nature; of its needs and modes,
its disabilities, its sufferings and aspirations. The man in woman
informs her of the intrinsic values of his sterner calibre, and thus
lends her patience with his impatiences, moves her tenderness and care
for him in his rougher, more arduous lot, wins her admiration of his
enterprises and ambitions. Moreover, the man in her strengthens and
intelligises her mental fibre, stiffens and renders more stable and
effective her more pliant will and softer, more delicate aptitudes.

While she, in her turn, endows him with her intrinsic mentalities.

Masculine intellection, pure and simple, is initiative, vigorous,
enterprising; analytical, logical, critical; its outlook rational and
concrete, its disposition just and honest. Capable in the degree of its
virility, of strenuous and sustained endeavour, of keen concentration
and close application; taking nothing for granted, but questioning and
demanding proof of all things, it is an admirable executive agent of
Mind. _Per se_, however, it is rational and deductive, judicial and
judicious, rather than inspirational and creative. The blending with it
of the Woman-faculty in him quickens his male brain by contributing the
emotional element; endues it with intuitive sensibility, fructifies it
with female creativeness.

Thus it blossoms in Imagination--a new talent, which his natural
intellectual energy and executive ability enable him to raise to highest
issues in Inductive Science and the creative Arts.


Sex, with its phenomena of the characteristics of both sexes blended
but, nevertheless, distinctive in the totally dissimilar constitution of
members of both, presents an enigma which all the thinkers of all the
ages have left unsolved.

What is its significance--what its explanation? How has it been
possible--without miracle, but by way of biological sequences of form
and process, of function and faculty--for the divergent characteristics,
physical and mental, of the two sexes to have developed in both, not
only without either order of characteristics (normally) neutralising
those of the other, but, on the contrary, with both orders ever further
intensifying their differences in the sex to which they belong?

By hereditary transmission. True! But by what precise means? Because
Nature achieves her results always by the continuous operation of
unerring Law and intensifying processes, not by eccentricities or
deviations. When she seems to us to skip at random, it means that we
have missed some intermediate footprints linking her progressive
sequences in a long unbroken train.

This problem of human duality, physical and psychical, has baffled not
biologists only, but philosophers, religionists and seers. It fills both
life and literature with puzzles, paradoxes, incongruities. It has been
the source of perpetual misapprehension, misconception,
maladministration, personal and ethical.

It lies at the root of the whole Woman question. It has supplied the
motive--and has made the mischief of the Feminist propaganda and
practice.

Because, in view of the masculine qualities latent in women, allied with
the circumstance that masculine powers are those most profitable and
effective on the plane alike of physics and of economics, it has seemed
an inevitable conclusion that these dormant male potentialities were
_powers lying idle_; virgin soil which, tilled and cultivated, would
yield fruitful harvest. And this for the benefit not of woman solely,
but of Humanity at large. Strangely enough, the converse proposition has
not presented itself. A pity! For it might have brought enlightenment.
Because it presents itself outright in the form of a patent absurdity.

Suppose a Man's Movement which should have had for aim the cult in males
of their potential woman-qualities! Not for an instant could the project
have found footing as being rational, its ends desirable, or as
improving upon Nature. Everywhere is pity or contempt for the effeminate
man. He is regarded as a poor creature, neither one thing nor the other;
as little the peer of true man as he is notably an unworthy counterfeit
of woman.

Yet how is this? Is it that we admit the male-sex to be so vastly and
intrinsically superior to the female that we are not satisfied for half
only, but demand that the whole human species shall be male?
Nevertheless, since masculine qualities, although undeniably present,
are normally latent in women, they must be inferior in power and calibre
to these same qualities in men. Otherwise, in place of remaining in
latency, they would assert themselves like men. Woman's inferior
masculine powers, even when developed to the full, can equip her,
therefore, to be no more than inferior male; "lesser man" merely, in
place of being "diverse"--the highly-differentiated, finely-specialised
being for which Nature would seem to have been shaping in her, during
untold aeons of progressive differentiation.


IV

The prevailing notion is that these masculine potentialities dormant in
women are powers common to both sexes, which have been blighted in the
one by long generations of educational and vocational disabilities
precluding exercise and outlet for them. Or that they are powers which
have been dwarfed by long "subjection" of the sex in maternal and
domestic functions mainly.

Consulting Biology, we find that such artificial repression of Faculty
in the mother (even were artificially-repressed faculty transmissible as
such) could in no way have limited itself, in succeeding generations, to
inheritance by daughters. On the contrary, the more we learn of the laws
of Heredity, the more it is seen that Faculty descends from mother to
son, rather than from mother to daughter. And yet, despite the
sex-disabilities, personal and social, which are now condemned as having
precluded the mothers of earlier eras from developing their masculine
abilities, such mothers transmitted masculine characteristics in
ever-increasing degree to successive generations of male offspring.

Whereupon another seeming paradox confronts us. Namely, that the sons of
those earlier women, in whom masculine inherences were permitted to
remain dormant, were notably more virile of body and mind than are the
sons of latter-day emancipated mothers who have sedulously cultivated
and have fully exercised their male proclivities.

And now upsprings a further momentous consideration: Is this cause and
effect? Were the sons of women in whom the potential male had remained
abeyant, more virile of body and brain than are the sons of women who
have cultivated masculine characteristics, solely and absolutely because
the mothers in the latter case had misappropriated to their own uses
powers that belonged by right of heredity to sons? While those other
mothers, by retaining such in latency, preserved them as a rich
inheritance for male heirs. Is it similar, indeed, to the cases of a
mother who realises and expends for her own purposes her sons' financial
patrimony, and of a mother who, expending the interest alone thereof,
retains the capital intact; and is enabled thus to pass it on as
heritage? Is the power held latent in one generation the potential of
the generation following?

It may be asked: Why should woman forgo possession and exercise of
faculties available to her, in order to transmit these to sons? One
might answer as in respect of that other patrimony. If it be true that
she holds these powers in trust merely, they are not hers to spend. To
expend them is to despoil her sons; to make paupers and bankrupts of
them, humanly speaking. Further, since daughters inherit from the
father, the male entail woman forbears to realise and to exploit for her
own uses returns to her sex in the person of her grand-daughter--by
paternal inheritance. For the able father is the parent of the able
daughter.

Thus Nature works with the eternal justice of eternal reciprocity
between the sexes; making them all the while more complexly diverse, but
nevertheless more closely interdependent. So that one sex can neither
progress nor can it regress by itself; but draws the other onward with
it, or drags it back. Thus, the bread of human heritage consigned to the
stream of posterity by one sex, for equipment and furtherance of the
other, returns to the hand of the sex that consigned it.

If this be so--and I hope to prove it so--the woman who develops the
potential male in her defrauds of its lawful racial and personal entail
not only the opposite sex, in the person of her son, but she defrauds of
its dower her own sex too, in the person of her grand-daughter.

Of the interesting and important biological processes underlying the
mystery of the Dual-Sex constitution and its manifold phenomena, I am
about to present a wholly new and--I venture to believe--a wholly true
and convincing elucidation.

_Natura simplex est_, said Newton, _et sibi semper consonans_. (Nature
is simple and always agrees with herself.) Bewilderingly multiple in her
phenomena, she is superbly simple in her principles. By the operation of
her one great Law of Gravitation, she sustains the mighty Solar
systems--and brings the apple to the ground. By the extension,
counterpoise and co-operation of one Primal Cosmic Energy--with its dual
impulses, Centripetal and Centrifugal--she has generated all the diverse
marvels of a Universe. And in view of her simplicity of Principle, it is
conceivable that the Duality of Sex may be an extension into Life of
that same principle of Duality which characterises the vaster Cosmic
phenomena.

If this be true, Man and Woman are the complex resultant of infinitely
many and varied evolutionary differentiations and associations of the
two modes of Primal Energy. If so, the principle of Sex must have
existed before Matter; must have been inherent in Creation before
Creation began to evolve. And if so, Evolution would seem to have had
for its purpose the ever further and fuller manifestation of these dual
and contrary inherences in terms of Life and Sex. While, to judge by
effects, it has had for its means such ever more intimate and intricate
co-operations of these as have resulted in the progressively diverse and
complex developments found to-day in Human Life and Human
Sex-Characteristics.




