The Project Gutenberg eBook of Feminism and Sex-Extinction
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Feminism and Sex-Extinction

Author: Arabella Kenealy


        
Release date: November 9, 2011 [eBook #37964]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37964

Credits: E-text prepared by Charlene Taylor, Martin Pettit, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries (http://www.archive.org/details/americana)




E-text prepared by Charlene Taylor, Martin Pettit, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/feminismsexextin00kenerich





FEMINISM AND SEX-EXTINCTION

       *       *       *       *       *

OLIVE SCHREINER'S GREAT BOOK

WOMAN & LABOUR

_Large Crown 8vo. Cloth._

8s. 6d. net

"The feelings which are behind the various women's movements could not
find clearer or more eloquent expression than they do in this remarkable
book."

_The Daily Mail._

"At last there has come the book which is destined to be the prophecy
and the gospel of the whole awakening."

_The Nation._


T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD., LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

FEMINISM AND SEX-EXTINCTION

by

ARABELLA KENEALY L.R.C.P. (DUBLIN)


"_A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can
a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit._"

"_Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them._"







London
T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd.
1 Adelphi Terrace

First published in 1920

All rights reserved




FOREWORD


Feminism, the extremist--and of late years the predominant cult of the
Woman's Movement, is Masculinism.

It makes for such training and development in woman, of male
characteristics, as shall equip her to compete with the male in every
department of life; academic, athletic, professional, political,
industrial. And it neither recognises nor admits in her natural
aptitudes differing from those of men, and fitting her, accordingly, for
different functions in these. It rejects all concessions to her
womanhood; even to her mother-function. It repudiates all privileges for
her. Boldly it demands a fair field only and no favour; equal rights,
political and social, identical education and training, identical
economic opportunities and avocations, an identical morale, personal and
public.

In _Woman and Labour_, Miss Olive Schreiner sums in a line the Feminist
objective: "_We take all labour for our province._" And this is the text
of the Feminist creed; the elimination of sex-differences and the
abolition of sex-distinctions in every department of life and activity.

Feminists anticipate--the militant faction with zest--fierce economic
encounters between the sexes now that, War ended, our men, having fought
their own and woman's battle in the trenches, are returning to reclaim
their places in the world of work. Secure in that possession which is
"nine-tenths of the law," and armed with their new powers of
enfranchisement, it is further anticipated that the usurpers will be
able triumphantly to stem the masculine reflux, and to retain, on all
hands, their new industrial footing.

By showing that, contrary to Feminist doctrine, the division of Labour
into two sexes, so to speak, is as natural and is as indispensable to
Human Progress as is the division of Life into two sexes, the purpose of
this book is to dissuade women from exploiting a world's misfortunes for
their own immediate profit, and to reconcile them, in their profounder
and more vital interests and in those of the Race, to surrender freely
all the essentially masculine employments into which mischance has cast
them.

Human evolution and progress have resulted absolutely from an opposite
trend, in inherence and development, of the two sexes, as regards Life
and characteristics, aptitude and avocation. The progressive
differentiations and specialisations of vital processes and living
forms, whereby human character and faculty have been increasingly
advanced to higher powers, reach their most admirable culmination in the
complex division of Humanity into two genders; each of which is enabled,
by way of such complex specialisation, to promote, to intensify and to
dignify its own allotted order of qualities. To oppose and frustrate
this natural dispensation, whereby Human development is achieved by the
two sexes travelling along diametrically opposite lines of Ascent, is to
nullify all that civilisation has secured, and to transform the impulse
of Progress into one of Decadence.

Nature, marvellously prescient in all her processes, has provided that
the sexes, by being constituted wholly different in body, brain and
bent, do not normally come into rivalry and antagonism in the fulfilment
of their respective life-roles. Their faculties and functions, being
complementary and supplementary (and obviously best applied, therefore,
in different departments of Life and of Labour), men and women are
naturally dependent upon one another in every human relation; a
dispensation which engenders reciprocal trust, affection and
comradeship.

Feminist doctrine and practice menace these most excellent previsions
and provisions of Nature by thrusting personal rivalries, economic
competition and general conflict of interests between the sexes.


Should any reader find in these pages allusions and passages which,
without biological or medical knowledge, may not be wholly clear to him,
let him remember that these are addressed to such as have dipped more
deeply into the subjects dealt with.

The main outlines and implications of the new Hypothesis presented here,
of the origin and evolution of Sex, are all that he requires to grasp,
in order to follow the argument of the book in its relation to Feminist
methods.

ARABELLA KENEALY, L.R.C.P.




CONTENTS


CHAP.                                                         PAGE

FOREWORD                                                         v


BOOK I

WOMAN'S PART IN HUMAN EVOLUTION

     I. IMPASSIONED FALLACIES OF FEMINISM                        3

    II. INCREASING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALE AND
        FEMALE SEX-CHARACTERISTICS AND FUNCTIONS
        ARE THE MAIN FEATURE OF HUMAN ADVANCE                   21

   III. THE MYSTERY OF SEX AND SEX-TRANSMISSION                 35

    IV. ONE SIDE OF BODY IS MALE, THE OTHER SIDE IS FEMALE      51

     V. MASCULINE MOTHERS PRODUCE EMASCULATE SONS BY
        MISAPPROPRIATING THE LIFE-POTENTIAL OF MALE OFFSPRING   73


