CHAPTER III

THE MYSTERY OF SEX AND SEX-TRANSMISSION

     "The idea that the female is naturally and really the superior sex
     seems incredible, and only the most liberal and emancipated minds,
     possessed of a large store of biological information, are capable
     of realising it."--_Professor Lester Ward._


I

Those happy persons who do not perplex themselves concerning the
intrinsic causes behind all physical phenomena see it as only "natural"
that two parents of opposite sex should produce offspring of both sexes.

And yet it is not only a great mystery, but, on the face of it, it is an
anomaly that a child who may possess an admixture of all the physical
and mental characteristics of its two parents, bears, nevertheless, the
sex and the sex-characteristics of one only. Sex, male or female, breeds
true in nearly every case; the rare exceptions merely emphasising the
rule. The mystery deepens when we realise that every individual is a
product of countless such admixtures of the qualities, throughout
countless generations, of countless forefathers and foremothers. And
although such a man or woman may hark back to any one, or more, of the
traits of his or her innumerable forbears, he or she, nevertheless,
"breeds true" in the factors of sex and sex-characteristics.

Long and closely biologists have pondered these many and involved
problems. How is it, they inquire, that an embryo bred of two parents of
opposite sex develops the sex of one only of these? How is it that the
mother, who belongs to one sex only, produces--and produces in about
equal number--offspring of both? The phenomenon is expressed,
biologically, in the term, "sex-limited factor"--an incalculable
something in the embryo which limits its sex to the sex of one only of
its parents. But the "something," and the method of this sex-limitation
have remained enigmas.

Sex is regarded by the new Mendelian school of biologists as that which
is known as a "Mendelian factor." And to follow the argument to its
conclusions, a few simple words about the Mendelian theory of Heredity
are essential to those unacquainted therewith.

       *       *       *       *       *

About forty years ago, a German monk, Mendel by name, was struck by the
facts that in his bed of edible peas certain plants grew tall, while
others remained dwarf; that the blossoms of certain plants were white
always, while those of others were always coloured. He made a number of
experiments in crossing the plants, with a view to discovering the law
of inheritance by way of its operation in hybrid varieties. Briefly, the
results of his experiments--which have since been repeated and confirmed
by many later observers--were as follows:

There are plants that are tall and can transmit only Tallness to
offspring. There are plants that are dwarf and can transmit only
Dwarfness to offspring. So too, there are plants of white blossom or of
coloured blossom that can transmit, respectively, only White or Coloured
blossoming to offspring.

When a Tall is crossed with a Dwarf plant, however, or a Coloured with a
White plant, strange to say, the hybrid offspring of this cross shows
_one_ only of these opposite traits, to the exclusion of the other. No
intermediate, or mixed, forms are produced.

Thus, a Tall crossed with a Dwarf produces only Talls. Plants of
Coloured flower crossed with those of White flower give only Coloured
flowering varieties. A yellow and a green-seeded cross produce only
yellow-seeded plants.

In the cross between plants of opposite traits, _one_ set of traits
appears thus, exclusively, in the hybrid offspring. These
traits--because they _dominate_ growth and development--Mendel styled
"Dominant." While those traits which are dominated by the other and
opposite traits and do not appear in offspring, he styled "Recessive."

On further breeding, a new and stranger thing happens, however. Because
when such hybrids--plants bred of parents that had borne, respectively,
"Dominant" and "Recessive" characteristics, but with the parental
Dominant traits so overpowering the Recessive traits of the other parent
that these latter are submerged and concealed--When these hybrids are
crossed with other hybrids like themselves, both the Dominant and the
Recessive traits of the original parents reappear in offspring. The tall
hybrids resulting from the cross between Tall and Dwarf plants, when
crossed with other tall hybrids of similar origin, produce both Tall and
Dwarf plants. So with Colour, and with the other so-called "Contrasted
Traits."

It becomes evident, therefore, that although the Dominant traits of
Tallness and Colour overpower in the growth and development of the
second generation of plants, the Recessive traits of Dwarfness and
Whiteness, these latter traits are _submerged_ only, and are neither
impaired in their values, nor destroyed. In the third generation, under
different conditions of mating, the original Recessive, and submerged,
traits re-appear, and reveal themselves in offspring-plants as the
Dwarfness or the Whiteness that had characterised their grandparents.

Mendel assumed that such hybrid plants--offspring of a Dominant and of a
Recessive parent--produce two varieties of sex-cells, or gametes, and
that one order of cells contain the Dominant traits of the Dominant
parent, while the other order contain the Recessive traits of the
Recessive parent.

But any individual sex-cell, or gamete, cannot (according to his view)
bear both Dominant and Recessive traits. The Dominant traits and the
Recessive traits of the respective parents he regarded as being
segregated, absolutely, in one or in the other set of sex-cells produced
by hybrid varieties. And of these, the cells bearing Dominant traits are
able to transmit Dominant traits only to offspring; while the cells
bearing Recessive traits transmit Recessive traits only to offspring.


II

Now, Biology shows that plants and living creatures develop from a
single microscopic cell, formed by the union of two half-cells, of which
each half was contributed by one of the two parents.

Clearly then, a hybrid plant is one that has sprung from the union of
two half-cells, one of which bore the Dominant traits of one parent,
while the other bore the Recessive traits of the other parent. But
because Dominant traits overpower Recessive traits in development, the
cross between a tall plant and a dwarf plant produces tall offspring
only--Tallness being a Dominant trait which overpowers the Recessive
trait of Dwarfness. So too, the cross between a plant bearing coloured
and a plant bearing white flowers produces offspring bearing coloured
flowers only--Colour being Dominant over the Recessive Trait of
Whiteness.

But because the Recessive traits of Dwarfness and of Whiteness were only
_overpowered_ in the plant-development, by the Dominant traits of
Tallness and Colour, but were neither lost nor impaired in stock, hybrid
plants that had shown only Dominant traits in growth and constitution,
produce, nevertheless, two sorts of sex-cells for plant-reproduction:
cells that bear the Recessive traits of the one parent, and cells that
bear the Dominant traits of the other parent. So that in the
fertilisation of one another by such hybrids, cells bearing Dominant
traits mate with other cells bearing Dominant traits, and produce plants
of pure Dominant type--Tall or Coloured, like one of the grandparents.
While cells bearing Recessive traits mate with other cells bearing
Recessive traits, and produce plants of pure Recessive type--Dwarf or
White, like the other grandparent.

It is seen, therefore, that in plants, when a cell bearing Dominant
traits mates with one bearing Recessive traits, the Dominant
characteristics so overpower the Recessive that these latter lie latent,
and concealed, in the resulting plant. But when a cell bearing Recessive
traits mates with another cell bearing Recessive traits, the resulting
plant (its growth and development not over-ridden now by the more
assertive Dominant traits) is able to develop its Recessive
characteristics.

       *       *       *       *       *

These interesting and significant laws of plant-heredity and
constitution, discovered by Mendel in peas, have since been found by
many expert observers to hold true as regards other species of plants;
as too in poultry, in mice, and in rabbits, and moreover, in the
hereditary transmission of human characteristics.

In _Heredity and Variation_, Dr. Saleeby points out that in the mating
of a black with a white rabbit, some of the offspring will be black like
one parent, some white like the other, and some grey--a blend of the
colours of both parents.

In the last case, the _Dominant_ trait of Blackness, derived from one
rabbit-parent, blends in the fur of the rabbit-offspring with the
_Recessive_ trait of Whiteness, derived from the other rabbit-parent; a
grey rabbit resulting. But that the Contrasted Traits come to no more
than a temporary and partial compromise during the life of such a
rabbit-individual, without either of the traits losing its intrinsic
characteristic--Blackness and Whiteness, respectively--is proved by the
fact that these grey rabbit-offspring, on further breeding, produce not
_grey_ rabbits, but black rabbits and white rabbits; proving that the
Black trait and the White trait in them remained distinct and
segregated, neither altering its character in the least degree.

It is as though one should take a spoonful of black pepper and a
spoonful of white salt, and thoroughly mix them. A drab
"pepper-and-salt" mixture will result. But neither pepper nor salt will
have changed its colour or its properties one iota. Could they be
separated out again, each would be precisely as it had been before
mixing. So it is with the Dominant and the Recessive traits in living
organisms. They commingle intimately, but each retains its original and
intrinsic quality.

All the diverse and beautiful varieties of vegetation and the loveliness
of flowers, in form and colour, result from multiple associations in
hybrid-plants, of those which are known as the "Contrasted Traits" of
parent-stock.


III

The lay reader need not perplex himself with the problems and phenomena
of Mendelism.

All he requires to remember are its three leading principles. Firstly,
that in the world of Life, plant and animal, living attributes are
divided into two contrasting orders. Secondly, that of these two orders
of so-called "Contrasted Traits" ("Contrasting Traits" would be a fitter
phrase), the two groups are as absolute and opposite in character and in
significance as are the _plus_ and the _minus_ signs of Algebra, the
Positive and the Negative potentials of Electricity, the conditions of
Light and Darkness, of Blackness and Whiteness, of Heat and Cold.
Thirdly, that the Dominant order of traits are paramount over and
extinguish the Recessive order of traits.

To sustain her equilibrium by a counterpoise of dual and contrary
factors, physical and vital, Nature must preserve these factors absolute
and unchangeable as the constitution and the opposite attraction of The
Poles. But in order to produce her countless progressive variations of
form and attribute, physical and vital, she assembles these contrary
factors in countless progressively complex combinations, co-operations
and correlations.

It is conceivable, therefore, that the infinite gradations and
variations of form and attribute found in the world of living creatures
are, as in the world of plants, phenomena of the ever further
differentiation and more complex combination, in the hybrid offspring of
two parents, of two orders of Contrasting Traits, transmitted by the
respective parents.

In all their multiple associations and diverse developments, however,
the two Sets of Traits remain unchanged, precisely as do the individual
elements of chemical combinations. Variations in species result,
accordingly, not from change in the essential traits, but from changes
in the modes and the degrees of the commingling of these in organisms;
and in the modes and degrees of their ever more complex associations in
such.

Tallness, being an impulse toward extension, can never be Dwarfness,
which is an impulse toward contraction. Black can never be White. Square
can never be Round. Yet two opposite traits, both influencing
development, may come to a mean, or poise, in an individual organism; as
is seen in the grey offspring of a black rabbit mated with a white
rabbit. But it is a _counterpoise_ merely of contrary factors. The
traits of Blackness and Whiteness remain absolute and unalterable.

If now, the reader has grasped these leading principles of
Plant-biology, he is in a position to follow the new application of them
to Human Biology which I now venture to present.

Without going into details of physiology, it may be stated that the
principles of reproduction are so identical in plants and living
creatures as wholly to justify argument from one to the other. The only
differences are in degrees of structural complexity as organisms rise
higher in the scale of development, and demand, accordingly, more
complex organs and functions for the more perfect manifestation of their
characteristics; as also for the transmission of these to offspring. It
may be repeated, however, that Mendelian law is found to hold good in
humans, both in the hereditary transmission of normal characteristics
and in the hereditary transmission of the abnormal traits of disease and
degeneracy.

Increasing complexities, structural and functional, are indispensable to
the presentment of the attributes of the higher species, Man. But such
complexities are, nevertheless, continuous with and have sprung out of
the simplicities of lower and rudimentary organisms, precisely as the
branches and leaves and flowers of a plant are continuous with and have
sprung out of its roots. A vital and important biological detail (to be
considered later) is that plants are not, as living creatures are,
differentiated into a right and a left-side, identical in construction.
Another is that plants are self-fertilising.

With the lower animals, plural births are the rule. And in these, the
still crude and imperfect differentiations of the Contrasting Traits
allow of piebald and other modes of chequered colour and amorphous
construction.

The higher the organism, the more complex are the biological
requirements for its pre-natal development, as for its post-natal
nurture. The functions of Parenthood, both physiological and
psychological, are always evolving to higher and more complex issues,
therefore, as the species to be reproduced and nurtured becomes more
complex. In human births, single offspring is the normal. Twin births
are comparatively rare. And that these are abnormal is shown by twins
being below the average always in health or in faculty; usually in both.


IV

As already mentioned, Sex is regarded by the large and ever-increasing
order of the adherents of Mendel as a "Mendelian factor." But in
applying Mendelian truth to humans, I venture to think the applications
have not been carried to their ultimate and most momentous conclusions.

Because, given the keynote to the Principle of Duality in the phenomenon
of the Contrasting Traits found manifesting in plant-heredity and
constitution, the duality of the Human Sexes, with their respective
orders of Contrasting characteristics, suggests itself as being
analogous.

Human attributes, physical and mental, are seen, like those of plants,
to group themselves into two distinct categories, the Male and the
Female sex-characteristics, primary and secondary. And these, though
wholly contrary in nature and in trend, are found--precisely as occurs
in plants--linked together in the hybrid offspring of the two parents
from whom they were, respectively, derived; blending in a temporal
unity, but remaining, nevertheless, unchanged in their essential
differences; coming to means and counterpoises in individual
organisations, yet nevertheless preserved distinct and unalloyed in
these, as is shown by their emergence, unaltered, in offspring of
opposite sexes.

As a hybrid plant is the product of two parents characterised by
opposite traits--Tallness and Dwarfness, for example--so, I submit, a
human creature is the hybrid offspring of two parents characterised by
opposite traits--Maleness and Femaleness, with the Sex-traits
differentiating one sex from the other.

And at once a solution of the many baffling presentments and problems of
Sex presents itself--of the enigma of man with Woman potential in him,
of woman with Man potential in her; a key to the mysterious Duality of
human biology and psychology, with its conflict of battling impulses,
its harmonies of blending attributes, its innumerable and diverse
developments in proportions, in means, in extremes; in normalities,
eccentricities, deviations and reversions. And the analogy between the
two orders of Traits--in Plant-life at the lower end of the scale of
species, and in Human life and psychology at the higher end--suggests
that the ever-increasing complexity of organisation and faculty which
has characterised Evolutionary Progress, has had for aim, as it has had
for method, the ever further differentiation and more perfect
segregation, but, nevertheless, the ever closer and more intricate
association of the contrary factors of Maleness and Femaleness.

In the lower organisms--plant and animal--the two groups of Traits are
but crudely differentiated as characteristics distinguishing one sex
from the other. In such lower organisms, Sex-development is merely
rudimentary; the first foreshadowings in Life of two intrinsic orders of
Essential Attribute, the progressive evolution whereof reveals two
contrary trends in physiological and psychical inherences.

Like Light and Darkness, Heat and Cold, Sex is a phenomenon of Dual
states which manifest by way of relativity. Without Maleness, Femaleness
has no significance--no existence, in fact. And the converse. And in the
lower and rudimentary forms of existence, in proportion to their degrees
of undevelopment, the dual states of Sex are but faintly defined. The
very lowly forms are bi-sexual and self-fertilising. While the first and
simplest mode of reproduction is by cell-division merely; the principle
of Sex, with its dual factors, functioning, but not yet differentiated
into dual forms.

The evolution of Species and the evolution of Sex have been so
absolutely co-incident in biological progress, indeed, that we are
forced to perceive them as cause and effect; or, rather, as one and the
same thing. And the evolution of Sex has meant, of course, the ever
further divergence and the more complex specialisation, in form and in
function, of the characteristics of the one sex from those of the other.


V

On still closer consideration, it appears, moreover, that the evolution
of Sex has meant pre-eminently the evolution of the _female_ sex--the
slow and gradual emergence and development, in species, of female
characteristics, as, in course of Evolution, these have freed themselves
and have risen ever further into evidence from long subjection by the
stronger, fiercer, more assertive--in a word, the Dominant--traits of
the male.

(A conclusion as singularly interesting, I think, as it is instructive,
in view of modern Feminist doctrine and aims, which make, not for the
culture and the ever further evolutionary development of the
Woman-traits in woman, but, on the contrary, for a reversion to earlier
cruder states of the subjection in her of her Woman-traits by those male
Dominant ones, which, as the hybrid offspring of a male and of a female
parent, every female creature inherits from her father, together with
the Woman-traits she inherits from her mother. There is seen here the
irony that woman has, by long ages of biological development, released
herself from sociological subjection by the male, only voluntarily to
set the Woman in herself in far worse psychological subjection to the
male in herself.)


In the new and profoundly interesting light thrown by Mendel on some
previously unsolved problems of heredity, the reason for the long
subjection of woman, biological and sociological, becomes clear.

Because, given the key-notes of Tallness and Colour as Dominant traits,
one identifies these, at once, as traits of Maleness; the greater
stature of male creatures and the richer colour of their fur and plumage
in the lower species pointing unmistakably thereto. Dwarfness (or lesser
stature) and Whiteness (or lesser colour) are Recessive, and are
obviously Female traits. The plant of Dominant type, though still
bi-sexual, is making for a male _genus_; the Recessive type is making
for a Female _genus_. White creatures are so feminine in general effect
that it seems an anomaly when they are males. The converse is true of
black creatures. The black horse is stubborn and restive; the white,
gentle and submissive.

White poultry are prolific in egg-production; white cattle are good
milkers--a female characteristic. Jersey cows are both small in size and
pale of colour.

The male sex stands presumably for Dominance. And his positive, or
objective, traits overpowering the negative, or subjective, traits of
Recessiveness, prevail accordingly in early biological development.

The female sex stands for Recessiveness. Her less assertive traits yield
and recede into the background before those of the Dominant male. In
stature, in strength, and in colour, and in the allied mental
attributes, he holds the foreground in form and in function. The reason
being that his role in Life is adaptation to environment.

The male, therefore, in his masculine role of Adaptation, with his
Dominant traits making fiercely for the survival and for the ever
further development of physical fitness--until physical fitness, or
Adaptation, had attained due degrees of ascendancy--was long lord of
Creation; the female, his vassal. And this not only in life and in
action, but too in the personal characteristics of both sexes. During
aeons before the Recessive female-traits were able to come into evidence
as definite traits, they functioned as negations, merely; submerged and
over-ridden in all female creatures by the Dominant male-traits they had
inherited from their sires.

Primal physical development may be said, thus, to have derived its first
impulse from those fierce and fighting male-proclivities which
characterised it in the epoch of that early savage struggle with
environment whence Species emerged. Only with further evolutionary
progress, do the female traits manifest as personal characteristics,
secure survival, and find increasing exercise and sway.

The tigress is only less fierce, less strong, and less savage than the
tiger. Primal woman was only less fierce, less strong, and less savage
than the male. It is only, indeed, in the maternal function and relation
that the female traits of both tigress and primal woman awake, and find
justification, impulse, and scope for development. And while the
material progress which has led to modern Civilisation resulted from
Adaptation to, and of, environment, and derived its impulse from the
male proclivities of strength, assertiveness and intelligence, the moral
progress thereof may be said to have derived its impulse from the
evolution of the female sex-characteristics. Because the evolution of
Woman-traits has meant the ever further tempering and counterpoising of
the fiercely active and aggressive male propensities, by the more
passive and self-surrendering qualities of the female.

Judging the respective characteristics of the sexes by their
widely-differing roles in the most important of their co-operative
living functions, the parental one--the sole function wherein the sexes
of lower organisation co-operate, indeed--the respective attributes of
Dominance and Recessiveness manifest clearly in these. The province of
the male being to fight for mate and young, providing food, defending
life--in order to fit him for this struggle for racial survival, his
traits of strength and stature remain long paramount, alike in
development and function, over those of the female, as regards his own
organisation and that of his offspring, both male and female. The
province of the female being to surrender her powers to the nurture of
offspring before birth, and, after birth, mildly to suckle and to tend
its helplessness, Nature equips her to these ends; inhibiting, or
negativing, strength and fierceness in her by the traits of
Recessiveness.

Tigress or savage woman, her struggle with the rough conditions of
primal existence is only less fierce and less strenuous than her mate's.
It demands the positive male-qualities (which manifest first in stature,
strength and pugnacity) only less in degree than does his, therefore.
The negative female qualities which, manifesting first in passivity and
surrender, detract from her fierceness and activity, would have made for
extinction of species had they not been defended by those of her
fighting mate, as too by the male-traits she herself had inherited from
her fighting father. They could only evolve, accordingly, precisely in
proportion as they were sheltered behind the male dominant powers. The
tiger shelters his tigress only during her maternal phases, however. Her
cubs brought forth, suckled, reared, and thrust into the jungle to fend
for themselves, she must fight her own battles for food and existence.
And her brief maternal phases being all too short for more than the
scantest development of female traits--which derive their fullest
impulse in their exercise as mother-traits--she remains a tigress
merely, and produces tiger offspring merely, because only tigerishness
secures survival in her domain of life and attribute.

With the further advance of progressing species, savage woman has
evolved from savage brute to savage woman by way of such increasing
shelter and protection by her Dominant mate as have permitted the slow
and gradual evolution of the Recessive Woman-traits in her; and thereby
the evolution of the Woman-sex. Her maternal phases and the unfitnesses
of these become ever more prolonged and incapacitating; her offspring
demands ever longer periods of suckling, devotion and care, as both she
and it rise higher in the scale of organisation. Thus, Sex has evolved
in the male by response to the ever-increasing claims upon him, by the
female and by offspring, of his traits of protective chivalry and
intelligent effort. And Sex has evolved in the female by response to the
ever-increasing claims by offspring upon her, of her traits of devotion
and ministry.


The evolution of the Woman-attributes has been rendered possible only by
that protection accorded by the male to the female as the due of her
maternal unfitnesses; securing thus for her and for offspring a more
privileged and kindlier environment. Environment which, evoking less of
fight and physical stress, enabled her inherent milder,
self-surrendering Recessive traits to emerge, to unfold, and to function
increasingly in life and heredity.

And in the degree of her advancing evolution, the male evolved. Because,
just as in her earlier hybrid constitution, the Dominant male-traits she
had inherited from her father, submerging the Recessive female-traits
she had inherited from her mother, made her, for long aeons, more male
than she was female, so now, with their progressive evolution, the
Recessive female-traits not only made _her_ ever more woman, but,
transmitted in ever fuller measure to her sons, increasingly tempered,
modified and humanised, the masculine fierceness and combativeness of
these. Whereby were substituted arts of peace and civilisation for those
of war.

Thus, with advancing Evolution, the female sex-characteristics have
engendered, in both sexes, qualities of quietism and subordination, to
temper those of force and aggression; amenities of gentleness,
forbearance and affection, to soften assertiveness, turn the edge of
strife, and fructify intelligence. Thus, human civilisation has been
fostered and furthered.


In the hybrid creature that every man and woman is, are grouped two sets
of Contrasting Traits, or Sex-characteristics: traits Dominant, or male,
and traits Recessive, or female. And in the complex human hybrid, these
traits, ever increasing in complexity of constitution and further
diverging in trend, are associated in ever more close and complex poise
and counterpoise as both become more intensified and intelligised.

Man is a hybrid in whom the male Dominant traits derived from his father
prevail in impulse and development over the female Recessive traits
derived from his mother. Woman is a hybrid in whom the maternal
Recessive traits prevail in impulse and development over the male
Dominant traits she has inherited from her father.

The Woman-traits (which, as said, reach their highest culmination in
_mother_-traits), become in man _paternal_ traits; modified
mother-instincts which move him not only to love, in addition to
providing for and protecting offspring, but, transfiguring all his other
characteristics, move him to philanthropy, amity, tolerance and altruism
in his dealings with his fellow-creatures.




