BOOK II

WOMAN'S PART IN HUMAN DECADENCE




CHAPTER I

DECLINE AND FALL OF ANCIENT CIVILISATIONS DUE TO FEMINISM

     "This is the function of our and every age, to grasp the knowledge
     already existing, to make it our own, and in so doing to develop it
     further and raise it to a higher level. In thus taking it to
     ourselves we make it different from what it was."--_Hegel._


I

Ancient history is depressing study.

It shows us peoples rising slowly and laboriously out of states of
barbarism to high degrees of culture and enlightenment, and then, more
or less suddenly, falling upon decline; lapsing to total extinction,
even. One after another, we may watch them climb the Evolutionary Hill,
then slacken pace and struggle on spasmodically. Till presently we find
them steadily losing ground; slowly at first, but, gathering momentum,
regressing more and more rapidly, until finally they are seen racing
headlong to destruction.

Of some among the proudest and the greatest Civilisations, so absolute
has been their ultimate extinction that nothing more than ruined temples
and some statuary remain to mark their quondam glory.

Biologists tell us this is natural. Races, they say--like
individuals--have only a certain life-tenure. They are born, develop,
attain maturity, lapse to old age and then die; just as men do.

The analogy is not sound, however. Because although individual men die,
the stock they leave behind, if duly preserved and replenished by fresh
blood, may live indefinitely. Moreover, such records as remain show
that these past civilisations died, obviously, not of natural old
age--but of disease. Natural old age is sane and wise, and
self-controlled; healthful in mind and in body. Whereas the main
features characterising the decline of these great powers, were
viciousness and licentiousness; physical, mental and moral corruption.
Theirs was no passing in gradual waning of strength and quiet
dissolution; not even in senility. They may be described, on the
contrary, as having rushed helter-skelter upon death in full vigour of
their prime. We see in them, indeed, all the vehemence and
self-destructive forces of "sthenic" disease--disease as it occurs in
strong men struck down in full health. They died in riot, venality, and
lust, and every other form of vice and evil. Clearly, they died
unnaturally--of disease, not naturally of old age.

How and why then did this happen? How and why should disease thus have
stricken these in mid-career? Since history shows the political
institutions, the laws and the administration of many of such mighty
decadents to have reached high levels of excellence, in respect of
justice and intelligence, while Culture, Art and Industry were likewise
notable among them, the causes of their downfall must be looked for
elsewhere than in their sociology.

And since all human processes, sociological as well as natural, have
their roots in Biology, we are led to examine such records as remain,
for evidences of biological failure. Healthy and vigorous races do not
decline in consequence of unjust laws or maladministration. If they are
healthy and vigorous, they reform these.


II

Investigation shows one striking feature as having been common to most
of these great decadences. In nearly every case, the dominance and
licence of their women were conspicuous. And realising Woman's
portentous role in Racial advance, it is difficult to believe anything
but that her role must be equally potent in Racial decline.

A nation becomes decadent because the individuals composing it have
become decadent. The individuals composing it can only have become
progressively decadent by progressive hereditary decadences. And since
Woman is the racial reservoir and the Agency of Evolution, hereditary
decline of individuals and nations must have its source in a decline of
mother-power.

History confirms this view. It shows the progress and waxing supremacy
of these great powers to have been concurrent with rising levels of
womanly character and virtue, with high regard for woman by man, with
high estimation and observance by woman of the functions of motherhood
and of The Home. While neglect of the home, contempt for and evasion of
the duties of motherhood, immorality and general licence among their
women characterised their downfall.

And comparing some modern developments with these records of Ruin, one
can but be struck by notable resemblances between these latter and the
present-day trend of all our greater civilisations.


In the decline of Rome, the Roman women went to two extremes. A tendency
that shows increasingly among our modern womanhood. They separated into
two main orders. "Blue-stocking" and "Rake," they were then designated.
"Mannish" and "Womanish," or "Feminist" and "Ultra-Feminine," better
characterise their latter-day presentments.

In America, these two orders of women are known as the "College" and the
"Society" types, respectively. The "College" type makes a cult of
masculinity of body and of brain. The "Society" type makes a cult of
feminine graces and social accomplishments.

In the poorer, as in the superior classes of all nations, similar
extremes are found. One order is virile and hard-working; and for the
most part plain and moral. The other is womanish and pretty; and for the
most part frail.

With us--as with those earlier peoples--the demand for liberty and
unrestricted economic opportunities for women is occasioning contempt
for and evasion of the functions of wife and of mother, emancipation
from the home, increasing absorption in public affairs, fever for
pleasure, lapse of womanly traditions and morale. All of which
developments passed rapidly, in those others, into general laxity,
licence and corruption; culminating finally in total ruin. With them,
the claims of Home and of The Family became, as they are becoming more
and more with us, secondary merely and subsidiary to other pursuits; to
personal ambitions, public careers, to pleasures, excitements, crazes
for notoriety. Woman's inherent erraticism--defect of her intrinsic
spontaneity, her bent for novelty and strong sensation--degenerated,
under the licence accorded her in ancient Rome, into the appalling
orgies of The Bacchanalia; which were instituted by the sex.

Women attended the displays of gladiators. They watched the wild beasts
tear their victims. They themselves dressed as gladiators, and held
mimic combats. By cult of muscle, they grew taller than the men.

Sallust writes thus of a notorious Roman matron:

"Sempronia had committed many crimes of a boldness _worthy of a man_.
Blest alike in family and beauty, in husband and children, she was
well-read in Greek and Roman literature; could sing, play and dance more
gracefully than any honest woman need; had many of the other
accomplishments of a riotous life. She cared for nothing less than for
decency and modesty."

Fifty years later, Seneca takes up the story of a rapid decadence: "The
ladies do not reckon the years by the number of the Consuls, but by the
number of their husbands."

Much the same licence, extravagance and viciousness of the sex
characterised the greater number of those other old-world wreckages.

The higher Woman-attributes ceased to evolve; ceased to be exercised;
ceased to inspire. Women cultivated solely, or pre-eminently, the
male-side of their natures; muscle, intellect, ambition, concrete
activities, indulgence of sex-instincts. By power of which masculine and
alien proclivities, they increasingly dominated the men, in whom the
virile traits had proportionally declined. Thus, more and more, the
purifying, uplifting and inspiring potence of true Womanhood, together
with the softening refinements of The Home, became ever further
withdrawn from the national life. Thus corruption undermined; and chaos
finally engulfed.


III

Things were different in Ancient Greece.

It has been said that Greece fell because she did not give her women
liberty. For a time comes, in the development of every nation, when its
women must be freed. Or decadence sets in inevitably. And some of those
old civilisations declined, undoubtedly, from lack of progress in this
respect.

It would seem that the first sips of liberty require to be administered
to the sex with caution, however; the effects observed carefully, the
doses increased warily. Otherwise, impulsive and impressionable as they
are, women lose their heads; become intoxicated, and get out of hand.
And once women get out of hand, it is next to impossible to bring them
again under control (as was seen in the outbreaks of Feminist
militancy). Civilisation forbids that men shall deal with them as with
masculine rebels. And fenced thus behind the privileges of their own
sex, when armed with the prerogatives of the other, they may prove
dangerously difficult customers.

In ancient Greece, the wives and mothers and the other reputable women
had but little or no freedom. They lived, for the most part, in
seclusion; dull and unintelligent and uneventful lives. There was no
pure, wholesome, and inspiring social life. The only women who were free
were the _hetairai_, those famous ladies who shed a lurid brilliance
over the corruption and decline of this great State--a decline wherewith
they had, most certainly, much to do. A faction apart from the wives and
mothers--although many among them were courtesans, they stood apart too
from the courtesan class. Women who had found in the unfreed state of
the wife and mother of their epoch, inadequate scope for their impulses
and talents, they broke away from domestic conditions, to form a coterie
of free lances--a cultured, brilliant and alluring band of renegades,
sought and esteemed for their beauty and intelligence by all men;
aristocrat, philosopher, and pleasure-seeker.

More likely than that Greece fell because she did not emancipate her
women, it is that she fell because the women who emancipated themselves
abandoned the roles of wife, of mother, and other reputable functions.
For these Grecian _hetairai_ comprised, in the main, the flower of their
generation. One sees them, indeed, as brilliant Racial poison-blossoms,
greedily appropriating and exploiting to their own purposes the nation's
beauty and the nation's talent, its aspirations, potence,
passion--without transmitting any of these racial attainments to a later
generation. In place of endowing their kind with such nobler light and
faculty, inspiration and sweetness, as supply a people's evolutionary
impulse, they abandoned the home and the sacred and spiritualising
functions of true wifehood, and of the motherhood of such higher living
types as are indispensable to lead a nation's progress.

A kindred movement--modified, for the present, by the more enlightened
traditions of our Century--is foreshadowing itself across the higher
civilisations of our day. More and more, our better types of women (the
misinterpretations of the Feminist Movement having imparted a distorted
bias and direction to their powers) are similarly abandoning the Home,
or are withdrawing their best interests and talents from it; are evading
wholly, or are gravely restricting their maternal obligations to the
Race; regarding children as bye-products, merely, of life--vastly less
important than some hobby or career. In place of realising the new
generation as the Vanguard of Life and Evolution; that which beyond
every other human achievement counts in the Universe.

Worse than this even, more and more, everywhere, women are failing in
the maternal power of transmitting to offspring the health, the beauty,
the abilities and aspirations which are the model and ideals of our age.


IV

A menace to the Race more alarming than that of the hard and mannish
woman (who, because of her lack of womanly attractiveness, is debarred,
in considerable degree, from marriage) is another and less ungraciously
obvious deviation from The Normal--an order of the sex, modern and
artificial, and rapidly increasing in number, over-civilised and
highly-feminised both of physique and of temperament, which may be
described as an Ultra-Feminine, or, in contradistinction to the
Feminist, as a Feminist order.

Their womanhood but lightly rooted in neurotic systems, the women of
this sect are unstable and erratic, seeking distraction for their
restless, ill-balanced forces, in cards, crazes, drugs; fads and freaks.
Unfitted for wifehood and motherhood--some by faulty heredity, but a far
greater number by educational strain and consequent warp--some of these
ultra-feminised and frequently interesting creatures absorb themselves
feverishly in public movements; religious, social or political. Some are
persons of irreproachable morale and ideals; devoted, gifted, wholly
admirable. And being wives not seldom of men as talented, it is
deplorable that warp of culture, unfitting them for motherhood, should
have left such to waste their powers and aspirations in beating the thin
air merely of Utopian propaganda. When, otherwise, they might have led
the true and only way of Progress by endowing the Race with living
presentments and evolving treasuries of the parental ideals and
endowments.

The greater her charm, the nobler her character and talent, the more the
pity is when woman is defective in the power to transmit her high
qualities, or has power to transmit these in inferior degree only; thus
sealing up for ever, or gravely impoverishing a vital spring of living
faculty and individualism--a unique line of Human Ascent which no other
stock can supply, and one which may have been leading up to the
production of genius such as the world has not yet known.


Another--and quite different--sub-order of this neurotic (and
partially-sterilised) type, in losing its higher potential of motherhood
has lost the racial instinct wherein personal virtue is rooted. The
lives of these are free and irregular. Not measures, but men, are their
vogue; to serve as admirers of their charm and talents, as spectators of
their temperamental extravagances. Incapable of the emotions of love,
they seek, are discontented, and seek further when they do not find in
its excitements, the joys and contentment that reside alone in deep and
abiding emotions. The poise and repose, the charm, the refreshment and
the inspiration of true Womanhood are lacking in them. They demand
increasing novelty and change of venue for their ill-ballasted powers
and capricious sensibilities. And this precisely in proportion as they
are deficient in those womanly emotions and illusions which endue the
least and simplest things with glamour and with beauty.

This type, which can scarcely be said to _live_, but merely to frolic
through life, is pre-eminently dangerous to progress. Because, while
possessing the psychology, the appeal and influence of women, some of
these have cast off, utterly, the traditions, the nobler aspirations and
the functions of the best womanhood.


V

It is universally admitted that a bad woman is far more wicked than a
bad man is. She is more callous, ruthless, wanton and debased. The
irresponsibility regarding concrete affairs (innate in a sex whereof The
Concrete is only secondarily the province) makes her a dangerous and a
demoralising factor when her acquired male brain and activities (for the
clever, bad woman is always of masculine bent) over-ride her own natural
aptitudes. Because the powers she has artificially acquired--in
substitution for her native ones--do not alter her inherent constitution
of a creature builded upon instincts; instincts which her native higher
qualities are alone adequate to guide and inspire. One may acquire some
of the characteristics of an opposite sex, _but never the morale_; which
is inborn and inherent to the natural sex-characteristics.

Faculty declines in the inverse order of its development. The bloom and
beauty of the peach and of the flower are the last things to come--and
the first to go. So, in forfeiting her womanly qualities, woman forfeits
earliest the best of these. Love and purity and spiritual aspiration
perish first; with the result that the lower-grade female Subconscious
emotionalism, instinct and palpitant with animal impulse, comes into
play.

Man requires to degenerate to far inferior levels than is the case with
woman, before he so loses his normal rationalism as to forfeit his sense
of proportion and of his responsibility with regard to material affairs,
and that stern obligation to conform to environmental conditions which
has been the impelling force of male development. Irresponsibility is in
him an acquired--and a feminine--defect; not an inherent failing of his
sex. The very basis of the manly character is a recognition of the male
responsibility in life's affairs. It was the impulse of man's primal
struggle. It is the mark of his civilised manhood.

Irresponsibility is, on the contrary, innate in woman. It is part of
that spontaneity, plasticity, and versatility which have engendered the
racial evolutionary mutations; and by way of these have engendered the
progressive transitions to ever higher forms. And indispensable as her
native mutability is in making her the agency of evolutionary change, it
is an insecure and a dangerous basis for too heavy a super-structure of
male characteristics, physical or mental; as also for too heavy a burden
of male responsibilities. It disqualifies her for liberty and scope of
action identical with man's, in material affairs.

The further we fit her, moreover (beyond her normal capacity), for such
affairs, by artificially equipping her with masculine aptitudes, the
more we unfit her for her evolutionary role of spontaneous advance. Her
chiefest values lie in the spring and the plasticity which enable her to
adapt her nature to the evolutionary impulses of life inherent in her;
and thereby to engender further human evolution. For this, it is
important that she shall not be moulded on those firmer and more
definitely prescribed lines of masculine development which are
indispensable to the pioneering of material progress. Nor should her
powers be equally differentiated, or similarly expended. They must be
left, in far greater degree, conserved, unformulate and unadapted.

Normally, she is the child of Nature, in whom (because she is the
mother of the human child, who shapes to the maternal model) Nature is
unfolding the type of our Perfecting Humanity. She should remain,
therefore, more or less in the native and spontaneously fructifying
state conducive to evolutionary unfoldment. When she adapts as closely
to concrete conditions as it is imperative for man to do, not only does
she exhaust the potential fertility indispensable to the further
evolution and growth of racial faculty, but her powers lose that mode of
flux which enables them to tide to higher levels.

While man stands for Civilisation, woman stands for Nature. Generatrix
of Life, she is instinct with vital impulses. And when these are not
expended, as is normal, in the creation of and ministration to living
and beloved beings, they generate warped, erratic and chaotic
aberrations. Because, no matter to what degree she may acquire masculine
characteristics and aptitudes, she remains, at core, a creature of
instinct; not of reason. As a creature of instinct she is invaluable to
life--because Life is moulded upon instinct. But instinct and
rationalism function on different planes of mentality. To over-develop
rationalism in her is to quench emotionalism in her, and the higher
illumination of her Supra-conscious faculties; thus rendering her the
prey of smouldering subconscious impulses which burst fitfully and
mischievously into flame.

For Progress, man must be always the leading half and controller in
politics and civic affairs. These are his province. His sex stands for
permanence and conformity--and, accordingly, for uniformity. And
uniformity is the model for Civilisation, making as it does for justice
and the common good.

Woman's non-conformability adapts her admirably to the personal
relations of life, but not to the political. Man builds institutions and
administers them by more or less rigid impersonal rule. Woman transforms
them into homes, and humanises them by individual concessions and
exceptions.

So the two are supplement and complement in the public as in the natural
sphere. But their respective roles are contrary in every mode and issue.
Man's conformity, political and civic, is continually leavened by the
element of non-conformity and change he inherits from his mother, with
her other Woman-traits. But in him, her spontaneity and impulse are so
intelligised and stabilised by his masculine rationalism and bent for
order that, in place of operating emotionally and spasmodically, they
become tempered and restrained. Under his administration, material
advance proceeds slowly, but surely and securely. His masculine
intelligence and sense of responsibility cause him to adjust the
maternal evolutionary impulses,--which he inherits as reformatory and
revolutionary impulses--to the exigencies of practicability, and the
requirements of circumstance.


VI

There is no more difficult, or possibly mischievous, person than a
strong and clever woman whose over-developed masculine energies and
abilities are controlled neither by a man's reason and sense of
responsibility, nor by a woman's natural disabilities, affections and
restraints. She is sometimes prodigiously clever; adding to her male
talents a woman's fertility, versatility, adaptability, complexity and
intuitiveness. And yet with all their gifts, such women accomplish
little but harm--alike to themselves and others.

Erratic, fickle, irrepressible, they are perpetually flying off at
tangents. Now they are one thing too much. Now they are the opposite--in
an equal extreme.

Medleys of contradictions and perversities, they are no sooner repressed
in one direction, or become fatigued by the monotony of any single line
of action, than they burst forth in some other. Their abnormal
mentality and energy, allied to their innate impulsiveness and craving
for change, impel them to break loose from those bonds of affection, of
tradition and of aspiration, which are woman's safeguards. There is in
the nature of most women, this dangerous quicksand of irresponsibility,
which may, in crises, topple and submerge the soundest structure of
education and of habit builded over it. This is seen in the abandon and
anarchy of the sex in riots and in revolutions.

Such women rebels become increasingly a law unto themselves, and see no
reason why all others should not do likewise. They lack the masculine
grip of concrete principles to recognise that general lawlessness and
individual liberty cannot co-exist. Because where every man is free to
do as he pleases, no man is free to do as he pleases, owing to some
other man's abuse of his liberty encroaching on that of his neighbours.

Women of this order are the Cleopatras, Agrippinas, Messalinas and the
Catharines of Russia; the de Pompadours, de Staels, Georges Sands, and
the innumerable other self-centred, unconscionable female-egotists whose
extravagances shriek discordant down the ages.

Lacking both a woman's morals and a man's ethics, they are freaks of
Nature; or are Frankensteins of abnormal culture. When they are not
Empresses, to indulge in shameful licence--their male abilities
exaggerating their woman-instincts to the dimensions of
megalomanias--their inordinate ambitions make them mistresses of crowned
heads, or of others whose rank or wealth supplies their mistresses with
means and scope for their unbridled prodigalities. Privileged by their
sex and by masculine favour, their lawlessness protected from its
merited penalties by the law-abiding of their fellows, they become
intoxicated--frequently insane--as result of their successes and
excesses. The famous courtesans have been (and are still) for the most
part women of this ilk; persons of steel brain and will, without a
woman's aspirations or emotions to soften their self-centredness; nor a
man's code to discipline their wantonness. They make men the instruments
and the victims of their feminine defects, which are all--or nearly
all--of woman they possess; self-consciousness distorted to a monstrous
vanity, emotions dwarfed to greeds and lusts.

One after another, they exploit their victims, by exercise, precisely,
of the same masculine business-abilities and ruthlessness which make men
fraudulent company-promoters, profiteers, or sweaters of the poor. When
one has served their purpose, they cast him off for another.
Cold-blooded, clever, and emotionless, although sometimes sensual in a
fashion purely male (in keeping with their other male proclivities) they
are adventuresses, spies, poisoners, adultresses, monsters; abiding
reproach to a noble sex; terrible example of the fate awaiting that sex,
as penalty for abnormal development of masculine characteristics beyond
the capacity of its Woman-traits to counterpoise and guide.

Power, which strengthens and steadies all but weak men, only too often
drives women to destruction. A factor in this is that those privileges
of their sex which have become, more or less, their civilised
prerogative, preserve them from the salutary harsh and stern rebuffs
which men in like circumstance inevitably encounter.


If women are to have scope and authority identical with men's, then they
must forgo all privileges; must come out from their fence behind strong
arms and chivalry to meet masculine blows in the face, economic and
ethical--if not actual, indeed, as Prevost has predicted.

And then, Heaven help them--and men--and the Race!




