CHAPTER V

MASCULINE MOTHERS PRODUCE EMASCULATE SONS BY MISAPPROPRIATING THE
LIFE-POTENTIAL OF MALE OFFSPRING

     "_The truth, when it is discovered, is what every one has known._"


I

Mendel found that the hybrid plants resulting from his cross-breedings
of Dominants with Recessives produced, when mated with similar hybrids,
sex-cells of pure Dominant and sex-cells of pure Recessive types, and,
moreover, a proportion of sex-cells of mixed type, corresponding to the
grey rabbit-offspring of a black rabbit that has mated with a white.

So too, are found among humans, four types of men and women such as
might be expected under my application of Mendelian doctrine:
_Homozygotes_ for Traits, or pure typical men and women--Dominant males
and Recessive females, respectively; and _Heterozygotes_ for Traits, or
mixed types--Dominant females and Recessive males.

Of the pure Masculine type, are men who are wholly male in body, mind
and bent; active, energetic, enterprising; pioneers of material
progress; State-builders, city-builders, trade-builders, financiers,
explorers, soldiers, men of affairs. Of the Mixed type, are men who,
while being virile of body and mind, possess nevertheless a greater
admixture of womanly quality than is strictly normal. These are the
artists, poets, writers, doctors, priests, philanthropists.

Among women also, are two kindred orders; the wholly womanly--pure
unalloyed types of natural woman, wife and mother, sister, friend; and
women who, while being wholly womanly too in attribute and trend,
possess, nevertheless, underlying manly faculties which give broader
scope and effectiveness to abstract and impersonal issues of their own
sex-characteristics. These are the artists and poets and writers who
present the Woman point of view. They are the Florence Nightingales, the
Charlotte Brontes, Mary Somervilles; the philanthropists, reformers,
born physicians, teachers, nurses, and so forth; whose part it is to
mother, befriend and inspire humanity at large rather than to minister
to individuals. Whose part it is, as well, to extend the tender,
purifying ethics of Woman and The Home ever further and more deeply into
public life, public work, and public administration.

Such men and women possess the characteristics of their own sex fully
differentiated, but tinctured and fructified by more than a normal
quotum of the characteristics of the other. They are quite normal,
however, and are wholly invaluable in their contribution to the world's
affairs. Admirably manly or womanly, they bear but little likeness to
the hereditarily-defective or to the artificially-manufactured
species--mannish women and womanish men. They deviate from the essential
Man and Woman types by degrees of overlapping in the higher mental
attributes. In all the main characteristics of Sex, physical, mental and
functional, they are completely men and women. The abnormal mixed types
are, on the contrary, more or less degenerate, structurally,
functionally and mentally. These persons of natural Mixed Types are
Nature's workers rather than the parents of her Races. The daily round
is too restricted for them. Their abilities and bent claim wider fields.
The home cannot contain them. It is too round to fit their angles. They
are hampered by its reciprocities, stifled by its personal atmosphere,
restive beneath its obligations. And not seldom they succeed in making
homes as uncomfortable for others as they themselves find such.

These Heterodox--of which mould Genius is--are indispensable to spur and
quicken human progress, while adding nothing to the personal evolution
of the Human Type. They advance the standards and the ethics of Humanity
by creating ideals in Art, in Literature, in Politics, in Reform and
Philanthropy. But only too often they fall short, in their own lives, of
the standards and ideals they establish for the world at large.

The Advance-guard of Faculty, they break new ground of Mind and Morale
for others to cultivate. Although they themselves frequently quarrel
with life, they make life in general greater and happier for their
fellows. If women, they possess much of the initiative and energy, the
intellect and chivalry of men. But they apply these to womanly ends. If
men, they possess much of the insight and sympathy, the altruism and
creativeness of women. But they devote these to manly achievements.


Herbert Spencer held that Genesis (or reproductive power) and
Individuation (or Self-development) exist in inverse ratio. Which is
because individuation _beyond the normal_ can only be achieved by
drawing upon the vital potential of offspring. Hence, these strong
individualities of Mixed Type--because reproductive power is diminished
in them--but seldom transmit their abilities to offspring. Genius is
frequently sterile. Otherwise, its children are of inferior calibre.

It is in imitation, doubtless, of the natural Mixed Types--which may be
described as a normal deviation from The Normal--that the cult of the
mannish woman is being cruelly and disastrously forced upon our
latter-day girls and women; resulting in wholly deplorable developments.

The woman of natural Mixed-type is essentially womanly in aim and bent.
She does womanly work with virile energy and masculine mental grip. But
she never (or seldom) assumes male proclivities or adopts male habits;
crazes to wear trousers, to ride astraddle, to smoke, spit, swear,
stride, talk slang, or shoot living sentient creatures. Nor does she
otherwise exchange the more highly-evolved and delicate morale and
manners of woman for those of the male. In Art, in Literature, in
Science; in Industry and Reform, her aims and work preserve the womanly
mode and outlook.


II

In consequence of doctrine which, for several generations, has trained
women to develop for their own uses the masculine potential belonging to
sons, many of our present-day boys and girls are seen actually to have
exchanged their natural sex-characteristics. Boys are born now, puny,
neurotic, and effeminate; while girls are strong and male and masterful.
And it is precisely in the families whereof the girls are strong and
male and masterful, that the boys are weakly and effeminate; the
degenerative lapse from The Normal expressing itself, in both sexes, in
terms of abnormal characteristics of the other sex.

That at thirteen, girls now-a-days are taller and heavier than boys of
the same age has been established by the Anthropometrical Committee of
the British Association.

Dr. J. J. Heslop, after carefully observing the health and the physical
growth of children in fourteen elementary schools belonging to the
Stretford (Lancashire) Education Authority, has published a striking
return of his investigations. The following table shows the average
height and weight at this age:


+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                       |        Height.          |      Weight.     |
+-----------------------+--------------------------+-----------------+
|St. Matthew's          | Boys  4 ft.  7-3/4  in. | 5 st.  7-3/4 lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft.  9      in. | 5 st. 10-3/4 lb. |
|Cornbrook Park         | Boys  4 ft.  8-1/2  in. | 6 st.  0     lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft. 10-1/3  in. | 6 st.  5-1/2 lb. |
|St. Anne's             | Boys  4 ft.  7      in. | 5 st.  3-3/4 lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft.  9      in. | 5 st. 10-1/2 lb. |
|Trafford Park          | Boys  4 ft.  7-3/4  in. | 5 st.  4     lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft.  9-1/2  in. | 5 st.  8-1/2 lb. |
|Gorse Hill             | Boys  4 ft.  8-1/2  in. | 5 st. 10     lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft.  10     in. | 5 st. 11     lb. |
|Seymour Park           | Boys  4 ft.  8-2/3  in. | 5 st.  0     lb. |
|                       | Girls 4 ft. 10      in. | 5 st. 11     lb. |
+-----------------------+-------------------------+------------------+


The most notable development among girls takes place between the
eleventh and thirteenth years.

The opposite bias in this abnormal substitution of alien sex-traits is
due presumably, in both sexes, to an antagonising and neutralising of
the qualities normal to the one sex by emergence of those of the other.
Thus, the boy is puny and emasculate because his impoverished maleness
is too feeble to dominate the Female traits inherent in him, as is
normal to males. The girl is big and crude and masterful because her
impoverished Womanliness is inadequate to inhibit and refine her
inherent Male traits.

The aims of Feminism are being realised in unforeseen developments.
Because in addition to extinguishing the most beautiful and inspiring
order of human qualities, this masculinising of women is burdening the
Race and deteriorating type by producing an ever-increasing number of
neurotic, emasculate men and boys.


III

The present-day Mortality-rate of boy-babies has become increasingly and
alarmingly high.

The mortality-rate of males is higher always than is that of females,
because of the greater hardships and dangers of men's pursuits. This is
one of the reasons why, although, normally, boys are born in greater
number (about 1050 to every 1000 girls) the female (pre-war) population
of England and Wales exceeded the male population by the huge majority
of 1,205,311.

But the excess of male over female infant-mortality has greatly
increased of late years. In 1860 it was only 9 per cent. In 1913 it had
leapt to the high figure of 23 per cent. And this diminishing vital
power of males begins before birth even, 180 boys being born prematurely
as compared with 145 girls. Of boys born, 7 die from inborn physical
defects, as compared with 6 girls. While, before the age of three
months, 4 boys die to every 3 girls. Among 1000 infants dying before
they are a year old, only 96 are girls, as compared with 120 boys.
Recent statistics show that in rural Westmoreland, 48 boys under a year
old died, while only 21 girls of the same age succumbed. In Wiltshire,
the ratio was _135 boys to 78 girls_.

To quote from a writer on these startling statistics of the
Registrar-General:--


     "Tuberculous diseases, convulsions, intestinal troubles, bronchitis
     and pneumonia, and other maladies, all kill more boy than
     girl-infants in their first year. The figures are surprising.
     Omitting fractions, we find that among 1000 infants of each sex 21
     boys die of intestinal troubles to 17 girls; 10 boys die of
     convulsions to 8 girls; 21 boys die from bronchitis and pneumonia
     to 17 girls; and 14 boys from other causes to 11 girls.
     Whooping-cough stands alone, carrying off 3.15 girls to 2.65 boys.
     Even when chloroform or ether is given for the purposes of an
     operation it kills more boys than girls."


It may be objected that, according to my view, the mortality of girls,
bred of constitutionally impoverished males, should likewise have
increased. But this high mortality among boy-infants and children must
so weed out the weakliest males that many of these do not live to
become fathers. Moreover, by developing into abnormal dominance the
_male_ potential in her, the mother de-vitalises sons more than she
de-vitalises daughters.

Further, these crude hoyden-sisters of the weakly boys fail rather in
the higher attributes of Sex than in mere survival-power. They survive,
but they are marred in type by the stigmata of sex-immaturity or
abnormality.

Increasing sex-impoverishment is bringing into vogue--almost as a matter
of routine--the performance on male infants of an unnatural (and a
degenerative) Jewish rite.


IV

Of the many theories advanced to explain the determination of Sex in
offspring, the true one is, undoubtedly, the relative parental power of
the respective parents.

Normally, this being well-balanced, the ratio of the sexes is about
equal; the preponderance being on the male side, however, owing to the
maternal parental potential being normally greater, because conserved by
reason of her less onerous role in life. When parental potential is
relatively greater in the father, female offspring is born. When greater
in the mother, male offspring results. In the families of men notably
virile, daughters preponderate. In those of women notably womanly, sons
are in the majority. (Presuming in such case the parent of the other sex
to be of average potence.)

The preponderance of male-births during War-conditions is due to the
fact that by far the greater stress of these conditions, with consequent
depletion of vital reserves, falls upon the males. Hence the women--who
although depleted likewise by the increased demands upon them, are less
vitally exhausted than the men are--become relatively prepotent in
parental potential. The more virile men being absent on military duty,
moreover, the less virile members of the sex it is who preponderate in
the paternal role.

Other parental factors, as of age, health and circumstance, which affect
the sex of offspring, do so _indirectly_ by their effects upon the
relative vital and parental potential of mother and father.

In corroboration of the view that power conserved in the mother
engenders Maleness and masculine vigour in offspring, I have received
the following letter from the Head-mistress of the village-school of
Corley:


     "I was much interested in your article _re Boy-babies_. I think my
     school here is unique, there being 86 children on the roll, of whom
     57 are boys and 29, girls. And of the children in the village who
     will be of age for admission this year, 7 are boys and 3, girls.

     "In the village there are several families composed of boys only.

     One family has    7 boys and 2 girls.

      "     "    "     6   "   "  0   "

     Two families have 5   "   "  1 girl each.

      "     "      "    4  "   "  1   "    "

     "Of one family reckoning 6 boys (1 dead; making 7 in all) the
     mother has but one leg--the other having been amputated when she
     was fourteen.[2] _None of the mothers here (so for as I can learn)
     do work outside their homes_; except in odd cases, an odd day's
     washing or cleaning.

     "_None do regular work on farms, or otherwise._

     "All the children are well-fed, clean and well clothed. Our Medical
     Nurse says she finds the finest babies here--of the whole of her
     district. For 57 years the yearly returns in School have shown a
     great preponderance of boys over girls."


The writer contrasts this Utopian order of things with her experience of
the rickety and otherwise diseased and defective states of
school-children whose mothers were employed in factories.


V

It would seem that the embryological development of the male brain and
nervous system, it is which demands more of vital expenditure on the
part of the mother than does that of the female brain; less elaborately
differentiated as is this in respect of concrete intellection and
physical adaptation.

For this reason, not only is more constitutional vitality on the
mother's part required for the production of sons--and more particularly
of virile sons--but the production of male offspring entails more
stress, and exacts a greater toll, physical and psychical, than does the
ante-natal nurture of the female embryo. Mothers who have borne female
children with but little constitutional strain or suffering may be
greatly debilitated, even invalided, during pregnancy with male
offspring. One finds women permanently weakened in constitution and
function, indeed, from the strain of producing a male. In such cases,
the male may be exceptional of type. Or the mother may be of
exceptionally low vitality.

It has been argued that defect and degeneracy, as hare-lip,
cleft-palate, clubbed or webbed-foot, are more common in the male
because he is normally less highly-developed than the female is. The
contrary is obviously the case. In creating a difficult and a simpler
thing, there will necessarily be more failures in the difficult than in
the simpler product. Being nearer to Nature, the female is usually more
true to the normal type of species. But the type is not so fully
differentiated, or specialised in relation to environment, as is the
male.

It is significant that the female _aphis_, when its vital potential is
stimulated by summer heat, is able to breed without co-operation of the
male, but breeds _females_ only. Supporting not only the view that the
female is the rootstock of species, while the male is, so to speak, an
alien grafted upon it, but indicating too, that the production of
females represents less output of reproductive energy, since one sex
alone is able to accomplish this.


VI

Absence both of womanly emotion and of spiritual attribute disqualifies
the faces of the greater number of our modern "beauties" from being
truly beautiful. They lack those last exquisite touches which psychical
qualities bestow; sweetness, tenderness, gaiety, pensiveness, mystery,
mockery, witchery, wistfulness, surrender, resistance, maidenhood,
motherhood--the celestial and the terrestrial melting into one another
like the colours of the rainbow.

Since evolution is advancing in some stock, modern beauty is, no doubt,
of higher calibre than has been attained in any previous epoch. But for
the most part, the faces of our handsome women are pre-eminently
pagan--bold, sophisticated, clever; without sweetness, softness,
imagination, sensitiveness--in a word, without Soul. The outlines,
howsoever fine, are hard and antipathetic in their uncompromising
firmness. The eyes are cold and critical and challenging, so that their
relentless gaze is sometimes rather of the nature of a blow than it is a
sympathy.

Owing to that setting of the jaw which attends strong muscular action,
the shaping bones of the faces of developing girls thicken and coarsen,
and the naturally delicate, beautiful contours of chin and of cheek
deteriorate to the crude and heavy lower jaws characteristic of a very
large order of the sex to-day.

The weak receding, or the sharply-pointed chin of the over-feminised
type--both early-Victorian and modern--errs in the other direction. To
give fine balance to the face and form--as to the mind--the Male traits
must be duly represented. These broaden and strengthen the curves, and
preserve them from lapsing to narrowness and feebleness; lending touches
of straightness and firmness which nobly enhance the graces. In excess,
they mar and deface, however; as is exemplified in the strong and
slovenly features, without drawing or delicacy, which characterise the
new type of girl being turned out by our schools and colleges, most of
which make now-a-days a speciality of sports. Similar heavy jaws and
blunt, amorphous features are replacing in our working-girls, de-sexed
by masculine employments, the classic, nobly-modelled lineaments which
made our Anglo-Saxon Race once the most beautiful, as it was the most
vigorous and enterprising, of the nations. Such faces may be deplorably
senseless for the sense--and lack of sensibility--in them.

The facial type of the opposite extreme is ultra-feminine--a cameo-like
reversion to an earlier Victorian physiognomy, to which several
generations of mothers have failed to add any new quality. But, unlike
its Victorian prototype, the modern ultra-feminine face lacks blood and
emotion, and shows like a faded attenuation thereof. The cold, delicate
features, with the pinched nostrils which, owing to adenoid
obstruction, have never expanded to a full, inspiring breath of Life,
suggest further cameo-comparison; as being the daintily-carven shell of
an extinct creature.

So devitalised and neurasthenic are many of our pretty young girls, that
their flowerlike faces, topping over-tall and undeveloped bodies,
suggest delicate blossoms crowning long attenuated, sapless stems.
Neither faces nor bodies are vitalised and athrill with powers rooted in
healthful organs; vivified by healthful functions, and instinct with
warm, iron-rich, magnetic blood. They show that making for beauty which
is inherent in the Woman-traits, but which, in latter-day girls, owing
to defective constitutional vigour or to educational, social or
industrial exhaustion, has been able to realise itself only in sickly
and weed-like development.

Life manifests in these neurotics in the form of vivacities merely; not
as vitalities.

Severed from their natural roots in Life and vital function, they
resemble nothing more than charming cut-blossoms gracefully fading on
drawing-room shelves.

The truth is that girls brought up on modern strenuous methods skip the
years between 16 and 26. If young and fresh at 16, all at once we find
them 26 in constitution and in temperament--a little lean, a little
lined, a little wan, a little shrill, a little chill, and only too often
more than a little disillusioned and cynical--in a word already
_passees_. Some are, of course, an interesting and attractive 26, but
the fresh, warm, vital and beautiful years from 17 to 27, the years of a
natural woman's most charming bloom of mind and body, have dropped from
their lives, like petals from roses. So that our girls in their 'teens
require to hide the ravages of time by every sort of artifice. And at 26
in years, they are approaching the forties in constitution and
temperament; are even keen on politics, cards, finance--resorts,
pre-eminently, of materialistic middle-age.

This blighting of young womanhood, with loss of youthful bloom and
responsiveness, it is that has led to the decadent and demoralising
vogue of the Flapper. Since, beyond all things, men seek vital youth and
freshness in the other sex, to find it now-a-days, they must seek it in
children.


VII

Deplorable are the degenerative processes by way of which those noble
natural characteristics of the Woman-sex which Nature has achieved by
ages of evolutionary advance may be observed to lapse, and are presently
all but obliterated from the woman form and face.

Increasingly the curves straighten; the conflict between straight lines
and curves occasioning wrinkles. The jaw squares. The lips lose womanly
fullness, sweetness, and their natural colour and texture of
rose-leaves; becoming thin and pale and stern. Shadows gather round
them, foreshadowing, it may be, a masculine growth of hair. Hair loses
lustre and grows sparse, particularly above the brows. The chin loses
its feminine softness; rigidity and grimness being substituted. Eyes
lose fullness, tenderness, brilliance, and woman's normal melting
expression. The glance grows chill, hard, shrewd, direct. Crowsfeet mar
the modelled lids. The serene, inspiring woman-brows are furrowed by the
permanent frown of eye-strain or of nervous tension. The voice falls
flat and metallic, or drops into gruffness and harshness; losing its
delicate tuneful inflections, its sympathetic timbre, its joyous
quality. The cheeks hollow; the white temples are wrecked.

In the faces of women whose systems are functioning healthfully, a
number of exquisite artistries in cellular texture of skin and in
tinting appear; the skin beneath the eyes differing from that of
the cheeks, that of the brows differing from that of the chin,
that above the mouth from that below, and so forth. In women
subjected to constitutional strain, all these exquisite artistic
differentiations--product of incalculable evolutionary developments--are
obliterated; the skin over the whole face becoming of the same grain and
hue, as is normal to the male. The body becomes spare and sinewy, or set
and spread; its movements heavy and abrupt. And more and more the hidden
male emerges from the wreckage. The male right arm, swinging like a
pendulum, suggests itself as being the motive-power of the ungraceful
mechanism.

With the increasing maleness of physique, male mental proclivities
develop; obsessions to wear trousers, to smoke, to stride, to kill, and
otherwise to indulge the masculine bent.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may be objected that Beauty takes too high a place in the counsels of
this book. _Beauty is Normality_, however. Nature, in her every aim and
handiwork, makes beyond every other thing for grace. Weed and moth,
shell and beetle, humming-bird and dragon-fly--all are lovely in
technique and artistry. Plainness and uncouthness in humans only too
often belie noble mind or disposition. This results, however, from such
failure of vital resources that the individual had fine material only to
equip his mind, and none left over to adorn his body.

One sees the converse too, where all the available potential of beauty
has been lavished on handsome exteriors.

Plainness is a mark of abnormality. The victim may be normal in other
respects. But in this, he or she is abnormal. And more particularly
_she_--since Woman is both medium and Creatrix of living harmony and
grace. So is comeliness declining, however, that one of the
specifications of a recent Baby-Competition was that beauty would not be
a necessary qualification.

Yet Beauty is the natural birthright and The Normal of all babes and
children.


VIII

The Male cult is impressed now at the earliest age. Some of our hapless
little girls, in consequence of having been subjected early to strain of
masculine drill, hockey, cricket and other rough and strenuous
exertions, are more like colts or smaller-sized bullocks in their crude
conformation and ungainly movements, as also in their crude mentality
and manners, than they are like charming human maids.

Few developments in life are prettier or more engaging than is a natural
little girl. The sex of her, with its fair Woman-attributes, reveals
itself early in children of high organisation. Crowned by her curls, in
her simple white frock, she is as fresh and dainty, as winsome and
elusive as a fairy. Her little Woman-soul begins to make for beauty ere
ever she can walk. Ere ever she can walk, she moves her limbs in rhythm
of the dance. She tries to sing. She stretches out a tiny finger and
reverently touches a bright colour--a blue ribbon, a gold button, a pink
flower on a chintz. Set her in a field, she runs to cram her hands with
daisies. She fills, within the House of Life, an exquisite small niche
that nothing else can fill.

Yet now they are cropping her fair curls, are exchanging her white frock
for masculine knickers. They are training her soft limbs and exquisite
elastic movements to the hard and rigid action of the soldiers' drill
and march; are teaching her to stride her pony that once she sat as
prettily and lightly as a bird; are making a hard, boisterous tom-boy of
her, with lusty, hairy limbs and uncouth manners; perverting all her
natural highly-differentiated delicate attributes and graces to clumsy
lower-grade form and activities.

They have robbed her of her Doll, whose helplessness and wax perfection
fostered sentiments of worship, tenderness and ministry in her. They
have given her a whipping-top, which--unlike the boy, who pleasures in
the skill and mechanism of its handling--she lashes with contorted
features and neurotic spitefulness.


With characteristic scorn of physical disability, Feminism contemns old
age as disease or degeneracy--a weakness to be combated with latter-day
strenuousness, cloaked by a counterfeit youthfulness, forced exertions
(even games!) simulated youthful zests and gaieties.

Beyond all things, women are exhorted not to allow themselves to "grow
old" as their grandmothers did, sitting, comely and tranquil and wise,
at their quiet firesides.

Yet the truth is, Age is a natural beautiful phase; in its way, as
natural, as healthful and as beautiful as are any of the younger
seasons. Calm and stately as the snows of Nature's winter, as Nature's
winter shows us, old age does not presage death--because there is no
Death. That we call Death is but a temporary Recession from the Outer
and Terrestrial to the Inner and Celestial zone of Being. And with the
vital quietude and longer-sightedness of eyes, come spiritual quickening
and longer-sightedness of mental view. So that both eyes and mind
perceive The Outer more and more obscurely, focusing more and more on
The Remote. The stream of life runs stilly for the reason that it runs
more deep; centring again to that Within and Spiritual, whence it issued
in Birth, and will issue again in re-Birth.

Compare such serene-faced, dignified age, cause to all of reverence and
tenderness, for the mystery and pathos of its wise and tranquil
resignation--Compare such with the restless, harried, malcontent old age
of modern counsels!


IX

Before the advent of that admirable institution, the Eugenics Education
Society, for the establishment of a new Science of Heredity, as, too, of
a new propaganda of Race-Culture, vital and illuminating data, not only
of supreme scientific interest but, moreover, of the greatest practical
significance, passed, for the most part, unnoted.

I venture to believe, however, that Eugenic propaganda has been too much
in the direction of eliminating defect from the Race by prohibiting
marriage to the so-called "Unfit." Whereas the true way of Racial
health, of normality and excellence, is, surely, to eliminate from life
the many conditions, material, economic, and personal, which make for
Unfitness--which preclude, indeed, the survival of little save
Unfitness.

For since we are not in the secret of Nature's aims, and are wholly in
the dark as to the human type for which she is aiming, to prohibit
parenthood to any but the flagrantly abnormal, the insane and imbecile,
the epileptic and the hopelessly-diseased, might be to quench the
evolution of such higher Fitness as we are not qualified to foresee.
That which shows like disability in one age may be the incipient ability
of a later. In cruder, primitive days, when standards of Fitness were
physical strength, rapacity and cunning, honesty and mercy, and more
delicate organisation of body--the starting-points of new routes of
evolutionary development--would have been condemned as worthy only of
extermination.

In sickly and declining stock there may exist, moreover, an ebbing vein
of rare faculty, which, re-vitalised by a due potential of maternal
re-creative power, might come to throb with genius.

Realising all the factors--the innumerable lives, the incalculable
personal traits, endeavours and experiences, that have gone to make the
Individualism of any strain of stock, and realising that just these
factors of Individualism can have occurred in one line only of human
ascent and can never be repeated, it becomes clear that summarily to
extinguish any human strain, by arbitrary prohibition, would be to
exterminate a unique branch of the great Life-tree, and thereby to
deprive the Race of a specialised route of further ascent; a route which
no other stock could supply.

The fact that great families, with great histories and talents behind
them, fall into decadence shows that even in decadent stock are
inherences of greatness which might be recruited to greatness again.
While apart from all this, the right of Parenthood, with the
evolutionary impulse to character and faculty consequent upon the
exercise of parental functions, is the birthright of every individual
capable of fulfilling such. The counsel of Selective Parenthood is
dangerous doctrine, indeed. Given Life, Nature by her methods of Disease
is able to eliminate stock too deteriorate for, or beside her purpose.
But she alone knows her purpose. And she alone can judge as to what is
intrinsic Fitness for Survival.

Selective Parenthood makes, moreover, for the elimination of those
valuable object-lessons of inherited defect and disease, whereby Nature
points her inestimable morals of healthy and disciplined living. For
evasion, too, of those penalties and burdens in the care and maintenance
of the Unfit, which a nation justly incurs by such social wrongs and
maladministrations as are largely responsible for disease and defect.

The doctrine of operative sterilisation is not only humanly repugnant
but, in view of the psychological import of every physical function, it
is essentially evil.


X

Some momentous morals of the Feminist trend are pointed by the
Insect-world, which may be regarded as a devolutionary back-water,
wherein Life is slowly ebbing toward extinction by fluctuating out in
ever smaller, meaner, drabber, ineffective, pulseless and spectral
existences--chill and teeming myriads unwarmed by the throb of emotion,
unillumined by the light of Mind. Dust which, raised from dust by power
of Life, has caught the trick of living, and goes on living and
perpetuating, without cause or impulse other than age-old, time-worn
mechanistic habit imparted by the state of living.

And in this phantom under-world of Decadence, cast by the shadow of Life
and peopled with distorted images thereof, the females are
Dominant--larger in size, stronger, more active, more enterprising and
ferocious than the males. As in the world of Vegetation, by way whereof
Matter first quickened into Life, so in this realm of _Insectivorae_ by
way of which Life is gravitating back to the inertia of Inorganic
Matter, in ever shallower, denser and more sluggish strata, the male is
seen as appanage and victim of the female.

In the beehive, he appears as ineffective drone amid a throng of
strenuous neuter female-workers. And a female is his Queen.


Significant again is it that insect-females are seen increasingly to
have emancipated themselves from mother-instincts and maternal
functions, as regards nurture or affection for their young. The single
process wherein the warring males and snarling females of finer fierce,
evolving species sheathe their claws and mute their hates in a
co-operative, self-effacing instinct--Reproduction, here in this
disintegrating world of Devolution, functions without welding spark, or
lighting gleam of parent-altruism. At best, it is as chill, as
colourless and meticulously mechanical as the interminable tickings of a
world of clockwork. At worst, it is a repulsive rapacity on the part of
females to secure perpetuation. And this secured, they straightway sting
the craven male to death, or tear him limb from limb and ghoulishly
devour him.

Queen Bee leads her vassal suitors so strenuous and dizzying an
ante-nuptial dance, for privilege of mating with her, that only one
survives to claim the prize; the others dropping, dead and dying, in the
wake of her murderous supremacy. And, as with other masculine and
muscular females, her progeny are neuter working-females (sterile) and
emasculate males (drones).

As Feminists demand for human babes, the Bee-mother hands over her
offspring to be brought up by the State. While some other
insect-mothers, having reposited their eggs (to serve as bombs that
explode and devastate their living hosts) straightway abandon them, and
return to the more strenuous and repulsive female-pursuits of this
Phantasmagoria-world--a clockwork kingdom fabricated of Life's debris,
and drably mimicking the throb and motion of its mechanism in ghoulish
mockeries and vacuous reiterations; the while it runs down slowly,
ticking back to the molecular vibration of mineral inertia.


END OF BOOK I

NOTE.--_Mendelian and other readers interested in the more scientific
aspects of the subject are referred to an Appendix at the end of this
volume, in which these issues are further considered and some important
evidences adduced._

FOOTNOTE:

[2] I have observed that lameness in women, by restricting physical
activities and thus conserving vital energy, conduces to male offspring.
The fact may well have been the origin of the Chinese custom of
crippling the feet of female children. In my own professional practice,
by prohibiting all strenuous and exhausting pursuits, intellectual,
social or athletic, before and after marriage, I have succeeded in
securing male offspring in patients whose stock had for generations
given birth to girls only. In those _organically_ de-sexed by male
pursuits, rest will not avail, of course.--_Author._




