CHAPTER II.
THE PARSON’S MARJORY.


After some years the old people died, both in one winter, very
carefully tended by their adopted son, and very quietly mourned when
they were gone. People who had heard of his roving fancies supposed he
would hasten to sell the property, and go down the river to push his
fortunes. But there was never any sign of such in intention on the part
of Will. On the contrary, he had the inn set on a better footing, and
hired a couple of servants to assist him in carrying it on; and there
he settled down, a kind, talkative, inscrutable young man, six feet
three in his stockings, with an iron constitution and a friendly voice.
He soon began to take rank in the district as a bit of an oddity: it
was not much to be wondered at from the first, for he was always full
of notions, and kept calling the plainest common-sense in question; but
what most raised the report upon him was the odd circumstance of his
courtship with the parson’s Marjory.

The parson’s Marjory was a lass about nineteen, when Will would be
about thirty; well enough looking, and much better educated than any
other girl in that part of the country, as became her parentage. She
held her head very high, and had already refused several offers of
marriage with a grand air, which had got her hard names among the
neighbours. For all that she was a good girl, and one that would have
made any man well contented.

Will had never seen much of her; for although the church and parsonage
were only two miles from his own door, he was never known to go there
but on Sundays. It chanced, however, that the parsonage fell into
disrepair, and had to be dismantled; and the parson and his daughter
took lodgings for a month or so, on very much reduced terms, at Will’s
inn. Now, what with the inn, and the mill, and the old miller’s
savings, our friend was a man of substance; and besides that, he had a
name for good temper and shrewdness, which make a capital portion in
marriage; and so it was currently gossiped, among their ill-wishers,
that the parson and his daughter had not chosen their temporary lodging
with their eyes shut. Will was about the last man in the world to be
cajoled or frightened into marriage. You had only to look into his
eyes, limpid and still like pools of water, and yet with a sort of
clear light that seemed to come from within, and you would understand
at once that here was one who knew his own mind, and would stand to it
immovably. Marjory herself was no weakling by her looks, with strong,
steady eyes and a resolute and quiet bearing. It might be a question
whether she was not Will’s match in stedfastness, after all, or which
of them would rule the roost in marriage. But Marjory had never given
it a thought, and accompanied her father with the most unshaken
innocence and unconcern.

The season was still so early that Will’s customers were few and far
between; but the lilacs were already flowering, and the weather was so
mild that the party took dinner under the trellice, with the noise of
the river in their ears and the woods ringing about them with the songs
of birds. Will soon began to take a particular pleasure in these
dinners. The parson was rather a dull companion, with a habit of dozing
at table; but nothing rude or cruel ever fell from his lips. And as for
the parson’s daughter, she suited her surroundings with the best grace
imaginable; and whatever she said seemed so pat and pretty that Will
conceived a great idea of her talents. He could see her face, as she
leaned forward, against a background of rising pinewoods; her eyes
shone peaceably; the light lay around her hair like a kerchief;
something that was hardly a smile rippled her pale cheeks, and Will
could not contain himself from gazing on her in an agreeable dismay.
She looked, even in her quietest moments, so complete in herself, and
so quick with life down to her finger tips and the very skirts of her
dress, that the remainder of created things became no more than a blot
by comparison; and if Will glanced away from her to her surroundings,
the trees looked inanimate and senseless, the clouds hung in heaven
like dead things, and even the mountain tops were disenchanted. The
whole valley could not compare in looks with this one girl.

Will was always observant in the society of his fellow-creatures; but
his observation became almost painfully eager in the case of Marjory.
He listened to all she uttered, and read her eyes, at the same time,
for the unspoken commentary. Many kind, simple, and sincere speeches
found an echo in his heart. He became conscious of a soul beautifully
poised upon itself, nothing doubting, nothing desiring, clothed in
peace. It was not possible to separate her thoughts from her
appearance. The turn of her wrist, the still sound of her voice, the
light in her eyes, the lines of her body, fell in tune with her grave
and gentle words, like the accompaniment that sustains and harmonises
the voice of the singer. Her influence was one thing, not to be divided
or discussed, only to be felt with gratitude and joy. To Will, her
presence recalled something of his childhood, and the thought of her
took its place in his mind beside that of dawn, of running water, and
of the earliest violets and lilacs. It is the property of things seen
for the first time, or for the first time after long, like the flowers
in spring, to reawaken in us the sharp edge of sense and that
impression of mystic strangeness which otherwise passes out of life
with the coming of years; but the sight of a loved face is what renews
a man’s character from the fountain upwards.

One day after dinner Will took a stroll among the firs; a grave
beatitude possessed him from top to toe, and he kept smiling to himself
and the landscape as he went. The river ran between the stepping-stones
with a pretty wimple; a bird sang loudly in the wood; the hill-tops
looked immeasurably high, and as he glanced at them from time to time
seemed to contemplate his movements with a beneficent but awful
curiosity. His way took him to the eminence which overlooked the plain;
and there he sat down upon a stone, and fell into deep and pleasant
thought. The plain lay abroad with its cities and silver river;
everything was asleep, except a great eddy of birds which kept rising
and falling and going round and round in the blue air. He repeated
Marjory’s name aloud, and the sound of it gratified his ear. He shut
his eyes, and her image sprang up before him, quietly luminous and
attended with good thoughts. The river might run for ever; the birds
fly higher and higher till they touched the stars. He saw it was empty
bustle after all; for here, without stirring a feet, waiting patiently
in his own narrow valley, he also had attained the better sunlight.

The next day Will made a sort of declaration across the dinner-table,
while the parson was filling his pipe.

“Miss Marjory,” he said, “I never knew any one I liked so well as you.
I am mostly a cold, unkindly sort of man; not from want of heart, but
out of strangeness in my way of thinking; and people seem far away from
me. ’Tis as if there were a circle round me, which kept every one out
but you; I can hear the others talking and laughing; but you come quite
close. Maybe, this is disagreeable to you?” he asked.

Marjory made no answer.

“Speak up, girl,” said the parson.

“Nay, now,” returned Will, “I wouldn’t press her, parson. I feel
tongue-tied myself, who am not used to it; and she’s a woman, and
little more than a child, when all is said. But for my part, as far as
I can understand what people mean by it, I fancy I must be what they
call in love. I do not wish to be held as committing myself; for I may
be wrong; but that is how I believe things are with me. And if Miss
Marjory should feel any otherwise on her part, mayhap she would be so
kind as shake her head.”

Marjory was silent, and gave no sign that she had heard.

“How is that, parson?” asked Will.

“The girl must speak,” replied the parson, laying down his pipe.
“Here’s our neighbour who says he loves you, Madge. Do you love him, ay
or no?”

“I think I do,” said Marjory, faintly.

“Well then, that’s all that could be wished!” cried Will, heartily. And
he took her hand across the table, and held it a moment in both of his
with great satisfaction.

“You must marry,” observed the parson, replacing his pipe in his mouth.

“Is that the right thing to do, think you?” demanded Will.

“It is indispensable,” said the parson.

“Very well,” replied the wooer.

Two or three days passed away with great delight to Will, although a
bystander might scarce have found it out. He continued to take his
meals opposite Marjory, and to talk with her and gaze upon her in her
father’s presence; but he made no attempt to see her alone, nor in any
other way changed his conduct towards her from what it had been since
the beginning. Perhaps the girl was a little disappointed, and perhaps
not unjustly; and yet if it had been enough to be always in the
thoughts of another person, and so pervade and alter his whole life,
she might have been thoroughly contented. For she was never out of
Will’s mind for an instant. He sat over the stream, and watched the
dust of the eddy, and the poised fish, and straining weeds; he wandered
out alone into the purple even, with all the blackbirds piping round
him in the wood; he rose early in the morning, and saw the sky turn
from grey to gold, and the light leap upon the hill-tops; and all the
while he kept wondering if he had never seen such things before, or how
it was that they should look so different now. The sound of his own
mill-wheel, or of the wind among the trees, confounded and charmed his
heart. The most enchanting thoughts presented themselves unbidden in
his mind. He was so happy that he could not sleep at night, and so
restless, that he could hardly sit still out of her company. And yet it
seemed as if he avoided her rather than sought her out.

One day, as he was coming home from a ramble, Will found Marjory in the
garden picking flowers, and as he came up with her, slackened his pace
and continued walking by her side.

“You like flowers?” he said.

“Indeed I love them dearly,” she replied. “Do you?”

“Why, no,” said he, “not so much. They are a very small affair, when
all is done. I can fancy people caring for them greatly, but not doing
as you are just now.”

“How?” she asked, pausing and looking up at him.

“Plucking them,” said he. “They are a deal better off where they are,
and look a deal prettier, if you go to that.”

“I wish to have them for my own,” she answered, “to carry them near my
heart, and keep them in my room. They tempt me when they grow here;
they seem to say, ‘Come and do something with us;’ but once I have cut
them and put them by, the charm is laid, and I can look at them with
quite an easy heart.”

“You wish to possess them,” replied Will, “in order to think no more
about them. It’s a bit like killing the goose with the golden eggs.
It’s a bit like what I wished to do when I was a boy. Because I had a
fancy for looking out over the plain, I wished to go down there—where I
couldn’t look out over it any longer. Was not that fine reasoning?
Dear, dear, if they only thought of it, all the world would do like me;
and you would let your flowers alone, just as I stay up here in the
mountains.” Suddenly he broke off sharp. “By the Lord!” he cried. And
when she asked him what was wrong, he turned the question off and
walked away into the house with rather a humorous expression of face.

He was silent at table; and after the night hid fallen and the stars
had come out overhead, he walked up and down for hours in the courtyard
and garden with an uneven pace. There was still a light in the window
of Marjory’s room: one little oblong patch of orange in a world of dark
blue hills and silver starlight. Will’s mind ran a great deal on the
window; but his thoughts were not very lover-like. “There she is in her
room,” he thought, “and there are the stars overhead:—a blessing upon
both!” Both were good influences in his life; both soothed and braced
him in his profound contentment with the world. And what more should he
desire with either? The fat young man and his councils were so present
to his mind, that he threw back his head, and, putting his hands before
his mouth, shouted aloud to the populous heavens. Whether from the
position of his head or the sudden strain of the exertion, he seemed to
see a momentary shock among the stars, and a diffusion of frosty light
pass from one to another along the sky. At the same instant, a corner
of the blind was lifted and lowered again at once. He laughed a loud
ho-ho! “One and another!” thought Will. “The stars tremble, and the
blind goes up. Why, before Heaven, what a great magician I must be! Now
if I were only a fool, should not I be in a pretty way?” And he went
off to bed, chuckling to himself: “If I were only a fool!”

The next morning, pretty early, he saw her once more in the garden, and
sought her out.

“I have been thinking about getting married,” he began abruptly; “and
after having turned it all over, I have made up my mind it’s not
worthwhile.”

She turned upon him for a single moment; but his radiant, kindly
appearance would, under the circumstances, have disconcerted an angel,
and she looked down again upon the ground in silence. He could see her
tremble.

“I hope you don’t mind,” he went on, a little taken aback. “You ought
not. I have turned it all over, and upon my soul there’s nothing in it.
We should never be one whit nearer than we are just now, and, if I am a
wise man, nothing like so happy.”

“It is unnecessary to go round about with me,” she said. “I very well
remember that you refused to commit yourself; and now that I see you
were mistaken, and in reality have never cared for me, I can only feel
sad that I have been so far misled.”

“I ask your pardon,” said Will stoutly; “you do not understand my
meaning. As to whether I have ever loved you or not, I must leave that
to others. But for one thing, my feeling is not changed; and for
another, you may make it your boast that you have made my whole life
and character something different from what they were. I mean what I
say; no less. I do not think getting married is worth while. I would
rather you went on living with your father, so that I could walk over
and see you once, or maybe twice a week, as people go to church, and
then we should both be all the happier between whiles. That’s my
notion. But I’ll marry you if you will,” he added.

“Do you know that you are insulting me?” she broke out.

“Not I, Marjory,” said he; “if there is anything in a clear conscience,
not I. I offer all my heart’s best affection; you can take it or want
it, though I suspect it’s beyond either your power or mine to change
what has once been done, and set me fancy-free. I’ll marry you, if you
like; but I tell you again and again, it’s not worth while, and we had
best stay friends. Though I am a quiet man I have noticed a heap of
things in my life. Trust in me, and take things as I propose; or, if
you don’t like that, say the word, and I’ll marry you out of hand.”

There was a considerable pause, and Will, who began to feel uneasy,
began to grow angry in consequence.

“It seems you are too proud to say your mind,” he said. “Believe me
that’s a pity. A clean shrift makes simple living. Can a man be more
downright or honourable, to a woman than I have been? I have said my
say, and given you your choice. Do you want me to marry you? or will
you take my friendship, as I think best? or have you had enough of me
for good? Speak out for the dear God’s sake! You know your father told
you a girl should speak her mind in these affairs.”

She seemed to recover herself at that, turned without a word, walked
rapidly through the garden, and disappeared into the house, leaving
Will in some confusion as to the result. He walked up and down the
garden, whistling softly to himself. Sometimes he stopped and
contemplated the sky and hill-tops; sometimes he went down to the tail
of the weir and sat there, looking foolishly in the water. All this
dubiety and perturbation was so foreign to his nature and the life
which he had resolutely chosen for himself, that he began to regret
Marjory’s arrival. “After all,” he thought, “I was as happy as a man
need be. I could come down here and watch my fishes all day long if I
wanted: I was as settled and contented as my old mill.”

Marjory came down to dinner, looking very trim and quiet; and no sooner
were all three at table than she made her father a speech, with her
eyes fixed upon her plate, but showing no other sign of embarrassment
or distress.

“Father,” she began, “Mr. Will and I have been talking things over. We
see that we have each made a mistake about our feelings, and he has
agreed, at my request, to give up all idea of marriage, and be no more
than my very good friend, as in the past. You see, there is no shadow
of a quarrel, and indeed I hope we shall see a great deal of him in the
future, for his visits will always be welcome in our house. Of course,
father, you will know best, but perhaps we should do better to leave
Mr. Will’s house for the present. I believe, after what has passed, we
should hardly be agreeable inmates for some days.”

Will, who had commanded himself with difficulty from the first, broke
out upon this into an inarticulate noise, and raised one hand with an
appearance of real dismay, as if he were about to interfere and
contradict. But she checked him at once looking up at him with a swift
glance and an angry flush upon her cheek.

“You will perhaps have the good grace,” she said, “to let me explain
these matters for myself.”

Will was put entirely out of countenance by her expression and the ring
of her voice. He held his peace, concluding that there were some things
about this girl beyond his comprehension, in which he was exactly
right.

The poor parson was quite crestfallen. He tried to prove that this was
no more than a true lovers’ tiff, which would pass off before night;
and when he was dislodged from that position, he went on to argue that
where there was no quarrel there could be no call for a separation; for
the good man liked both his entertainment and his host. It was curious
to see how the girl managed them, saying little all the time, and that
very quietly, and yet twisting them round her finger and insensibly
leading them wherever she would by feminine tact and generalship. It
scarcely seemed to have been her doing—it seemed as if things had
merely so fallen out—that she and her father took their departure that
same afternoon in a farm-cart, and went farther down the valley, to
wait, until their own house was ready for them, in another hamlet. But
Will had been observing closely, and was well aware of her dexterity
and resolution. When he found himself alone he had a great many curious
matters to turn over in his mind. He was very sad and solitary, to
begin with. All the interest had gone out of his life, and he might
look up at the stars as long as he pleased, he somehow failed to find
support or consolation. And then he was in such a turmoil of spirit
about Marjory. He had been puzzled and irritated at her behaviour, and
yet he could not keep himself from admiring it. He thought he
recognised a fine, perverse angel in that still soul which he had never
hitherto suspected; and though he saw it was an influence that would
fit but ill with his own life of artificial calm, he could not keep
himself from ardently desiring to possess it. Like a man who has lived
among shadows and now meets the sun, he was both pained and delighted.

As the days went forward he passed from one extreme to another; now
pluming himself on the strength of his determination, now despising his
timid and silly caution. The former was, perhaps, the true thought of
his heart, and represented the regular tenor of the man’s reflections;
but the latter burst forth from time to time with an unruly violence,
and then he would forget all consideration, and go up and down his
house and garden or walk among the fir-woods like one who is beside
himself with remorse. To equable, steady-minded Will this state of
matters was intolerable; and he determined, at whatever cost, to bring
it to an end. So, one warm summer afternoon he put on his best clothes,
took a thorn switch in his hand, and set out down the valley by the
river. As soon as he had taken his determination, he had regained at a
bound his customary peace of heart, and he enjoyed the bright weather
and the variety of the scene without any admixture of alarm or
unpleasant eagerness. It was nearly the same to him how the matter
turned out. If she accepted him he would have to marry her this time,
which perhaps was, all for the best. If she refused him, he would have
done his utmost, and might follow his own way in the future with an
untroubled conscience. He hoped, on the whole, she would refuse him;
and then, again, as he saw the brown roof which sheltered her, peeping
through some willows at an angle of the stream, he was half inclined to
reverse the wish, and more than half ashamed of himself for this
infirmity of purpose.

Marjory seemed glad to see him, and gave him her hand without
affectation or delay.

“I have been thinking about this marriage,” he began.

“So have I,” she answered. “And I respect you more and more for a very
wise man. You understood me better than I understood myself; and I am
now quite certain that things are all for the best as they are.”

“At the same time—,” ventured Will.

“You must be tired,” she interrupted. “Take a seat and let me fetch you
a glass of wine. The afternoon is so warm; and I wish you not to be
displeased with your visit. You must come quite often; once a week, if
you can spare the time; I am always so glad to see my friends.”

“O, very well,” thought Will to himself. “It appears I was right after
all.” And he paid a very agreeable visit, walked home again in capital
spirits, and gave himself no further concern about the matter.

For nearly three years Will and Marjory continued on these terms,
seeing each other once or twice a week without any word of love between
them; and for all that time I believe Will was nearly as happy as a man
can be. He rather stinted himself the pleasure of seeing her; and he
would often walk half-way over to the parsonage, and then back again,
as if to whet his appetite. Indeed there was one corner of the road,
whence he could see the church-spire wedged into a crevice of the
valley between sloping firwoods, with a triangular snatch of plain by
way of background, which he greatly affected as a place to sit and
moralise in before returning homewards; and the peasants got so much
into the habit of finding him there in the twilight that they gave it
the name of “Will o’ the Mill’s Corner.”

At the end of the three years Marjory played him a sad trick by
suddenly marrying somebody else. Will kept his countenance bravely, and
merely remarked that, for as little as he knew of women, he had acted
very prudently in not marrying her himself three years before. She
plainly knew very little of her own mind, and, in spite of a deceptive
manner, was as fickle and flighty as the rest of them. He had to
congratulate himself on an escape, he said, and would take a higher
opinion of his own wisdom in consequence. But at heart, he was
reasonably displeased, moped a good deal for a month or two, and fell
away in flesh, to the astonishment of his serving-lads.

It was perhaps a year after this marriage that Will was awakened late
one night by the sound of a horse galloping on the road, followed by
precipitate knocking at the inn-door. He opened his window and saw a
farm servant, mounted and holding a led horse by the bridle, who told
him to make what haste he could and go along with him; for Marjory was
dying, and had sent urgently to fetch him to her bedside. Will was no
horseman, and made so little speed upon the way that the poor young
wife was very near her end before he arrived. But they had some
minutes’ talk in private, and he was present and wept very bitterly
while she breathed her last.




