CHAPTER I.
THE PLAIN AND THE STARS.


The Mill here Will lived with his adopted parents stood in a falling
valley between pinewoods and great mountains. Above, hill after hill,
soared upwards until they soared out of the depth of the hardiest
timber, and stood naked against the sky. Some way up, a long grey
village lay like a seam or a ray of vapour on a wooded hillside; and
when the wind was favourable, the sound of the church bells would drop
down, thin and silvery, to Will. Below, the valley grew ever steeper
and steeper, and at the same time widened out on either hand; and from
an eminence beside the mill it was possible to see its whole length and
away beyond it over a wide plain, where the river turned and shone, and
moved on from city to city on its voyage towards the sea. It chanced
that over this valley there lay a pass into a neighbouring kingdom; so
that, quiet and rural as it was, the road that ran along beside the
river was a high thoroughfare between two splendid and powerful
societies. All through the summer, travelling-carriages came crawling
up, or went plunging briskly downwards past the mill; and as it
happened that the other side was very much easier of ascent, the path
was not much frequented, except by people going in one direction; and
of all the carriages that Will saw go by, five-sixths were plunging
briskly downwards and only one-sixth crawling up. Much more was this
the case with foot-passengers. All the light-footed tourists, all the
pedlars laden with strange wares, were tending downward like the river
that accompanied their path. Nor was this all; for when Will was yet a
child a disastrous war arose over a great part of the world. The
newspapers were full of defeats and victories, the earth rang with
cavalry hoofs, and often for days together and for miles around the
coil of battle terrified good people from their labours in the field.
Of all this, nothing was heard for a long time in the valley; but at
last one of the commanders pushed an army over the pass by forced
marches, and for three days horse and foot, cannon and tumbril, drum
and standard, kept pouring downward past the mill. All day the child
stood and watched them on their passage—the rhythmical stride, the
pale, unshaven faces tanned about the eyes, the discoloured regimentals
and the tattered flags, filled him with a sense of weariness, pity, and
wonder; and all night long, after he was in bed, he could hear the
cannon pounding and the feet trampling, and the great armament sweeping
onward and downward past the mill. No one in the valley ever heard the
fate of the expedition, for they lay out of the way of gossip in those
troublous times; but Will saw one thing plainly, that not a man
returned. Whither had they all gone? Whither went all the tourists and
pedlars with strange wares? whither all the brisk barouches with
servants in the dicky? whither the water of the stream, ever coursing
downward and ever renewed from above? Even the wind blew oftener down
the valley, and carried the dead leaves along with it in the fall. It
seemed like a great conspiracy of things animate and inanimate; they
all went downward, fleetly and gaily downward, and only he, it seemed,
remained behind, like a stock upon the wayside. It sometimes made him
glad when he noticed how the fishes kept their heads up stream. They,
at least, stood faithfully by him, while all else were posting downward
to the unknown world.

One evening he asked the miller where the river went.

“It goes down the valley,” answered he, “and turns a power of mills—six
score mills, they say, from here to Unterdeck—and is none the wearier
after all. And then it goes out into the lowlands, and waters the great
corn country, and runs through a sight of fine cities (so they say)
where kings live all alone in great palaces, with a sentry walling up
and down before the door. And it goes under bridges with stone men upon
them, looking down and smiling so curious it the water, and living
folks leaning their elbows on the wall and looking over too. And then
it goes on and on, and down through marshes and sands, until at last it
falls into the sea, where the ships are that bring parrots and tobacco
from the Indies. Ay, it has a long trot before it as it goes singing
over our weir, bless its heart!”

“And what is the sea?” asked Will.

“The sea!” cried the miller. “Lord help us all, it is the greatest
thing God made! That is where all the water in the world runs down into
a great salt lake. There it lies, as flat as my hand and as
innocent-like as a child; but they do say when the wind blows it gets
up into water-mountains bigger than any of ours, and swallows down
great ships bigger than our mill, and makes such a roaring that you can
hear it miles away upon the land. There are great fish in it five times
bigger than a bull, and one old serpent as long as our river and as old
as all the world, with whiskers like a man, and a crown of silver on
her head.”

Will thought he had never heard anything like this, and he kept on
asking question after question about the world that lay away down the
river, with all its perils and marvels, until the old miller became
quite interested himself, and at last took him by the hand and led him
to the hilltop that overlooks the valley and the plain. The sun was
near setting, and hung low down in a cloudless sky. Everything was
defined and glorified in golden light. Will had never seen so great an
expanse of country in his life; he stood and gazed with all his eyes.
He could see the cities, and the woods and fields, and the bright
curves of the river, and far away to where the rim of the plain
trenched along the shining heavens. An over-mastering emotion seized
upon the boy, soul and body; his heart beat so thickly that he could
not breathe; the scene swam before his eyes; the sun seemed to wheel
round and round, and throw off, as it turned, strange shapes which
disappeared with the rapidity of thought, and were succeeded by others.
Will covered his face with his hands, and burst into a violent fit of
tears; and the poor miller, sadly disappointed and perplexed, saw
nothing better for it than to take him up in his arms and carry him
home in silence.

From that day forward Will was full of new hopes and longings.
Something kept tugging at his heart-strings; the running water carried
his desires along with it as he dreamed over its fleeting surface; the
wind, as it ran over innumerable tree-tops, hailed him with encouraging
words; branches beckoned downward; the open road, as it shouldered
round the angles and went turning and vanishing fast and faster down
the valley, tortured him with its solicitations. He spent long whiles
on the eminence, looking down the rivershed and abroad on the fat
lowlands, and watched the clouds that travelled forth upon the sluggish
wind and trailed their purple shadows on the plain; or he would linger
by the wayside, and follow the carriages with his eyes as they rattled
downward by the river. It did not matter what it was; everything that
went that way, were it cloud or carriage, bird or brown water in the
stream, he felt his heart flow out after it in an ecstasy of longing.

We are told by men of science that all the ventures of mariners on the
sea, all that counter-marching of tribes and races that confounds old
history with its dust and rumour, sprang from nothing more abstruse
than the laws of supply and demand, and a certain natural instinct for
cheap rations. To any one thinking deeply, this will seem a dull and
pitiful explanation. The tribes that came swarming out of the North and
East, if they were indeed pressed onward from behind by others, were
drawn at the same time by the magnetic influence of the South and West.
The fame of other lands had reached them; the name of the eternal city
rang in their ears; they were not colonists, but pilgrims; they
travelled towards wine and gold and sunshine, but their hearts were set
on something higher. That divine unrest, that old stinging trouble of
humanity that makes all high achievements and all miserable failure,
the same that spread wings with Icarus, the same that sent Columbus
into the desolate Atlantic, inspired and supported these barbarians on
their perilous march. There is one legend which profoundly represents
their spirit, of how a flying party of these wanderers encountered a
very old man shod with iron. The old man asked them whither they were
going; and they answered with one voice: “To the Eternal City!” He
looked upon them gravely. “I have sought it,” he said, “over the most
part of the world. Three such pairs as I now carry on my feet have I
worn out upon this pilgrimage, and now the fourth is growing slender
underneath my steps. And all this while I have not found the city.” And
he turned and went his own way alone, leaving them astonished.

And yet this would scarcely parallel the intensity of Will’s feeling
for the plain. If he could only go far enough out there, he felt as if
his eyesight would be purged and clarified, as if his hearing would
grow more delicate, and his very breath would come and go with luxury.
He was transplanted and withering where he was; he lay in a strange
country and was sick for home. Bit by bit, he pieced together broken
notions of the world below: of the river, ever moving and growing until
it sailed forth into the majestic ocean; of the cities, full of brisk
and beautiful people, playing fountains, bands of music and marble
palaces, and lighted up at night from end to end with artificial stars
of gold; of the great churches, wise universities, brave armies, and
untold money lying stored in vaults; of the high-flying vice that moved
in the sunshine, and the stealth and swiftness of midnight murder. I
have said he was sick as if for home: the figure halts. He was like
some one lying in twilit, formless preexistence, and stretching out his
hands lovingly towards many-coloured, many-sounding life. It was no
wonder he was unhappy, he would go and tell the fish: they were made
for their life, wished for no more than worms and running water, and a
hole below a falling bank; but he was differently designed, full of
desires and aspirations, itching at the fingers, lusting with the eyes,
whom the whole variegated world could not satisfy with aspects. The
true life, the true bright sunshine, lay far out upon the plain. And O!
to see this sunlight once before he died! to move with a jocund spirit
in a golden land! to hear the trained singers and sweet church bells,
and see the holiday gardens! “And O fish!” he would cry, “if you would
only turn your noses down stream, you could swim so easily into the
fabled waters and see the vast ships passing over your head like
clouds, and hear the great water-hills making music over you all day
long!” But the fish kept looking patiently in their own direction,
until Will hardly knew whether to laugh or cry.

Hitherto the traffic on the road had passed by Will, like something
seen in a picture: he had perhaps exchanged salutations with a tourist,
or caught sight of an old gentleman in a travelling cap at a carriage
window; but for the most part it had been a mere symbol, which he
contemplated from apart and with something of a superstitious feeling.
A time came at last when this was to be changed. The miller, who was a
greedy man in his way, and never forewent an opportunity of honest
profit, turned the mill-house into a little wayside inn, and, several
pieces of good fortune falling in opportunely, built stables and got
the position of post master on the road. It now became Will’s duty to
wait upon people, as they sat to break their fasts in the little arbour
at the top of the mill garden; and you may be sure that he kept his
ears open, and learned many new things about the outside world as he
brought the omelette or the wine. Nay, he would often get into
conversation with single guests, and by adroit questions and polite
attention, not only gratify his own curiosity, but win the goodwill of
the travellers. Many complimented the old couple on their serving-boy;
and a professor was eager to take him away with him, and have him
properly educated in the plain. The miller and his wife were mightily
astonished and even more pleased. They thought it a very good thing
that they should have opened their inn. “You see,” the old man would
remark, “he has a kind of talent for a publican; he never would have
made anything else!” And so life wagged on in the valley, with high
satisfaction to all concerned but Will. Every carriage that left the
inn-door seemed to take a part of him away with it; and when people
jestingly offered him a lift, he could with difficulty command his
emotion. Night after night he would dream that he was awakened by
flustered servants, and that a splendid equipage waited at the door to
carry him down into the plain; night after night; until the dream,
which had seemed all jollity to him at first, began to take on a colour
of gravity, and the nocturnal summons and waiting equipage occupied a
place in his mind as something to be both feared and hoped for.

One day, when Will was about sixteen, a fat young man arrived at sunset
to pass the night. He was a contented-looking fellow, with a jolly eye,
and carried a knapsack. While dinner was preparing, he sat in the
arbour to read a book; but as soon as he had begun to observe Will, the
book was laid aside; he was plainly one of those who prefer living
people to people made of ink and paper. Will, on his part, although he
had not been much interested in the stranger at first sight, soon began
to take a great deal of pleasure in his talk, which was full of good
nature and good sense, and at last conceived a great respect for his
character and wisdom. They sat far into the night; and about two in the
morning Will opened his heart to the young man, and told him how he
longed to leave the valley and what bright hopes he had connected with
the cities of the plain. The young man whistled, and then broke into a
smile.

“My young friend,” he remarked, “you are a very curious little fellow
to be sure, and wish a great many things which you will never get. Why,
you would feel quite ashamed if you knew how the little fellows in
these fairy cities of yours are all after the same sort of nonsense,
and keep breaking their hearts to get up into the mountains. And let me
tell you, those who go down into the plains are a very short while
there before they wish themselves heartily back again. The air is not
so light nor so pure; nor is the sun any brighter. As for the beautiful
men and women, you would see many of them in rags and many of them
deformed with horrible disorders; and a city is so hard a place for
people who are poor and sensitive that many choose to die by their own
hand.”

“You must think me very simple,” answered Will. “Although I have never
been out of this valley, believe me, I have used my eyes. I know how
one thing lives on another; for instance, how the fish hangs in the
eddy to catch his fellows; and the shepherd, who makes so pretty a
picture carrying home the lamb, is only carrying it home for dinner. I
do not expect to find all things right in your cities. That is not what
troubles me; it might have been that once upon a time; but although I
live here always, I have asked many questions and learned a great deal
in these last years, and certainly enough to cure me of my old fancies.
But you would not have me die like a dog and not see all that is to be
seen, and do all that a man can do, let it be good or evil? you would
not have me spend all my days between this road here and the river, and
not so much as make a motion to be up and live my life?—I would rather
die out of hand,” he cried, “than linger on as I am doing.”

“Thousands of people,” said the young man, “live and die like you, and
are none the less happy.”

“Ah!” said Will, “if there are thousands who would like, why should not
one of them have my place?”

It was quite dark; there was a hanging lamp in the arbour which lit up
the table and the faces of the speakers; and along the arch, the leaves
upon the trellis stood out illuminated against the night sky, a pattern
of transparent green upon a dusky purple. The fat young man rose, and,
taking Will by the arm, led him out under the open heavens.

“Did you ever look at the stars?” he asked, pointing upwards.

“Often and often,” answered Will.

“And do you know what they are?”

“I have fancied many things.”

“They are worlds like ours,” said the young man. “Some of them less;
many of them a million times greater; and some of the least sparkles
that you see are not only worlds, but whole clusters of worlds turning
about each other in the midst of space. We do not know what there may
be in any of them; perhaps the answer to all our difficulties or the
cure of all our sufferings: and yet we can never reach them; not all
the skill of the craftiest of men can fit out a ship for the nearest of
these our neighbours, nor would the life of the most aged suffice for
such a journey. When a great battle has been lost or a dear friend is
dead, when we are hipped or in high spirits, there they are unweariedly
shining overhead. We may stand down here, a whole army of us together,
and shout until we break our hearts, and not a whisper reaches them. We
may climb the highest mountain, and we are no nearer them. All we can
do is to stand down here in the garden and take off our hats; the
starshine lights upon our heads, and where mine is a little bald, I
dare say you can see it glisten in the darkness. The mountain and the
mouse. That is like to be all we shall ever have to do with Arcturus or
Aldebaran. Can you apply a parable?” he added, laying his hand upon
Will’s shoulder. “It is not the same thing as a reason, but usually
vastly more convincing.”

Will hung his head a little, and then raised it once more to heaven.
The stars seemed to expand and emit a sharper brilliancy; and as he
kept turning his eyes higher and higher, they seemed to increase in
multitude under his gaze.

“I see,” he said, turning to the young man. “We are in a rat-trap.”

“Something of that size. Did you ever see a squirrel turning in a cage?
and another squirrel sitting philosophically over his nuts? I needn’t
ask you which of them looked more of a fool.”




