CHAPTER V.
A MAN OUT OF THE SEA.


Rorie set out for the house in search of warmth and breakfast; but my
uncle was bent upon examining the shores of Aros, and I felt it a part
of duty to accompany him throughout. He was now docile and quiet, but
tremulous and weak in mind and body; and it was with the eagerness of a
child that he pursued his exploration. He climbed far down upon the
rocks; on the beaches, he pursued the retreating breakers. The merest
broken plank or rag of cordage was a treasure in his eyes to be secured
at the peril of his life. To see him, with weak and stumbling
footsteps, expose himself to the pursuit of the surf, or the snares and
pitfalls of the weedy rock, kept me in a perpetual terror. My arm was
ready to support him, my hand clutched him by the skirt, I helped him
to draw his pitiful discoveries beyond the reach of the returning wave;
a nurse accompanying a child of seven would have had no different
experience.

Yet, weakened as he was by the reaction from his madness of the night
before, the passions that smouldered in his nature were those of a
strong man. His terror of the sea, although conquered for the moment,
was still undiminished; had the sea been a lake of living flames, he
could not have shrunk more panically from its touch; and once, when his
foot slipped and he plunged to the midleg into a pool of water, the
shriek that came up out of his soul was like the cry of death. He sat
still for a while, panting like a dog, after that; but his desire for
the spoils of shipwreck triumphed once more over his fears; once more
he tottered among the curded foam; once more he crawled upon the rocks
among the bursting bubbles; once more his whole heart seemed to be set
on driftwood, fit, if it was fit for anything, to throw upon the fire.
Pleased as he was with what he found, he still incessantly grumbled at
his ill-fortune.

“Aros,” he said, “is no a place for wrecks ava’—no ava’. A’ the years
I’ve dwalt here, this ane maks the second; and the best o’ the gear
clean tint!”

“Uncle,” said I, for we were now on a stretch of open sand, where there
was nothing to divert his mind, “I saw you last night, as I never
thought to see you—you were drunk.”

“Na, na,” he said, “no as bad as that. I had been drinking, though. And
to tell ye the God’s truth, it’s a thing I cannae mend. There’s nae
soberer man than me in my ordnar; but when I hear the wind blaw in my
lug, it’s my belief that I gang gyte.”

“You are a religious man,” I replied, “and this is sin’.

“Ou,” he returned, “if it wasnae sin, I dinnae ken that I would care
for’t. Ye see, man, it’s defiance. There’s a sair spang o’ the auld sin
o’ the warld in you sea; it’s an unchristian business at the best o’t;
an’ whiles when it gets up, an’ the wind skreights—the wind an’ her are
a kind of sib, I’m thinkin’—an’ thae Merry Men, the daft callants,
blawin’ and lauchin’, and puir souls in the deid thraws warstlin’ the
leelang nicht wi’ their bit ships—weel, it comes ower me like a
glamour. I’m a deil, I ken’t. But I think naething o’ the puir sailor
lads; I’m wi’ the sea, I’m just like ane o’ her ain Merry Men.”

I thought I should touch him in a joint of his harness. I turned me
towards the sea; the surf was running gaily, wave after wave, with
their manes blowing behind them, riding one after another up the beach,
towering, curving, falling one upon another on the trampled sand.
Without, the salt air, the scared gulls, the widespread army of the
sea-chargers, neighing to each other, as they gathered together to the
assault of Aros; and close before us, that line on the flat sands that,
with all their number and their fury, they might never pass.

“Thus far shalt thou go,” said I, “and no farther.” And then I quoted
as solemnly as I was able a verse that I had often before fitted to the
chorus of the breakers:—

But yet the Lord that is on high,
Is more of might by far,
Than noise of many waters is,
As great sea billows are.


“Ay,” said my kinsinan, “at the hinder end, the Lord will triumph; I
dinnae misdoobt that. But here on earth, even silly men-folk daur Him
to His face. It is nae wise; I am nae sayin’ that it’s wise; but it’s
the pride of the eye, and it’s the lust o’ life, an’ it’s the wale o’
pleesures.”

I said no more, for we had now begun to cross a neck of land that lay
between us and Sandag; and I withheld my last appeal to the man’s
better reason till we should stand upon the spot associated with his
crime. Nor did he pursue the subject; but he walked beside me with a
firmer step. The call that I had made upon his mind acted like a
stimulant, and I could see that he had forgotten his search for
worthless jetsam, in a profound, gloomy, and yet stirring train of
thought. In three or four minutes we had topped the brae and begun to
go down upon Sandag. The wreck had been roughly handled by the sea; the
stem had been spun round and dragged a little lower down; and perhaps
the stern had been forced a little higher, for the two parts now lay
entirely separate on the beach. When we came to the grave I stopped,
uncovered my head in the thick rain, and, looking my kinsman in the
face, addressed him.

“A man,” said I, “was in God’s providence suffered to escape from
mortal dangers; he was poor, he was naked, he was wet, he was weary, he
was a stranger; he had every claim upon the bowels of your compassion;
it may be that he was the salt of the earth, holy, helpful, and kind;
it may be he was a man laden with iniquities to whom death was the
beginning of torment. I ask you in the sight of heaven: Gordon
Darnaway, where is the man for whom Christ died?”

He started visibly at the last words; but there came no answer, and his
face expressed no feeling but a vague alarm.

“You were my father’s brother,” I continued; “You, have taught me to
count your house as if it were my father’s house; and we are both
sinful men walking before the Lord among the sins and dangers of this
life. It is by our evil that God leads us into good; we sin, I dare not
say by His temptation, but I must say with His consent; and to any but
the brutish man his sins are the beginning of wisdom. God has warned
you by this crime; He warns you still by the bloody grave between our
feet; and if there shall follow no repentance, no improvement, no
return to Him, what can we look for but the following of some memorable
judgment?”

Even as I spoke the words, the eyes of my uncle wandered from my face.
A change fell upon his looks that cannot be described; his features
seemed to dwindle in size, the colour faded from his cheeks, one hand
rose waveringly and pointed over my shoulder into the distance, and the
oft-repeated name fell once more from his lips: “The _Christ-Anna_!”

I turned; and if I was not appalled to the same degree, as I return
thanks to Heaven that I had not the cause, I was still startled by the
sight that met my eyes. The form of a man stood upright on the
cabin-hutch of the wrecked ship; his back was towards us; he appeared
to be scanning the offing with shaded eyes, and his figure was relieved
to its full height, which was plainly very great, against the sea and
sky. I have said a thousand times that I am not superstitious; but at
that moment, with my mind running upon death and sin, the unexplained
appearance of a stranger on that sea-girt, solitary island filled me
with a surprise that bordered close on terror. It seemed scarce
possible that any human soul should have come ashore alive in such a
sea as had rated last night along the coasts of Aros; and the only
vessel within miles had gone down before our eyes among the Merry Men.
I was assailed with doubts that made suspense unbearable, and, to put
the matter to the touch at once, stepped forward and hailed the figure
like a ship.

He turned about, and I thought he started to behold us. At this my
courage instantly revived, and I called and signed to him to draw near,
and he, on his part, dropped immediately to the sands, and began slowly
to approach, with many stops and hesitations. At each repeated mark of
the man’s uneasiness I grew the more confident myself; and I advanced
another step, encouraging him as I did so with my head and hand. It was
plain the castaway had heard indifferent accounts of our island
hospitality; and indeed, about this time, the people farther north had
a sorry reputation.

“Why,” I said, “the man is black!”

And just at that moment, in a voice that I could scarce have
recognised, my kinsman began swearing and praying in a mingled stream.
I looked at him; he had fallen on his knees, his face was agonised; at
each step of the castaway’s the pitch of his voice rose, the volubility
of his utterance and the fervour of his language redoubled. I call it
prayer, for it was addressed to God; but surely no such ranting
incongruities were ever before addressed to the Creator by a creature:
surely if prayer can be a sin, this mad harangue was sinful. I ran to
my kinsman, I seized him by the shoulders, I dragged him to his feet.

“Silence, man,” said I, “respect your God in words, if not in action.
Here, on the very scene of your transgressions, He sends you an
occasion of atonement. Forward and embrace it; welcome like a father
yon creature who comes trembling to your mercy.”

With that, I tried to force him towards the black; but he felled me to
the ground, burst from my grasp, leaving the shoulder of his jacket,
and fled up the hillside towards the top of Aros like a deer. I
staggered to my feet again, bruised and somewhat stunned; the negro had
paused in surprise, perhaps in terror, some halfway between me and the
wreck; my uncle was already far away, bounding from rock to rock; and I
thus found myself torn for a time between two duties. But I judged, and
I pray Heaven that I judged rightly, in favour of the poor wretch upon
the sands; his misfortune was at least not plainly of his own creation;
it was one, besides, that I could certainly relieve; and I had begun by
that time to regard my uncle as an incurable and dismal lunatic. I
advanced accordingly towards the black, who now awaited my approach
with folded arms, like one prepared for either destiny. As I came
nearer, he reached forth his hand with a great gesture, such as I had
seen from the pulpit, and spoke to me in something of a pulpit voice,
but not a word was comprehensible. I tried him first in English, then
in Gaelic, both in vain; so that it was clear we must rely upon the
tongue of looks and gestures. Thereupon I signed to him to follow me,
which he did readily and with a grave obeisance like a fallen king; all
the while there had come no shade of alteration in his face, neither of
anxiety while he was still waiting, nor of relief now that he was
reassured; if he were a slave, as I supposed, I could not but judge he
must have fallen from some high place in his own country, and fallen as
he was, I could not but admire his bearing. As we passed the grave, I
paused and raised my hands and eyes to heaven in token of respect and
sorrow for the dead; and he, as if in answer, bowed low and spread his
hands abroad; it was a strange motion, but done like a thing of common
custom; and I supposed it was ceremonial in the land from which he
came. At the same time he pointed to my uncle, whom we could just see
perched upon a knoll, and touched his head to indicate that he was mad.

We took the long way round the shore, for I feared to excite my uncle
if we struck across the island; and as we walked, I had time enough to
mature the little dramatic exhibition by which I hoped to satisfy my
doubts. Accordingly, pausing on a rock, I proceeded to imitate before
the negro the action of the man whom I had seen the day before taking
bearings with the compass at Sandag. He understood me at once, and,
taking the imitation out of my hands, showed me where the boat was,
pointed out seaward as if to indicate the position of the schooner, and
then down along the edge of the rock with the words “Espirito Santo,”
strangely pronounced, but clear enough for recognition. I had thus been
right in my conjecture; the pretended historical inquiry had been but a
cloak for treasure-hunting; the man who had played on Dr. Robertson was
the same as the foreigner who visited Grisapol in spring, and now, with
many others, lay dead under the Roost of Aros: there had their greed
brought them, there should their bones be tossed for evermore. In the
meantime the black continued his imitation of the scene, now looking up
skyward as though watching the approach of the storm now, in the
character of a seaman, waving the rest to come aboard; now as an
officer, running along the rock and entering the boat; and anon bending
over imaginary oars with the air of a hurried boatman; but all with the
same solemnity of manner, so that I was never even moved to smile.
Lastly, he indicated to me, by a pantomime not to be described in
words, how he himself had gone up to examine the stranded wreck, and,
to his grief and indignation, had been deserted by his comrades; and
thereupon folded his arms once more, and stooped his head, like one
accepting fate.

The mystery of his presence being thus solved for me, I explained to
him by means of a sketch the fate of the vessel and of all aboard her.
He showed no surprise nor sorrow, and, with a sudden lifting of his
open hand, seemed to dismiss his former friends or masters (whichever
they had been) into God’s pleasure. Respect came upon me and grew
stronger, the more I observed him; I saw he had a powerful mind and a
sober and severe character, such as I loved to commune with; and before
we reached the house of Aros I had almost forgotten, and wholly
forgiven him, his uncanny colour.

To Mary I told all that had passed without suppression, though I own my
heart failed me; but I did wrong to doubt her sense of justice.

“You did the right,” she said. “God’s will be done.” And she set out
meat for us at once.

As soon as I was satisfied, I bade Rorie keep an eye upon the castaway,
who was still eating, and set forth again myself to find my uncle. I
had not gone far before I saw him sitting in the same place, upon the
very topmost knoll, and seemingly in the same attitude as when I had
last observed him. From that point, as I have said, the most of Aros
and the neighbouring Ross would be spread below him like a map; and it
was plain that he kept a bright look-out in all directions, for my head
had scarcely risen above the summit of the first ascent before he had
leaped to his feet and turned as if to face me. I hailed him at once,
as well as I was able, in the same tones and words as I had often used
before, when I had come to summon him to dinner. He made not so much as
a movement in reply. I passed on a little farther, and again tried
parley, with the same result. But when I began a second time to
advance, his insane fears blazed up again, and still in dead silence,
but with incredible speed, he began to flee from before me along the
rocky summit of the hill. An hour before, he had been dead weary, and I
had been comparatively active. But now his strength was recruited by
the fervour of insanity, and it would have been vain for me to dream of
pursuit. Nay, the very attempt, I thought, might have inflamed his
terrors, and thus increased the miseries of our position. And I had
nothing left but to turn homeward and make my sad report to Mary.

She heard it, as she had heard the first, with a concerned composure,
and, bidding me lie down and take that rest of which I stood so much in
need, set forth herself in quest of her misguided father. At that age
it would have been a strange thing that put me from either meat or
sleep; I slept long and deep; and it was already long past noon before
I awoke and came downstairs into the kitchen. Mary, Rorie, and the
black castaway were seated about the fire in silence; and I could see
that Mary had been weeping. There was cause enough, as I soon learned,
for tears. First she, and then Rorie, had been forth to seek my uncle;
each in turn had found him perched upon the hill-top, and from each in
turn he had silently and swiftly fled. Rorie had tried to chase him,
but in vain; madness lent a new vigour to his bounds; he sprang from
rock to rock over the widest gullies; he scoured like the wind along
the hill-tops; he doubled and twisted like a hare before the dogs; and
Rorie at length gave in; and the last that he saw, my uncle was seated
as before upon the crest of Aros. Even during the hottest excitement of
the chase, even when the fleet-footed servant had come, for a moment,
very near to capture him, the poor lunatic had uttered not a sound. He
fled, and he was silent, like a beast; and this silence had terrified
his pursuer.

There was something heart-breaking in the situation. How to capture the
madman, how to feed him in the meanwhile, and what to do with him when
he was captured, were the three difficulties that we had to solve.

“The black,” said I, “is the cause of this attack. It may even be his
presence in the house that keeps my uncle on the hill. We have done the
fair thing; he has been fed and warmed under this roof; now I propose
that Rorie put him across the bay in the coble, and take him through
the Ross as far as Grisapol.”

In this proposal Mary heartily concurred; and bidding the black follow
us, we all three descended to the pier. Certainly, Heaven’s will was
declared against Gordon Darnaway; a thing had happened, never
paralleled before in Aros; during the storm, the coble had broken
loose, and, striking on the rough splinters of the pier, now lay in
four feet of water with one side stove in. Three days of work at least
would be required to make her float. But I was not to be beaten. I led
the whole party round to where the gut was narrowest, swam to the other
side, and called to the black to follow me. He signed, with the same
clearness and quiet as before, that he knew not the art; and there was
truth apparent in his signals, it would have occurred to none of us to
doubt his truth; and that hope being over, we must all go back even as
we came to the house of Aros, the negro walking in our midst without
embarrassment.

All we could do that day was to make one more attempt to communicate
with the unhappy madman. Again he was visible on his perch; again he
fled in silence. But food and a great cloak were at least left for his
comfort; the rain, besides, had cleared away, and the night promised to
be even warm. We might compose ourselves, we thought, until the morrow;
rest was the chief requisite, that we might be strengthened for unusual
exertions; and as none cared to talk, we separated at an early hour.

I lay long awake, planning a campaign for the morrow. I was to place
the black on the side of Sandag, whence he should head my uncle towards
the house; Rorie in the west, I on the east, were to complete the
cordon, as best we might. It seemed to me, the more I recalled the
configuration of the island, that it should be possible, though hard,
to force him down upon the low ground along Aros Bay; and once there,
even with the strength of his madness, ultimate escape was hardly to be
feared. It was on his terror of the black that I relied; for I made
sure, however he might run, it would not be in the direction of the man
whom he supposed to have returned from the dead, and thus one point of
the compass at least would be secure.

When at length I fell asleep, it was to be awakened shortly after by a
dream of wrecks, black men, and submarine adventure; and I found myself
so shaken and fevered that I arose, descended the stair, and stepped
out before the house. Within, Rorie and the black were asleep together
in the kitchen; outside was a wonderful clear night of stars, with here
and there a cloud still hanging, last stragglers of the tempest. It was
near the top of the flood, and the Merry Men were roaring in the
windless quiet of the night. Never, not even in the height of the
tempest, had I heard their song with greater awe. Now, when the winds
were gathered home, when the deep was dandling itself back into its
summer slumber, and when the stars rained their gentle light over land
and sea, the voice of these tide-breakers was still raised for havoc.
They seemed, indeed, to be a part of the world’s evil and the tragic
side of life. Nor were their meaningless vociferations the only sounds
that broke the silence of the night. For I could hear, now shrill and
thrilling and now almost drowned, the note of a human voice that
accompanied the uproar of the Roost. I knew it for my kinsman’s; and a
great fear fell upon me of God’s judgments, and the evil in the world.
I went back again into the darkness of the house as into a place of
shelter, and lay long upon my bed, pondering these mysteries.

It was late when I again woke, and I leaped into my clothes and hurried
to the kitchen. No one was there; Rorie and the black had both
stealthily departed long before; and my heart stood still at the
discovery. I could rely on Rorie’s heart, but I placed no trust in his
discretion. If he had thus set out without a word, he was plainly bent
upon some service to my uncle. But what service could he hope to render
even alone, far less in the company of the man in whom my uncle found
his fears incarnated? Even if I were not already too late to prevent
some deadly mischief, it was plain I must delay no longer. With the
thought I was out of the house; and often as I have run on the rough
sides of Aros, I never ran as I did that fatal morning. I do not
believe I put twelve minutes to the whole ascent.

My uncle was gone from his perch. The basket had indeed been torn open
and the meat scattered on the turf; but, as we found afterwards, no
mouthful had been tasted; and there was not another trace of human
existence in that wide field of view. Day had already filled the clear
heavens; the sun already lighted in a rosy bloom upon the crest of Ben
Kyaw; but all below me the rude knolls of Aros and the shield of sea
lay steeped in the clear darkling twilight of the dawn.

“Rorie!” I cried; and again “Rorie!” My voice died in the silence, but
there came no answer back. If there were indeed an enterprise afoot to
catch my uncle, it was plainly not in fleetness of foot, but in
dexterity of stalking, that the hunters placed their trust. I ran on
farther, keeping the higher spurs, and looking right and left, nor did
I pause again till I was on the mount above Sandag. I could see the
wreck, the uncovered belt of sand, the waves idly beating, the long
ledge of rocks, and on either hand the tumbled knolls, boulders, and
gullies of the island. But still no human thing.

At a stride the sunshine fell on Aros, and the shadows and colours
leaped into being. Not half a moment later, below me to the west, sheep
began to scatter as in a panic. There came a cry. I saw my uncle
running. I saw the black jump up in hot pursuit; and before I had time
to understand, Rorie also had appeared, calling directions in Gaelic as
to a dog herding sheep.

I took to my heels to interfere, and perhaps I had done better to have
waited where I was, for I was the means of cutting off the madman’s
last escape. There was nothing before him from that moment but the
grave, the wreck, and the sea in Sandag Bay. And yet Heaven knows that
what I did was for the best.

My uncle Gordon saw in what direction, horrible to him, the chase was
driving him. He doubled, darting to the right and left; but high as the
fever ran in his veins, the black was still the swifter. Turn where he
would, he was still forestalled, still driven toward the scene of his
crime. Suddenly he began to shriek aloud, so that the coast re-echoed;
and now both I and Rorie were calling on the black to stop. But all was
vain, for it was written otherwise. The pursuer still ran, the chase
still sped before him screaming; they avoided the grave, and skimmed
close past the timbers of the wreck; in a breath they had cleared the
sand; and still my kinsman did not pause, but dashed straight into the
surf; and the black, now almost within reach, still followed swiftly
behind him. Rorie and I both stopped, for the thing was now beyond the
hands of men, and these were the decrees of God that came to pass
before our eyes. There was never a sharper ending. On that steep beach
they were beyond their depth at a bound; neither could swim; the black
rose once for a moment with a throttling cry; but the current had them,
racing seaward; and if ever they came up again, which God alone can
tell, it would be ten minutes after, at the far end of Aros Roost,
where the seabirds hover fishing.




WILL O’ THE MILL.




